Let 'em go drown like Pip , that jumped from a whale-boat . 
Shame ! 
shame ! '' 
During all this , Queequeg lay with closed eyes , as if in a dream . 
Pip was led away , and the sick man was replaced in his hammock . 
But now that he had apparently made every preparation for death ; now that his coffin was proved a good fit , Queequeg suddenly rallied ; soon there seemed no need of the carpenter 's box ; and thereupon , when some expressed their delighted surprise , he , in substance , said , that the cause of his sudden convalescence was this ; -- at a critical moment , he had just recalled a little duty ashore , which he was leaving undone ; and therefore had changed his mind about dying : he could not die yet , he averred . 
They asked him , then , whether to live or die was a matter of his own sovereign will and pleasure . 
He answered , certainly . 
In a word , it was Queequeg 's conceit , that if a man made up his mind to live , mere sickness could not kill him : nothing but a whale , or a gale , or some violent , ungovernable , unintelligent destroyer of that sort . 
Now , there is this noteworthy difference between savage and civilized ; that while a sick , civilized man may be six months convalescing , generally speaking , a sick savage is almost half-well again in a day . 
So , in good time my Queequeg gained strength ; and at length after sitting on the windlass for a few indolent days -LRB- but eating with a vigorous appetite -RRB- he suddenly leaped to his feet , threw out his arms and legs , gave himself a good stretching , yawned a little bit , and then springing into the head of his hoisted boat , and poising a harpoon , pronounced himself fit for a fight . 
With a wild whimsiness , he now used his coffin for a sea-chest ; and emptying into it his canvas bag of clothes , set them in order there . 
Many spare hours he spent , in carving the lid with all manner of grotesque figures and drawings ; and it seemed that hereby he was striving , in his rude way , to copy parts of the twisted tattooing on his body . 
And this tattooing had been the work of a departed prophet and seer of his island , who , by those hieroglyphic marks , had written out on his body a complete theory of the heavens and the earth , and a mystical treatise on the art of attaining truth ; so that Queequeg in his own proper person was a riddle to unfold ; a wondrous work in one volume ; but whose mysteries not even himself could read , though his own live heart beat against them ; and these mysteries were therefore destined in the end to moulder away with the living parchment whereon they were inscribed , and so be unsolved to the last . 
And this thought it must have been which suggested to Ahab that wild exclamation of his , when one morning turning away from surveying poor Queequeg -- `` Oh , devilish tantalization of the gods ! '' 
The Pacific When gliding by the Bashee isles we emerged at last upon the great South Sea ; were it not for other things I could have greeted my dear Pacific with uncounted thanks , for now the long supplication of my youth was answered ; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me a thousand leagues of blue . 
There is , one knows not what sweet mystery about this sea , whose gently awful stirrings seems to speak of some hidden soul beneath ; like those fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buried Evangelist St. John . 
And meet it is , that over these sea-pastures , wide-rolling watery prairies and Potters ' Fields of all four continents , the waves should rise and fall , and ebb and flow unceasingly ; for here , millions of mixed shades and shadows , drowned dreams , somnambulisms , reveries ; all that we call lives and souls , lie dreaming , dreaming , still ; tossing like slumberers in their beds ; the ever-rolling waves but made so by their restlessness . 
To any meditative Magian rover , this serene Pacific , once beheld , must ever after be the sea of his adoption . 
It rolls the midmost waters of the world , the Indian ocean and Atlantic being but its arms . 
The same waves wash the moles of the new-built California towns , but yesterday planted by the recentest race of men and lave the faded but still gorgeous skirts of Asiatic lands , older than Abraham ; while all between float milky-ways of coral isles , and low-lying , endless , unknown Archipelagoes , and impenetrable Japans . 
Thus this mysterious , divine Pacific zones the world 's whole bulk about ; makes all coasts one bay to it ; seems the tide-beating heart of earth . 
Lifted by those eternal swells , you needs must own the seductive god , bowing your head to Pan . 
But few thoughts of Pan stirred Ahab 's brain , as standing , like an iron statue at his accustomed place beside the mizen rigging , with one nostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the Bashee isles -LRB- in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking -RRB- , and with the other consciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea ; that sea in which the hated White Whale must even then be swimming . 
Launched at length upon these almost final waters , and gliding towards the Japanese cruising-ground , the old man 's purpose intensified itself . 
His firm lips met like the lips of a vice ; the Delta of his forehead 's veins swelled like overladen brooks ; in his very sleep , his ringing cry ran through the vaulted hull , `` Stern all ! 
the White Whale spouts thick blood ! '' 
The Blacksmith Availing himself of the mild , summer-cool weather that now reigned in these latitudes , and in preparation for the peculiarly active pursuits shortly to be anticipated , Perth , the begrimed , blistered old blacksmith , had not removed his portable forge to the hold again , after concluding his contributory work for Ahab 's leg , but still retained it on deck , fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast ; being now almost incessantly invoked by the headsmen , and harpooneers , and bowsmen to do some little job for them ; altering , or repairing , or new shaping their various weapons and boat furniture . 
Often he would be surrounded by an eager circle , all waiting to be served ; holding boat-spades , pikeheads , harpoons , and lances , and jealously watching his every sooty movement , as he toiled . 
Nevertheless , this old man 's was a patient hammer wielded by a patient arm . 
No murmur , no impatience , no petulance did come from him . 
Silent , slow , and solemn ; bowing over still further his chronically broken back , he toiled away , as if toil were life itself , and the heavy beating of his hammer the heavy beating of his heart . 
And so it was . 
-- Most miserable ! 
A peculiar walk in this old man , a certain slight but painful appearing yawing in his gait , had at an early period of the voyage excited the curiosity of the mariners . 
And to the importunity of their persisted questionings he had finally given in ; and so it came to pass that every one now knew the shameful story of his wretched fate . 
Belated , and not innocently , one bitter winter 's midnight , on the road running between two country towns , the blacksmith half-stupidly felt the deadly numbness stealing over him , and sought refuge in a leaning , dilapidated barn . 
The issue was , the loss of the extremities of both feet . 
Out of this revelation , part by part , at last came out the four acts of the gladness , and the one long , and as yet uncatastrophied fifth act of the grief of his life 's drama . 
He was an old man , who , at the age of nearly sixty , had postponedly encountered that thing in sorrow 's technicals called ruin . 
He had been an artisan of famed excellence , and with plenty to do ; owned a house and garden ; embraced a youthful , daughter-like , loving wife , and three blithe , ruddy children ; every Sunday went to a cheerful-looking church , planted in a grove . 
But one night , under cover of darkness , and further concealed in a most cunning disguisement , a desperate burglar slid into his happy home , and robbed them all of everything . 
And darker yet to tell , the blacksmith himself did ignorantly conduct this burglar into his family 's heart . 
It was the Bottle Conjuror ! 
Upon the opening of that fatal cork , forth flew the fiend , and shrivelled up his home . 
Now , for prudent , most wise , and economic reasons , the blacksmith 's shop was in the basement of his dwelling , but with a separate entrance to it ; so that always had the young and loving healthy wife listened with no unhappy nervousness , but with vigorous pleasure , to the stout ringing of her young-armed old husband 's hammer ; whose reverberations , muffled by passing through the floors and walls , came up to her , not unsweetly , in her nursery ; and so , to stout Labor 's iron lullaby , the blacksmith 's infants were rocked to slumber . 
Oh , woe on woe ! 
Oh , Death , why canst thou not sometimes be timely ? 
Hadst thou taken this old blacksmith to thyself ere his full ruin came upon him , then had the young widow had a delicious grief , and her orphans a truly venerable , legendary sire to dream of in their after years ; and all of them a care-killing competency . 
But Death plucked down some virtuous elder brother , on whose whistling daily toil solely hung the responsibilities of some other family , and left the worse than useless old man standing , till the hideous rot of life should make him easier to harvest . 
