` Aye ? 
Well then , Don , refill my cup . 
Your chicha 's very fine ; and ere proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are ; for such information may throw side-light upon my story . ' 
`` For three hundred and sixty miles , gentlemen , through the entire breadth of the state of New York ; through numerous populous cities and most thriving villages ; through long , dismal , uninhabited swamps , and affluent , cultivated fields , unrivalled for fertility ; by billiard-room and bar-room ; through the holy-of-holies of great forests ; on Roman arches over Indian rivers ; through sun and shade ; by happy hearts or broken ; through all the wide contrasting scenery of those noble Mohawk counties ; and especially , by rows of snow-white chapels , whose spires stand almost like milestones , flows one continual stream of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life . 
There 's your true Ashantee , gentlemen ; there howl your pagans ; where you ever find them , next door to you ; under the long-flung shadow , and the snug patronizing lee of churches . 
For by some curious fatality , as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters that they ever encamp around the halls of justice , so sinners , gentlemen , most abound in holiest vicinities . '' 
` Is that a friar passing ? ' 
said Don Pedro , looking downwards into the crowded plazza , with humorous concern . '' 
` Well for our northern friend , Dame Isabella 's Inquisition wanes in Lima , ' laughed Don Sebastian . 
` Proceed , Senor . ' '' ' 
A moment ! 
Pardon ! ' 
cried another of the company . 
` In the name of all us Limeese , I but desire to express to you , sir sailor , that we have by no means overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice in your corrupt comparison . 
Oh ! 
do not bow and look surprised : you know the proverb all along this coast -- `` Corrupt as Lima . '' 
It but bears out your saying , too ; churches more plentiful than billiard-tables , and for ever open-and `` Corrupt as Lima . '' 
So , too , Venice ; I have been there ; the holy city of the blessed evangelist , St. Mark ! 
-- St. Dominic , purge it ! 
Your cup ! 
Thanks : here I refill ; now , you pour out again . ' 
`` Freely depicted in his own vocation , gentlemen , the Canaller would make a fine dramatic hero , so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he . 
Like Mark Antony , for days and days along his green-turfed , flowery Nile , he indolently floats , openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra , ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunny deck . 
But ashore , all this effeminacy is dashed . 
The brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports ; his slouched and gaily-ribboned hat betoken his grand features . 
A terror to the smiling innocence of the villages through which he floats ; his swart visage and bold swagger are not unshunned in cities . 
Once a vagabond on his own canal , I have received good turns from one of these Canallers ; I thank him heartily ; would fain be not ungrateful ; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your man of violence , that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger in a strait , as to plunder a wealthy one . 
In sum , gentlemen , what the wildness of this canal life is , is emphatically evinced by this ; that our wild whale-fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates , and that scarce any race of mankind , except Sydney men , are so much distrusted by our whaling captains . 
Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter , that to many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line , the probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field , and recklessly ploughing the waters of the most barbaric seas . '' ' 
I see ! 
I see ! ' 
impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro , spilling his chicha upon his silvery ruffles . 
` No need to travel ! 
The world 's one Lima . 
I had thought , now , that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the hills . 
-- But the story . ' 
`` I had left off , gentlemen , where the Lakeman shook the backstay . 
Hardly had he done so , when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and the four harpooneers , who all crowded him to the deck . 
But sliding down the ropes like baleful comets , the two Canallers rushed into the uproar , and sought to drag their man out of it towards the forecastle . 
Others of the sailors joined with them in this attempt , and a twisted turmoil ensued ; while standing out of harm 's way , the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike , calling upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel , and smoke him along to the quarter-deck . 
At intervals , he ran close up to the revolving border of the confusion , and prying into the heart of it with his pike , sought to prick out the object of his resentment . 
But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too much for them all ; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck , where , hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass , these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade . '' 
` Come out of that , ye pirates ! ' 
roared the captain , now menacing them with a pistol in each hand , just brought to him by the steward . 
` Come out of that , ye cut-throats ! ' 
`` Steelkilt leaped on the barricade , and striding up and down there , defied the worst the pistols could do ; but gave the captain to understand distinctly , that his -LRB- Steelkilt 's -RRB- death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands . 
Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true , the captain a little desisted , but still commanded the insurgents instantly to return to their duty . '' 
` Will you promise not to touch us , if we do ? ' 
demanded their ringleader . '' 
` Turn to ! 
