You would be kind to me -- that , too , I believe ; you would make as many allowances for me as you could , but you would always have to make them : that would become burdensome to you , and I should be alone -- alone in a foreign land . 
I am weak , spoiled , bound by a hundred ties to the customs of this house , to the little domestic duties of every day , and to my brother 's life . '' 
Fink looked down darkly . 
`` You are punishing severely in this hour all that you have disapproved in me hitherto . '' 
`` No , '' cried Sabine , holding out her hand , `` not so , my friend . 
If there have been hours in which you have pained me , there have been others in which I have looked up to you in admiration ; and this is the very reason that keeps us apart forever . 
I can never be at rest near you ; I am constantly tossed from one extreme of feeling to another ; I am not sure of you , nor ever should be . 
I should have to conceal this inward conflict in a relation where my whole nature ought to be open to you , and you would find that out , and would be angry with me . '' 
She gave him her hand . 
Fink bent low over the little hand , and pressed a kiss upon it . 
`` Blessings on your future ! '' 
said Sabine , trembling all over . 
`` If ever you have spent a happy hour among us , oh ! 
think of it when far away . 
If ever in the German merchant 's house , in the career of my brother , you have found any thing to respect , think , oh ! 
think of it in that far country . 
In the different life that awaits you , in the great enterprises , the wild struggles that you will engage in , never think slightly of us and of our quiet ways ; '' and she held her left hand over his head , like an anxious mother blessing her parting darling . 
Fink pressed her right hand firmly in his own ; both looked long into each other 's eyes , and both faces were pale . 
At last Fink said , in his deep , melodious voice , `` Fare you well ! '' 
`` Fare you well ! '' 
replied she , so low that he hardly caught the words . 
He walked slowly away , while she looked after him motionless , as one who watches the vanishing of an apparition . 
When the merchant , after the close of his day 's work , went into his sister 's room , Sabine flew to meet him , and , clasping him in her arms , laid her head on his breast . 
`` What is it , my child ? '' 
inquired he , anxiously stroking back her hair from her damp brow . 
`` Fink has been with me ; I have been speaking with him . '' 
`` About what ? 
Has he been disagreeable ? 
Has he made you an offer ? '' 
asked the merchant , in jest . 
`` He has made me an offer , '' said Sabine . 
Her brother started : `` And you , my sister ? '' 
`` I have done what you might expect me to do -- I shall not see him again . '' 
Tears started at the words ; she took her brother 's hand and kissed it . 
`` Do not be angry with me for weeping . 
I am still a little shaken : it will soon pass . '' 
`` My precious sister -- dear , dear Sabine ! '' 
cried the merchant ; `` I can not but fear that you thought of me when you refused . '' 
`` I thought of you and of your self-sacrificing , duty-loving life , and his bright form lost the fair colors in which I had once seen it clothed . '' 
`` Sabine , you have made a sacrifice for my sake , '' cried her brother . 
`` No , Traugott ; if this has been a sacrifice , I have made it to the home where I have grown up under your care , and to the memory of our good parents , whose blessing rests on our quiet life . '' 
It was late when Fink re-entered Anton 's room ; he looked heated , threw his hat on the table , himself on the sofa , and said to his friend , `` Before any thing else , give me a cigar . '' 
Anton shook his head as he reached him a bundle , and asked , `` How have you fared ? '' 
`` No wedding to be , '' coolly returned Fink . 
`` She plainly showed me that I was a good for nothing sort of fellow , and no match for a sensible girl . 
She took the matter rather too seriously , assured me of her regard , gave me a sketch of my character , and dismissed me . 
But , hang me ! '' 
cried he , springing up , and throwing away his cigar , `` if she be not the best soul that ever preached virtue in a petticoat . 
She has only one fault , that of not choosing to marry me ; and even there she is right . '' 
Fink 's strange bearing made Anton feel anxious . 
`` Why have you been so long away , and where have you been ? '' 
said he . 
`` Not to the wine-shop , as your wisdom seems to surmise . 
If a man be refused , he has surely a good right to be melancholy for a couple of hours or so . 
I have done what any one would in such desperate circumstances . 
I have walked about and philosophized . 
I have quarreled with the world -- that is to say , with the black-haired and myself -- and then ended by standing still before a lamp-lit stall , and buying three oranges . '' 
So saying , he drew them out of his pocket . 
`` And now , my son , the past is over and gone ; let us speak of the future : this is the last evening that we shall spend together ; let no cloud hang over our spirits . 
Make me a glass of punch , and squeeze these fat fellows in . 
Orange-punch-making is one of the accomplishments you owe to me . 
I taught it you , and now the rogue makes it better than I do . 
Come and sit down beside me . '' 
The next morning old Sturm himself came to carry off the luggage . 
Fink took Anton 's hand , and said , `` Before I go through my leave-taking of all the others , I repeat to you what I said in our early days . 
Go on with your English , that you may come after me . 
And be I where I may , in log hut or cabin , I shall always have a room ready for you . 
As soon as you are tired of this Old World , come to me . 
Meanwhile , I make you my heir ; you will take possession of my rooms . 
For the rest , be perfectly sure that I have done with all bad ways . 
And now -- no emotion , my boy ! 
-- there are no great distances nowadays on our little earth . '' 
He tore himself away , hurried into the counting-house , returned , bowed to the ladies at the window , clasped his friend once more to his heart , leaped into the carriage , and away -- away to the New World . 
Meanwhile Anton mournfully returned to the office , and wrote a letter to Herr Stephan in Wolfsburg , inclosing that worthy man a new price current and several samples of sugar . 
A bad year came upon the country . 
A sudden rumor of war alarmed the German borderers in the east , and our province among the rest . 
The fearful consequences of a national panic were soon perceptible . 
Trade stood still ; the price of goods fell . 
Every one was anxious to realize and withdraw from business , and large sums embarked in mercantile speculations became endangered . 
No one had heart for new ventures . 
Hundreds of ties , woven out of mutual interest , and having endured for years , were snapped at once . 
Each individual existence became more insecure , isolated , and poor . 
On all sides were anxious faces and furrowed brows . 
The country was out of health ; money , the vital blood of business , circulated slowly from one part of the great body to the other -- the rich fearing to lose , the poor becoming unable to win . 
The future was overcast all at once , like the summer sky by a heavy storm . 
That word of terror , `` Revolution in Poland ! '' 
was not without serious effects in Germany . 
The people on the other side of the frontier , excited by old memories and by their landed proprietors , rose , and , led by fanatical preachers , marched up and down the frontier , falling upon travelers and merchandise , plundering and burning small towns and noblemen 's seats , and aiming at a military organization under the command of their favorite leaders . 
Arms were forged , old fowling-pieces produced from many a hiding-place ; and , finally , the insurgents took and occupied a large Polish town not far from the frontier , and proclaimed their independent national existence . 
Troops were then assembled in all haste by government , and sent to invest the frontier . 
Trains filled with soldiers were incessantly running up and down the newly-constructed railway . 
The streets of the capital were filled with uniforms , and the drum every where heard . 
The army , of course , was all at once in the ascendant . 
The officers ran here and there , full of business , buying maps , and drinking toasts in all sorts of wines . 
The soldiers wrote home to get money if possible , and to send more or less loving greetings to their sweethearts . 
Numberless young clerks grew pale ; numberless mothers knit strong stockings through their tears , and providently made lint for their poor sons ; numberless fathers spoke with an unsteady voice of the duty of fighting for king and country , and braced themselves up by remembering the damage they had in their day done to that wicked Napoleon . 
It was on a sunny autumn morning that the first positive intelligence of the Polish insurrection reached the capital . 
Dark rumors had indeed excited the inhabitants on the previous evening , and crowds of anxious men of business and scared idlers were crowding the railway terminus . 
No sooner was the office of T. O. Schröter open , than in rushed Mr. Braun , the agent , and breathlessly related -LRB- not without a certain inward complacency , such as the possessor of the least agreeable news invariably betrays -RRB- that the whole of Poland and Galicia , as well as several border provinces , were in open insurrection , numerous quiet commercial travelers and peaceable officials surprised and murdered , and numerous towns set fire to . 
This intelligence threw Anton into the greatest consternation , and with good cause . 
A short time before , an enterprising Galician merchant had undertaken to dispatch an unusually large order to the firm ; and , as is the custom of the country , he had already received the largest part of the sum due to him for it -LRB- nearly twenty thousand dollars -RRB- in other goods . 
The wagons that were to bring the merchandise must now , Anton reckoned , be just in the heart of the disturbed district . 
Moreover , another caravan , laden with colonial produce , and on its way to Galicia , must be on the very confines of the enemy 's land . 
And , what was still worse , a large portion of the business of the house , and of the credit granted it , was carried on in , and depended upon , this very part of the country . 
Much -- nay , every thing , he apprehended , would be endangered by this war . 
So he rushed up to his principal , met him coming down , and hastily related the news just heard ; while Mr. Braun hurried to deliver a second edition in the office , with as many further particulars as were compatible with his love of truth . 
The principal remained for a moment silent where he stood , and Anton , who was watching him anxiously , fancied that he looked a shade paler than usual ; but that must have been a mistake , for the next moment , directing his attention to the porters beyond , he called out , in the cool , business-like tone which had so often impressed Anton with respect , `` Sturm , be good enough to remove that barrel : it 's in the very middle of the way ; and bestir yourselves , all of you ; the carrier will set out in an hour . '' 
To which Sturm , with a sorrowful look upon his broad face , replied , `` The drums are beating , and our men marching off . 
My Karl is there as a hussar , with gay lace on his little coat . 
It is unlucky , indeed . 
Alas for our wares , Mr. Schröter ! '' 
`` Make the more haste on that account , '' replied the principal , smiling . 
`` Our wagons are going to the frontier too , laden with sugar and rum ; our soldiers will be glad of a glass of punch in the cold weather . '' 
Then turning to Anton , he said , `` These tidings are not satisfactory , but we must not believe all we hear . '' 
And then , going into his office , he spoke rather more cheerfully than usual to Mr. Braun ; and , having quietly heard his whole story , made a few comforting observations as to the probability of the wagons not having yet reached the frontier . 
And so the great subject of interest was laid aside for the day , and office-work went on as usual . 
Mr. Liebold wrote down large sums in his ledger ; Mr. Purzel piled dollar on dollar ; and Mr. Pix wielded the black brush and governed the servants with his wonted decision . 
At dinner the conversation was as calm and cheerful as ever ; and after it , the principal went out walking with his sister and a few ladies of his acquaintance , while all business men who met him exclaimed in amazement , `` He goes out walking to-day ! 
As usual , he has known it all before the rest of us . 
He has a good head of his own . 
The house is a solid house . 
All honor to him ! '' 
Anton sat all day at his desk in a state of nervous excitement till then unknown to him . 
He was full of anxiety and suspense , and yet there was something of enjoyment in his feelings . 
He was keenly alive to the danger in which his principal and the business were placed , but he was no longer dejected or spiritless -- nay , he felt every faculty enhanced ; never had he written so easily ; never had his style been so ' clear , or his calculations so rapidly made . 
He remarked that Mr. Schröter moved with a quicker step , and looked round with a brighter glance than usual . 
Never had Anton so honored him before ; he seemed , as it were , transfigured in his eyes . 
In wild delight , our hero said to himself , `` This is poetry -- the poetry of business ; we can only experience this thrilling sense of power and energy in working our way against the stream . 
When people say that these times are wanting in inspiration , and our calling wanting most of all , they talk nonsense . 
That man is at this very moment staking all he has at a single cast -- all that he holds dearest , the result of a long life , his pride , his honor , his happiness ; and there he sits coolly at his desk , writes letters about logwood , and examines samples of clover-seed -- nay , I believe that he actually laughs within himself . '' 
So mused Anton while locking up his desk and preparing to join his colleagues . 
He found them discussing , over a cup of tea , the news of the day , and its probable effect upon business , with a pleasant sort of shudder . 
All agreed that the firm must indeed suffer loss , but that they were the men to retrieve it sooner than ever was done before . 
Various views were then propounded , till at length Mr. Jordan pronounced that it was impossible to know beforehand what turn things would take , which profound opinion was generally adopted , and the conference broke up . 
Through the thin wall of his room Anton heard his neighbor Baumann put up a fervent prayer for the principal and the business , and he himself worked off his excitement by walking up and down till his lamp burned low . 
It was already late when a servant noiselessly entered , and announced that Mr. Schröter wished to speak to him . 
Anton followed in all haste , and found the merchant standing before a newly-packed trunk , with his portfolio on the table , together with that unmistakable symptom of a long journey , his great English cigar-case of buffalo hide . 
It contained a hundred cigars , and had long excited the admiration of Mr. Specht . 
Indeed , the whole counting-house viewed it as a sort of banner never displayed but on remarkable occasions . 
Sabine stood at the open drawers of the writing-table , busily and silently collecting whatever the traveler might want . 
The merchant advanced to meet Anton , and kindly apologized for having summoned him so late , adding that he had not expected him to be still up . 
When Anton replied that he was far too excited to sleep , such a ray of gratitude for his sympathy shone from Sabine 's eyes that our hero was mightily moved , and did not trust himself to speak . 
The principal , however , smiled . 
`` You are still young , '' he said ; `` composure will come by-and-by . 
It will be necessary that I go and look after our merchandise to-morrow . 
I hear that the Poles show special consideration to our countrymen ; possibly they imagine that our government is not disaffected toward them . 
This illusion can not last long ; but there will be no harm in our trying to turn it to advantage for the safety of our goods . 
You have conducted the correspondence , and know all that is to be done for me . 
I shall travel to the frontier , and , when there , shall decide what steps should next be taken . '' 
Sabine listened in the utmost excitement , and tried to read in her brother 's face whether he was keeping back any thing out of consideration for her . 
Anton understood it all . 
The merchant was going over the frontier into the very heart of the insurrection . 
`` Can I not go in your stead ? '' 
said he , imploringly . 
`` I feel , indeed , that I have hitherto given you no grounds for trusting me in so important an affair , but , at least , I will exert myself to the utmost , Mr. Schröter . '' 
Anton 's face glowed as he spoke . 
`` That is kindly said , and I thank you , '' replied the principal ; `` but I can not accept your offer . 
The expedition may have its difficulties , and as the profits will be mine , it is but fair that the trouble should be so too . '' 
Anton hung his head . 
`` On the contrary , I purpose leaving definite instructions with you , in case of my not being able to return the day after to-morrow . '' 
Sabine , who had been anxiously listening , now seized her brother 's hand , and whispered , `` Take him with you . '' 
This support gave Anton fresh courage . 
`` If you do not choose to send me alone , at least allow me to accompany you ; possibly I may be of some use ; at least I would most gladly be so . '' 
`` Take him with you , '' again implored Sabine . 
The merchant slowly looked from his sister to Anton 's honest face , which was glowing with youthful zeal , and replied , `` Be it so , then . 
If I receive the letters I expect , you will accompany me to-morrow to the frontier ; and now good-night . '' 
The following morning , Anton , who had thrown himself ready dressed on the bed , was awakened by a slight knock . 
`` The letters are come , sir . '' 
And , hurrying into the office , he found the principal and Mr. Jordan already there , engaged in earnest conversation , which the former merely interrupted for a moment by the words `` We go . '' 
Never had Anton knocked at so many doors , run so quickly up and down stairs , and so heartily shaken the hands of his colleagues , as in the course of the next hour . 
As he hurried along the dim corridor , he heard a slight rustling . 
Sabine stepped toward him and seized hold of his hand . 
`` Wohlfart , protect my brother . '' 
Anton promised , with inexpressible readiness , to do so ; felt for his loaded pistols , a present from Mr. Fink , and jumped into the railway carriage with the most blissful feelings a youthful hero could possibly have . 
He was bent on adventure , proud of the confidence of his principal , and exalted to the utmost by the tender relation into which he had entered with the divinity of the firm . 
He was indeed happy . 
The engine puffed and snorted across the wide plain like a horse from Beelzebub 's stables . 
There were soldiers in all the carriages -- bayonets and helmets shining every where ; at all the stations , crowds of curious inquirers , hasty questions and answers , fearful rumors , and marvelous facts . 
Anton was glad when they left the railroad and the soldiers , and posted on to the frontier in a light carriage : The high road was quiet , less frequented indeed than usual , but when they drew near the border they repeatedly met small detachments of military . 
The merchant did not say any thing to Anton about the business in hand , but spoke with much animation on every other subject , and treated his traveling companion with confidential cordiality . 
Only he showed an aversion to Anton 's pistols , which a little damped the latter 's martial ardor ; for when , at the second station , he carefully drew them out of his pocket to examine their condition , Mr. Schröter pointed toward their brown muzzles , saying , `` I do not think we shall succeed in getting back our goods by dint of pocket pistols . 
Are they loaded ? '' 
Anton bowed assent , adding , with a last remnant of martial vanity , `` They are at full cock . '' 
`` Really ! '' 
said the principal , seriously , taking them out of Anton 's pocket , and then calling to the postillion to hold his horses , he coolly shot off both barrels , remarking good-naturedly as he returned the pistols to their owner , `` It is better to confine ourselves to our accustomed weapons : we are men of peace , and only want our own property restored to us . 
If we can not succeed in convincing others of our rights , there is no help for it . 
Plenty of powder will be shot away to no purpose -- plenty of efforts without result , and expenditure which only tends to impoverish . 
There is no race so little qualified to make progress , and to gain civilization and culture in exchange for capital , as the Slavonic . 
All that those people yonder have in their idleness acquired by the oppression of the ignorant masses they waste in foolish diversions . 
With us , only a few of the specially privileged classes act thus , and the nation can bear with it if necessary ; but there , the privileged classes claim to represent the people . 
As if nobles and mere bondsmen could ever form a state ! 
They have no more capacity for it than that flight of sparrows on the hedge . 
The worst of it is that we must pay for their luckless attempt . '' 
`` They have no middle class , '' rejoined Anton , proudly . 
`` In other words , they have no culture , '' continued the merchant ; `` and it is remarkable how powerless they are to generate the class which represents civilization and progress , and exalts an aggregate of individual laborers into a state . '' 
`` In the town before us , however , '' suggested Anton , `` there is Conrad Gaultier , and the house of the three Hildebrands in Galicia as well . '' 
`` Worthy people , '' agreed the merchant , `` but they are all merely settlers , and the honorable burgher-class feeling has no root here , and seldom goes down to a second generation . 
What is here called a city is a mere shadow of ours , and its citizens have hardly any of those qualities which with us characterize commercial men -- the first class in the state . '' 
`` The first ? '' 
said Anton , doubtingly . 
`` Yes , dear Wohlfart , the first . 
Originally individuals were free , and , in the main , equal ; then came the semi-barbarism of the privileged idler and the laboring bondsman . 
It is only since the growth of our large towns that the world boasts civilized states -- only since then is the problem solved which proves that free labor alone makes national life noble , secure , and permanent . '' 
Toward evening our travelers reached the frontier station . 
It was a small village , consisting , in addition to the custom-house and the dwellings of the officials , of only a few poor cottages and a public house . 
On the open space between the houses , and round about the village , bivouacked two squadrons of cavalry , who had posted themselves along the narrow river that defined the border , and who were appointed to guard it in company with a detachment of riflemen . 
The public house presented a scene of wild confusion : soldiers moving to and fro , and sitting cheek by jowl in the little parlor ; gay hussars and green coats camped round the house on chairs , tables , barrels , and every thing that could by any contrivance be converted into a seat . 
They appeared to Anton so many Messrs. Pix , such was the peremptoriness with which they disposed of the little inn and its contents . 
The Jew landlord received the well-known merchant with a loud welcome , and his zeal was such that he actually cleared out a small room for the travelers , where they could at least spend the night alone . 
The merchant had scarcely dismounted when half a dozen men surrounded him with shouts of joy . 
They were the drivers of the wagons that had been recently expedited . 
The oldest of their party related that , when just beyond the frontier , they had been induced to make a hasty retreat by the alarming spectacle of a body of armed peasants . 
In turning round , the wheel of the last wagon had come off ; the driver , in his fright , had unharnessed the horses and left the wagon . 
While the delinquent stood there , flourishing his hat in the air , and excusing himself as well as he could , the officer in command came up and confirmed the story . 
`` You may see the wagon on the road , about a hundred yards beyond the bridge , '' he went on to say ; and when the merchant begged leave to cross the bridge , he offered to send one of his officers with him . 
A young officer belonging to a squadron just returned from a patrol was curbing his fiery steed at the door of the tavern . 
`` Lieutenant von Rothsattel , '' called the captain , `` accompany the gentlemen beyond the bridge . '' 
It was with rapture that Anton heard a name linked with so many sweet recollections . 
He knew at once that the rider of the fiery charger could be no other than the brother of his lady of the lake . 
The lieutenant , tall and slender , with a delicate mustache , was as like his sister as a young cavalry officer could be to the fairest of all mortal maidens . 
Anton felt at once a warm and respectful regard for him , which was perhaps discernible in his bow , for the young gentleman acknowledged it by a careless inclination of his small head . 
His horse went prancing on by the side of the merchant and his clerk . 
They hurried to the middle of the bridge , and looked eagerly along the road . 
There lay the colossal wagon , like a wounded white elephant resting on one knee . 
`` A short time ago it had not been plundered , '' said the lieutenant ; `` the canvas was stretched quite tightly over it ; but they have been at it now , for I see a corner fluttering . '' 
`` There does not appear to have been much mischief done , '' replied the principal . 
`` If you could get over a wheel and a pair of horses , you might carry off the whole affair , '' replied the lieutenant , carelessly . 
`` Our men have had a great hankering after it all day . 
They were very anxious to ascertain whether there was any thing drinkable in it or not . 
Were it not that we are commanded not to cross the borders , it would be a mere trifle to bring the wagon here , if the commanding officer allowed you to pass the sentinels , and if you could manage those fellows yonder . '' 
So saying , he pointed to a crowd of peasants , who were camping behind some stunted willows just out of reach of shot , and who had stationed an armed man on the high road as sentinel . 
`` We will fetch the wagon if the officer in command permit us to do so , '' said the principal . 
`` I hope we may find a way of dealing with those people yonder . '' 
Meanwhile Anton could not refrain from murmuring , `` The whole day long these gentlemen have allowed two thousand dollars ' worth to lie there on the highway ; they have had plenty of time to get back the wagon for us . '' 
`` We must not be unreasonable in our demands upon the army , '' replied the merchant , with a smile . 
`` We shall be satisfied if they only allow us to rescue our property from those boors ; '' and , accordingly , they turned back to make their wishes known to the captain . 
`` If you can find men and horses , I have nothing to object , '' replied he . 
As soon as the wagoners were reassembled , the principal inquired which of them would accompany him , engaging to make good any harm that might happen to the horses . 
After some scratching and shaking of their heads , most of them declared their willingness to go . 
Four horses were speedily harnessed , a child 's sledge belonging to the landlord produced , a wheel and some levers placed thereon , and then the little caravan set off in the direction of the bridge , pursued by the jocular approbation of the soldiers , and accompanied by some of the officers , who showed as much interest in the expedition as comported with their martial dignity . 
On the bridge the captain said , `` I wish you success , but unfortunately I am unable to send any of my men to assist you . '' 
`` It is better as it is , '' answered the principal , bowing ; `` we will proceed to recover our goods like peaceable people , and while we do not fear those gentry yonder , we do not wish to provoke them . 
Be so good , Mr. Wohlfart , as to leave your pistols behind you ; we must show these armed men that we have nothing to do with war and its apparatus . '' 
Anton had replaced his pistols in his pocket , whence they peeped out with an air of defiance , but now he gave them to a soldier called by Lieutenant von Rothsattel . 
And so they crossed the bridge , at the end of which the lieutenant reluctantly reined up his charger , muttering , `` These grocers march into the enemy 's country before us ; '' while the captain called out , `` Should your persons be in danger , I shall not consider it any departure from duty to send Lieutenant Rothsattel and a few soldiers to your aid . '' 
The lieutenant rushed back and gave the word of command to his troop , which was not far off , to sit still , and then he dashed again to the end of the bridge , and watched with great interest and warlike impatience the progress of the grocers , as he called them . 
To his and his country 's honor , be it here said , that they all alike wished the poor civilians a warm reception , and some serious inconvenience , that they might have a right to interfere , and cut and hack a little on their behalf . 
Meanwhile , the march of the merchants into the enemy 's country had nothing very imposing about it ; lighting his cigar , and walking with a brisk step , the principal went on , Anton close by his side , and behind them three stout wagoners with the horses . 
When they had got within about thirty yards of certain peasants in white smock frocks , these brandished their weapons , and cried out to them in Polish to halt . 
The principal , raising his voice , addressed them in their own tongue , desiring that they would call their leader . 
Accordingly , some of the savages began by wild gesticulations to communicate with their companions at a distance , while others held their weapons in readiness , and aimed , as Anton remarked without any particular satisfaction , pretty exactly at him . 
Meanwhile the leader of the band advanced with long strides . 
He wore a blue coat with colored lace , a square red cap trimmed with gray fur , and he carried a wild-duck gun in his hand . 
He seemed a dark-hued fellow , of a formidable aspect , enhanced by a long black mustache falling down on each side of his mouth . 
As soon as he came near , the merchant addressed him in a loud voice , and rather imperfect Polish . 
`` We are strangers . 
I am the owner of that wagon yonder , and am come to fetch it ; tell your people to help me , and I will give them a good gratuity . '' 
At which word all the weapons were reverentially lowered . 
The chief of the krakuse , or irregulars , now placed himself pathetically in the middle of the highway , and began a long oration , accompanied by much action , of which Anton understood very little , and his principal not all , but which , being interpreted by one of the wagoners , was found to signify that the leader much regretted his inability to serve the gentlemen , as he had received orders from the corps stationed behind him to keep watch over the wagon till the horses should arrive which were to take it to the nearest town . 
The merchant merely shook his head , and replied , in a tone of quiet command , `` That wo n't do . 
The wagon is mine , and I must carry it off . 
I can not wait the permission of your expected wagoners ; '' and , putting his hand into his pocket , he displayed to the owner of the blue coat half a dozen shining dollars , unseen by the rest . 
`` So much for you , and as much for your people . '' 
The leader looked at the dollars , scratched his head vehemently , and turned his cap round and round ; the result of which was , that he at last arrived at the conclusion that , since things stood thus , the worthy gentleman might drive off his wagon . 
The procession now triumphantly proceeded ; the drivers seized the levers , and , by their united efforts , raised the fallen side , detached the fragments of the broken wheel , put on the new one , and harnessed the horses ; and all this with the active assistance of some of the peasants , and the brotherly support of their commandant , who himself wielded a lever . 
Then the horses were set off with a good will , and the wagon rolled on toward the bridge amid the loud acclamations of the krakuse , which were perhaps intended to drown a dissentient voice in his innermost breast . 
`` Go on with the wagon , '' said the merchant to Anton ; and when the latter hesitated to leave his principal alone with the boors , the command was still more peremptorily repeated . 
And so the wagon slowly progressed toward the frontier ; and Anton already heard from a distance the laughing greetings of the soldiers . 
Meanwhile the merchant remained in animated conversation with the peasant band , and at length parted on the best possible terms with the insurgents ' leader , who , with true Slavonic politeness , acted the part of landlord on the public road , and , cap in hand , accompanied the travelers till within gunshot of the military on the bridge . 
The principal got into the wagon , underwent the warlike ceremonial of `` Halt ! '' 
& c. , on the part of the sentinels , and received the smiling congratulations of the captain , while the lieutenant said satirically to Anton , `` You have had no cause to lament the want of your pocket pistols . '' 
`` All the better , '' answered Anton ; `` it was a tame affair indeed . 
The poor devils had stolen nothing but a small cask of rum . '' 
An hour later , the travelers were sitting with the officers of both regiments , in the little tavern parlor , over a bottle of old Tokay , which the host had disinterred from the lowest depths of his cellar . 
Not the least happy of the party was Anton . 
For the first time in his life he had experienced one of the small perils of war , and was , on the whole , pleased with the part he had played ; and now he was sitting by a young soldier , whom he was prepared to admire to the utmost , and had the privilege of offering him his cigars , and discussing with him the day 's adventures . 
`` The boors pointed their guns at you at first , '' said the young nobleman , carelessly curling his mustache ; `` you must have found that a bore . '' 
`` Not much of one , '' replied Anton , as coolly as he could . 
`` For a moment I felt startled as I saw the guns aimed at me , and behind them men with scythes , pantomiming the cutting off of heads . 
It struck me uncomfortably at first that all the muzzles should point so directly at my face ; afterward I had to work away at the wagon , and thought no more about it ; and when , on our return , each of our wagoners affirmed that the guns had pointed at him and no one else , I came to the conclusion that this many-sidedness must be part of the idiosyncrasy of guns -- a sort of optical unmannerliness that does not mean much . '' 
`` We should soon have cut you out if the peasants had been in earnest , '' replied the lieutenant , benevolently . 
`` Your cigars are remarkably good . '' 
Anton was rejoiced to hear it , and filled his neighbor 's glass . 
And so he entertained himself , and looked at his principal , who seemed to be unusually inclined to converse with the gay gentlemen around him on all subjects connected with peace and war . 
Anton remarked that he treated the officers with a degree of formal politeness , which considerably checked the free and easy tone which they had at first adopted . 
The conversation soon became general , and all listened with attention to the merchant while he spoke of the disturbed districts , with which former journeys had made him familiar , and sketched some of the leaders of the insurrection . 
Young Von Rothsattel alone , to Anton 's great distress , did not seem to like the attention lent by his comrades to the civilian , nor the lion 's share of the conversation conceded him . 
He threw himself carelessly back on his chair , looked absently at the ceiling , played with his sword-hilt , and uttered curt observations , intended to denote that he was not a little bored . 
When the captain mentioned that he expected their commander-in-chief to arrive in the morning , and the merchant said in reply , `` Your colonel will not be here till to-morrow evening , so at least he said to me when I met him at the station , '' the demon of pride in the young officer 's breast became uncontrollable , and he rudely said , `` You know our colonel , then ? 
I suppose he buys his tea and sugar from you . '' 
`` At all events , he used to do so , '' politely replied the merchant ; `` indeed , as a younger man , I have sometimes weighed out coffee for him myself . '' 
A certain degree of embarrassment now arose among the officers , and one of the elder attempted , according to his light , to rectify the intentional rudeness by saying something about a most highly-respectable establishment where civilians or military alike might procure , with perfect satisfaction , whatever they needed . 
`` I thank you , captain , for the confidence you repose in my house , '' replied the merchant , with a smile , `` and I am indeed proud that it should have become respectable through my own active exertions and those of my firm . '' 
`` Lieutenant Rothsattel , you head the next patrol ; it is time that you should set out , '' said the captain . 
Accordingly , with clink and clatter , the lieutenant rose . 
`` Here comes our landlord with a new bottle on which he sets great value ; it is the best wine in his cellar . 
May not Herr von Rothsattel take a glass of it before he goes to watch over our night 's rest ? '' 
inquired the merchant , with calm politeness . 
The young man haughtily thanked him and clattered out of the room . 
Anton could have thrashed his new favorite with all his heart . 
It was now late ; and Anton saw , with some astonishment , that the merchant still continued with the utmost politeness to play the host , and to evince a pleasure in every fresh experience of the Tokay not easy to reconcile with the purpose of his journey . 
At last , another bottle having been uncorked , and the captain having taken and commenced a fresh cigar of the merchant 's , the latter casually observed , `` I wish to travel to the insurgent capital to-morrow , and request your permission , if it be necessary . '' 
`` You do ! '' 
cried all the officers round the table . 
`` I must ! '' 
said the merchant , gravely , and proceeded briefly to state the reasons for his resolve . 
The captain shook his head . 
`` It is true , '' said he , `` that the exact terms in which my orders are couched leave it optional whether I bar the frontier against all alike , but yet the chief aim of our occupying this position is the closing up of the disturbed district . '' 
`` Then I must make known my wishes to the commander-in-chief ; but this will delay me more than a day , and this delay will very probably defeat the whole object of my journey . 
As you have kindly informed me , there still exists a certain degree of order among the insurgents , but it is impossible to say how long this may last . 
Now it is upon the existence of this very order that I must depend for the recovery of my property , for I can only get the loaded wagons out of the town with the consent of the revolutionary party . '' 
`` And do you hope to obtain it ? '' 
`` I must endeavor to do so , '' was the reply ; `` at all events , I shall oppose might and main the plundering and destroying of my goods . '' 
The captain mused a while . 
`` Your plans , '' said he , `` place me in a strait ; if any harm should befall you , which is , I fear , only too likely , I shall be reproached for having allowed you to cross the frontier . 
Can nothing persuade you to give up this undertaking ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' said the merchant -- `` nothing but the law of the land . '' 
`` Are the wagons , then , of such consequence to you , that you are willing to risk your life for them ? '' 
asked the captain , rather morosely . 
`` Yes , captain , of as much consequence as the doing your duty is to you . 
To me their safety involves far more than mere mercantile profit . 
I must cross the frontier unless prevented by a positive prohibition . 
That I should not actually resist , but I should do all in my power to have an exception made in my favor . '' 
`` Very good , '' said the captain ; `` I will lay no hinderance in your way ; you will give me your word of honor that you will disclose nothing whatever as to the strength of our position , the arrangement of our troops , or as to what you have heard of our intended movements . '' 
`` I pledge my word , '' said the merchant . 
`` Your character is sufficient guarantee that your intentions in taking this journey are upright ; but officially I could wish to see the papers connected with it , if you have them by you . '' 
`` Here they are , '' said the merchant , in the same business-like tone . 
`` There is my passport for a year , here the bill of goods of the Polish seller , the copies of my letters to the custom-house officer , and the replies to them . '' 
The captain glanced over the papers , and gave them back . 
`` You are a brave man , and I heartily wish you success , '' said he , in a dignified tone . 
`` How do you mean to travel ? '' 
`` With post-horses . 
If I can not hire , I shall buy , and drive them myself . 
Our host will let me have a carriage , and I shall set out to-morrow morning , as I might cause more suspicion traveling by night . '' 
`` Very well , then , I shall see you again at break of day . 
I believe that we ourselves are to move over into the enemy 's country in three days ' time ; and if I hear no tidings from you in the mean time , I shall look you out in the conquered city . 
We must disperse , gentlemen ; we have already sat here too long . '' 
The officers then retired with clank of arms , and Anton and his principal remained alone with the empty bottles . 
The merchant opened the window , and then turning to Anton , who had listened to the foregoing conversation in the greatest excitement , began , `` We must part here , dear Wohlfart -- '' Before he could finish his sentence Anton caught hold of his hand , and said , with tears in his eyes , `` Let me go with you ; do not send me back to the firm . 
I should reproach myself intolerably my whole life through if I had left you on this journey . '' 
`` It would be useless , perhaps unwise , that you should accompany me . 
I can perfectly well do alone all that has to be done ; and if there be any risk to run , which , however , I do not believe , your presence could not protect me , and I should only have the painful feeling of having endangered another for my sake . '' 
`` Still , I should be very grateful to you if you would take me with you , '' urged Anton ; `` and Miss Sabine wished it too , '' added he , wisely keeping his strongest argument for the last . 
`` She is a terrible girl , '' said the merchant , with a smile . 
`` Well , then , so let it be . 
We will go together ; call the landlord , and let us make all our traveling arrangements . '' 
It was still night when Anton stepped over the threshold of the tavern . 
A thick cloud hung over the plain . 
A red glare on the horizon marked the district through which the travelers had to pass . 
The mist of night covered , with a gray veil , a dark mass on the ground . 
Anton went nearer , and found that it consisted of men , women , and children , cowering on the earth , pale , hungry , and emaciated . 
`` They are from the village on the other side of the boundary , '' explained an old watchman , who stood wrapped in his cavalry cloak . 
`` Their village was on fire ; they had run into the forest , and during the night they had come down to the river , stretching out their hands , and crying piteously for bread . 
As they were mostly women and children , our captain allowed them to cross , and has had a few loaves cut up for them . 
They are half famished . 
After them came larger bodies , all crying ` Bread ! 
bread ! ' 
and wringing their hands . 
We fired off a few pistol-shots over their heads , and soon scattered them . '' 
`` Ha ! '' 
said Anton , `` this is a poor prospect for us and our journey . 
But what will become of these unfortunate creatures ? '' 
`` They are only border rascals , '' said the watchman , soothingly . 
`` Half the year they smuggle and swill , the other half they starve . 
They are freezing a little just now . '' 
`` Could one not have a caldron full of soup made for them ? '' 
inquired Anton , compassionately , putting his hand into his pocket . 
`` Why soup ? '' 
replied the other , coldly ; `` a drink of brandy would please the whole fry better . 
Over there they all drink brandy , even the child at the breast ; if you are inclined to spend something upon them in that way , I 'll give it out , not forgetting a loyal old soldier at the same time . '' 
`` I will request the landlord to have something warm got ready for them , and you will have the goodness to see that it is all right . '' 
And again Anton 's hand went into his pocket , and the watchman promised to keep his warlike heart open to compassion . 
An hour later the travelers were rolling along in an open britzska . 
The merchant drove ; Anton sat behind him , and looked eagerly out into the surrounding landscape , where , through darkness and mist , a few detached objects were just beginning to appear . 
When they had driven about two hundred yards , they heard a Polish call . 
The merchant stopped , and a single man cautiously approached . 
`` Come up , my good friend , '' said the merchant ; `` sit here by me . '' 
The stranger politely took off his cap , and swung himself up to the driving-box . 
He turned out to be the chief krakuse of the day before -- the man with the drooping mustache . 
`` Keep an eye on him , '' said the merchant in English to Anton ; `` he shall serve us as a safe-conduct , and be paid for it too ; but if he touches me , lay hold of him from behind . '' 
Anton took his despised pistols out of an old leathern pouch on one side of the carriage , and , in sight of the krakuse , arranged them ostentatiously in the pocket of his paletot . 
But the latter only smiled , and soon showed himself a creature of a friendly and social nature , nodding confidentially to both travelers , drinking some mouthfuls out of Anton 's traveling flask , trying to keep up , over his left shoulder , a conversation with him , calling him `` your grace '' in broken German , and giving him to understand that he too smoked , though he did not happen to have any tobacco . 
At last he requested the honor of driving the gentlemen . 
In this manner they passed a group of fallen houses , which lay on a flat close to a marsh , looking like giant fungi that had shot up on a malarian soil , when they suddenly found themselves surrounded by a band of insurgents . 
It was a general levy , such as they had seen the day before . 
There were flails in abundance , a few scythes , old muskets , linen smock-frocks , a strong smell of spirits , and wild , staring eyes . 
This troop at once seized the horses by the bridles , and quick as lightning began to unharness them . 
The krakuse now sprang up lion-like from his seat , and displayed , in his Polish tongue , a vast amount of eloquence , aided by much gesticulation with hands and feet . 
He declared that these gentlemen were great noblemen , who were traveling to the capital that they might speak with the government , and that it would cost the head of every man who presumed to pull a hair out of one of their horses ' tails . 
This speech provoked several animated replies , during which some clenched their fists , and some took off their caps . 
Upon that the driver began a still more powerful oration , setting before the patriots a prospective quartering if they even ventured to look askance at the heads of the horses . 
This had the effect of diminishing the number of clenched fists , and increasing that of the doffed caps . 
At length the merchant put an end to the whole scene by suddenly flogging the horses , and thus compelling the last recusants to jump aside as fast as they could . 
The horses galloped off , loud interjections were heard in the distance , and a few shots passed harmlessly over the heads of the travelers , probably fired out of a general enthusiasm for fatherland rather than with any definite purpose . 
So the hours passed on . 
They not unfrequently met bands of armed peasantry screaming and brandishing their cudgels , or else following , with bent heads and hymn-singing , a priest who bore a church banner displayed . 
The travelers were sometimes , indeed , stopped and threatened , but at other times saluted with the utmost reverence , especially Anton , who , sitting as he did behind , was taken for the most important personage . 
At length they approached a larger village , the bands grew closer , the uproar greater , and here and there a uniform , a cockade , or a bayonet appeared among the smock-frocks . 
Here , too , the driver began to show symptoms of disquiet , and announced to the merchant that he could not take them any farther , and that they must report themselves to the leader in command . 
To this Mr. Schröter made no objection , but paid the driver and stopped the carriage . 
