Ostrau is a small town near the Oder , celebrated even as far as Poland for its gymnasium and its gingerbread . 
In this patriarchal spot had dwelt for many years the accountant-royal , Wohlfart , an enthusiastically loyal subject , and a hearty lover of his fellow-men -- with one or two exceptions . 
He married late in life , and his wife and he lived in a small house , the garden of which he himself kept in order . 
For a long time the happy pair were childless ; but at length came a day when the good woman , having smartened up her white bed-curtains with a broad fringe and heavy tassels , disappeared behind them amid the approbation of all her female friends . 
It was under the shade of those white bed-curtains that the hero of our tale was born . 
Anton was a good child , who , according to his mother , displayed remarkable peculiarities from the very day of his birth . 
For instance , he had a great objection to going to bed at the proper hour ; he would pore time untold over his picture-alphabet , and hold lengthy conversations with the red cock depicted upon its last page , imploring him to exert himself in the cause of his young family , and not allow the maid-servant to carry them off and roast them . 
Lastly , he would often run away from his playfellows , and sit lost in thought in a corner of the room . 
His greatest delight , however , was to perch himself on a chair opposite his father , cross his legs in the same way , and smoke a mimic pipe in emulation . 
Moreover , he was so seldom naughty , that all such of the female population of Ostrau as took a gloomy view of things in general held it doubtful that he could live to grow up , till one day Anton publicly thrashed the councilor 's son , which in some degree modified the opinions concerning him . 
In short , he was just the boy that the only child of warm-hearted parents might be expected to prove . 
At school he was an example of industry ; and when the drawing-master began to declare that he must be a painter , and the classical teacher to devote him to Philology , the boy might have been in some danger of being diverted from the serious pursuit of any one specific calling but for an accident which determined his choice . 
Every Christmas evening the mail brought to the house of the paternal Wohlfart a box containing a loaf of the finest sugar and a quantity of the best coffee . 
This sugar the good man himself broke into squares : the coffee was roasted by his wife 's own hands ; and the complacency with which they sipped their first cup was pleasant to behold . 
These were seasons when , to the childish soul of Anton , the whole house seemed pervaded with poetry , and his father was never weary of telling him the history of this periodical present . 
Many years ago , he had chanced to find , in a dusty bundle of law-papers , a document of great importance to a well-known mercantile house in the capital . 
This document he had at once forwarded , and , in consequence of it , the firm had been enabled to gain a long-pending lawsuit , which had previously threatened to go against them ; upon which the young head of the concern had written his acknowledgments , and Wohlfart had refused to be thanked , having , he said , only done his duty . 
From that time forth the box we have described made its appearance every Christmas evening , accompanied by a few cordial lines , to which Wohlfart responded in a masterpiece of caligraphy , expressing his surprise at the unexpected arrival , and wishing a happy new year to the firm . 
The old gentleman persisted , even to his wife , in treating this Christmas box as a mere accident , a trifle , a whim of some clerk in the house of T. O. Schröter , and yearly protested against the expectation of its arrival , by which the good woman 's household purchases were more or less influenced . 
But its arrival was , in reality , of the utmost importance in his eyes ; and that , not for the sake of the actual coffee and sugar themselves , but of the poetry of this connecting link between him and the life of a perfect stranger . 
He carefully tied up all the letters of the firm , together with three love-letters from his wife . 
He became a connoisseur in colonial produce , an oracle in coffee , whose decision was much deferred to by the Ostrau shopkeepers . 
He began to interest himself in the affairs of the great firm , and never failed to note the ups and downs reported in a certain corner of the newspapers , wholly mysterious to the uninitiated . 
Nay , he even indulged in fancy speculations and an ideal partnership , chafed when sugars fell , and chuckled at the rise of coffee . 
A strange , invisible , filmy thread it was , this which connected Wohlfart 's quiet household with the activity of the great mercantile world , and yet it was by this that little Anton 's whole life was swayed ; for when the old gentleman sat in his garden of an evening in his satin cap , and pipe in his mouth , he would dilate upon the advantages of trade , and ask his son whether he should like to be a merchant ; whereupon a kind of kaleidoscope-picture suddenly shaped itself in the little fellow 's mind , made up of sugar-loaves , raisins , and almonds , golden oranges , his father 's smile , and the mysterious delight which the arrival of the box always occasioned him , and he replied at once , `` Yes , father , that I should ! '' 
Let no one say that our life is poor in poetical influences ; still does the enchantress sway us mortals as of old . 
Rather let each take heed what dreams he nurses in his heart 's innermost fold , for when they are full grown they may prove tyrants , ay , and cruel ones too . 
In this way the Wohlfart family lived on for many a year ; and whenever the good woman privately entreated her husband to form some decision as to the boy 's way of life , he would reply , `` It is formed already ; he is to be a merchant . '' 
But in his own heart he was a little doubtful as to how this dream of his could ever be realized . 
Meanwhile a dark day drew on , when the shutters of the house remained late unclosed , the servant-girl with red eyes , ran up and down the steps , the doctor came and shook his head , the old gentleman stood in prayer near his wife 's bed , and the boy knelt sobbing by , while his dying mother 's hand still tried to stroke his curls . 
Three days later came the funeral , and father and son sat together alone . 
Both wept , but the boy 's red cheeks returned . 
Not so the old man 's health and strength . 
Not that he complained ; he still sat and smoked his pipe as before , and still concerned himself about the price of sugars , but there was no heart in the smoking or the concern ; and he would often look anxiously at his young companion , who wondered what his father could have on his mind . 
One evening , when he had for the hundredth time asked him whether he would really like to be a merchant , and received the unvarying answer , he rose from his seat with an air of decision , and told the servant-girl to order a conveyance to take him the next morning to the capital , but he said nothing about the object of his expedition . 
Late on the following day he returned in a very different mood -- happier , indeed , than he had ever been since his wife 's death . 
He enchanted his son by his account of the incredible charms of the extensive business , and the kindness of the great merchant toward himself . 
He had been invited to dinner , he had eaten peewits ' eggs , and drunk Greek wine , compared to which the very best wine in Ostrau was mere vinegar ; and , above all , he had received the promise of having his son taken into their office , and a few hints as to the future course of his education . 
The very next day saw Anton seated at a ledger , disposing arbitrarily of hundreds of thousands , converting them into every existing currency , and putting them out at every possible rate of interest . 
Thus another year passed away . 
Anton was just eighteen , when again the windows remained darkened , and the red-eyed servant-girl ran up and down , and the doctor shook his head . 
This time it was the old gentleman by whose bed Anton sat , holding both his hands . 
But there was no keeping him back ; and after repeatedly blessing his son , he died , and Anton was left alone in the silent dwelling , at the entrance of a new life . 
Old Wohlfart had not been an accountant for nothing ; he left his house in the highest order ; his affairs were balanced to a farthing , and he had written a letter of introduction to the merchant only a few days before his death . 
A month later , on a fine summer morning , Anton stood upon the threshold of his home , placed the key in a friendly hand , made over his luggage to the carrier , and , with his father 's letter in his pocket , took his way to the great city . 
The new-mown grass was already fading in the sun when Anton shook the hand of the neighbor who had accompanied him as far as the nearest station to the capital , and then walked off merrily along the high road . 
The day was bright , the mower was heard whetting his scythe in the meadows close by , and the indefatigable lark sang high overhead . 
On all sides rose church-towers , central points of villages buried in woods , near many of which might be seen a stately baronial residence . 
Anton hurried on as if his feet were winged ; the future lay before him sunny as the plain , a life of radiant dreams and evergreen hopes ; his heart beat high , his eyes beamed , he felt intoxicated by the beauty and the fragrance around him . 
Whenever he saw a mower , he called out to him that it was a lovely day , and got many a friendly greeting in return . 
The very birds seemed as though they congratulated him , and cheered him onward . 
He now took a footpath that led through a meadow , crossed a bridge , and found himself in a plantation with neatly-graveled paths . 
As he went on , it more and more assumed the character of a garden ; a sudden turn , and he stood on a grass-plot , and saw a gentleman 's seat , with two side towers and a balcony , rise before him . 
Vines and climbing roses ran up the towers , and beneath the balcony was a vestibule well filled with flowers . 
In short , to our Anton , brought up as he had been in a small town , it all appeared beauteous and stately in the extreme . 
He sat down behind a bushy lilac , and gave himself up to the contemplation of the scene . 
How happy the inhabitants must be ! 
how noble ! 
how refined ! 
A certain respect for every thing of acknowledged distinction and importance was innate in the son of the accountant ; and when , in the midst of the beauty around him , his thoughts reverted to himself , he felt utterly insignificant , a species of social pigmy scarcely visible to the naked eye . 
For some time he sat and looked in perfect stillness ; at last the picture shifted . 
A lovely lady came out on the balcony clad in light summer attire , with white lace sleeves , and stood there like a statue . 
When a gay paroquet flew out of the room and lighted on her hand , Anton 's admiration went on increasing ; but when a young girl followed the bird , and wound her arms around the lovely lady 's neck , and the paroquet kept wheeling about them , and perching now on the shoulder of one , and then on that of the other , his feeling of veneration became such that he blushed deeply , and drew back further into the lilac-tree 's shadow . 
Then , with his imagination filled by what he had seen , he went with elastic step along the broad walk , hoping to find a way of exit . 
Soon he heard a horse 's feet behind him , and saw the younger of the two ladies come riding after him , mounted upon a black pony , and using her parasol as a whip . 
Now the ladies of Ostrau were not in the habit of riding . 
He had , indeed , once upon a time , beheld a professional equestrian with very red cheeks and flowing garments , and had unspeakably admired her , but now the same feeling was far more intense . 
He stood still and bowed reverentially . 
The young girl acknowledged his homage by a gracious nod , pulled up her horse , and asked whether he wished to speak to her father . 
`` I crave your pardon , '' replied Anton , with the deepest respect ; `` probably I am in a path not open to strangers . 
I came across the meadow , and saw no gate and no hedge . '' 
`` The gate is on the bridge ; it is open by day , '' said the young lady , with great benignity , for reverence was not the sentiment her fourteen years often inspired , and she was the more pleased therewith . 
`` But , since you are in the garden , '' continued she , `` will you not look around ? 
We shall be very glad if it give you pleasure . '' 
`` I have already taken that liberty , '' replied Anton , with another bow . 
`` I have been on the lawn before the castle : it is magnificent . '' 
`` Yes , '' said the young lady , reining in her pony ; `` the gardener laid it out under mamma 's own direction . '' 
`` Then the lady who stood with you on the balcony was your mother ? '' 
timidly inquired Anton . 
`` What ! 
you have been watching us , then ? 
Do you know that that was wrong ? '' 
`` Forgive me , '' was the humble reply ; `` I retreated at once , but it was such a lovely sight -- the two ladies , the roses in full blossom , the framework of vine leaves -- I shall never forget it . '' 
`` He is charming ! '' 
thought the young girl . 
`` Since you have already seen the garden , '' said she , condescendingly , `` you must go to the point from which we have the best view . 
I am on my way thither now , if you like to follow . '' 
Anton followed , lost in delight . 
The lady bade her horse walk slowly , and played the cicerone . 
At last she dismounted and led the pony , whereupon Anton ventured to stroke his neck -- an attention which the little fellow took in good part , and returned by sniffing his coat pockets . 
`` He trusts you , '' said the young lady ; `` he is a sagacious beast . '' 
She then tied the bridle round his neck , told him to go home , and turning to Anton , added , `` We are going into the flower-garden , where he must not come ; and so , you see , he trots back to his stable . '' 
`` This pony is a perfect wonder , '' cried Anton . 
`` He is very fond of me ; he does all I tell him , '' was the reply . 
Anton thought that the most natural thing in the world . 
`` I think you are of a good family , '' said the little lady , decidedly , looking at Anton with a discriminating air . 
`` No , '' replied he , sadly . 
`` My father died last month , my dear mother a year ago ; I am alone , and on my way to the capital . '' 
His lips quivered as he spoke . 
The lady looked at him with the utmost sympathy , and in some embarrassment . 
`` Oh , poor , poor lad ! '' 
cried she . 
`` But come quickly ; I have something to show you . 
These are the beds of early strawberries ; there are still a few . 
Do , pray , take them . 
No guest must leave my father 's house without partaking of the best each season brings . 
Pray , pray eat them . '' 
Anton looked at her with tearful eyes . 
`` I am going to share with you , '' said she , taking two strawberries . 
Upon that , the youth obediently followed her example . 
`` And now I will take you across the garden , '' said she , leading him to a little lake where old swans and young were swimming about . 
`` They are coming hither , '' cried Anton , in delight . 
`` They know that I have something for them , '' said his companion , loosening the while the chain of a small boat . 
`` Now , sir , jump in , and I will row you across , for yonder lies your way . '' 
`` I can not think of troubling you . '' 
`` No opposition ! '' 
said she , imperatively , and they set off . 
Anton was entranced . 
Behind , the rich green trees ; beneath , the clear water rippling round the prow ; opposite him , the slender figure of his companion , and the swans , her snowy subjects , following in her train -- it was a dream such as is only granted to youth . 
The boat grounded ; Anton leaped out , and involuntarily offered his hand , which the little lady touched with the tips of her fingers as she wished him good-by . 
He sprang up the hill and looked down . 
Through an opening in the wood he saw the castle with its flag floating , and its vines and roses shining in the sun . 
`` How noble ! 
how magnificent ! '' 
said he , aloud . 
`` If you were to count out to that baron a hundred thousand dollars , he would not sell you the property he inherited from his father , '' said a sharp voice behind him . 
He angrily turned ; the dream was gone ; he stood on the dusty highway , and saw a meanly-dressed youth , with a great bundle under his arm , looking at him with cool familiarity . 
`` Is it you , Veitel Itzig ? '' 
cried Anton , without showing much pleasure at the meeting . 
Indeed , young Itzig was by no means a pleasant apparition , pale , haggard , red-haired , and shabbily clothed as he was . 
He came from Ostrau , and had been a schoolfellow of Anton 's , who had once fought a battle on his behalf , and had stood between the young Jew and the general ill-will of the other boys . 
But of late they had seldom met , just often enough to give Itzig an opportunity of keeping up in some measure their old schooldays ' familiarity . 
`` They say that you are going to the great city to learn business , '' added Veitel ; `` to be taught how to twist up paper bags and sell treacle to old women . 
I am going there too , but I mean to make my fortune . '' 
To this Anton replied , dryly enough , `` Go , then , and make it , and do not let me detain you . '' 
`` There 's no need to hurry , '' said the other , carelessly ; `` I will walk on with you , if you are not ashamed of my dress . '' 
This appeal to our hero 's humanity was successful , and , casting a last look at the castle , he went on his way , his unwelcome companion a foot or so behind him . 
At length he turned , and inquired who the proprietor was . 
Itzig displayed wonderful familiarity with the subject . 
The baron , said he , had only two children , large flocks , and a clear estate . 
His son was at a military school . 
Finally , observing Anton 's interest , he remarked , `` If you wish for his property , I will buy it for you . '' 
`` Thanks , '' was the cold reply . 
`` You have just told me he was not disposed to sell . '' 
`` When a man is not disposed to sell , he must be forced to do so . '' 
`` You are the very person to force him , I suppose , '' replied Anton , thoroughly out of patience . 
`` Whether I am or not , does not signify ; there is a receipt for making any man sell . '' 
`` What ! 
can they be bewitched , or given some magic potion ? '' 
asked Anton , contemptuously . 
`` A hundred thousand dollars is a potion that can work wonders ; but a poor man must get hold of a secret to accomplish his ends . 
Now , I am on my way to town to get at the knowledge of this secret . 
It is all contained in certain papers , and I will search for those papers till I find them . '' 
Anton looked askance at his companion as at a lunatic , and at length replied , `` Poor Veitel , you never will find them . '' 
However , Itzig went on to say confidentially , `` Never repeat what I tell you . 
Those papers have been in our town ; and a certain person , who is become a very great man now , got them from an old dying beggar-man , who gave them to him one night that he watched by his bedside . '' 
`` And do you know this man ? '' 
inquired Anton , in a tone of curiosity . 
`` Never mind whether I know him or not , '' answered the other , slyly . 
`` I shall find out the receipt I spoke of . 
And if ever you wish to have this baron 's property , horses , flocks , and his pretty daughter to boot , I 'll buy them for you , for the sake of our old friendship , and the thrashing you once gave some of our schoolfellows on my account . '' 
`` Take care , '' said Anton , `` that you do n't turn out a thorough rascal ; you seem to me to be in the fair way . '' 
So saying , he crossed over to the other side of the road in high dudgeon ; but Itzig took his caution with the utmost equanimity , and ever and anon , as they passed different country-seats , gave him an account of the names and rentals of their proprietors , so that Anton was perfectly stupefied with the extent of his statistical information . 
At length both walked on in silence . 
The Baron of Rothsattel was one of the few men whom not only the world pronounced happy , but who believed himself to be so . 
The descendant of an ancient and honorable house , he had married , out of sheer love , a beautiful young lady without any fortune . 
Like a sensible man , he had retired with her into the country , lived for his family , and within his means . 
He was a thoroughly noble-hearted man , still handsome and dignified in appearance , an affectionate husband , a hospitable host ; in short , the very model of a landed proprietor . 
His means were not , indeed , very large , but he might have sold his property over and over again for a far higher sum than the sagacious Itzig had surmised , had he felt any inclination to do so . 
Two healthy , intelligent children completed his domestic happiness ; the boy was about to enter the military career , which had been that of all his ancestors ; the girl was to remain yet a while under her mother 's wing . 
Like all men of old descent , our baron was a good deal given to speculate upon the past and the future of his family . 
We have said that his means were not large , and though he had always intended to lay by , the time for beginning to do so had never yet come . 
Either some improvement to house or grounds was wanted , or a trip to the baths -- rendered necessary by his wife 's delicate health -- consumed the overplus income . 
Reflections of this nature were occupying him just now , as he came galloping up the great chestnut avenue . 
The cloud on his brow was , however , but a little one , and it soon vanished in sunshine when he saw the flutter of feminine garments , and found that his wife and daughter were coming to meet him . 
He leaped off his horse , kissed his favorite child on the brow , and cheerfully remarked to his wife , `` We have capital weather for the harvest ; the bailiff vows we never have had such a crop . '' 
`` You are a fortunate man , Oscar , '' said the baroness , tenderly . 
`` Yes , ever since I brought you here , seventeen years ago , '' replied he , with a politeness that came from the heart . 
`` There are indeed seventeen years since then , '' cried his wife , `` and they have flown by like a summer day . 
We have been very happy , Oscar , '' said she , bending over his arm , and looking gratefully in his face . 
`` Been happy ! '' 
cried the baron ; `` why , so we still are , and I see not why we should not continue so . '' 
`` Hush ! '' 
implored she . 
`` I often feel that so much sunshine can not last forever . 
I desire , as it were , to fast and do penance , thus to propitiate the envy of fortune . '' 
`` Come , come , '' was the good-humored reply ; `` fortune has given us a few rubs already : we have had our clouds , only this little hand has always conjured them away . 
Why , have you not had plague enough with the servants , the pranks of the children , and sometimes with your tyrant too , that you should be wishing for more ? '' 
`` You dear tyrant ! '' 
cried the wife , `` I owe all my happiness to you ; and , after seventeen years , I am as proud as ever of my husband and my home . 
When you brought me here , a poor maid of honor , with nothing but my trinket-box , and that a gift , I first learned the blessedness of being mistress in my own house , and obeying no other will than that of a beloved husband . '' 
`` And yet you gave up much for me , '' returned the baron ; `` I have had many a fear lest our country life should seem petty and dull to you , a favorite at court . '' 
`` There I obeyed , here I rule , '' said the baroness , laughing . 
`` There I had nothing besides my fine dresses that I could call my own ; here , every thing around is mine . 
You belong to me -LRB- she wound her arms around the baron -RRB- , and so do the children , the castle , and our silver candlesticks . '' 
`` The new ones are only plated , '' suggested the baron . 
`` Never mind ; no one finds it out , '' cried she , merrily . 
`` When I look at our own dinner-service , and see your and my arms on the plates , two spoonfuls give me ten times more satisfaction than all the courses of the court dinner ever did . '' 
`` You are a bright example of contentment , '' said the baron ; `` and for your and the children 's sake , I wish this property were ten times larger , so that I might keep a page and a couple of maids of honor for my lady wife . '' 
`` For heaven 's sake , no maids of honor ; and as for a page , I need none with such an attentive knight as yourself . '' 
And so the pair walked on to the house , Lenore having taken possession of the horse 's bridle , affectionately exhorting him to raise as little dust as possible . 
`` I see a carriage , '' said the baron , as they drew near the door ; `` have any visitors come ? '' 
`` It is only Ehrenthal , who wished to see you , '' replied his wife , `` and meanwhile expended all his pretty speeches upon us . 
Lenore was so arrogant that it was high time I should carry her off -- the droll man was quite put out of countenance by the saucy girl . '' 
The baron smiled . 
`` I like him the best of his class , '' said he . 
`` His manners are at least not repulsive , and I have always found him obliging . 
How do you do , Mr. Ehrenthal ; what brings you here ? '' 
Mr. Ehrenthal was a portly man in the prime of life , with a face too yellow , fat , and cunning to be considered exactly handsome . 
He wore gaiters , and a large diamond breast-pin , and advanced with a series of low bows toward the baron . 
`` Your servant , good sir , '' said he , with a deferential smile ; `` although no business matters lead me here , I must sometimes crave permission to look round your farm , it is such a treat and refreshment to me ; all your live-stock is so sleek and well-fed , and the barns and stables in such perfect order . 
The very sparrows look better off here than elsewhere . 
To a man of business , who is often obliged to see things going to wrack and ruin , it is a delight , indeed , to contemplate an estate like yours . '' 
`` You are so complimentary , Mr. Ehrenthal , that I can but believe you have some weighty business on hand . 
Do you want to make a bargain with me ? '' 
asked the count , good-naturedly . 
With a virtuous shake of the head in refutation of the charge , Mr. Ehrenthal went on : `` Not a word of business , baron , not a word . 
Our business , when we have any , admits of no compliments -- good money and good stock , that is our plan ; and so , please God , it will be . 
I merely came , in passing by '' -- here he waved his hand -- `` in passing by , to inquire about one of the horses the baron has to sell ; I promised a friend to make inquiries . 
But I can settle the matter with the bailiff . '' 
`` No , no ; come along with me , Ehrenthal -- I am going to take my horse to the stable . '' 
With many bows to the ladies , Ehrenthal followed , and , arrived at the stable-door , respectfully insisted that the baron should enter it first . 
After the customary questions and answers , the baron took him to the cow-house , and he then fervently requested to see the calves , and then the sheep . 
Being an experienced man , his praise , although somewhat exaggerated , was in the main judicious , and the baron heard it with pleasure . 
After the inspection of the sheep , there was a pause , Ehrenthal being quite overcome by the thickness and fineness of their fleece . 
He nodded and winked in ecstasy . 
`` What wool ! '' 
said he ; `` what it will be next spring ! 
Do you know , baron , you are a most fortunate man ? 
Have you good accounts of the young gentleman , your son ? '' 
`` Thank you , he wrote to us yesterday , and sent us his testimonials . '' 
`` He will be like his father , a nobleman of the first order , and a rich man too ; the baron knows how to provide for his children . '' 
`` I am not laying by , '' was the careless reply . 
`` Laying by , indeed ! '' 
said the tradesman , with the utmost contempt for any thing so plebeian ; `` and why should you ? 
When old Ehrenthal is dead and gone , you will be able to leave the young gentleman this property -- with -- between ourselves -- a very large sum indeed , besides a dowry to your daughter of -- of -- what shall I say ? 
of fifty thousand dollars , at least . '' 
`` You are mistaken , '' said the baron , gravely ; `` I am not so rich . '' 
`` Not so rich ! '' 
cried Ehrenthal , ready to resent the speech , if it had not been made by the baron himself . 
`` Why , you may then be so any moment you like ; any one , with a property like yours , can double his capital in ten years , without the slightest risk . 
Why not take joint-stock promissory notes upon your estate ? '' 
Ehrenthal alluded to a great joint-stock company of landed proprietors which lent money on a first mortgage on estates . 
This money took the form of promissory notes , made payable to the holder . 
The company itself paid interest to those who accepted the mortgages , and advanced money on them , raising from its own debtors , in addition to the interest , a small sum as commission , for the purpose of defraying expenses , and also for the gradual extinction of the debt incurred . 
`` I will have nothing to do with money transactions , '' said the baron , proudly . 
But the string the tradesman had touched went on vibrating notwithstanding . 
`` Transactions such as those I speak of are carried on by every prince , '' continued Mr. Ehrenthal , fervently . 
`` If you were to do as I suggested , you might any day obtain fifty thousand dollars in good parchment . 
For it you would pay to the company four per cent. ; and if you merely let the mortgages lie in your cash-box , they would bring you in three and a half . 
So you would only have a half per cent . 
to pay , and by so doing you would liquidate the capital . '' 
`` That is to say , I am to run into debt in order to get rich , '' said the baron , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` Excuse me , baron ; if a nobleman like you has fifty thousand dollars lying by him , for which he only pays a half per cent. , he may buy up half the world . 
There are always opportunities of getting estates for a mere nothing , or shares in mines , or something or other , if you only have the money ready . 
Or you might establish some kind of works on your property ; as , for instance , for making beet-root sugar , like Herr von Bergue ; or a brewery , like your neighbor , Count Horn . 
There is no possible risk to be feared . 
Why , you would receive ten , twenty , ay , fifty per cent . 
for the capital borrowed at four per cent . '' 
The baron looked down thoughtfully . 
Ideas of the sort had often flitted across his mind . 
It was just the time when numerous industrial speculations had started up , and landed proprietors looked upon them as the best way to increase their means . 
Mr. Ehrenthal perceived the effect his words had taken , and concluded in the obsequious tone most natural to him : `` But what right have I to give any advice to a nobleman like you ? 
Only , every capitalist will tell you that in our days this is the surest method by which a man of rank can provide for his family ; and , when the grass is growing over old Ehrenthal 's grave , you will think of me and say , ` Ehrenthal was but a plain man , but he gave me advice which has proved advantageous to my family . ' '' 
The baron still looked thoughtfully down . 
His mind was made up , but he merely replied , with affected indifference , `` I will think the matter over . '' 
Ehrenthal asked no more . 
It was a pity that the baron did not see the expression of the tradesman 's face as he got into his conveyance and drove away . 
He told the coachman to go slowly through the grounds , and looked with delight at the flourishing crops on either side . 
`` A fine property , '' he went on muttering to himself ; `` truly a fine property . '' 
Meanwhile the baroness sat in the shrubbery , and turned over the leaves of a new magazine , every now and then casting a look at her daughter , who was occupied in framing , with old newspapers and flowers , a grotesque decoration for the pony 's head and neck , while he kept tearing away all of it that he could reach . 
As soon as she caught her mother 's glance , she flew to her , and began to talk nonsense to the smart ladies and gentlemen who displayed the fashions in the pages of the magazine . 
At first her mother laughed , but by-and-by she said , `` Lenore , you are now a great girl , and yet a mere child . 
We have been too careless about your education ; it is high time that you should begin and learn more systematically , my poor darling . '' 
`` I thought I was to have done with learning , '' said Lenore , pouting . 
`` Your French is still very imperfect , and your father wishes you to practice drawing , for which you have a talent . '' 
`` I only care for drawing caricatures , '' cried Lenore ; `` they are so easy . '' 
`` You must leave off drawing these ; they spoil your taste , and make you satirical . '' 
Lenore hung her head . 
`` And who was the young man with whom I saw you a short time ago ? '' 
continued the baroness , reprovingly . 
`` Do not scold me , dear mother , '' cried Lenore ; `` he was a stranger -- a handsome , modest youth , on his way to the capital . 
He has neither father nor mother , and that made me so sorry for him . '' 
Her mother kissed her , and said , `` You are my own dear , wild girl . 
Go and call your father ; his coffee will get cold . '' 
As soon as the baron appeared , his head still full of his conversation with Ehrenthal , his wife laid her hand in his , and said , `` Oscar , I am uneasy about Lenore ! '' 
`` Is she ill ? '' 
inquired her father , in alarm . 
`` No , she is well and good-hearted , but she is more free and unconventional than she should be at her age . '' 
`` She has been brought up in the country , and a fine , clever girl she is , '' replied the baron , soothingly . 
`` Yes , but she is too frank in her manner toward strangers , '' continued his wife ; `` I fear that she is in danger of becoming an original . '' 
`` Well , and is that a very great misfortune ? '' 
asked the baron , laughing . 
`` There can be no greater to a girl in our circle . 
Whatever is unusual in society is ridiculous , and the merest shade of eccentricity might ruin her prospects . 
I am afraid she will never improve in the country . '' 
`` What would the child do away from us , and growing up with strangers ? '' 
`` And yet , '' said the baroness , earnestly , `` it must come to this , though I grieve to tell you so . 
She is rude to girls of her own age , disrespectful to ladies , and , on the other hand , much too forward to gentlemen . '' 
`` She will change , '' suggested the baron , after a pause . 
`` She will not change , '' returned the baroness , gently , `` so long as she leaps over hedge and ditch with her father , and even accompanies him out hunting . '' 
`` I can not make up my mind to part with both children , '' said the kind-hearted father ; `` it would be hard upon us , indeed , and hardest upon you , you rigid matron ! '' 
`` Perhaps so , '' said the baroness , in a low voice , and her eyelids moistened ; `` but we must not think of ourselves , only of their future good . '' 
The baron drew her closer to him , and said in a firm voice , `` Listen , Elizabeth ; when in earlier days we looked forward to these , we had other plans for Lenore 's education . 
We resolved to spend the winter in town , to give the child some finishing lessons , and then to introduce her into the world . 
We will go this very winter to the capital . '' 
The baroness looked up in amazement . 
`` Dear , kind Oscar , '' cried she ; `` but -- forgive the question -- will not this be a great sacrifice to you in other respects ? '' 
`` No , '' was the cheerful reply ; `` I have plans which make it desirable for me to spend the winter in town . '' 
He told them , and the move was decided upon . 
The sun was already low when the travelers reached the suburbs of the capital . 
First came cottages , then villas , then the houses crowded closer , and the dust and noise made our hero 's heart sink within him . 
He would soon have lost his way but for Veitel Itzig , who seemed to have a preference for by-streets and narrow flag-stones . 
At length they reached one of the main streets , where large houses , with pillared porticoes , gay shops , and a well-dressed crowd , proclaimed the triumph of wealth over poverty . 
Here they stopped before a lofty house . 
Itzig pointed out the door with a certain degree of deference , and said , `` Here you are , and here you will soon get as proud as any of them ; but , if you ever wish to know where I am to be found , you can inquire at Ehrenthal 's , in Dyer Street . 
Good-night . '' 
Anton entered with a beating heart , and felt for his father 's letter . 
He had become so diffident , and his head felt so confused , that he would gladly have sat down for a moment to rest and compose himself . 
But there was no rest here . 
A great wagon stood at the door , and within , colossal bales and barrels ; while broad-shouldered giants , with leathern aprons and short hooks in their belts , were carrying ladders , rattling chains , rolling casks , and tying thick ropes into artistic knots ; while clerks , with pens behind their ears and papers in their hands , moved to and fro , and carriers in blue blouses received the different goods committed to their care . 
Clearly there was no rest to be had here . 
Anton ran up against a bale , nearly fell over a ladder , and was with difficulty saved by the loud `` Take care ! '' 
of two leathern-aproned sons of Anak from being crushed flat under an immense tun of oil . 
In the centre of all this movement -- the sun around which porters , and clerks , and wagoners revolved -- stood a young official , of decided air and few words , holding a large black pencil in his hand , with which he made colossal hieroglyphics on the bales before he desired the porters to move them . 
To him Anton addressed himself in a nearly inaudible voice , and was directed by a wave of the pencil to the counting-house . 
Slowly he approached the door , which it cost him a mighty effort to open , and as it gently yielded , and he saw the great room before him , his alarm was such that he could scarcely enter . 
His entrance , however , did not make much sensation . 
Half a dozen clerks were dashing in haste over the blue folio paper before them , to save the post . 
Only one of them , who sat next the door , rose , and asked what Anton was pleased to want . 
Upon his replying that he wished to speak to Mr. Schröter , there emerged from an inner room a tall man , with a deeply-marked visage , standing shirt-collar , and thoroughly English aspect . 
Anton took a rapid survey of his countenance , and felt his courage return . 
He at once discovered uprightness and kindness of heart , though the air and manner were somewhat stern . 
He rapidly drew out his letter , gave his name , and , in a broken voice , mentioned his father 's death . 
At this a friendly light beamed from the merchant 's eyes ; he opened the letter , read it attentively , and stretched out his hand , saying , `` You are welcome . '' 
Then turning to one of the clerks , who wore a green coat and a gray over-sleeve on the right arm , he announced , `` Mr. Wohlfart enters our office from this day . '' 
For an instant the six pens were silent , and the principal went on to say to Anton , `` You must be tired ; Mr. Jordan will show you your room : the rest to-morrow . '' 
So saying , he went back to his office , and the six pens began again with fearful rapidity . 
The gentleman in the green coat rose , drew off his over-sleeve , carefully folded and locked it up , and invited Anton to follow him . 
Anton felt a different man to that he had done ten minutes before ; he had now a home , and belonged to the business . 
Accordingly , as he passed , he patted a great bale as though it had been the shoulder of a friend , at which his conductor turned and benevolently vouchsafed the word `` cotton ; '' next he rapped a gigantic barrel , and received the information `` currants . '' 
He no longer fell over ladders -- nay , he boldly pushed one out of his way , bestowed a friendly greeting upon one of the leathern-aproned Anakims , and felt pleased to be politely thanked in return , especially when informed that this was the head porter . 
They crossed the court , mounted a well-worn staircase , and then Mr. Jordan opened the door of a room which he told Anton would most probably be his , and had been formerly occupied by a friend of his own . 
It was a neat little room , with a beautiful stucco cat sitting on the writing-table , which had been left by the former tenant for the benefit of his successor . 
Mr. Jordan hurried off to the office , where he had to be earliest and latest of all ; and Anton , with the help of a friendly servant , arranged his room and his dress . 
Soon the green coat reappeared , and said that Mr. Schröter was gone out , and not to be seen again that day . 
`` Would the new-comer make the acquaintance of his colleagues ? 
It was not necessary to dress . '' 
Anton followed him down stairs , and Mr. Jordan was just about to knock at the door of a certain room , when it was opened by a handsome , slender young man , whose whole appearance made a great impression upon our hero . 
He wore a riding-dress , had on a jockey 's cap , and a whip in his hand . 
`` So you are trotting your colt round already ? '' 
said the stranger , laughing . 
Mr. Jordan looked solemn , and went on to introduce Mr. Wohlfart , the new apprentice , just arrived ; Herr von Fink , son of the great Hamburg firm , Fink and Becker . 
`` Heir of the greatest train-oil business in the world , and so forth , '' broke in Fink , carelessly . 
`` Jordan , give me ten dollars ; I want to pay the groom ; add them to the rest . '' 
Then turning to Anton , he said , with some degree of politeness , `` If you were coming to call upon me , as I guess from the festive air of your Mercury , I am sorry not to be at home , having to buy a new horse . 
I consider your visit paid , return you my most ceremonious thanks , and give you my blessing on your entrance . '' 
And , with a careless nod , he went rattling down the stairs . 
Anton was a good deal discomposed by this cool behavior , and Jordan thought it desirable to add a short commentary of his own . 
`` Fink only half belongs to us , and has been here but a short time . 
He was brought up in New York , and his father has sent him here to be made a rational being . '' 
`` Is he not rational , then ? '' 
inquired Anton , with some curiosity . 
`` Why , he is too wild , too full of mischief -- else , a pleasant fellow enough . 
And now come with me ; I have invited all our gentlemen to tea , that they may make your acquaintance . '' 
Mr. Jordan 's room was the largest of those appropriated to the clerks , and having a piano-forte and a few arm-chairs , it was occasionally used as a drawing-room . 
Here , then , the gentlemen were sitting and standing , awaiting the new-comer . 
Anton went through the ceremony of introduction with becoming gravity , shaking each of them by the hand , and asking for their good-will and friendly assistance , as he had been but little in the world , and was totally inexperienced as to business . 
This candor produced a favorable impression . 
The conversation grew animated , and was seasoned with many allusions and jests wholly unintelligible to the stranger , who held his peace , and devoted himself to observation . 
First , there was the book-keeper , Liebold , a little , elderly man , with a gentle voice and a modest smile , that seemed to apologize to the world at large for his having taken the liberty of existing in it . 
He said but little , and had a way of always retracting what he had advanced , as , for example , `` I admit this tea is too weak ; though , to be sure , strong tea is unwholesome , '' and so on . 
Next came Mr. Pix , the despotic wielder of the black pencil , a decided kind of man , who seemed to look upon all social relations as mere business details , respectable but trivial . 
As a chair was wanting , he sat astride on a small table . 
Near him was Mr. Specht , who spoke much , and dealt in assertions that every one else disputed . 
Then there was a Mr. Baumann , with short hair and thoughtful aspect , very regular in his attendance at church , a contributor to every missionary association , and , as his friends declared , much inclined to be a missionary himself , but that the force of habit retained him in Germany and with the firm . 
Anton remarked with pleasure the courtesy and good feeling that prevailed . 
Being tired , he soon made his retreat ; and having contradicted no one , and been friendly to all , he left a favorable impression behind . 
Meanwhile , Veitel Itzig made his way through the narrow and crowded streets till he reached a large house , the lower windows of which were secured by iron bars ; while , on the drawing-room floor , the panes of glass were large , and showed white curtains within ; the attic windows again being dirty , dusty , and here and there broken ; in short , the house had a disreputable air , reminding one of an old gipsy who has thrown a new and gayly-colored shawl over her rags . 
Into this house he entered , kissing his hand to a smart maid-servant , who resented the liberty . 
The dirty staircase led to a white door , on which the name `` Hirsch Ehrenthal '' was inscribed . 
He rang ; and an old woman , with a torn cap , appeared , who , having heard his request , called out to those within , `` Here is one from Ostrau , Itzig Veitel by name , who wishes to speak to Mr. Ehrenthal . '' 
A loud voice replied , `` Let him wait ; '' and the clatter of plates showed that the man of business meant to finish his supper before he gave the future millionnaire a hearing . 
Accordingly , Veitel sat upon the steps admiring the brass plate and the white door , and wondering how the name of Itzig would look upon just such another . 
That led him to reflect how far he was from being as rich as this Hirsch Ehrenthal ; and , feeling the half dozen ducats his mother had sewn into his waistcoat , he began to speculate how much he could daily add to them , provided the rich man took him into his service . 
In the midst of these reflections the door was flung open , and Mr. Ehrenthal stood before him , no longer the same man we saw in the morning ; the deference , the kindness , all were gone . 
No Eastern despot so proud and lofty . 
Itzig felt his own insignificance , and stood humbly before his master . 
`` Here is a letter to Baruch Goldmann , in which Mr. Ehrenthal has sent for me , '' began Veitel . 
`` I wrote Goldmann word to send you , that I might see whether you would suit ; nothing is yet settled , '' was the dignified reply . 
`` I came that you might see me , sir . '' 
`` And why did you come so late , young Itzig ? 
this is not the time for business . '' 
`` I wished to show myself to-night , in case , sir , you should have any commission to give me for to-morrow . 
I thought I might be useful , as it is market-day ; and I know most of the coachmen of the farmers who come in with rape-seed and other produce ; and I know many of the brokers too . '' 
`` Are your papers in good order , '' was the reply , `` so that I may have no trouble with the police ? '' 
When Veitel had given satisfaction on this important subject , Ehrenthal vouchsafed to say , `` If I take you into my house , you must turn your hand to any thing that I , or Mrs. Ehrenthal , or my son , may chance to order ; you must clean the boots and shoes , and run errands for the cook . '' 
`` I will do any thing , Mr. Ehrenthal , to make you satisfied with me , '' was the humble reply . 
`` For this you will receive two dollars a month ; and , if I make a good bargain by your assistance , you will have your share . 
As for your sleeping-quarters , they had better be with Löbel Pinkus , that I may know where to find you when wanted . '' 
