cried Anton . 
`` Yes , '' said Fink ; `` it was good firm sand . 
I found myself on shore about a mile to leeward of my clothes , and fell down like a dead seal . '' 
Then stopping , and with a steady look at Anton , `` Now , mate , get ready ! '' 
cried he ; `` take your legs from under the bench ; I am going to tack and make for shore . 
Now for it ! '' 
At that moment came a violent gust of wind ; the mast creaked , the boat heeled over , and could not right herself . 
According to promise , Anton went to the bottom without any more ado . 
Quick as lightning Fink dived after him , brought him up , and , with a violent effort , reached a spot whence they could wade ashore . 
`` Deuce take it , '' gasped Fink ; `` take hold of my arm , ca n't you ? '' 
But Anton , who had swallowed a quantity of water , was hardly conscious , and only waved Fink off . 
`` I do believe he 'll be down again , '' cried the latter , impatiently , catching hold of him and making for the shore . 
A crowd had by this time assembled round the spot where Fink was holding his companion in his arms and exhorting him to recover himself . 
At length Anton opened his eyes . 
`` Why , Wohlfart , '' said Fink , anxiously , `` how goes it , my lad ? 
You have taken the matter too much to heart . 
Poncho y ponche ! '' 
cried he to the by-standers ; `` a cloak and a glass of rum -- that will soon bring him round . '' 
A cloak was willingly lent , and our hero carried to the builder 's house . 
`` Here is an end of boat , sails , oars , and all , '' said Fink , reproachfully , `` and of our coats into the bargain . 
Did not I tell you that it was a good-for-nothing tub ? '' 
For an hour , at least , Fink tended his victim with the greatest tenderness , but it was late before Anton was sufficiently recovered to walk home . 
The next day was Sunday , and the principal 's birth-day besides . 
On this important occasion , the gentlemen of the office spent some hours after dinner with the family circle , and coffee and cigars were served . 
As they were sitting down to table , the good-natured cousin said to Fink , `` The whole town is full of the fearful risk which you and Mr. Wohlfart ran yesterday . '' 
`` Not worth mentioning , my dear lady ! '' 
replied Fink , carelessly ; `` I only wanted to see how Master Wohlfart would behave in drowning . 
I threw him into the water , and he was within a hair 's - breadth of remaining at the bottom , considering it indiscreet to give me the trouble of saving him . 
Only a German is capable of such self-sacrificing politeness . '' 
`` But , '' cried the cousin , `` this is a sheer tempting of Providence . 
It is dreadful to think of it ! '' 
`` It is dreadful to think of the impurity of your river . 
The water sprites that inhabit it must be a dirty set . 
But Wohlfart did not mind their mud . 
He fell into their arms with enthusiasm . 
He threw both legs over the boat 's edge before there was any occasion . '' 
`` You told me to do so , '' cried Anton , in self-exculpation . 
`` Poor Mr. Wohlfart ! '' 
exclaimed the astonished cousin . 
`` But your coats ! 
This morning I met a policeman with the wet bundle in his arms , and it was he who told me of your accident . '' 
`` The coats were fished up at an early hour , '' said Fink , `` but Karl doubts whether they will ever dry . 
Meanwhile , Wohlfart 's boots are on a voyage of discovery toward the ocean . '' 
Anton blushed with anger at his friend 's jests , and looked stealthily toward the upper end of the table . 
The merchant glanced darkly at the cheerful Fink . 
Sabine was pale and downcast -- the cousin alone was fluent in her pity for the coats . 
The dinner was more solemn than usual . 
After the plates were removed , Mr. Liebold rose to fulfill the arduous duty imposed upon him by his position -- to propose the health of their principal . 
He took all possible pains not to retract or qualify his eulogiums and good wishes ; but even this toast fell flat -- a certain painful excitement seemed to prevail at the head of the table . 
After dinner they all stood round in groups , drinking their coffee ; and bold spirits -- Mr. Pix , for instance , ventured upon a cigar as well . 
Meanwhile , Anton roamed through the suite of rooms , looking at the paintings on the walls , turning over albums , and fighting off ennui as well as he could . 
In this way he reached the end room , and stopped there in amazement . 
Sabine stood before him , tears falling from her eyes . 
She was sobbing silently , her slender form shaken by the conflict within , but yet she was trying to repress her grief with an energy that only made it the more touching . 
As Anton , filled with deepest sympathy , turned to go , she looked round , composed herself , passed her handkerchief over her eyes , and said kindly , `` Take care , Mr. Wohlfart , that the foolhardiness of your friend leads you into no fresh danger . 
My brother would be very sorry that your intercourse with him should prove an injury to you . '' 
`` Miss Sabine , '' replied Anton , looking reverentially at her , `` Fink is as noble as he is reckless . 
He saved me at the peril of his own life . '' 
`` Oh yes ! '' 
cried Sabine , with an expression Anton did not quite understand ; `` he loves to play with whatever is sacred to others . '' 
At that moment Mr. Jordan came to request her to give them some music . 
She went at once . 
Anton was excited to the utmost . 
Sabine Schröter stood so high in the estimation of the gentlemen of the counting-house that they paid her the compliment of rarely naming her . 
Most of the younger clerks had been desperately in love with her ; and though the flames had burned down for want of fuel , yet the embers still glowed in the innermost recesses of their hearts . 
All alike would have fought for her against any enemy in the world . 
But they looked upon her as a marble saint , a being beyond the influence of human weaknesses . 
Anton , however , now doubted whether she were really this . 
To him , too , the young lady of the house had been like the moon , only visible afar off , and on one side . 
Daily he sat opposite her , saw the delicate sadness of her face -- the deep glance of her beautiful eyes -- heard her speak the same commonplace sentences , and knew no more of her . 
All at once an accident made him her confidant . 
He felt sure , by many a token , that this grief was connected with Fink ; and although he had for him the devoted admiration that an unsophisticated youth readily bestows upon a daring and experienced comrade , yet , in this case , he found himself enlisted on the lady 's side against his friend ; he resolved to watch him narrowly , and be to her a brotherly protector , a faithful confidant -- all , in short , that was sympathizing and helpful . 
A few hours later , Sabine sat in the window with folded hands . 
Her brother had laid aside his newspaper , and was watching her anxiously . 
At last he rose , stepped silently up to her , and laid his hand on her head . 
She clasped him in her arms . 
There they stood , leaning against each other , two friends who had so shared their lives that each knew the other 's thoughts without a spoken word . 
Tenderly stroking his sister 's hair , the merchant began : `` You know what large dealings we have with Fink 's father ? '' 
`` I know that you are not satisfied with the son . '' 
`` I could not help taking him into our house , but I regret the hour I did so . '' 
`` Do not be hard upon him , '' pleaded the sister , kissing her brother 's hand ; `` think how much there is that is noble in his character . '' 
`` I am not unjust toward him . 
But it is yet to be proved whether he will be a blessing or a curse to his fellow-men . 
He may become a more paltry aristocrat , who wastes his energies in refined self-indulgence , or a covetous , unscrupulous money-maker , like his uncle in America . '' 
`` He is not heartless ! '' 
murmured Sabine ; `` his friendship for Wohlfart shows that . '' 
`` He does but play with him -- throws him into the water , and picks him out again . '' 
`` Nay , '' cried Sabine ; `` he esteems his good sense and high principles , and feels that he has a better nature than his own . '' 
`` Do not deceive yourself and me , '' replied the merchant ; `` I know the fascination that this strange man has long had for you . 
I have said nothing , for I could trust you . 
But , now that I see that he makes you really unhappy , I can not but wish for his absence . 
He shall leave our house without delay . '' 
`` Oh no , no ! '' 
cried Sabine , wringing her hands . 
`` No , Traugott , that shall not , must not be ! 
If there be any way of rescuing him from the evil influences of his past life , it is the being with you . 
To see , to take part in the regular activity , the high honor of your mercantile career , is salvation to him . 
Brother , '' continued she , taking his hand , `` I have no secrets from you ; you have found out my foolish weakness ; but I promise you that henceforth it shall be no more to me than the recollection of some tale that I have read . 
Never by look or word will I betray it ; only do not , oh ! 
do not be angry with him -- do not send him away , and that on my account . '' 
`` But how can I tell whether his remaining here may not subject you to a painful conflict ? '' 
inquired the merchant . 
`` Our position as regards him is difficult enough without this . 
He ranks as a brilliant match in every sense of the word . 
His father has intrusted him to me . 
If an attachment were to spring up between you , it would be treachery to his father to withhold it from him . 
It might seem to him as if we had a wish to secure the young heir ; and he , accustomed as he is to easy conquests , might perhaps laugh at what he would call your weakness and my long-headedness . 
The very thought calls up all my pride . '' 
`` Brother , '' cried Sabine , with burning cheeks , `` do not forget that I am your sister . 
I am a merchant 's daughter , and he would never belong entirely to our class . 
I am as proud as you , and have always had the conviction that not all the love in the world could ever fill the gulf between us . 
Trust me , '' continued she , with tears ; `` you shall see no more sad looks . 
But be kinder to him ; think what his fate has been , tossed about among strangers ; think how he has grown up without affection , without a home ; spoiled in many ways , but still with a high sense of honor , an abhorrence of all that is little . 
Trust me , and be kinder to him . '' 
`` He shall stay , '' said the merchant ; `` but besides , my darling , there is another whom we should seek to guard from his influence . '' 
`` Wohlfart ! '' 
cried Sabine , cheerfully ; `` oh , I will answer for him . '' 
`` You undertake a good deal . 
So he , too , is a favorite ? '' 
`` He is tender-hearted and honorable , and devoted to you ; and he has plenty of spirit too . 
Trust him , he will be a match for Fink . 
I happened to meet him at the time that Fink had insulted him , and I have given him a place in my heart ever since . '' 
`` How does this heart find room for every thing ? '' 
cried the merchant , playfully ; `` above and beyond all , the great store-room , the oaken presses of our grandmother , and the piles of white linen ; then , in a side-chamber apart , your strict brother ; then -- '' `` Then all the others in the ante-chamber , '' broke in Sabine . 
Meanwhile Fink entered Anton 's room , humming a tune , little suspecting the storm in the front part of the house , and , truth to tell , little caring what they thought about him there . 
`` I have fallen into disgrace on your account , my son , '' cried he , merrily . 
`` His majesty has treated me all the day long with killing indifference , and the black-haired has not deigned me a single glance -- good sort of people , but desperately matter of fact . 
That Sabine has at bottom plenty of life and spirit , but she plagues herself about the merest trifles . 
She would raise a question as to whether it was a fly 's duty to scratch its head with the right leg or the left . 
Why , you are on the way to be looked upon as the ` Mignon ' of the counting-house , and I as your evil genius . 
Never mind ; to-morrow we will go together to the swimming-school . '' 
And so it was . 
From that day forth Fink delighted to initiate his young friend into all his own pursuits . 
He taught him to swim , to ride , to leap , to shoot at a mark , and even threatened to get him an invitation to a hunting-party . 
Against this Anton vehemently protested . 
Anton on his side rewarded him by the greatest devotion . 
They were happy evenings for both when , sitting under the shadow of the condor 's wings , they chatted away and laughed so loud that through the open window the sound reached old Pluto the watch-dog , who , feeling himself the guardian of the establishment , and considered by all as a distinguished member of it , woke up to bay out his hearty sympathy with their enjoyment -- ay , they were happy hours ; for their intimacy ripened for the first time in the life of either into sincere friendship . 
And yet Anton never left off watching Fink 's bearing to Sabine ; although he did not name her to him , he was always expecting to hear of some important event : a betrothal , or a quarrel between Fink and the merchant , or something extraordinary . 
But nothing of the kind occurred ; the solemn daily meals went on , and Sabine 's behavior to both friends was the same as before . 
Another year had passed away , the second since our apprentice 's arrival , and again the roses blossomed . 
One evening Anton bought a large nosegay of them , and knocked with them at the door of Jordan , who was a great lover of flowers . 
He was surprised to find all the clerks assembled , as they had been on the day of his arrival , and he saw at a glance that they were embarrassed by his appearance . 
Jordan hurried to meet him , and , with a slight degree of confusion , requested that he would leave them for about an hour , as they were discussing a subject into which he , as an apprentice , could not enter . 
It was the first time that these kind-hearted men had ever allowed him to feel any difference between his position and theirs , and therefore his banishment slightly depressed him . 
He carried back his nosegay , placed it with a resigned air upon his own table , and took up a book . 
Meanwhile a solemn deliberation was going on in Jordan 's room . 
He rose , struck the table with a ruler , and went on to state that a colleague having , as they all knew , left the business , a vacancy had occurred , which Mr. Schröter himself wished should be filled by Wohlfart ; but as his case would thus be made exceptional -- he having been an apprentice only two years instead of four -- the principal kindly referred the decision to the body of the clerks . 
An imposing silence succeeded to these words , which was at length interrupted by Mr. Pix proposing punch , and that they should order in the kettle for the tea-drinkers . 
The other gentlemen preserved a dignified silence , looked with solemnity at the preparations going forward , and each felt his responsibility and his importance as a man and a clerk . 
The next question was , `` How shall we vote ? '' 
It was decided that the youngest should begin . 
Specht was the youngest . 
`` First of all , I have to remark that Herr von Fink is not present , '' said he , looking around in some excitement . 
A general murmur arose , `` He does not belong to us ; he is a volunteer . '' 
`` In that case , '' continued Specht , somewhat taken down by this universal opposition , `` I am of opinion that Anton ought , according to custom , to remain an apprentice for four years ; but , as he is a good fellow , and likely to prove useful , I am also of opinion that an exception should be made in his favor ; while I propose that , in order to remind him of his former position , he be appointed to make tea for us during a year , and to mend a hundred pens for each of his colleagues . '' 
`` Stuff and nonsense ! '' 
muttered Pix ; `` you have always such overstrained notions . '' 
`` What do you mean by overstrained notions ? '' 
inquired Specht , angrily . 
`` I must call you to order , '' said Mr. Jordan . 
The rest of the colleagues proceeded to give in their adherence to the plan . 
Baumann did so with enthusiasm . 
At last it came to the turn of Pix . 
`` Gentlemen , '' said he , `` what is the use of much talking ? 
His knowledge of business is fair , considering that he is but a young fellow ; his manner is pleasant -- the servants respect him . 
According to my notions , he is too tender and considerate ; but it is not given to all to manage others . 
He is a poor hand at cards , and can make little or nothing of punch -- that 's about what he is . 
But , as these last peculiarities have nothing to do with the present proposal , I see no reason why he should not , from the present date , become our colleague . '' 
Then came Purzel and Liebold , who each gave his vote in his own characteristic way , and the affair was settled . 
Baumann was about to rush off and call Anton , when Specht insisted upon the solemnity of a deputation , and Liebold and Pix were appointed to escort the astonished youth , who could not conceive what it all meant , till Jordan , advancing to meet him , said , with the utmost cordiality , `` Dear Wohlfart , you have now worked with us two years ; you have taken pains to learn the business , and have won the friendship of us all . 
It is the will of the principal , and our united wish , that the term of your apprenticeship should be abridged , and that you should to-morrow enter upon your duties as a clerk . 
We congratulate you sincerely , and hope that , as our colleague , you will show us the same friendly regard that you have hitherto shown . '' 
So said worthy Mr. Jordan , and held out his hand . 
Anton stood for a moment as if stupefied , and then there followed an amount of hand-shaking and congratulation never witnessed before in that apartment . 
Next came toasts , speeches , and , after an evening of most hearty enjoyment , the colleagues separated at a late hour . 
Anton could not go to bed , however , without imparting his good fortune to his friend Fink . 
So he went to meet him on his return home , and told him the important event in the bright moonlight . 
Fink made a grand flourish in the air with his riding-whip , and said , `` Bravo ! 
bravo ! 
I should not have given our despot credit for such contempt of precedent . 
You will be launched a year the sooner into life . '' 
The following day the principal called the new clerk into his own sanctuary , and received his thanks with a smile . 
Last of all , at dinner , the ladies congratulated the new official . 
Sabine even came down the whole length of the table to where Anton stood , and greeted him in the kindest terms . 
A bottle of wine was placed beside each cover ; while the merchant , raising his glass , and bowing to our happy hero , said , with earnest kindness , `` Dear Wohlfart , we drink to the memory of your excellent father . '' 
One winter morning Anton was reading diligently the `` Last of the Mohicans , '' while the first snow-flakes were dancing down outside his window , when Fink came in hurriedly , saying , `` Anton , let me have a look at your wardrobe ? '' 
He opened the different drawers , examined their contents , and , shaking his head , said , `` I will send my tailor to measure you for a new suit . '' 
`` I have no money , '' replied Anton , laughing . 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
cried Fink ; `` the tailor will give you as much credit as you like . '' 
`` I do not , however , choose to buy on credit , '' said Anton , settling himself upon the sofa to argue the point with his friend . 
`` You must make an exception in this case . 
It is high time that you should see more of society , and I am going to introduce you . '' 
Anton started up , blushed , and exclaimed , `` It wo n't do , Fink ; I am quite a stranger , and have no position to give me confidence . '' 
`` That 's the very reason why you must go into society , '' replied Fink , severely . 
`` You must get rid of this miserable timidity as soon as possible . 
Can you waltz ? 
Have you any remote conception of the figures of a quadrille ? '' 
`` A few years ago I had some dancing-lessons in Ostrau . '' 
`` Very well ; now you shall have some more . 
Frau von Baldereck informed me yesterday that a few families purposed instituting a private assembly , where their half-grown chickens might learn to spread their wings , secure from birds of prey . 
It is to be held in her house , as she has a chicken of her own to bring up for the market . 
It 's the very thing for you , and I will introduce you . '' 
`` Fink , '' said our hero , `` this is another of your mad adventures . 
Frau von Baldereck belongs to the aristocratic set ; you would only occasion me the mortification of being rejected , or , worse , treated with hauteur . '' 
`` Is he not enough to put a saint out of patience ? '' 
cried Fink , in dudgeon ; `` you and your class have more reason to hold your heads high than half of those here assembled . 
And yet you are the very people , with your timidity and subserviency , to keep up their foolish pretensions ! 
How can you suppose yourself their inferior ? 
I should never have expected to have found such meanness in you . '' 
`` You mistake me , '' replied Anton , angry in his turn . 
`` I am not wanting in self-respect ; but it would be foolish and unbecoming to intrude into a circle where I am not wished for , and where a man would be despised for being in a counting-house . '' 
`` Nonsense ! 
you are wished for . 
There is a paucity of gentlemen . 
The lady of the house -LRB- I am a favorite -- no honor , mind you -RRB- has asked me to introduce three young men of my acquaintance , and so nothing can be more simple . 
You pay for your lessons like another ; and whether you whirl round a countess or a young bourgeoise , what matters it ? '' 
`` It wo n't do , '' replied Anton , shaking his head ; `` I have an inward conviction that it is unbecoming , and wish to be guided by this . '' 
`` Well , then , '' said Fink , impatiently , `` I have one other proposal to make . 
You shall this very day call with me upon Frau von Baldereck . 
I will introduce you as Anton Wohlfart , one of the clerks in the firm of T. O. Schröter . 
Not a word shall be said of these dancing-lessons , and you shall see that she herself will invite you . 
If she does not , or if she shows the very least hauteur , you can stay away . 
This you can not object to . '' 
Anton demurred . 
The case seemed by no means so clear as Fink made it out , but he was no longer able to weigh it dispassionately . 
For years past he had yearned for the free , dignified , refined life of the upper circles . 
Whenever he heard music -- whenever he read of the doings of the aristocracy , the turreted castle and the noble maiden rose before him in the golden light of poetry . 
He consented to the proposal of his experienced friend . 
An hour later came the tailor , and Fink himself determined the cut of the new suit with a technical precision which impressed the tailor no less than it did Anton . 
That afternoon , as the November sun melted away the snow , Fink , with a large bundle of papers in his hand , loitered down the most unfrequented streets , evidently on the look-out for some one or other . 
At last he crossed over , and encountered , apparently to his surprise , two elegantly-dressed gentlemen who were sauntering , on the opposite side . 
`` Ah ! 
Fink . '' 
`` Oh , how do you do ? '' 
`` Where are you wandering to in this absent mood ? '' 
inquired young Von Tönnchen . 
`` I am looking , '' replied Fink , in a melancholy voice , `` for two good fellows who will come and drink a bottle of wine with me this gloomy afternoon , and assist me in a little matter of business beforehand . '' 
`` What ! 
a duel ? '' 
inquired Herr von Zernitz . 
`` No , fair sir , '' replied Fink ; `` you know that I have forsworn all evil ways , and am become a hard-working man of business , a worthy son of the firm of Fink and Becker . 
I only want two witnesses to a legal document , which must be executed at once . 
Will you accompany me for a quarter of an hour to the notary -- for the rest of the evening to Feroni 's ? '' 
The two gentlemen were only too happy . 
Fink took them to a well-known lawyer , to whom he delivered a long and important-looking document , written in English , and setting forth that Fritz von Fink was the lawful proprietor of the territory of Fowling-floor , in the State of New York . 
This , he explained to the lawyer , he now wished to make over to Anton Wohlfart , at present clerk in the house of T. O. Schröter , imploring the man of business , at the same time , to keep the matter secret , which he duly promised ; and the two witnesses attested the deed . 
As they left , Fink earnestly besought them never to reveal the circumstance to Mr. Wohlfart . 
They both gave him their word of honor , evincing , however , some degree of curiosity as to the whole transaction . 
`` I can not explain it to you , '' said Fink , `` there being about it a political mystery that is not quite clear even to myself . '' 
`` Is the estate large that you have just ceded ? '' 
inquired Von Tönnchen . 
`` An estate ! '' 
said Fink , looking up to the sky ; `` it is no estate . 
It is a district , mountain and vale , wood and water -- but a small part , certainly , of America . 
But then , what is large ? 
On the other side of the Atlantic we measure things by a very different scale to that used in this corner of Germany . 
At all events , I shall never again call the property mine . '' 
`` But who is this Wohlfart ? '' 
asked the lieutenant . 
`` You shall make his acquaintance , '' answered Fink . 
`` He is a handsome youth from the heart of the province , over whom a remarkable destiny hovers -- of which , however , he knows , and is to know , nothing . 
But enough of business . 
I have a plan for you this winter . 
You are old boys , it is true ; but you must take dancing-lessons . '' 
And , so saying , he led the way into Feroni 's , where the three were soon deep in a bottle of port wine . 
Frau von Baldereck was one of the main supports of the very best society , consisting as it did of the families of the county nobility , the officers , and a few of the highest officials . 
It was difficult to say what had given this lady her social importance , for she was neither very well connected , nor very rich , nor very elegant , nor very intellectual . 
Perhaps it was this absence of all marked superiority which accounted for it . 
She had a very large acquaintance , was rigidly conventional , valued every one according to a social standard , and , therefore , her estimate was always attended to . 
She had a young daughter who promised to be very like her , and she inhabited a suite of large rooms on a first floor , where for many years dramatic representations , tableaux vivants , rehearsals , etc. , had been constantly held . 
This influential lady was deep in consultation with her mantuamaker as to how the new dress of her daughter could be best made so as to display her faultless bust without exciting comment at the dancing-lesson , when her favorite , Fink , was announced . 
Dismissing a while the weighty consideration , she hurried down to give him a most gracious reception . 
After a few introductory remarks upon the last evening party at which they had met , Fink began : `` I have obeyed your orders , lady patroness , and shall bring you three gentlemen . '' 
`` And who are they ? '' 
`` First , Lieutenant von Zernitz . '' 
`` A great acquisition , '' was the reply , for the lieutenant was considered an accomplished officer . 
He made neat verses , was great in the arrangement of tableaux vivants , and was said to have written a tale in some annual or other . 
`` Herr von Zernitz is a delightful companion . '' 
`` Yes , '' said Fink ; `` but he can not bear port wine . 
The second is young Von Tönnchen . '' 
`` An old family , '' observed the mistress of the house ; `` but is he not a little -- just a little -- wild ? '' 
added she , modestly . 
`` By no means , '' said Fink ; `` though sometimes , perhaps , he makes other people so . '' 
`` And the third ? '' 
inquired the lady . 
`` The third is a Mr. Wohlfart . '' 
`` Wohlfart ! '' 
returned she , somewhat perplexed ; `` I do not know the name . '' 
`` Very likely not , '' said Fink , coolly ; `` Mr. Wohlfart came here from the country two or three years ago , to get an insight into the mysteries of business ; he is now in Schröter 's office , like myself . '' 
`` But , my dear Fink ! '' 
interposed the lady . 
Fink was by no means taken aback . 
Comfortably reclining in his arm-chair , he went on : `` Mr. Wohlfart is a striking and interesting person . 
There are some singular circumstances connected with him . 
I think him the finest fellow I ever met with . 
He comes from Ostrau , and calls himself the son of an accountant there , now dead . 
But there hangs a mystery over him , of which he himself knows nothing . '' 
`` But , Herr von Fink , '' said the lady , anxious to be heard . 
Fink looked intently at the cornice , and went on . 
`` He is already the possessor of certain lands in America . 
The title-deeds have passed through my hands confidentially ; but he must know nothing of it for the present . 
I myself believe that he has every prospect of more than a million some future day . 
Did you ever see the late archduke ? '' 
`` No , '' said the lady , with some curiosity . 
`` There are people , '' continued Fink , `` who maintain that Anton is strikingly like him . 
What I have said is a secret , however , of which my friend knows nothing . 
One thing is certain , that the late emperor , on the occasion of his last journey through the province , stopped at Ostrau , and had a long conversation with the pastor there . '' 
Now this last circumstance was true , and Anton had chanced to mention it to Fink among other of his childish recollections . 
He had also stated that the pastor in question had been an army-chaplain in the last war , and that the emperor had asked him in what corps he had served . 
Fink , however , did not think it necessary to descend to such minutiæ . 
Frau von Baldereck declared herself ready to receive Mr. Wohlfart . 
`` One word more , '' said Fink , rising ; `` what I have confided to you , good fairy '' -- the fairy weighed upward of ten stone -- `` must remain a secret between us . 
I am sure I may trust to your delicacy what , were it to be spoken of by others , I should resent as a liberty taken with me and my friend , Mr. Wohlfart . '' 
He pronounced the name so ironically that the lady felt convinced that this gentleman , now under the disguise of a clerk , would soon burst upon the world as a prince . 
`` But , '' said she , as they parted , `` how shall I introduce him to my acquaintance ? '' 
`` Only as my best friend ; for whom I will answer , in every respect , as a great addition to our circle . '' 
When Fink found himself in the street , he muttered irreverently enough , `` How the old lady swallowed all my inventions , to be sure ! 
As the son of plain honest parents , they would have given the poor lad the cold shoulder ; now , however , they will all behave with a courtesy that will charm my young friend . 
I never thought that old sand-hole and its tumble-down hut would turn out so useful . '' 
The seed that Fink had sown fell on fruitful soil . 
Frau von Baldereck , who had a maternal design upon him , was only too glad to have a chance of him as her daughter 's partner in these dancing-lessons , which she had not expected him to attend . 
The few hints that she ventured to throw out about Anton being confirmed by certain mysterious observations made by two officers , a rumor became current that a gentleman of immense fortune , for whom the Emperor of Russia had purchased extensive possessions in America , would make his appearance at the dancing-lessons . 
A few days later , Anton was taken by Fink to call upon Frau von Baldereck , from whom he received the most gracious , nay , pressing invitation to join their projected réunions . 
The visit over , Anton , tripping down stairs on his Mentor 's arm , remarked , in all simplicity , that he was surprised to find it so easy to converse with people of distinction . 
Fink muttered something , which might or might not be an assent , and said , `` On the whole , I am satisfied with you . 
Only you must , this winter , get over that confounded habit of blushing . 
It 's bad enough in a black neckcloth , but what will it be in a white one ? 
You will look like an apoplectic Cupid . '' 
Frau von Baldereck , however , thought this modesty exceedingly touching ; and when her daughter announced decidedly that she liked Fink much the best of the two , she shook her head , and smiling , replied , `` You are no judge , dear ; there is a nobility and natural grace in every thing the stranger does and says that is perfectly enchanting . '' 
Meanwhile the great day of the opening lesson arrived , and Fink , having superintended Anton 's toilette , carried him off to the scene of action . 
As they went down stairs , the door of Jordan 's room softly opened , and Specht , stretching out his long neck to look after them , cried out to those within , `` He is gone . 
Did you ever hear of such a thing ? 
Why , there are only the nobility there ! 
A pretty story it will make . '' 
`` After all , why should he not go , since he is invited ? '' 
said the good-natured Jordan . 
To this no one knew exactly what to answer , till Pix cried angrily , `` I do not like his accepting such an invitation . 
He belongs to us and to the office . 
He will learn no good among such people . '' 
`` These dancing-lessons must be curious scenes , '' chimed in Specht ; `` frivolous in the extreme , mere love-making and dueling -- for which we know Wohlfart has always had a turn . 
Some fine morning we shall have him going out with pistols under his arm , and not returning on his feet . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
replied the irritable Pix ; `` they do n't fight more than other people . '' 
`` Then he will have to speak French ? '' 
`` Why not Russ ? '' 
asked Mr. Pix . 
At which the two fell into a dispute as to what was the medium of communication in the great lady 's salon . 
However , all the colleagues agreed in considering that Wohlfart had taken an exceedingly bold and mysterious step , and one pregnant with calamitous consequences . 
Nor was this the only discussion on the subject . 
`` He is gone ! '' 
announced the cousin , returning from an interview with some of the domestics . 
`` Another trick of his friend Fink , '' said the merchant . 
Sabine looked down at her work . 
`` I am glad , '' said she at length , `` that Fink should use his influence to give his friend pleasure . 
He himself does not care for dancing , and I am sure that to attend these lessons is in him an act of self-denial ; and I am also truly glad that Wohlfart , who has hitherto led such a solitary life , should go a little into society . '' 
`` But into such society as this ? 
How is it possible ! '' 
cried the cousin . 
Sabine tapped the table with her thimble . 
`` Fink has spoken highly of him , and that was good and kind . 
And , in spite of the grave face of my dear brother , he shall , as a reward , have his favorite dish to-morrow . '' 
`` Ham , with Burgundy sauce , '' added the cousin . 
Meanwhile Fink and Anton were entering Frau von Baldereck 's lighted rooms , and Fink , whispering , `` Come , summon all your courage ; you have nothing to fear , '' led his unresisting friend up to the lady of the house , by whom they were most graciously received , and who , saying at once to Anton , `` I will introduce you to Countess Pontak , '' led him off to a gaunt lady of uncertain age , who sat on a slightly-elevated seat , surrounded by a small court of her own . 
`` Dear Betty , this is Mr. Wohlfart . '' 
Anton saw at once that `` dear Betty '' had a nose of parchment , thin lips , and a most unpleasing countenance . 
He bowed before her with the resigned air of a prisoner , while she began to cross-examine him as to who he was and whence he came , till his shyness was fast changing into annoyance , when Fink stepped in . 
`` My friend , proud lady , is half Slavonic , though he passionately protests against any doubts cast upon his German origin . 
I recommend him to your kindness . 
You have just given a proof of your talent for investigation , now give my friend the benefit of the gentle indulgence for which we all admire you . '' 
The ladies smiled , the gentlemen turned away to hide their laughter , and Betty sat there with ruffled feathers , like some small bird of prey whom a larger has robbed of its victim . 
As for Anton , he was hurrying away into a corner to recover , when he felt a light tap on his arm , and heard a fresh young voice say , `` Mr. Wohlfart , do you not remember your old friend ? 
This is the second time that I have been obliged to speak first . '' 
Anton turned , and saw a tall , slight figure , with fair hair , and large dark blue eyes , smiling at him . 
The expression of delight on his face was so unmistakable that Lenore could not help telling him how glad she too was to see him again . 
Soon they were in full conversation ; they had met but three times in their lives , and yet had so much to say . 
At last the young lady reminded him that he must now speak to others , told him to join her when the music began , and , with the majesty of a queen , crossed the room to her mother . 
Anton was now hardened against all social terrors , and his embarrassment over and gone . 
He joined Fink , who introduced him to a dozen gentlemen , not one of whose names he remembered , caring for them no more than for poplars along a high road . 
But this audacious mood vanished when he approached the baroness . 
There were the delicate features , the unspeakable refinement , which had so impressed him when he saw her first . 
She at once discovered that he was unaccustomed to society , and looked at him with a curiosity not unmingled with some misgiving ; but Lenore cut the interview as short as she could by saying that it was time to take their places in the dance . 
`` He waltzes tolerably -- too much swing , perhaps , '' muttered Fink to himself . 
`` A distinguished-looking pair , '' cried Frau von Baldereck , as Anton and Lenore whirled past . 
`` She talks too much to him , '' said the baroness to her husband , who happened to join her . 
`` To him ? '' 
asked he ; `` who is the young man ? 
I have never seen the face before . '' 
`` He is one of the adherents of Herr von Fink -- he is alone here -- has rich relatives in Russia or America ; I do not like the acquaintance for Lenore . '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
replied the baron ; `` he looks a good , innocent sort of youth , and is far better suited for this child 's - play than the old boys that I see around . 
There is Bruno Tönnchen , whose only pleasure is to make the girls blush , or teach them to leave off blushing . 
Lenore looks uncommonly well to-night . 
I am going to my whist ; send for me when the carriage is ready . '' 
Anton heard none of these comments upon him ; and if the hum of the company around had been as loud as that of the great bell of the city 's highest steeple , he would not have heard it better . 
For him the whole world had shrunk to the circle round which he and his partner revolved . 
The beautiful fair head so near his own that sometimes they touched , the warm breath that played on his cheek , the unspeakable charm of the white glove that hid her small hand , the perfume of her handkerchief , the red flowers fastened to her dress -- these he saw and felt ; all besides was darkness , barrenness , nothingness . 
Suddenly the music stopped , and Anton 's world fell back into chaos . 
`` What a pity ! '' 
said Lenore , as the last note died away . 
