I could not endure to behold it , and screamed with terror , fainting . '' 
`` You demanded to see the future , and I showed it to you , '' said Cagliostro , earnestly . 
`` Though I let the light shine into your soul , still it was dark within ; you pursued the way of unbelief , and desired not to walk in the way of knowledge . 
I sent messengers twice to you to lead you in the right path , and you sent them laughing away . 
Recall what I told you in Paris . 
I will it ! '' 
`` I remember , master ; you said that in the most important days of my life you would come to me , and extend to me a helping hand : if I seized it , the first picture would be fulfilled ; if I refused it , the prison awaited me ! '' 
`` I have kept my word : to-day is an eventful day in your life ; you have risen from want and degradation -- you have mounted the first rounds of the ladder of your greatness and power . 
You are the mistress of this house . '' 
`` How did you know it ? '' 
asked Wilhelmine , astonished . 
With a pitying smile he answered : `` I know every thing that I will , and I see many things that I would willingly close my eyes upon . 
I see your future , and my soul pities you , unhappy one ; you are lost if you do not seize the hand extended to you . 
You see not the abyss which opens before you , and you will fall bleeding and with broken limbs . '' 
`` Mercy , mercy ! '' 
she groaned -- `` stretch out your hand and protect me . '' 
Wilhelmine sank as if crushed to the earth . 
Cagliostro bent over her , and stroked her cold , pale face , breathing upon her the hot breath of his lips . 
`` I will pity you -- I will protect you . 
Rise , my daughter ! '' 
He assisted her to rise , and imprinted a passionate kiss upon her hand . 
`` From this hour I count you as one of mine , '' he said ; `` you shall be received into the holy band of spirits ! 
You shall be consecrated , and enter the Inner Temple . 
Are you prepared ? '' 
`` I am , master , '' she humbly replied . 
`` To-morrow the Temple brothers will open the temple of bliss to you . 
You shall hear , see , and be silent . '' 
`` I will see , hear , and be silent , '' she murmured . 
`` When evening sets in , send away your servants , '' commanded Cagliostro . 
`` Let the doors stand open ; they shall be guarded , that no one may enter but the summoned . 
Art thou prepared ? '' 
`` I am , master ! '' 
`` Withdraw now to your room , Wilhelmine , and elevate your thoughts in devotion and contrition , and await the future . 
Kneel , my daughter , kneel ! '' 
She sank upon her knees . 
`` Bless me , master , bless me ! '' 
`` I bless you ! '' 
She felt a hot , burning sensation upon her forehead , and suddenly a bright light shone in the obscure room . 
Wilhelmine screamed , and covered her eyes . 
When she ventured to look up , only soft moonlight penetrated from the high window into the apartment , and she was alone . 
`` To-morrow -- to-morrow , at midnight ! '' 
she murmured , shuddering , and casting a timid look around . 
`` I wish I only knew whether it were a man , or whether the god Apollo has really appeared to me in human form , '' sighed Conrector Moritz , as he paced his room -- a strange , gloomy apartment , quite in keeping with the singular occupant -- gray walls , with Greek apothegms inscribed upon them in large letters -- dirty windows , pasted over with strips of paper ; high , open book-shelves , containing several hundred books , some neatly arranged , others thrown together in confusion . 
In the midst of a chaos of books and papers stood a colossal bust of the Apollo-Belvedere upon a table near the window , the whiteness and beauty of which were in singular contrast , to the dust and disorder which surrounded it . 
At the back of the room was an open wardrobe , filled with gay-colored garments . 
A beautiful carpet of brilliant colors covered the middle of the dirty floor , and upon this paced to and fro the strange occupant of this strange room , Philip Charles Moritz , conrector of the college attached to the Gray Monastery . 
There was no trace of the bearing and demeanor which distinguished him at the parade at Potsdam yesterday -- no trace of the young elegant , dressed in the latest fashion . 
To-day he wore a white garment , of no particular style , tied at the neck with a red ribbon -LRB- full sleeves , buttoned at the wrist with lace-cuffs -RRB- ; and , falling from the shoulders in scanty folds to just below the knees , it displayed his bare legs , and his feet shod with red sandals . 
His hair was unpowdered , and not tied in a cue , according to the fashion , but hung in its natural brown color , flowing quite loosely , merely confined by a red ribbon wound in among his curls , and hanging down in short bows at each temple like the frontlet of the old Romans . 
Thus , in this singular costume , belonging half to old Adam , and half to the old Romans , Philip Moritz walked back and forth upon the carpet , ruminating upon the beaming beauty of the stranger whose acquaintance he had so recently made , and whom he could not banish from his thoughts . 
`` What wicked demon induced me to go to Potsdam yesterday ? '' 
said he to himself . 
`` I who hate mankind , and believe that they are all of vulgar , ordinary material , yield to the longing for society , and am driven again into the world . '' 
A loud knocking at the door interrupted this soliloquy , and the door opened at the commanding `` Come in ! '' 
`` It is he , it is Apollo , '' cried Moritz , joyfully . 
`` Come in , sir , come in -- I have awaited you with the most ardent desire . '' 
Moritz rushed to the young gentleman , who had just closed the door , and whose beautiful , proud face lighted up with a smile at the singular apparition before him . 
`` Pardon me , I disturb you , sir ; you were about to make your toilet . 
Permit me to return after you have dressed . '' 
`` You are mistaken , '' cried Moritz , eagerly . 
`` You find me in my usual home-dress -- I like my ease and freedom , and I am of opinion that mankind will never be happy and contented until they return to their natural state , wearing no more clothing , but glorying in the beauty which bountiful Nature has bestowed upon her most loved and chosen subjects . '' 
`` Sir , '' cried the other , laughing , `` then benevolent Nature should adapt her climate accordingly , and relieve her dear creatures from the inclination to take cold . '' 
`` You may be right , '' said Moritz , earnestly , `` but we will not quarrel about it . 
Will you not keep your promise to reveal to me your name ? '' 
`` Tell me your own once more . 
Tell me if this youth , whom I see before me in this ideal dress , is the same modest young man whom I met at the parade yesterday , and who presented himself as Philip Moritz ? 
Then please to inform me whether you are the Philip Moritz who wrote a spirited and cordial letter to Johann Wolfgang Goethe some years since about the tragedy of ` Stella , ' the representation of which had been forbidden at that time ? '' 
`` Yes , I am the same Philip Moritz , who wrote to the poet Goethe to prove to him , with the most heart-felt sympathy , that we are not all such stupid fellows in Berlin as Nicolai , who pronounced the tragedy ` Stella ' immoral ; that it is only , as Goethe himself called it , ' a play for lovers . ' '' 
`` And will you not be kind enough to tell me what response the poet made to your amiable letter ? '' 
`` Proud and amiable at the same time , most gracefully he answered me , but not with words . 
He sent me his tragedy ` Stella ' bound in rose-colored satin . 
-LSB- Footnote : `` Goethe in Berlin , '' -- Sketches from his life at the anniversary of his one hundredth birthday . -RSB- 
See there ! 
it is before the bust of Apollo on my writing-table , where it has lain for three years ! '' 
`` What did he write to you at the same time ? '' 
`` Nothing -- why should he ? 
Was not the book sufficient answer ? '' 
`` Did he write nothing ? 
Permit me to say to you that Goethe behaved like a brute and an ass to you ! '' 
`` Sir , '' cried Moritz , angrily , `` I forbid you to speak of my favorite in so unbecoming a manner in my room ! '' 
`` Sir , '' cried the other , `` you dare not forbid me . 
I insist upon it that that man is sometimes a brute and an ass ! 
I can penitently acknowledge it to you , dear Moritz , for I am Johann Wolfgang Goethe himself ! '' 
`` You , you are Goethe ! '' 
shouted Moritz , as he seized him with both hands , drawing him toward the window , and gazing at him with the greatest enthusiasm and delight . 
`` Yes , yes , '' he shouted , `` you are either Apollo or Goethe ! 
The gods are not so stupid as to return to this miserable world , so you must be Goethe . 
No other man would dare to sport such a godlike face as you do , you favorite of the gods ! '' 
He then loosed his hold upon the smiling poet , and sprang to the writing-table . 
`` Listen , Apollo , '' he cried , with wild joy . 
`` Goethe is here , thy dear son is here ! 
Hurrah ! 
long live Goethe ! '' 
He took the rose-colored little book , and shouting tossed it to the ceiling , and sprang about like a mad bacchant , and finally threw himself upon the carpet , rolling over and over like a frolicksome , good-natured child upon its nurse 's lap . 
Goethe laughed aloud . 
`` What are you doing , dear Moritz ? 
What does this mean ? '' 
he asked . 
Moritz stopped a moment , looking up to Goethe with a face beaming with joy . 
`` I can not better express my happiness . 
Language is too feeble -- too poor ! '' 
`` If that is the case , then I will join you , '' said Goethe , throwing himself upon the carpet , rolling and tumbling about . 
-LSB- Footnote : This scene which I relate , and which Teichman also mentions in his `` Leaves of Memory of Goethe in Berlin , '' has been often related to me by Ludwig Tieck exactly in this manner . 
Teichman believes it was the poet Burman . 
But I remember distinctly that Ludwig Tieck told me that it was the eccentric savant , Philip Moritz , with whom Goethe made the acquaintance in this original manner . 
-- The Authoress . -RSB- 
All at once Moritz jumped up without saying a word , rushed to the wardrobe , dressed himself in modest attire in a few moments , and presented himself to Goethe , who rose from the carpet quite astounded at the sudden metamorphosis . 
Then he seized his three-cornered hat to go out , when Goethe held him fast . 
`` You are not going into the street , sir ! 
You forget that your hair is flying about as if unloosed by a divine madness . '' 
`` Sir , people are quite accustomed to see me in a strange costume , and the most of them think me crazy . '' 
`` You are aware that insane people believe that they only are sane , and that reasonable people are insane . 
You will grant me that it is much more like a crazy person to strew his hair with flour , and tie it up in that ridiculous cue , than to wear it as God made it , uncombed and unparted , as I do my beautiful hair , and for which they call me crazy ! 
But , for Heaven 's sake , where are you going ? '' 
asked Goethe , struggling to retain him . 
`` I am going to trumpet through every street in Berlin that the author of ` Werther , ' of ` Clavigo , ' of ` Gotz von Berlichingen , ' of ` Stella , ' of the most beautiful poems , is in my humble apartment . 
I will call in all the little poets and savants of Berlin ; I will drag Mammler , Nicolai , Engel , Spaulding , Gedicke , Plumicke , Karschin , and Burman here . 
They shall all come to see Wolfgang Goethe , and adore him . 
The insignificant poets shall pay homage to thee , the true poet , the favorite of Apollo . '' 
`` My dear Moritz , if you leave me for that , I will run away , and you will trouble yourself in vain . '' 
`` Impossible ; you will be my prisoner until I return . 
I shall lock you in , and you can not escape by the window , as I fortunately live on the third story . '' 
`` But I shall not wait to be looked in , '' answered Goethe , slightly annoyed . 
`` I came to see you , and if you run away I shall go also , and I advise you not to try to prevent me . '' 
His voice resounded through the apartment , growing louder as he spoke , his cheeks flushed , and his high , commanding brow contracted . 
`` Jupiter Tonans ! '' 
cried Moritz , regarding him , `` you are truly Jupiter Tonans in person , and I bow before you and obey your command . 
I shall remain to worship you , and gaze at you . '' 
`` And it may be possible to speak in a reasonable manner to me , '' said Goethe , coaxingly . 
`` Away with sentimentality and odors of incense ! 
We are no sybarites , to feed on sweet-meats and cakes ; but we are men who have a noble aim in view , attained only by a thorny path . 
Our eyes must remain fixed upon the goal , and nothing must divert them from it . '' 
`` What is the aim that we should strive for ? '' 
asked Moritz , his whole being suddenly changing , and his manner expressing the greatest depression and sadness . 
Goethe smiled . 
`` How can you ask , as if you did not know it yourself . 
Self-knowledge should be our first aim ! 
The ancient philosophers were wise to have inscribed over the entrances to their temples , ` Know thyself , ' in order to remind all approaching , to examine themselves before they entered the halls of the gods . 
Is not the human heart equally a temple ? 
only the demons and the gods strive together therein , unfortunately . 
To drive the former out , and give place to the latter , should be our aim ; and when once purified , and room is given for good deeds and great achievements , we shall not rest satisfied simply to conquer , but rise with gladness to build altars upon those places which we have freed from the demons ; for that , we must steadily keep in view truth and reality , and not hide them with a black veil , or array them in party-colored rags . 
Our ideas must be clear about the consequences of things , that we may not be like those foolish men who drink wine every evening and complain of headache every morning , resorting to preventives . '' 
Did Goethe know the struggles and dissensions which rent the heart of the young man to whom he spoke ? 
Had his searching eyes read the secrets which were hidden in that darkened soul ? 
He regarded him as he spoke with so much commiseration that Moritz 's heart softened under the genial influence of sympathy and kindness . 
A convulsive trembling seized him , his cheeks were burning red , and his features expressed the struggle within . 
Suddenly he burst into tears . 
`` I am very , very wretched , '' he sighed , with a voice suffocated by weeping , and sank upon a chair , sobbing aloud , and covering his face with his hands . 
Goethe approached him , and laid his hand gently upon his shoulder . 
`` Why are you so miserable ? 
Is there any human being who can help you ? '' 
he kindly inquired . 
`` Yes , '' sobbed Moritz ; `` there are those who could , but they will not , and I am lost . 
I stand upon the brink of a precipice , with Insanity staring at me , grinning and showing her teeth . 
I know it , but can not retreat . 
I wear the mask of madness to conceal my careworn face . 
Your divine eyes could not be deceived . 
You have not mistaken the caricature for the true face . 
You have penetrated beneath the gay tatters , and have seen the misery which sought to hide itself there . '' 
`` I saw it , and I bewailed it , as a friend pities a friend whom he would willingly aid if he only knew how to do it . '' 
`` No one can help me , '' sighed Moritz , shaking his head mournfully . 
`` I am lost , irremediably lost ! '' 
`` No one is lost who will save himself . 
He who is wrecked by a storm and tossed upon the raging sea , ought to be upon the watch for a plank by which he can save himself . 
He must keep his eyes open , and not let his arms hang idly ; for if he allows himself to be swallowed up he becomes a self-murderer , who , like Erostratus , destroyed the holy temple , and gained eternal fame through eternal shame . '' 
`` What are you saying ? '' 
cried Moritz , `` you , the author of ` Werther , ' of that immortal work which has drunk the tears of the whole world , and has become the Holy Testament for unhappy souls ! '' 
`` Rather say for lovers , '' replied Goethe , `` and add also those troubled spirits who think themselves poetical when they whine and howl ; who cry over misfortune if Fate denies them the toy which their vanity , their ambition , or their amorousness , had chosen . 
Do not burden me with what I am not guilty of ; do not say that wine is a poison , because it is not good for the sick . 
It is intended for well people ; it animates and inspires them to fresh vigor . 
Now please to consider yourself well , and not ill . '' 
`` I am ill , indeed I am ill , '' sighed Moritz . 
`` Oh ! 
continue to regard me with those eyes , which shine like stars into my benighted soul . 
I feel like one who has long wandered through the desert , his feet burnt with the sand , his hair scorched with the sun , and , exhausted with hunger and thirst , feels death approaching . 
Suddenly he discovers a green oasis , and a being with outstretched arms calling to him with a soft , angel-like voice : ` Come , save thyself in my arms ; feel that thou art not alone in the desert , for I am with thee , and will sustain thee ! ' '' 
`` And I say it to you from the bottom of my heart , '' said Goethe , affectionately . 
`` Yes , here is one , who is only too happy to aid you , who can sympathize with every sorrow , because he has himself felt it in his own breast , who may even say of himself , like Ovid : ` Nothing human is strange to me . ' 
If I can aid you , say so , and I will willingly do it . '' 
`` No , you can not , '' murmured Moritz . 
`` At least confide your grief to me ; that is an alleviation . '' 
`` Oh , how kind and generous you are ! '' 
Moritz said , pressing the hand of his new-made friend to his bosom . 
`` How much good it does me to listen to you , and look at your beautiful face ! 
I believed myself steeled against every thing that could happen to mortals ; that the fool which I would be had killed within me the higher man . 
I was almost proud to have succeeded in deceiving men ; that they mistook my grotesque mask for my real face ; that they point the finger at me , and laugh , saying to each other : ` That is a fool , an original , whom Nature herself has chosen as a kind of court fool to society . ' 
No one has understood the cry of distress of my soul . 
Those who laughed at the comical fellow by day , little dreamed of the anguish and misery in which he sighed away the night . '' 
`` You not only wrong yourself , but you wrong mankind , '' said Goethe , kindly . 
`` In the world , and in literature , you bear an honored name ; every one of education is familiar with your excellent work on ` Prosody of the German Language ' -- has read also your spirited Journey to England . 
You have no right to ask that one should separate the kernel from the shell in hastily passing by . 
If you surround yourself with a wall bedaubed with caricatures , you can not expect that people will look behind what seems an entrance to a puppet-show , to find holy temples , blooming gardens , or a church-yard filled with graves . '' 
`` That is just what I resemble , '' said Moritz , with a melancholy air . 
`` From the depths of my soul it seems so . 
Nothing but buried hopes , murdered ideals , and wishes trodden under foot . 
From childhood I have exerted myself against circumstances ; I have striven my whole life -- a pledge of my being against unpropitious Fate . 
Although the son of a poor tradesman , Nature had given me a thirst for knowledge , a love for science and art . 
On account of it I passed for a stupid idler in the family , who would not contribute to his own support . 
Occupation with books was accounted idleness and laziness by my father . 
I was driven to work with blows and ill-treatment ; and , that I might the sooner equal my father as a good shoemaker , I was bound to the stool near his own . 
During the long , fearful days I was forced to sit and draw the pitched , offensive thread through the leather , and when my arms were lame , and sank weary at my side , then I was invigorated to renewed exertion with blows . 
Finally , with the courage of despair , I fled from this life of torture . 
Unacquainted with the world , and inexperienced , I hoped for the sympathy of men , but in vain . 
No one would relieve or assist me ! 
Days and weeks long I have wandered around in the forest adjoining our little village , and lived like the animals , upon roots and herbs . 
Yet I was happy ! 
I had taken with me in my flight two books which I had received as prizes , in the happy days that my father permitted me to go to the Latin school . 
The decision of the teacher that I was created for a scholar , so terrified my father , that he took me from the school , to turn the embryo savant , who would be good for nothing , into a shoemaker , who might earn his bread . 
My two darling books remained to me . 
In the forest solitude I read Ovid and Virgil until I had memorized them , and recited them aloud , in pathetic tones , for my own amusement . 
To-day I recall those weeks in the forest stillness as the happiest , purest , and most beautiful of my life . '' 
`` And they undoubtedly are , '' said Goethe , kindly . 
`` The return to Nature is the return to one 's self . 
Who will be an able , vigorous man and remain so , must , above all things , live in and with Nature . '' 
`` But oh ! 
this happy life did not long continue , '' sighed Moritz . 
`` My father discovered my retreat , and came with sheriffs and bailiffs to seize me like a criminal -- like a wild animal . 
With my hands bound , I was brought back in broad day , amid the jeers of street boys . 
Permit me to pass in silence the degradation , the torture which followed . 
I became a burden to myself , and longed for death . 
The ill-treatment of my father finally revived my courage to run away the second time . 
I went to a large town near by , and decided to earn my living rather than return to my father . 
To fulfil the prophecy of my teacher was my ambition . 
The privations that I endured , the life I led , I will not recount to you . 
I performed the most menial service , and worked months like a beast of burden . 
For want of a shelter , I slept in deserted yards and tumble-down houses . 
Upon a piece of bread and a drink of water I lived , saving , with miserly greediness , the money which I earned as messenger or day-laborer . 
At the end of a year , I had earned sufficient to buy an old suit of clothes at a second-hand clothing-store , and present myself to the director of the Gymnasium , imploring him to receive me as pupil . 
Bitterly weeping , I opened my heart to him , and disclosed the torture of my sad life as a child , and begged him to give me the opportunity to educate myself . 
He repulsed me with scorn , and threatened to give me over to the police , as a runaway , as a vagabond , and beggar . ' 
I am no beggar ! ' 
I cried , vehemently , ' I will be under obligation to no one . 
I have money to pay for two years in advance , and during this time I shall be able to earn sufficient to pay for the succeeding two years . ' 
This softened the anger of the crabbed director ; he was friendly and kind , and promised me his assistance . '' 
`` Poor boy ! '' 
sighed Goethe . 
`` So young , and yet forced to learn that there is a power to which not only kings and princes , but mind must bow ; to which science and art have submitted , as to their Maecenas ! 
This power opened the doors of the Gymnasium to you . '' 
`` It was even thus . 
The director took pity upon me , and permitted me to enter upon my studies at once ; he did more , he assured my future . 
Oh , he was a humane and kind man ! 
When he learned that I possessed nothing but the little sum to which the drops of blood of a year 's toil still clung , then -- '' `` He returned it to you , '' interrupted Goethe , kindly . 
`` No , he offered me board , lodging , and clothing , during my course at the Gymnasium . '' 
`` That was well , '' cried Goethe . 
`` Tell me the name of this honorable man , that I may meet him and extend to him my hand . '' 
A troubled smile spread over Philip 's face . 
`` Permit me for the time being to conceal the name , '' he replied . 
`` I received the generous proposal gratefully , and asked , deeply moved , if there were no services which I could return for so much kindness and generosity . 
It proved that there were , and the director made them known to me . 
He was unmarried , hence the necessity of men 's service . 
I should be society for him -- be a companion , in fact ; I should do what every grateful son would do for his father -- help him dress , keep his room in order , and prepare his breakfast . '' 
`` That meant that you should be his servant ! '' 
cried Goethe , indignant . 
`` Only in the morning , '' replied Moritz , smiling . 
`` Evenings and nights I should have the honor to be his amanuensis ; I should look over the studies of the scholars , and correct their exercises ; and when I had made sufficient progress , it should be my duty to give two hours to different classes , and I should read aloud or play cards with the director on leisure evenings . 
Besides , I was obliged to promise never to leave the house without his permission ; never to speak to , or hold intercourse with , any one outside the hours of instruction . 
All these conditions were written down , and signed by both parties , as if a business contract . '' 
`` A transaction by which a human soul was bargained for ! '' 
thundered Goethe . 
`` Reveal to me , now , the name of this trader of souls , that I may expose him to public shame ! '' 
`` He died a year since , '' replied Moritz , softened . 
`` God summoned him to judgment . 
When the physician announced to him that the cancer was incurable , when he felt death approaching , he sent for me , and begged my forgiveness , with tears and deep contrition . 
I forgave him , so let me cease to recall the life I passed with him . 
By the sweat of my brow I was compelled to serve him ; for seven long years I was his slave . 
I sold myself for the sake of knowledge , I was consoled by progress . 
I was the servant , companion , jester , and slave of my tyrant , but I was also the disciple , the priest of learning . 
In my own room my chains fell off . 
In the lonely night-watches I communed with the great , the immortal spirits of Horace , Virgil , and even the proud Caesar , and the divine Homer . 
Those solitary but happy hours of the night are never to be forgotten , never to be portrayed ; they refreshed me for the trials of the day , and enabled me to endure them ! 
At the close of seven years I was prepared to enter the university , and the bargain between my master and myself was also at an end . 
Freed from my tyrant , I bent my steps toward Frankfort University , to feel my liberty enchained anew . 
For seven years I had been the slave of the director ; now I became the slave of poverty , forced to labor to live ! 
Oh , I can not recall those scenes ! 
Suffice it to say , that during one year I had no fixed abode , never tasted warm food . 
But it is passed -- I have conquered ! 
After years of struggle , of exertion , of silent misery , only relieved by my stolen hours of blissful study , I gained my reward . 
I was free ! 
My examination passed , I was honored with the degrees of Doctor of Philosophy and Master of Arts . 
After many intervening events , I was appointed conrector of the college attached to the Gray Monastery , which position now supports me . '' 
`` God be praised , I breathe freely ! '' 
answered Goethe , with one of those sunny smiles which , in a moment of joyful excitement , lighted up his face . 
`` I feel like one shipwrecked , who has , at last , reached a safe harbor . 
I rejoice in your rescue as if it were my own . 
Now you are safe . 
You have reached the port , and in the quiet happiness of your own library you will win new laurels . 
Why , then , still dispirited and unhappy ? 
The past , with its sorrows and humiliations , is forgotten , the present is satisfactory , and the future is full of hope for you . '' 
`` Full of misery is the present , '' cried Philip , angrily , `` and filled with despair I glance at the future . 
You do not see it with your divine eyes , you do not perceive it , poet with the sympathetic soul . 
You , too , thought that Philip Moritz had only a head for the sciences , and forgot that he had a heart to love . 
I tell you that he has a warm , affectionate heart , torn with grief and all the tortures of jealousy ; that disappointed happiness maddens him . 
I was not created to be happy , and my whole being longs for happiness . 
Oh ! 
I would willingly give my life for one day by the side of the one I love . '' 
`` Do not trifle , '' said Goethe , angrily . 
`` He who has striven and struggled as you have , dare not offer , for any woman , however beautiful and seductive , to yield his life , which has been destined to a higher aim than mere success in love . 
Perhaps you think that God has infused a ray of His intelligence into the mind of man , created him immortal , and breathed upon him with His world-creating breath only , to make him happy , and find that happiness in love ! 
No ! 
my friend , God has given to man like faculties with Himself , and inspired him , that he might be a worthy representative of Him upon the earth ; that he should prove , in his life , that he is not only the blossom , but the fruit also , of God 's creation . 
Love is to man the perfume of his existence . 
She may intoxicate him for a while , may inspire him to poetical effusions , to great deeds , even ; but he should hesitate to let her become his mistress , to let her be the tyrant of his existence . 
If she would enchain him , he must tear himself away , even if he tear out his own heart . 
Man possesses that which is more ennobling than mere feeling ; he has intellect -- soul . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
cried Moritz , `` it is easy to see that you have never loved madly , despairingly . 
You have never seen the woman whom you adore , and who perhaps reciprocates your passion , forced to marry another . '' 
A shadow flitted over Goethe 's brow , and the flashing brilliancy of his eyes was changed to gloomy sadness . 
Gently , but quickly , he laid his hand upon Moritz 's shoulder , saying : `` In this hour , when two souls are revealed to each other , will I acknowledge to you that which I have never spoken of . 
I , too , love a woman , who loves me , and yet can never be mine , for she is married to another . 
I love this sweet woman as I have never loved a mortal being . 
For years my existence has belonged to her , she has been the centre of all my thoughts . 
It would seem to me as if the earth were without a sun , heaven without a God , if she should vanish from life . 
I even bless the torture which her prudery , her alternate coldness and friendliness cause me , as it comes from her , from the highest bliss of feeling . 
This passion has swept through my soul , as if uniting in itself all my youthful loves , till , like a torrent , ever renewing itself , ever moving onward , it has become the highway of my future . 
Upon this stream floats the bark laden with all my happiness , fame , and poetry . 
The palaces which my fancy creates rise upon its shore . 
Every zephyr , however slight , makes me tremble . 
Every cloud which overshadows the brow of my beloved , sweeps like a tempest over my own . 
I live upon her smile . 
A kind word falling from her lips makes me happy for days ; and when she turns away from me with coldness and indifference , I feel like one driven about as Orestes by the Furies . '' 
`` You really are in love ! '' 
cried Moritz . 
`` I will take back what I have said . 
You , the chosen of the gods , know all the human heart can suffer , even unhappy love . '' 
Almost angry , and with hesitation , Goethe answered him : `` I do not call this passion of mine an unhappy one , for in the very perception of it lies happiness . 
We are only wretched when we lose self-control . 
To this point Love shall never lead me . 
She yields me the highest delight , but she shall never bring me to self-destruction . 
Grief for her may , like a destructive whirlwind , crush every blossom of my heart ; but she shall never destroy me . 
The man , the poet , must stand higher than the lover ; for where the latter is about to yield to despair , the former will rise , and , with the defiance of Prometheus , challenge the gods to recognize the godlike similitude , that man can rise superior to sorrow , never despairing , never cursing Fate if all the rosy dreams of youth are not realities , but with upturned gaze stride over the waste places of life , consoling himself with the thought that only magnanimous souls can suffer and conquer magnanimously . 
Vanquished grief brings us nearer to the immortal , and gradually bears us from this vale of sorrow up to the brighter heights , nearer to God -- the earth with her petty confusion lying like a worthless tool at our feet ! '' 
`` It is heavenly to be able to say that , and divine to perceive it , '' cried Moritz , bursting into tears . 
`` The miseries of life chain me to the dust , and do not permit me to mount to the heights which a hero like Goethe reaches victorious . 
It is indeed sublime to conquer one 's self , and be willing to resign the happiness which flees us . 
But see how weak I am -- I can not do it ! 
I can never give up the one I love . 
It seems as if I could move heaven and earth to conquer at last , and that I must die if I do not succeed -- die like Werther . '' 
Goethe 's eyes flashed with anger , and with heightened color he exclaimed : `` You all repeat the same litany -- do not make me answerable for all your weaknesses , and blame poor Werther for the creations of your own imagination . 
I , who am the author of Werther , am free from this abominable sentimentality . 
Why can not others be , who only read what I have conceived ? 
But pardon my violence , '' he continued , with a milder voice and gentler manner . 
`` Never did an author create a work which brought him at the same time so great fame and bitter reproach as this work has brought to me . 
` The Sorrows of Young Werther ' have indeed been transformed into the sorrows of young Goethe , and I even fear that old Goethe will have to suffer for it . 
I have spoken to you as a friend to a friend : cherish my words , take them to heart , and arise from the dust ; shake off the self-strewn ashes from your head . 
Enter again as a brave champion the combat of life -- summon to your aid cunning , power , prudence , and audacity , to conquer your love . 
Whether you succeed or not , then you aim at the greatest of battles -- that of mind over matter -- then remember my farewell words . 
From the power which binds all men he frees himself who conquers himself . 
-- Farewell ! 
If ever you need the encouragement of a friend , if ever a sympathizing soul is necessary to you , come to Weimar ; sympathy and appreciation shall never fail you there . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I will surely go , '' answered Moritz , deeply moved , and pressing heartily Goethe 's offered hand . 
`` One thing more I have to say to you : Live much with Nature ; accustom yourself to regard the sparrow , the flower , or the stone , as worthy of your attention as the wonderful phoenix or the monuments of the ancients with their illegible inscriptions . 
To walk with Nature is balsam for a weary soul ; gently touched by her soft hands , the recovery is most rapid . 
I have experienced it , and do experience it daily . 
Now , once more , farewell ; in the true sense of the word fare-thee-well ! 
I wish that I could help you in other ways than by mere kind words . 
It pains me indeed that I can render you no other aid or hope . 
You alone can do what none other can do for you . 
-- Farewell ! '' 
He turned , and motioning to Moritz not to follow him , almost flew down the stairs into the street . 
Drawing a long breath , he stood leaning against the door , gazing at the crowd -- at the busy passers-by -- some merrily chatting with their companions , others with earnest mien and in busy haste . 
No one seemed to care for him , no one looked at him . 
If by chance they glanced at him , Johann Wolfgang Goethe was of no more consequence to them than any other honest citizen in a neighboring doorway . 
Without perhaps acknowledging it to himself , Goethe was a little vexed that no one observed him ; that the weather-maker from Weimar , who was accustomed to be greeted there , and everywhere , indeed , with smiles and bows , should here in Berlin be only an ordinary mortal -- a stranger among strangers . 
`` I would not live here , '' said he , as he walked slowly down the street . 
`` What are men in great cities but grains of sand , now blown together and then asunder ? 
There is no individuality , one is only a unit in the mass ! 
But it is well occasionally to look into such a kaleidoscope , and admire the play of colors , which I have done , and with a glad heart I will now fly home to all my friends -- to you , beloved one -- to you , Charlotte ! '' 
Wilhelmine Enke had passed the day in great anxiety and excitement , and not even the distraction of her new possession had been able to calm the beating of her heart or allay her fears . 
Prince Frederick William had arrived early in the morning , to bid her farewell , as he was to march in the course of the day with his regiments from Potsdam . 
With the tenderest assurances of love he took leave of Wilhelmine , and with tears kissed his two children , pressing them to his heart . 
As he was about to enter his carriage he returned to the house to embrace his weeping mistress , and reassure her of his fidelity , and make her promise him again and again that she would remain true to him , and never love another . 
It was not alone the farewell to her beloved prince which caused Wilhelmine such anxiety and made her so restless . 
Like a dark cloud the remembrance of Cagliostro 's mysterious appearance arose in her mind , overshadowing her every hour more and more , filling her soul with terror . 
In vain did she seek refuge near her children , trying to cheer and forget herself in their innocent amusement -- one moment running about the garden with them , then returning to the house to reexamine it . 
Her thoughts would revert to Cagliostro , and the solemnities which were to take place at her house that night . 
The thought terrified her that at nightfall she was obliged to send away all her servants , and not even be permitted to lock herself in the lonely , deserted house . 
For the great magician had commanded her to let the doors of her house stand open ; he would place sentinels at every entrance , and none but the elect would be allowed to enter . 
Wilhelmine had not the courage to resist this command . 
As evening approached , she sent the cook , with other servants , to her apartment at Berlin , ordering them to pack her furniture and other effects , and send them by a hired wagon to Charlottenburg the following morning . 
An hour previous to this she had sent the nurse and two children to Potsdam with a similar commission , ordering them to return early the next day . 
Alone she now awaited with feverish anxiety Cagliostro 's appearance . 
Again and again she wandered through the silent , deserted rooms frightened at the sound of her own footsteps , and peering into each room as if an assassin or robber were lurking there . 
She had many enemies -- many there were who cursed her , and , alas ! 
none loved her -- she was friendless , save the prince , who was far away . 
The tears which the princess had shed on her account weighed like a heavy burden upon her heart , burning into her very soul in this hour of lonely , sad retrospection . 
She tried in vain to excuse herself , in the fact that she had loved the prince before his marriage ; that she had sacrificed herself to him through affection , and that she was not entitled to become his wife , as she was not born under the canopy of a throne . 
From the depths of her conscience there again rose the tearful , sad face of the princess , accusing her as an adulteress -- as a sinner before God and man ! 
Terrified , she cried : `` I have truly loved him , and I do still love him ; this is my excuse and my justification . 
She is not to be pitied who can walk openly by the side of her husband , enjoying the respect and sympathy of all to whom homage is paid , and who , one day , will be queen ! 
I am the only one , I alone ! 
I stand in the shade , despised and scorned , avoided and shunned by every one . 
Those who recognize me , do so with a mocking smile , and when I pass by they contemptuously shrug their shoulders and say to one another , ` That was Enke , the mistress of the Prince of Prussia ! ' 
All this shall be changed , '' she cried aloud ; `` I will not always be despised and degraded ! 
I will be revenged on my crushed and scorned youth ! 
I will have rank and name , honor and position , that I will -- yes , that I will , indeed ! '' 
Wilhelmine wandered on through the silent rooms , all brilliantly illuminated , a precaution she had taken before dismissing her servants . 
The bright light was a consolation to her , and , at least , she could not be attacked by surprise , but see her enemy , and escape . 
`` I was a fool , '' she murmured , `` to grant Cagliostro this reception to-night . 
