`` Thank Heaven , '' she said , `` I have escaped . 
For the moment I am safe ! 
What will the prince do , when he finds that we have fled from Potsdam ? 
Will he divine where we have gone ? 
Will he come to seek me ? 
If he still loves me -- if I am really the happy rival of his wife and every other court lady -- yes , then he will come . 
Then he will know where to find his Wilhelmine . 
But if it is true , what malicious people have repeated to me , with feigned sympathy , that the prince loves another -- that he has withdrawn his love from me , is indifferent and cold -- then he will not seek me ; then I shall remain here alone ! 
-- alone , with my children , this long , fearful night ! 
What , then , if I am alone ? 
No , oh , no ! 
I will not believe that I am forsaken . 
These are wicked thoughts which haunt me -- only the agitation of this dreadful day , which imagination has overwrought . 
Rise up and be strong ! 
Go to thy children , '' said she , `` and read in their eyes that he can never leave thee ! '' 
Forcing herself to composure , she sought her children ; found Louisa humming and singing her little boy to sleep , and her daughter nodding , on a low stool at her feet . 
`` Come , my child , I will put you to sleep , '' said the mother , lifting her in her arms . 
`` Your mother will make your bed softly . 
When you sleep and speak with the angels , intercede for us all . '' 
With tender care she undressed her and bore her gently in her arms to her bed , and , kneeling before it , breathed a prayer over her sleeping child ; then bent over the cradle of her son , blessing and kissing him . 
`` Sleep my boy , sleep . 
I know not that I shall ever see thy beautiful eyes open again -- whether I shall ever again press thee to my heart . 
Who can tell if they may not come this very night to remove me to prison -- to punish me for you , my children , my beloved children ! 
-- Be calm , be calm ! 
I shall remain here until morning , at least , '' added she . 
She turned to the nurse , who , with anxious face and folded hands , stood at the farthest corner of the room . 
`` Go , now , Louisa -- go , and take something to eat . 
You must be hungry and tired . 
Buy at the next store what you need ; but do not stop to talk with any one or repeat my name . 
Then return quickly , and take care of the children . 
Do not trouble yourself about me -- I need nothing more . '' 
`` But you must eat something , mamselle ; you must have some supper ! '' 
Wilhelmine shook her head , refusing , and returned quickly to her own room . 
Long after nightfall the nurse heard her mistress rapidly pacing her room , and talking aloud to herself . 
Soon , however , Sleep spread her soothing wings over Louisa , and she heard no more the rapid steps and loud talking of her mistress , nor the rolling of a carriage which stopped before the door , and the quick , vigorous steps of a man mounting the stairs . 
But Wilhelmine heard them . 
Breathless she stood , listening to the approaching footsteps , for she felt that they had to decide her future -- the weal and woe of her children ! 
Was it he , her beloved , the father of her children ? 
or was it the king 's bailiff who had followed her , and came to seize her ? 
Nearer they came ; the bell was hastily , violently rung . 
Wilhelmine uttered a cry of delight . 
She recognized the voice , the commanding manner , and rushed through the anteroom to open the door . 
The prince encircled her in his arms , pressed her to his beating heart , and , lifting her up , bore her into the room . 
`` Why did you leave Potsdam , Wilhelmine ? 
Tell me quickly , why did you do it ? '' 
asked the prince , tenderly kissing her , as he sat her upon the divan at his side . 
Overcome with her tears , she could not answer . 
`` What mean these tears ? 
Has any one dared to wound your feelings or injure you ? '' 
`` Yes , Frederick , and he who injures me hazards nothing -- for it is the king ! 
I met him in the park at Potsdam this morning . 
He has crushed me with his scorn and anger . 
He has threatened me with a fearful punishment -- no less than the house of correction at Spandau ! 
He has told me that the spinning-wheel is in readiness for me if I excite his further contempt . '' 
A cry of fury escaped the prince . 
Springing up , he paced the room with rapid strides . 
Wilhelmine remained upon the divan , but her tears did not prevent her following the prince with a searching glance -- to read his face , pale with rage . 
`` I must bear it , '' he cried , beating his forehead . 
`` I can not protect those that I love ! '' 
A ray of joy lighted up Wilhelmine 's face as she listened , but it disappeared with the tears which flowed afresh . 
`` I am a poor , unfortunate child , '' she sobbed , `` whom every one despises , and fears not to injure , who has no one to counsel or protect her , and who is lost if God does not have compassion upon her . '' 
The prince rushed to her , seizing both hands . 
`` Wilhelmine , do not drive me mad with sorrow , '' he cried , trembling with excitement and anger . 
`` Is it my fault that I can not protect you against him ? 
Have I not defended you from all the rest of the world ? 
Have I ever allowed any one to treat you with contempt ? '' 
`` I have never given occasion for it , dearest . 
I have studiously avoided all men , to escape their contempt and scorn . 
Shame is hard to bear , fearfully hard . 
I felt it today , as his beautiful eyes flashed upon me with contempt , as his haughty language crushed me to the earth . 
This is the yoke , Frederick William , that I and my children must bear to our graves ! '' 
`` No , Wilhelmine , not as long as we live -- only while he lives ! 
Wait , only wait ; let me rise from want and slavery ; let the day come which makes me free -- which exalts me : my first act will be to lift the yoke from you and our children , and woe to those -- a thousand times woe to those who would hold it fast ! 
Only be patient , Wilhelmine , submit , and bear with me the hard and distressing present . 
Tell me , my child , my loved one , why did you leave Potsdam so suddenly ? '' 
`` I was afraid , Frederick . 
A kind of madness seized me at the thought of the king 's bailiffs carrying me off to Spandau ; a nameless anxiety confused my mind , and I only realized that I must escape -- that I must conceal myself . 
I felt in greater security here than at Potsdam for the night . '' 
`` And you fled without leaving me any sign or message to tell me whither you had gone ! 
Oh , Wilhelmine , what if I had not divined your hiding-place , and had awaited at Potsdam in painful anxiety ? '' 
`` Then I should have fled from here at daybreak , leaving my children , and in some quiet , obscure retreat have concealed myself from every eye -- even your own . '' 
`` Would you have hidden yourself from me ? '' 
cried the prince , encircling her in his arms , and pressing her to his heart . 
`` Yes , Frederick , when your heart did not prompt you where to find me , then it would have been a proof that you were indifferent to me . 
When I can not lean upon your love , then there is no longer any protection or abiding-place for me in the world , and the grave will be my refuge . '' 
`` But you see my heart revealed you to me , and I am here , '' said the prince , smiling . 
`` Yes , Heaven be praised , you have come to me , '' she cried , exultingly , throwing her arms about his neck , and kissing him passionately . 
`` You are here ; I no longer dread the old king 's anger , and his fearful words fall as spent arrows at my feet . 
You are here , king of my heart ; now I have only one thing to dread . '' 
`` What is that , Wilhelmine ? '' 
She bent close to his ear , and whispered : `` I fear that you are untrue to me ; that there is some ground for truth in those anonymous letters , which declare that you would discard me and my children also , for you love another -- not one other , but many . '' 
`` Jealousy , again jealous ! '' 
the prince sighed . 
`` Oh , no , '' said she , tenderly , `` I only repeat what is daily written me . '' 
`` Why do you read it ? '' 
cried the prince , vehemently . 
`` Why do you quaff the poison which wicked , base men offer you ? 
Why do you not throw such letters into the fire , as I do when they slander you to me ? '' 
`` Because you know , Frederick , '' she answered , proudly and earnestly -- `` you must know that that which they write against me is slander and falsehood . 
My life lies open before you ; every year , every day , is like an unsullied page , upon which but one name stands inscribed -- Frederick William -- not Prince Frederick William . 
What does it benefit me that you are a prince ? 
If you were not a prince , I should not be despised , my children would not be nameless , without fortune , and without justice . 
No , were you not a prince , I should not have felt ashamed and grief-stricken , with downcast eyes , before the lady who drove past in her splendid carriage , while I was humbly seated in a miserable wagon . 
No , were not my beloved a prince , he could have made me his wife , could have given me his name , and I should to-day be at his side with my children . 
Then , what benefit is it to me that you are a prince ? 
I love you not that you are one , but notwithstanding it . 
And if I love you in spite of all this , you must know that my affection is ever-enduring and ever-faithful -- that I can never forget you , never abandon you . '' 
`` And do you believe , Wilhelmine , that I could ever abandon or forsake you ? 
Is it not the same with me ? '' 
She shook her head , sadly answering : `` No , Frederick , it is unfortunately not the same . 
You have loved me , and perhaps you love me still , but with that gentle warmth which does not hinder glowing flames to kindle near it , and with their passionate fire overpower the slight warmth . '' 
`` It may be so for the moment , I grant it , '' the prince answered , thoughtfully ; `` but the quick , blazing fire soon consumes itself , leaving only a heap of ashes ; then one turns to the gentle warmth with inward comfort , and rejoices in its quiet happiness . '' 
`` You confess loving another ? '' 
said Wilhelmine , sorrowfully . 
`` No , I do not grant that , '' the prince cried ; `` but you are a sensible , clever woman , and you know my heart is easily excited . 
It is only the meteoric light of the ignis fatuus , soon extinguished . 
Let it dance and flicker , but remember that the only warmth which cheers and brightens my heart is your love and friendship . 
You are my first and only love , and you will be my last -- that I swear to you , and upon it you can rely . 
Every thing is uncertain and wavering in life . 
They have ruined me , lacerated my heart , and there is nothing more in the world which I honor . 
Only sycophants and hypocrites surround me , who speculate upon my future greatness ; or spies , who would make their fortune today , and therefore spy and hang about me , in order to be paid by the reigning king , and who slander me in order to be favorites of his . 
No one at court loves me , not even my wife . 
How should she ? 
She is well aware that I married her only at the command of my royal uncle , and she accepted me almost with detestation , for they had related to her the unhappiness of my first marriage , and the happiness of my first love ! 
She has learned the story of my first wife , Elizabeth von Braunschweig , and that of my only love , Wilhelmine Enke ! 
She obeyed , like myself , the stern command of another , and we were married , as all princes and princesses are , and we have had children , as they do . 
We lead the life of a political marriage , but the heart is unwed . 
We bow before necessity and duty , and , believe me , those are the only household gods in the families of princes . 
Happy the man who , besides these stern divinities , possesses a little secret temple , in which he can erect an altar to true love and friendship , and where he can enjoy a hidden happiness . 
This I owe to you , Wilhelmine ; you are the only one in whom I have confidence , for you have proved to me that you love me without self-interest and without ambition . 
You have said it , and it is true , you love me , notwithstanding I am a prince . 
I confess to you , there are many lovely women of the court who are your rivals , and who would try to separate us in order to attract me to themselves . 
They are beautiful and seductive , and I am young and passionate ; and if these lovely women have no respect for my dignity as a married man , how then should I have it , who married for duty , not for love ? 
But there is one whom I respect for disinterestedness and fidelity ! 
Do you not know who alone is disinterested and faithful ? 
-- who has never seen in me the prince , the future king -- only the beloved one , the man -- one who has never wavered , never counted the cost ? 
-- that you are , Wilhelmine Enke , therefore we are inseparable , and you have not to fear that I can ever forsake you , even if I am sometimes entangled in the magic nets of other beautiful women . 
The chains which bind us together can not be torn asunder , for a wonderful secret power has consecrated them with the magic of true love -- of heart-felt friendship . '' 
`` Still they are chains , dearest , '' sighed Wilhelmine . 
`` You have named them thus ! 
The chains will at last oppress you , and you will forget the magic power which binds you , and will be free . 
No holy bond , no oath , no marriage tie -- nothing but your love binds you to me . 
I rejoice in it , and so long as you do not forsake me , I am conscious that it is your own free choice and not force which retains you . '' 
`` I will give you an outward sign of our bond of union , '' cried the prince . 
`` I will do it today , as a twofold danger hangs over us -- the king menaces you , and war menaces me . '' 
`` Is it then true , do you go with the king to the field ? '' 
groaned Wilhelmine . 
`` Do you wish me to remain ? '' 
cried the prince , his eyes flashing . 
`` Shall I here seek pleasure , with effeminate good nature , while the king , in spite of his age , exposes himself to all the fatigue of a campaign and the danger of battle ? 
This war of the Bavarian succession is unfortunate , and no one knows whether the German empire will derive any important advantage from our sustaining by force of arms a little duchy . 
It is a question whether it would not be better to abolish the little principalities , in order to strengthen the greater German powers . 
The king will support Bavaria , because he envies Austria its possession , and , as he has decided upon war , it becomes his crown prince to yield to his decision without murmuring . 
Therefore , Wilhelmine , I will today witness to you the oath of fidelity . 
If God calls me to Him , if I fall in battle , this oath will be your legacy . 
I have nothing else to leave you , thanks to the parsimony of my noble uncle . 
I am a very poor crown prince , with many debts and little money , and not in a condition to reward your love and fidelity otherwise than with promises and hopes , and letters of credit for the future . 
Such a bill of exchange I will write for you -- a legacy for my dear Wilhelmine . 
Give me pen and paper . '' 
Wilhelmine hastened to her writing table and brought him paper with writing materials . 
`` There , my Frederick , '' said she , `` there is every thing necessary -- only the ink , I fear , may be dried . '' 
The prince shook his head , smiling . 
`` Such a lover 's oath as I will transcribe for you can be written with no common ink . 
See , here is my ink ! '' 
The prince had suddenly made a slight incision in his arm , and , as the blood gushed out , he dipped his pen in it , and wrote ; then handed it to Wilhelmine , saying : `` Read it here , in the presence of God and ourselves . '' 
Wilhelmine pressed it to her lips , and read , with a solemn voice : '' ` By my word of honor as a prince , I will never forsake you , and only death shall separate you from me . 
-- Prince Frederick William of Prussia . ' '' 
-LSB- Footnote : `` Memoires of the Countess Lichtenau . '' 
p. 120 . -RSB- 
`` By my word of honor as a prince , I will never forsake you , and only death shall separate me from you , '' repeated the prince , as he bent over Wilhelmine , lifting her in his arms and placing her upon his knee . 
`` Take the paper and guard it carefully , '' said he . 
`` When I die , and you have closed my eyes , as I trust you will , give this paper to my son and successor , for it is my legacy to you , and I hope my son will honor it and recognize in you the wife of my heart , and care for you . '' 
`` Oh ! 
speak not of dying , Frederick , '' cried Wilhelmine , embracing him tenderly ; `` may they condemn me , and imprison me as a criminal , when you are no more ! 
What matters it to me what befalls me , when I no longer possess you , my beloved one , my master ? 
Not on that account will I preserve the precious paper , but for the love which it has given me , and of which it will one day be a proof to my children . 
This paper is my justification and my excuse , my certificate and my declaration of honor . 
I thank you for it , for it is the most beautiful present that I have ever received . '' 
`` But will you make me no return , Wilhelmine ? 
Will you not swear to me , as I have sworn to you ? '' 
She took the knife from the table without answering , and pointing it to her left arm -- `` Oh , not there ! '' 
cried the prince , as he sought to stay her hand . 
`` Do not injure your beautiful arm , it would be a sacrilege . '' 
Wilhelmine freed herself from him , as he sought to hold her fast , and in the mutual struggle the knife sank deep into her left hand , the blood gushing out . 
-LSB- Footnote : The scar of this wound remained her whole life , as Wilhelmine relates in her memoirs . 
-- See `` Memoires of the Countess Lichtenau . '' -RSB- 
`` Oh , what have you done ? '' 
cried the prince , terrified ; `` You are wounded ! '' 
He seized her hand and drew the knife from the wound , screaming with terror as a clear stream of blood flowed over his own . 
`` A physician ! 
Send quickly for a physician , '' cried he . 
`` Where are my servants ? '' 
Wilhelmine closed his lips at this instant with a kiss , and forced herself to smile in spite of the pain which the wound caused her . 
`` Dearest , it is nothing , '' she cried . 
`` I have only prepared a great inkstand -- let me write ! '' 
She dipped her pen in the blood , which continued to flow , and wrote quickly a few lines , handing them to the prince . 
`` Read aloud what you have written . 
I will hear from your own mouth your oath . 
You shall write it upon my heart with your lips . '' 
Wilhelmine read : `` By my love , by the heads of my two children , I swear that I will never forsake you -- that I will be faithful to you unto death , and will never separate myself from you ; that my friendship and love will endure beyond the grave ; that I will ever be contented and happy so long as I may call myself your Wilhelmine Enke . '' 
`` I accept your oath , dearest , '' said the prince , pressing her to his heart . 
`` This paper is one of my choicest jewels , and I will never separate myself from it . 
We have now sealed our love and fidelity with our blood , and I hope that you will never doubt me again . 
Remember this hour ! '' 
`` I will , '' she earnestly promised , `` and I swear to you never to torment and torture you again with my jealousy . 
I shall always know , and shall hold fast to it , that you will return to me . '' 
A violent knocking on the house door interrupted the stillness of the night . 
A voice in loud , commanding tones called to the night-watch . 
`` Here I am ! '' 
answered the porter . 
`` Who calls me ? 
And what is the matter ? '' 
`` Open the door , '' commanded the voice again . 
`` It is our house , '' whispered Wilhelmine , who had softly opened the window . 
`` It is so dark , I can only see a black shadow before the door . '' 
`` Do you belong to the house ? '' 
asked the night-watch . 
`` I dare let no one in who does not belong there . '' 
`` Lift up your lantern , and look at my livery . 
It is at the king 's order ! '' 
Wilhelmine withdrew from the window , and hastened to the prince , who had retired to the back part of the room . 
`` It is Kretzschmar , the king 's footman and spy , '' she whispered . 
`` Hide yourself , that he does not discover you . 
Go there to the children . '' 
`` No , Wilhelmine , I will remain here . 
I -- '' Wilhelmine pressed her hand upon his mouth , and forced him into the side-room , bolting the door . 
`` Now , '' said she , `` I will meet my fate with courage ; whatever may come , it shall find me firm and composed . 
My children are safe , for their father is with them . '' 
She took the light , and hastened into the anteroom , which was resounding with the loud ringing . 
`` Who is there ? '' 
she cried . 
`` Who rings so late at night ? '' 
`` In the name of the king , open ! '' 
Wilhelmine shoved back the bolt , opening the door . 
`` Come in , '' she said , `` and tell me who you are . '' 
`` I think you recognize me , '' said Kretzschmar , with an impudent smile . 
`` You have often seen me at Potsdam in company with the king . 
I saw you this morning as the king did you the honor to speak with you , and I believe did not compliment you . '' 
`` Did his majesty send you here to say this to me ? '' 
`` No , not exactly that , '' answered he , smiling ; `` but , as you asked me , I was obliged to answer . 
I have come here with all speed as courier from Potsdam . 
I hope you will at least give me a good trinkgeld . 
I was commanded to deliver into your own hands this paper , for which I must have a receipt . '' 
He drew from his breast pocket a large sealed document , which he handed to Wilhelmine . 
`` Here is the receipt all ready , with the pencil ; you have only to sign your name , and the business is finished . '' 
He stretched himself with an air of the greatest ease upon the cane chair , near the door . 
Wilhelmine colored with anger at the free conduct of the royal footman , and hastened to sign the receipt to rid herself of the messenger , and to read the letter . 
`` What will you give me for trinkgeld , Mamselle Enke ? '' 
asked the footman , as she gave him the receipt . 
`` Your own rudeness and insult , '' answered Wilhelmine proudly , as she turned , without saluting him , to the sitting-room . 
Kretzschmar laughed aloud . 
`` She will play the great and proud lady , '' said he . 
`` She will get over that when in prison . 
The letter is without doubt an order of arrest , for when the king flashes and thunders as he did this morning , he usually strikes . 
I hope it will agree with you . '' 
He slowly left the anteroom , and descended the stairs to mount his horse , which he had bound to a tree . 
Wilhelmine hastened in the mean time to the prince . 
`` Here is the letter addressed to me , '' said she , handing him the sealed envelope . 
`` I beg you to open it ; courage fails me , everything trembles and swims before my eyes . 
Read it aloud -- I will receive my sentence from your lips . '' 
The prince exclaimed , breaking the seal : `` It is the handwriting of the secret cabinet secretary , Menken , and the message comes immediately from the king 's cabinet . 
Now , Wilhelmine , do not tremble ; lean your head upon me , and let us read . '' '' 
` In the name of his majesty , Wilhelmine Enke is commanded , under penalty of severe punishment , not to leave her room or her dwelling , until the king shall permit her , and send some one to take her and all that belongs to her to her place of destination . 
She shall receive this order with patience and humility , and consider her apartment as a prison , which she shall not leave under severe penalty , nor allow any one to enter it . 
Whoever may be with her at the time of receiving the order , who do not belong there , shall speedily absent themselves , and if the same ride or drive to Potsdam , they shall immediately take a message to his royal highness the Prince of Prussia , and announce to him that his majesty expects him at Sans-Souci at ten o'clock tomorrow morning . 
The Minister von Herzberg will be in waiting to confer with the prince . 
The above is communicated to Wilhelmine Enke for her strict observance , and she will act accordingly . ' '' 
A long silence followed the reading of this letter . 
Both looked down , thoughtfully recalling the contents . 
`` A prisoner , '' murmured Wilhelmine , `` a prisoner in my own house . '' 
`` And for me the peremptory command to leave immediately for Potsdam , in order to be at Sans-Souci early in the morning . 
What can the king mean ? '' 
`` He will announce to you my imprisonment , my exile , '' sighed Wilhelmine . 
The crown prince shook his head . 
`` No , '' said he , `` I do not believe it . 
If the king would send you to prison , he would not make such preparation ; he would not commence with the house arrest , as if you were an officer , who had been guilty of some slight insubordination , but he would act with decision , as is his wont . 
He would at once have sent you to Spandau or some other prison , and left it to me to have taken further steps . 
No -- the more I think it over , the more evident it is to me that the king is not really angry ; he will only torment us a little , as it pleases his teasing spirit . 
The chief thing now is to obey , and give him no further occasion for anger . 
You must be very careful not to leave your apartment , or to allow any one to enter it . 
I shall start without delay for Potsdam . 
There are spies posted as well for you as myself ; our steps are watched , and an exact account of them given . 
I must away quickly . '' 
`` Must you leave me a prisoner ? 
Oh , how hard and cruel life is ! '' 
`` Yes , it is , indeed , Wilhelmine . 
But I must also humbly submit and obey . 
Is not life hard for me , and yet I am crown prince , the heir to the throne ! 
I shall be reprimanded and scolded like a footman . 
I must obey as a slave , and am not permitted to act according to my will . 
I am only a mere peg in the great machine which he directs , and the -- '' `` Hush ! 
for mercy 's sake be quiet ! 
What if some one should hear you ? 
You know not if the spies may not be at the door . '' 
`` True , '' said the prince , bitterly . 
`` I do not know ! 
The nurse even , who suckles our child , may be a paid spy . 
The owner of this house may be in the king 's service , and creep to the door to listen . 
Therefore it is necessary , above all things , that we act according to the king 's commands . 
Farewell , Wilhelmine , I must set off at once . 
Kretzschmar is no doubt at the corner of the street to see whether I , as an obedient servant of his master , leave here . 
If I do it , he will take the news to Sans-Souci , and perhaps the king will be contented . 
Farewell , I go at once to the palace , to start from there for Potsdam . '' 
`` Farewell , my beloved one ! 
May God in heaven and the king upon earth be merciful to us ! 
I will force myself to composure and humility . 
What I suffer is for you ! 
This shall be my consolation . 
If we never meet again , Frederick William , I know you will not forget how much I have loved you ! '' 
Since early morning a gay , warlike life had reigned at Potsdam and the neighborhood of Sans-Souci . 
From every side splendid regiments approached , with proud and stately bearing , in glittering uniforms , to take in perfect order the places assigned to them . 
With flying banners , drums beating , and shrill blasts of trumpets , they came marching on to the great parade -- the last , for the king was about to leave for the field . 
Thousands of spectators poured forth , notwithstanding the early hour , from Potsdam ; and from Berlin even they came in crowds , to take a last look of the soldiers -- of their king , who was still the hero at sixty-nine -- the `` Alto Fritz , '' whom they adored -- though they felt the rigor of his government . 
It was a magnificent spectacle , indeed -- this immense square , filled with regiments , their helmets , swords , and gold embroideries glittering in the May sun . 
Officers , mounted on richly caparisoned steeds , drew up in the centre , or galloped along the front of the lines , censuring with a thundering invective any deviation or irregularity . 
In the rear of the troops stood the equipages of the distinguished spectators on the one side , while on the other the people in compact masses swayed to and fro , gayly passing judgment upon the different regiments and their generals . 
The people -- that means all those who were not rich enough to have a carriage , or sufficiently distinguished to claim a place upon the tribune reserved for noble ladies and gentlemen -- here they stood , the educated and uneducated , shoemaker and tailor , savant and artist -- a motley mixture ! 
Two gentlemen of the high citizen class apparently were among the crowd . 
They were dressed in the favorite style , which , since the `` Sorrows of Werther '' had appeared , was the fashion -- tight-fitting boots , reaching to the knee , with yellow tops ; white breeches , over which fell the long-bodied green vest ; a gray frock with long pointed tails and large metal buttons , well-powdered cue , tied with little ribbons , surmounted with a low , wide-brimmed hat . 
Only one of the gentlemen wore the gray frock , according to the faultless Werther costume , a young man of scarcely thirty years , of fine figure , and proud bearing ; a face expressive and sympathetic , reminding one of the glorious portraits of men which antiquity has bequeathed to us . 
It seemed like the head of a god descended to earth , noble in every feature , full of grace and beauty ; the slightly Roman nose well marked yet delicate ; the broad , thoughtful brow ; the cheeks flushed with the hue of youth and power ; the well-defined chin and red lips , expressive of goodness , benevolence , roguery , and haughtiness ; large , expressive eyes , flashing with the fire which the gods had enkindled . 
His companion was perhaps eight years younger , less well-proportioned , still of graceful appearance , in his youthful freshness , with frank , cheerful mien , clever , good-natured , sparkling eyes , and red , pouting lips , which never liked to cease chatting . 
`` See , Wolff ! 
I beg , '' said the young man , `` see that old waddling duck , Mollendorf . 
I know the old fellow , he is from Gotha ; he imagines himself of the greatest importance , and thinks Prussia begets fame and honor from his grace . 
He trumpets forth his own glories at a dinner , and abuses his king . 
He makes Frederick the Great an insignificant little being , that he may look over him . '' 
`` Unimportant men always do that , '' answered the other . 
`` They would make great men small , and think by placing themselves on high pedestals they become great . 
The clown striding through the crowd on his stilts may even look over an emperor . 
But fortunately there comes a time when the dear clown must come down from his stilts , and then it is clear to others , if not to himself , what little , earth-born snips the men of yesterday are . '' 
`` Only look , Wolff , there is just such a moment coming to that stiltsman Mollendorf . 
How the great man stoops , and how small he looks on his gray horse , for a greater springs past ! 
Look at him well , Wolff -- we shall dine with him , and he does not like to be stared at in the face . '' 
`` Is that , then , Prince Henry passing ? '' 
asked Wolff , with animation ; `` That little general , who just galloped into the circle with his suite , is that the king 's brother ? '' 
`` Yes , that is just his misfortune that he is the king 's brother , '' answered a deep , sonorous voice behind them . 
Turning , they beheld a young , elegantly dressed man , in the light gray frock and gold-bordered , three-cornered hat , and a Spanish cane , with an ivory handle . 
`` What did you remark , sir ? '' 
asked Herr Wolff ; his great , brown eyes flashing over the pale , intellectual face of the other , so that he was quite confused , yet , as if enchanted , could not turn away . 
`` What did you remark , sir ? '' 
asked again Herr Wolff . 
`` I believe , '' stammered the other , `` that I said it was the misfortune of the prince that he was the brother only , as he was worthy of being mentioned for himself ; but I beg , sir , be a little indulgent , and do not pry into my very soul with your godlike eyes . 
It will craze me , and I shall run through the streets of Berlin , crying that the Apollo-Belvedere has arrived at Potsdam , and invite all the poets and authors to come and worship him . '' 
`` I believe you are right , '' cried the youngest of the two gentlemen , laughing . 
`` I believe myself it is the Apollo-Belvedere . '' 
`` Be still , my dear sir , hush , and preserve our incognito , '' interrupted his companion . 
`` But I can not help it , Wolff . 
Am I to blame that this clever fellow sees through your mask , and discovers the divine spark which hides itself under a gray Werther costume ? '' 
`` I pray , sir , grant my request , and respect our incognito , '' begged the other , gently but firmly . 
`` Well , well , you shall have your way , '' laughed the other , good-naturedly , and turning to the pale young man , who still kept his eyes fixed on Herr Wolff in a sort of ecstacy , he said : `` Let the authors and poets stay in Berlin ; we will persuade the disguised Apollo to meet them there , and read them a lecture , for among the Berlin poets and critics there are wicked heretics , who , if the Deity Himself wrote tragedies and verses , would find some fault to object to . '' 
`` Pray tell me , sir , do you think Prince Henry a great man ? '' 
`` Did not the king call him so in his ` History of the Seven Years ' War ? ' '' 
said the stranger . 
`` Did he not publicly , in the presence of all his generals , say , ` that Prince Henry was the only general who had not made a mistake during the whole war ? ' '' 
`` Do you believe the king will say that of the prince just riding in with his suite , after the present war ? '' 
asked the young man , with earnestness . 
`` You mean the Prince of Prussia , '' answered the other , shaking his head . 
`` There are men who call this prince the ` hope of Prussia , ' and regard him as a new Aurora in the clouded sky . '' 
`` And you , sir , do you regard him so ? '' 
cried Herr Wolff . 
`` Do you mean that the Prince of Prussia will usher in a brighter day for Germany ? '' 
`` No , '' answered the other . 
`` I believe that day expires with Frederick the Great , and that a long night of darkness will succeed . '' 
`` Why do you think so ? '' 
`` Because it is the course of nature that darkness succeeds light . 
Look at the prince , gentlemen -- the divine light of genius is not stamped upon his brow , as formerly , and care will be taken that it is soon extinguished altogether . '' 
`` Who will take care ? '' 
`` Those who are the enemies of light , civilization , and freedom . '' 
`` Who are they ? '' 
asked Herr Wolff . 
The other smiled , and answered : `` Sir , so far as I , in all humility , call myself a scholar , I also owe to the god Apollo obedience , and must answer him , though it may endanger me . 
I answer , then , the enemies of light and civilization are the disguised Jesuits . '' 
`` Oh , it is easy to perceive that you do not belong to them , or you would not thus characterize them , and -- '' A mighty flourish of drums , and shrill blasts of horns and trumpets , drowned the youth 's words , and made all further conversation impossible . 
The king , followed by a brilliant suite , had just arrived at the parade . 
The regiments greeted their sovereign with loud blasts of trumpets , and the people shouted their farewell . 
Frederick lifted lightly his hat , and rode along the ranks of the well-ordered troops . 
He listened to the shouts with calm , composed manner ; the Jupiter-flashes from his great eyes seemed to be spent forever . 
Mounted upon Caesar , his favorite horse , he looked today more bent , his back more bowed with the burden of years ; and it was plainly visible that the hand which held the staff crosswise over the horse 's neck , holding at the same time the bridle , trembled from very weakness . 
`` That is Frederick , '' said Herr Wolff to himself . 
`` That is the hero before whom Europe has trembled ; the daring prince who caused the sun to rise upon his country , and awaken the spirits to cheerful life . 
Oh , how lamentable ; how much to be regretted , that a hero , too , can grow feeble and old ! 
Oh , cruel fate , that the noblest spirits embodied in this fragile humanity , and -- '' Suddenly he ceased , and looked at the king amazed and with admiration . 
The old man had become the hero again . 
The bowed form was erect , the face beamed with energy and conscious power , the eyes flashed with bold daring , strong and sonorous was the voice . 
The king had turned to his generals , who were drawn up around him in a large circle , saying : `` Gentlemen , I come to take leave of you . 
We shall meet again upon the battle-field , where laurels bloom for the brave . 
I hope that we may all return , crowned with fresh laurels . 
Tell my soldiers that I count upon them -- that I know they will prove the glory of the Prussian troops anew , and that on the day of battle they will see me at their head . 
-- Farewell ! '' 
`` Long live the king ! '' 
cried the generals and staff officers , in one voice . 
The people and the soldiers joined the shout , the ladies waved their handkerchiefs . 
Herr Wolff and his companions tore off their hats with enthusiasm , and swung them high in the air . 
The great eyes of the king , who passed at this moment , rested upon Herr Wolff . 
`` My heart quaked as if I were the pillar of Memnon , and had been touched by the sun 's rays , '' sighed he , as he followed the king with his fiery glance . 
`` The ceremony is now finished , '' said the young man near him , `` and we must leave , in order to be punctual to dinner at Prince Henry 's . '' 
`` I wish the king had remained an hour longer , '' sighed Herr Wolff again . 
`` As I looked at him , it seemed as if I were listening to a song from Homer , and all my faculties were in unison in delight and enthusiasm . 
Happy those who dare approach him , and remain near him ! '' 
