`` If Lavater says so , he is a fool and an ass , '' cried Chodowiecki , furiously , `` and he can hide himself in the remotest corner of the earth . 
Lichtenberg of Gottingen is quite right when he says that this empty-headed Lavater has made himself ridiculous throughout Germany with his wonderful physiognomy of dogs ' tails and his profiles of unknown pigtails . 
If Lavater is really so narrow-minded as not to be able to distinguish a crow from an eagle , it is his own affair ; but he shall never presume to look at this portrait , and you , too , are not worthy , you scorner , that I should get angry with you . 
The likeness is so beautiful that Jupiter himself would be satisfied to have it imputed to him . 
It is so like , that you need not pretend you do not know that it represents Wolfgang Goethe . 
As you insult it , and regard it with scorn and contempt , I will destroy it . '' 
`` For mercy 's sake do not tear it , '' cried Goethe , springing toward Chodowiecki , and holding him fast with a firm grasp . 
`` My dear good man , do not tear it ; it would be like splitting my own head . '' 
`` Ah , ah ! '' 
shouted Chodowiecki , `` you acknowledge the likeness ? '' 
`` I do acknowledge it , with joy . '' 
`` And will you admit that it is the head of a noble , talented poet , a favorite of the Muses ? 
Say yes , or I will tear it , and you will have terrible pains in your head your life long ! '' 
`` Yes , yes ! 
all that you wish . 
I am capable of saying the most flattering things of myself to save this beautiful design . 
Give it to me , you curious fellow ! '' 
`` No , '' said Chodowiecki , earnestly , `` I will not give it to you . 
Such a portrait is not made to be put in a dusty portfolio , or framed for the boudoir of your lady-love . 
All Germany , all the world should enjoy it , and centuries later the German women will still see Wolfgang Goethe as he looked in his twenty-ninth year , and hang an engraving on the wall in their parlor , and sighing and palpitating acknowledge -- ` There never was but one such godlike youth , and there never will be another . 
I wish that I had known him ; I wish he had loved me ! ' 
So will they speak centuries later , for I will perpetuate this drawing in a steel engraving of my most beautiful artistic work . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : This engraving from the artist Chodowiecki still exists , and the author of this work possesses a beautiful copy , which Ottille von Goethe sent her . 
It is a bust in profile , the most beautiful of his youth . -RSB- 
`` You are a splendid fellow , and I must embrace you , and rejoice to be immortalized by you , for this portrait pleases me exceedingly . 
I might well be proud that this head with the rare profile is a counterpart of my own . 
Now we are good friends . 
Before I say farewell , let me see the work at which I just disturbed you upon entering . '' 
Goethe was about to raise the cloth , when Chodowiecki waved him back . 
`` Do not look at it , '' said he , quickly ; `` I dislike to appear as a mechanic before you , as I wish that you should honor only the artist . 
We poor toilers are badly off , as the old proverb is ever proving true with us , ` Art goes for bread . ' 
We must be mechanics the chief part of our lives , in order to have a few hours free , in which we are allowed to be artists . 
I have to illustrate the most miserable works with my engravings , to buy the time to pursue works of art . '' 
`` That is the interest , friend , which you pay the world for the great capital which the gods confided to you . 
Believe me , the artist Chodowiecki would have but a morsel to eat if the mechanic Chodowiecki did not serve him a tempting meal , paying the bill . 
Do not be vexed about it ; man must have a trade to support him , as art is never remunerated . 
-LSB- Footnote : Goethe 's words -- See G. H. Lewes 's `` Goethe 's Life and Writings , '' vol . 
1. , p. 459 . -RSB- 
I hope the mechanic will be well paid , that the artist may create beautiful and rare works for us . 
This is my farewell visit to-day , friend . 
If you will hear a welcome from me very soon , come to Weimar , and see how one honors the artists there , and how well appreciated Chodowiecki is . '' 
Goethe embraced and kissed the artist , who regarded him , his face radiant with joy , and would not be prevented from accompanying him to the house door , as if he were a prince or a king . 
`` Now to Madame Karschin , '' said Goethe to himself , as he hastened through the streets in that direction . 
`` The good woman has welcomed me with so many pretty verses that I must make my acknowledgments , in spite of my decision to keep the Berlin authors at a distance . '' 
From Wilhelm Street , where Chodowiecki lived , to the tilt-yard , was not far , and Goethe soon reached the old , antiquated house where the poetess lived . 
After many questionings and inquiries at the lower stories and more splendid apartments of the house , he found the abode of the poetess , and climbed up the steep stairs to the slanting attic-room . 
The dim light of a small window permitted Goethe to read upon a gray piece of paper , pasted upon the door , ` Anna Louisa Karsch , German poetess . ' 
He knocked modestly at the door at first , then louder , and as the voices within never ceased for a moment their animated conversation , he opened it , and entered the obscure room . 
`` I will do it , sir , '' said the little woman sitting in the window-niche near a table to a young man standing near her . 
`` I will do it , though I must tell you album writing is very common . 
But you must promise me to return here , and let me see what Herr Rammler writes , and tell me what he says about me . 
These are my conditions . '' 
`` Frau Karschin , I promise you , upon the word of honor of a German youth , who can never lower himself to break his word . '' 
`` Very well ! 
then I will write . '' 
There was perfect silence . 
The youth watched the little , dry hand which guided the pen , with a devotional mien , and Goethe with eager curiosity , who , unobserved , stood like a suppliant at the door of the obscure little room , the shabby furniture of which betrayed the narrow circumstances of the German poetess . 
It harmonized with the occupant , a little , bony , meagre figure , wearing a tight-fitting blue-flowered chintz dress . 
Upon the gray hair , which , parted in the middle , encircled the low forehead , was a cap , which had lost its whiteness and was , therefore , more in harmony with the ruff about her yellow , thin neck . 
Her sharp , angular features were redeemed by large , dark eyes , flashing with marvellous brilliancy from under the thick , gray eyebrows , and with quick , penetrating glances she sometimes turned them to the ceiling thoughtfully as she wrote . 
`` There , sir , is my poem , '' said she , laying down the pen . 
`` Listen : ` Govern your will ; If it hinders duty , It fetters virtue ; Then envy beguiles Into fault-finding . ' '' 
`` Oh , how beautiful , cried the young man , enraptured . 
`` I thank you a thousand times for those glorious words , and they shall henceforth be the guiding star of my existence . '' 
`` Go to Professor Rammler , and : then return and show me what he writes , for I am convinced -- . 
Oh , Heavens ! 
there is a stranger , '' she cried , as she discovered Goethe , who had remained standing by the door . 
`` Yes , a stranger , '' said Goethe , smiling , and approaching , as the happy possessor of the album withdrew -- `` a stranger would not leave Berlin without visiting the German poetess . '' 
`` And without verses in your album ; is it not so ? 
I have become the fashion , and if I could only live by immortalizing myself in your albums , I should be free from care . 
Now I have divined it -- you wish an autograph ? '' 
`` No ! 
only a good word , and a friendly shake of the hand , for I possess a poem and a letter which the good Frau Karschin sent me at Weimar some six months since , written by herself . '' 
`` Is it Goethe ? '' 
she cried , clasping her hands in astonishment . 
`` The poet Johann Wolfgang Goethe , the renowned author of the work which -- '' `` Cost you many tears , '' broke in Goethe , laughing . 
`` I beg you spare me these phrases , which follow me upon my journey as the Furies Orestes . 
I know that ` Werther ' has become the favorite of the reading public ; he has opened all the tear-ducts and made all lovers of moonlight as soft as a swaddling-cloth . 
I could punish myself for having written ` Werther . ' '' 
Frau Karschin laughed aloud . 
`` That is glorious ! 
You please me ! 
You are a famous poet and a genius , for only geniuses can revise and ridicule themselves . 
Welcome , Germany 's greatest poet , welcome to the attic of the poetess ! 
There is the good word which you would have , and here is the hand . 
Did you think it worth while to visit poor Karschin ? 
I am rejoiced at it , for I see that they accused you unjustly of arrogance and pride ! '' 
`` Do they accuse me of it ? '' 
asked Goethe , smiling . 
`` Can the Berlin poets and authors never forgive me that I live at a court , and am honored with the favor of a prince ? '' 
`` They would willingly forgive you if they had the power to push you one side , and take your place . 
They are angry with you , because they envy you and are not accustomed to be esteemed . 
Our prince and ruler , as great a hero and king as he otherwise is , cares little for German poetry , and for all he would care , the Berlin authors might starve , one and all ; he would trouble himself no more about them than the flies dancing in the sunlight . '' 
`` The great king is still the same , then ? 
He will never know anything of German literature ? '' 
`` No ! 
he declares that it is the language of barbarians and bear-catchers ; scolds about us , and despises us , and yet knows as little of us as the man in the moon . 
He adores his Voltaire . 
Old Fritz knows the French poet by heart , but Lessing he knows nothing of . 
He abuses ` Goetz von Berlichingen , ' and ` Werther 's Sorrows . ' '' 
`` Oh ! 
I know it all -- I know the king 's adjutant-general , von Siedlitz . 
I often dine with him , and read aloud my poems to him , when he relates to me what the king says to enrage me . 
You must know when I am angry I speak in verse . 
I accustomed myself to it during my unhappy marriage with the tailor Karsch . 
When he scolded , I answered in verse , and tried to turn my thoughts to other things , and to make the most difficult rhymes . 
As he was always scolding and quarrelling , I always spoke in rhyme . '' 
`` And in this way you led a very poetical marriage ? '' 
smiled Goethe . 
`` Yes , indeed , poetical , '' she said , and her large brilliant eyes were dimmed . 
`` If it is true that tears are the baptism of poets , then I was baptized daily for twelve years , and ought to be an extraordinary poetess . '' 
`` That you are , indeed , '' said Goethe , `` who would dispute it ? 
You have given evidence of great poetical talent , and I read your heroic poem upon the Great Frederick with real delight . '' 
`` Do you know what he did ? '' 
she asked , bitterly . 
`` I turned to him , begging for assistance ; for who should a poet turn to , but his God and his king ? 
Moreover , he had promised it to me personally . '' 
`` You have spoken with him , then , yourself ? '' 
asked Goethe . 
`` Yes , eight years ago ; General von Siedlitz procured me an audience . 
The king was very gracious , and among other things , asked me about my life ; and as I explained to him my poverty and want , he most kindly promised to help me . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : This interview which Frau Karschin had with the king is found in `` Anecdotes and Traits of Character of Frederick the Great . '' 
vol . 
ii. , p. 72 . -RSB- 
`` And did he not fulfil his promise ? '' 
`` No , had it been given to the least of the French writers he would have kept it , but to a German poet it was not worth while . 
What is a native poet to the great German king ? 
A phantom that he knows not , and believes not . 
As great as he is , the king showed himself very small to me . 
I sang him as a poetess and he bestowed a pittance upon me as one would to a beggar in tatters by the wayside . '' 
`` Is it really true , upon your supplication -- '' `` Sent me two thalers ! 
Yes , that is indeed true , and I see by your smile that you know it , and know also that I returned it to him . 
I had rather die with hunger than take a beggar 's penny . 
But let me relate to you what happened two weeks since . 
I had borne patiently the affair of the two thalers , and forgotten it . 
I am more comfortable now ; the booksellers pay me for my songs and poems very well , and a number of patrons and friends , at whose head is the Prince of Prussia , give me a small pension , from which I can at least live -- though poorly . 
One of my patrons sent me a strip of land on the Spree not far from the Hercules Bridge , where I would gladly build me a little house , at last to have a sure abiding-place where I could retire -- that would be a refuge against all the troubles and sorrows of life . 
As I thought it over , the old confidence and imperishable love for the great king rose again within me , and as I esteemed him I always hoped for the fulfilment of his promise . 
I applied to him again , and begged him to do for me what he had granted to so many cobblers and tailors , as the king gives building-money to help those who will build . 
All the houses of the Gensdarmen-markt are built by royal aid , and sometimes the king designs the facades , as he did for the butcher Kuhn 's great house ; and sent him a design to ornament the frieze of ninety-nine , sheeps ' heads , only ninety-nine , for he said the butcher himself was the one hundredth . 
The butcher remonstrated , but he was obliged to keep them , if he would have the building-money . '' 
`` Really , '' cried Goethe , laughing , `` the king is an ingenious and extraordinary man in every thing , and no one is like him . '' 
`` No one is like him , and no one would have treated me as he did . 
I addressed to him a poem , begging him with true inspiration and emotion to let a German poetess find favor in his sight -- and that he would be for me a Maecenas , if I were not a Horace . 
My heart bled with sorrow , that I must so beg and pray , and my tears wet the paper upon which I indited my begging , rhyming petition . 
How much money do you think the great king sent me for my house ? 
Think of the smallest sum . '' 
`` If it was small , yet for building-money he would send you at least two hundred thalers . '' 
The poetess burst into a scornful laugh . 
`` He sent me three thalers ! 
The great Frederick sent me three thalers to build a house ! '' 
`` What did you do ? 
Did you take them ? '' 
`` Yes , '' she answered , proudly , `` and I will leave them as a legacy to my daughter , as an historical souvenir for succeeding generations , who will relate the benevolence of the German king for the German poetess . 
I sent the king a receipt -- I will read it to you . '' 
` His majesty commanded , Instead of building-money , To send me three thalers . 
The order was exactly , Promptly fulfilled . 
I am indebted for thanks , But for three thalers can No joiner in Berlin My coffin make . 
Otherwise to-morrow I would order Such a house without horror Where worms feast , And , feasting , quarrel Over the lean , care-worn Old woman 's remains That the king let sigh away . ' '' 
-LSB- Footnote : See `` Life and Poems of Louisa Karschin , '' edited by her daughter . -RSB- 
`` Why do you not laugh ? '' 
said Frau Karschin , raising her flashing eyes to Goethe , who sat looking down earnestly and quietly before her . 
`` I can not , '' he gently answered . 
`` Your poem makes me sad ; it recalls the keen sorrow of a poet 's existence , the oft-repeated struggle between Ideality and Reality . 
The blessed of the gods must humble themselves ; though they may raise their heads to heaven , their feet must still rest upon earth ; and to find their way upon it , and walk humbly therein , they must again lower their inspired heads . '' 
`` Oh , that makes me feel better , '' cried Karschin , with tears in her eyes ; `` that is balsam for my wounds . 
You are a great poet , Goethe , I feel it to be so . 
You are a great man , for your heart is good and filled with pity . 
How unjustly they call you cold and proud ! 
Only be a little more yielding , and call upon the Berlin poets and writers . 
You can imagine that the news of your arrival ran like wild-fire through the town . 
Nicolai , Rammler , Engel , Mendelssohn , and all the other distinguished gentlemen have stayed at home like badgers in their kennels , watching for you , so as not to miss your visit . 
At last they became desperate , and scolded furiously over your arrogance and pride in thinking yourself better than they . 
Why have you not called upon them ? '' 
There was a loud knocking at the door , and the young man with his album entered , almost breathless . 
`` Here I am , '' said he , `` I came directly from Professor Rammler here , as I promised you . '' 
`` You saw him , then ? 
Has he written something for you ? '' 
`` Yes , I saw him , and he granted my request . '' 
`` And abused me , did he not , with his nose turned up ? 
You must know , Goethe , that Professor Rammler despises my poems , because I am not so learned in Greek and Roman mythology as he is . 
Now tell me , my young friend , what did he say about me ? '' 
`` I promised you , upon my word of honor , to tell you every thing , but I hope you will release me from the promise . '' 
sighed the young man . 
`` No , that I will not . 
Much more , upon the strength of your word of honor , I desire it . 
You promised , word for word , to relate it to me . '' 
`` If it must be , then , let it be . 
I went at once to Professor Rammler 's . 
He asked me immediately if I had not been here . '' 
`` Just as I asked you , '' laughed Karschin . 
`` I affirmed it , saying that you showed me his house . 
Upon which he asked , ` Did she say any thing against me ? 
She is accustomed to do it before strangers , like all old women . ' 
He then turned over my album , and as he saw the lines you wrote he reddened , and striking the book -- ' I see it , she knew she had said something about me . 
She tells every stranger that I think she is censorious . 
What she has written is aimed at me . ' 
Upon that he wrote some lines opposite yours , shut the book , and handed it to me . 
I have not even had the time to read them . '' 
`` Read them now , quickly . '' '' 
` He who slanders and listens to slander , let him be punished . 
She may be hung by the tongue , and he by the ears . ' '' 
-LSB- Footnote : This scene took place literally , and may be found in `` Celebrated German Authors , '' vol . 
II. , p. 340 . -RSB- 
`` That is shameful -- that is mean ! '' 
said Frau Karschin , while Goethe re-read the cutting epigram . 
`` That is just like Rammler ; his tongue is like a two-edged sword for every one but himself , and he fans his own glories , and does not know that he is a fool . 
Frederick the Great himself called him so . 
One of his generals called his attention to him , upon which Frederick turned his horse , riding directly up to him , asking , ` Is this the distinguished Rammler ? ' 
` Yes , your majesty , I am he , ' the little professor proudly bowed . 
` You are a fool ! ' 
called out Frederick , very loud , and rode away , as all around the ` Great Rammler ' laughed and sneered . 
There are many such stories . 
Shall I tell you how Lessing teased him ? '' 
`` No , dear woman , tell me nothing more . 
I perceive your Berlin writers and poets are a malicious , contentious set of people . 
I may well fear you , and shall be glad to escape unharmed . 
Think kindly of me , and have pity upon me ; if the others are too severe , raise your dear hand and hold back the scourge that it may not fall upon poor Wolfgang Goethe . 
Adieu , dear Frau Karschin . '' 
Goethe bowed , and hastened down into the street . 
`` With the authors and poets of Berlin I wish nothing more to do , but with the philosophers I may be more fortunate , and with them find the wisdom and forbearance which fail the poets . '' 
Goethe bent his steps to Spandauer Street , in which the merchant and philosopher Moses Mendelssohn lived ; hastened up the stairs , and knocked , which was answered by an old servant , to whom Goethe announced himself . 
The servant disappeared , and the poet stood in the little , narrow corridor , smilingly looking to the study-door , and waiting for the `` gates of wisdom '' to open and let the worldling enter the temple of philosophy . 
The crooked little man , the great philosopher , Moses , son of Mendelssohn , stood behind the door , turning over in his mind whether he would receive Goethe or not . 
`` Why should I ? 
The proud secretary of legation has already been in Berlin eight days , and wishes to prove to me that he cares little for Berlin philosophers . 
My noble friend , the great Lessing , can not abide ` Gotz von Berlichingen ; ' and Nicolai , Rammler , and Engel are the bitter opponents , the very antipodes of the rare genius and secretary of legation from Weimar . 
If he wishes to see me , why did he come so late , so -- '' `` Herr Goethe is waiting -- shall he enter ? '' 
asked the servant . 
The philosopher raised his head . 
`` No , '' cried he , loudly . 
`` No ! 
tell him you were mistaken . 
I am not at home . '' 
The old servant looked quite frightened at his master -- the first time he had heard an untruth from him . 
`` What shall I say , sir ? '' 
`` Say no , '' cried Moses , very excited and ill-humored . 
`` Say that I am not at home -- that I am out . '' 
With a determined , defiant manner the philosopher seated himself to work upon his new book , `` Jerusalem , '' saying to himself , `` I am right to send him away ; he waited too long , is too late . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : From Ludwig Tieck I learned this anecdote , and he assured me that Moses Mendelssohn told it to him . 
-- See `` Goethe in Berlin , Leaves of Memory , '' p. 6 . 
-- The Authoress . -RSB- 
`` What is the matter , my dear Wolf ? '' 
cried the duke , as Goethe returned from his visits . 
`` What mean those shadows upon your brow ? 
Have the cursed beaux-esprits in Berlin annoyed and tortured you ? '' 
`` No , duke , I -- '' and suddenly stopping , he burst into a loud ringing laugh , and sprang about the room , bounding up and down , shouting , `` Hurrah ! 
hurrah ! 
Long live the philosophers , vivat the philosophers ! '' 
`` They shall live -- live -- live , '' shouted the duke ! 
`` Vivat the philosophers ! 
hurrah ! 
To the May-sports upon the Blockberg they ride upon a little ass with golden horns -- with Pharisaical mien , praying with their eyes , ' I thank Thee , O Lord , that I am a philosopher , that I am not as the world 's children , vain , proud , and arrogant . ' 
Hey , good Carl Augustus , today a great revelation has been made known to me by a philosopher . 
Wisdom flowed from his mouth . 
All the spiders in their gray , self-woven nets , whispered and sang in his corridor , ` We weave at the fountain of life , we spin the web of time . ' 
The little mice crept out from the corners , whispering , Hallelujah ! 
Here lives the great philosopher Moses , who has devoured wisdom , and is unknowing of earthly vanities . 
Oh ! 
the mice and the spiders waltz together upon the threshold of the great philosopher . 
Hey , ha ! 
a waltz we will dance ! '' 
Goethe caught the duke with both arms around the waist , and tore around in a giddy whirl , both laughing , both shrieking . 
Wolfshund , the duke 's dog , asleep in the corner , sprang up howling and barking at their wild bounds and goat-like springs , and joined the dancers . 
As Goethe felt the ribbon which confined his cue give way , he shook wildly his curly , powdered hair and it fell in mad confusion . 
Both he and the duke now sank exhausted to the floor , panting and laughing . 
`` Heaven be praised , Wolf , '' said the duke , `` the must has once more fermented , and sprung a few of the hoops of dignity ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Goethe , who suddenly assumed a grave , serious mien , `` the must has fermented , and I trust a fine wine will clear itself from it . '' 
`` Can you not set off , Wolf ? '' 
asked the duke , springing up . 
`` Have you had sufficient of the Berliners ? '' 
`` I have done with them , '' replied Goethe , `` not only with the Berliners , but it may be with all the rest of humanity . 
I feel , my duke , that the bloom of confidence , candor , and self-sacrificing love fades daily ; only for you , and the friend whom I love , is there still attraction and flagrancy . 
Oh ! 
you dear ones , be charitable , and do not consent that they fade for you . 
Let the goodness which I read in your eyes , my dear Carl , and the sunny rays of friendship strengthen the poor little blossom , that it does not entirely fade and wither away ! '' 
With passionate earnestness he threw his arms around the duke , pressing him to his bosom . 
`` Oh ! 
Wolf , my dear Wolf , you have a child 's heart and a poet 's soul . 
Are you faint-hearted and dispirited ? 
Do you not know that you are the sun which brings forth the flowers for us , and shines for us all ? 
Let no clouds overshadow you , Wolf ! 
Let your fresh , youthful vigor , and divine brilliancy , penetrate them . 
In the thick , sandy atmosphere of Berlin I confess the sun itself loses its force and brightness ! 
Come ! 
let us be off . 
Our steeds stamp with impatience . '' 
The duke drew his friend from the room and joyfully they sprang down the stairs to the carriage , the great dog following , howling and barking after them . 
`` Forward , then , forward ! 
Blow , postilion , blow ! 
A gay little air ! 
Let it peal through the streets , a farewell song ! 
Blow , postilion , blow ! 
and I will moisten your throat at the gates with the thin , white stuff , which you have the boldness to call beer . '' 
The postilion laughed for joy , and the German song resounded in quivering tones -- `` Three riders rode out of the gate . '' 
He blew so long and loudly , that the dog set up a mournful howl , and amid the peals of the postilion , and the distressed cry of Wolfshund , they drove through the long , hot streets of Berlin , through the Leipsic Gate , and the suburbs with their small , low houses . 
The wagon-wheels sank to the spokes in the loose , yellow sand of the hill they soon mounted , and , arriving at the top of which , the postilion stopped to let his horses take breath , and turned to remind his aristocratic passengers that this was their last view of the city . 
`` And will be seen no more , '' repeated the duke . 
`` Come , let us take a farewell look at Berlin , Wolf ! '' 
and away they sprang without waiting for the footman to descend , and waded through the sand to a rising in the fallow fields . 
There they stood , arm in arm , and viewed the town with its towers and chimneys , houses , barracks , and palaces stretched at their feet . 
A thick , gray , cloud of vapor and smoke hovered over it , and veiled the horizon in dust and fog . 
`` Farewell , Berlin , you city of arrogance and conceit ! '' 
cried the duke , joyfully . 
`` I shake your dust from my feet , and strew the sand of your fields over every souvenir of you in memory , '' and suiting the action to his words , he tossed a handful of it in the air . 
`` Farewell , Muses and Graces of sand and dust ! '' 
cried Goethe , as his fiery eye flashed far out over the fog-enveloped roofs . 
`` Farewell , Berlin , void of nature and without verdure ! 
the abode of poetic art , but not of poesy . 
You Babylon of wisdom and philosophy , I have seen you with your painted cheeks and coquettish smile , your voluptuous form and seductive charms . 
You shall never ensnare me with your deceitful beauty , and suck the marrow from my bones , or the consciousness of pure humanity from my soul . 
Beautiful may you be to enslaved intellects , but to the free , they turn their backs to you and thrice strew ashes on your head . 
Farewell , Berlin , may I never see you again ! '' 
-LSB- Goethe , in fact , never visited Berlin again , though he was often invited there , particularly when the new theatre was opened , with a poetic prologue written by himself . 
They inaugurated the festivity with Goethe 's `` Iphigenia , '' the first representation , and Prince Radzwill urgently invited the poet , through Count Bruhl , to visit Berlin at this time , and reside in his palace . 
But Goethe refused ; he was seventy-two years old -LRB- 1826 -RRB- , and excused himself on account of his age . -RSB- 
Goethe stooped and threw a handful of sand in the air . 
The postilion , tired of standing in the burning sun , blew loudly the air of the soldier 's song : `` Now , adieu , Louisa , wipe your face , every ball does not hit . '' 
Mournfully the melody sounded in the stillness , like accusing spirits who wept the insult of the prince and the poet . 
`` Now , on to our dear Weimar , Wolf ! '' 
The carriage rolled down the sandy hill , and Berlin disappeared to the travellers , lost in dreamy thought . 
Slowly they advanced , in spite of relays and fresh horses at every station . 
Night spread out her starry mantle over the world , and the sleepers who rested from the burdens and cares of the day . 
Goethe alone was wakeful and vigilant . 
With his beautiful eyes , as brilliant as fallen stars , uplifted to heaven , to God , his manly bosom heaving with noble thoughts and glorious aspirations , he reviewed the past , and recalled with joy that he had accomplished much and well . 
He peered into the future , and promised himself to do more and better . 
`` Yes , I will , '' whispered he softly , pointing to the stars ; `` so high as possible shall the pyramid of my being rise . 
To that I will constantly bend my thoughts , never forgetting it , for I dare not tarry ; with the years already on my head , fate may arrest my steps , and the tower of Babylon remain unfinished . 
At least they must acknowledge the edifice was boldly designed , and if I live , God willing , it shall rise . '' 
Frederick commenced the campaign against the house of Hapsburg with all the energy and bold courage of former days . 
The diplomats had once more been permitted to seek the arts of negotiation , and , these having failed , the king advanced rapidly , and entered Bohemia with his advance-guard . 
The imperial army , informed of the approach of the enemy , retired hurriedly to their intrenchments at Koeniggratz , beyond the Elbe , without a decisive battle . 
In the skirmishes at the outposts the Prussians had been victorious . 
On the opposite shore of the Elbe , at Welsdorf , the king took up his headquarters . 
Why did he not pursue his bold run of victory ? 
Why did he not surprise the imperial army , which he knew was scattered , and not in a position to resist the strength of the Prussian forces ? 
Moreover , the second column of the Prussian army , under the command of Prince Henry , had also entered Bohemia , and fortified a camp near Rimburg , having united with the Saxon allies , which caused the imperialists under Field-Marshal Loudon to seek protection beyond the Iser , near Muenchengratz and Yung-bunzlau . 
Why did the king then stop in the midst of his victorious career ? 
He had advanced to the field with his fresh , youthful fire , a shining example to all . 
He was always mounted , shunning no danger , but taking part in the hardships and fatigue incident to the changing life of war ; even showing himself personally active at the discovery of foraging-parties . 
Why did he suddenly hesitate and lie inactive in camp ? 
Why did he not summon his generals and staff-officers to his quarters , instead of his Minister von Herzberg ? 
Every one asked himself the question , and every one answered it differently . 
-- Some said , `` Because the Empress of Russia had raised objections to this war of German brothers ; '' others , that `` the King of the French had offered to settle the quarrel as intermediator . '' 
A third said , the `` empress-queen , Maria Theresa , was terrified at the rapid advance of the Prussians , and had immediately commenced negotiations for peace . '' 
While the wise politicians of Germany and all Europe read and pondered , Frederick tarried quietly in his peasant-house , in which he had taken up his quarters , and which had been arranged very comfortably with carpets , camp-stools , and curtains . 
He sat in his cabinet upon the high , leather-covered arm-chair , which had been brought for him from the neighboring parsonage . 
Alkmene lay upon his knee , and Diana at his feet . 
His countenance was pale , and betrayed fatigue , but his eye beamed with undimmed brilliancy , and around his mouth played an ironical smile . 
`` Well , so matters stand ; therefore , I have summoned you to Welsdorf , '' said Frederick to his minister , Von Herzberg . 
`` The empress-queen is , above all things , a most tender mother . 
She is fearfully anxious , now that the dear young Emperor Joseph has left for the army , and will be exposed to the dangers of war . 
My good friends in Vienna inform me that my entrance into Bohemia created a sensation at the brilliant capital , and had so much alarmed the empress-queen , that she was seriously thinking of negotiating for peace . 
As I learned this from a reliable source , I halted and encamped , that the empress should know where to find me , and sent to summon you immediately . 
I had not been here three days , when the empress 's ambassador , Baron von Thugut , appeared to make offers , and consult about an armistice of two weeks . 
I made known my conditions , and promised the empress , through her negotiator , that I would so calculate my movements that her majesty would have nothing to fear for her blood and her cherished emperor . 
-LSB- Footnote : The king 's words . 
-- See `` Prussia , Frederick the Great , '' vol . 
iv. , p. 102 . -RSB- 
Voila , mon cher ministre , you know all now . 
If the Austrian diplomat comes a second time , you can negotiate with him . '' 
`` Is your majesty also inclined to peace ? '' 
asked Herzberg . 
The king shrugged his shoulders . 
`` When it can be arranged with honor , yes , '' said he . 
`` I will acknowledge , Herzberg , to you , the campaign is hard for me . 
The old fellow of sixty-eight feels the burden of life , and would gladly rest quietly , and enjoy the last few years as philosopher and writer instead of soldier . '' 
`` Your majesty has yet many years to live , God willing , '' cried Herzberg . 
`` It would be a great misfortune to Prussia if she could not yet owe to her great king a long and happy reign . '' 
`` Hem ! '' 
replied the king , `` there are in Prussia very many who think otherwise , and wish me to the devil . 
But I have no intention of seeking monsieur so soon , for there are sufficient devilish deeds to endure in this earthly vale of sorrow to prepare for one a very decent purgatory , and give him hereafter well-founded hopes of heaven . 
Therefore I count upon remaining here below a while , and to knead with you this leaven of life that may yield to my subjects an eatable bread . 
You must help me , Herzberg , when I am the baker , to provide the flour for my people ; you must be the associate to knead the bread . 
In order that the flour should not fail , and the bread give out , it may be necessary , if possible , to make peace . '' 
`` Will your majesty be so gracious as to inform me what steps I may take , and upon what conditions ? '' 
`` Take this paper , '' said the king , extending a written document to Herzberg . 
`` I have therein expressed my wishes , and you can act accordingly . 
I am prepared for peace upon any terms which can be made with honor , and which do not frustrate the aim I have in view . 
You well know that this is the security of Germany against Austria 's ambitious love of territorial aggrandizement ! 
I can not and I will not suffer that the house of Habsburg should strive for unjust possession in Germany , and appropriate Bavaria to herself while a lawful heir exists . 
I well know that I play the role of Don Quixote , and am about to fight for the rights of Germany as the Chevalier de la Mancha fought for his Dulcinea del Toboso . 
Mais , que voulez-vous , it is necessary for my fame and repose that I enter the arena once more against Austria to prove to her that I exist . 
I take this step on account of the prestige I have gained in the German empire , and which I should lose if I had not faced Austria in this Bavarian contest . 
And besides , it is agreeable to me to accustom my successor to the thunder of cannon , and witness his bearing on the field of battle . '' 
`` He will certainly do honor to the heroic race of Hohenzollern , '' answered Herzberg , bowing . 
A sudden flash from the king 's fiery eyes met the calm pale face of Herzberg . 
`` Mere words and flattery , which prove that you are not satisfied , Herzberg ! 
Nay , nay , do not deny it ; you do not like that I should tarry and treat , and set the pen in motion instead of the sword . 
You are a man of deeds , and if you had had your way , I should have already won a decisive battle , and be on the road to Vienna to besiege the empress in her citadel , and dictate an humiliating peace to her . '' 
`` Your majesty , I can assure you -- '' `` Well , well , do not quarrel ! '' 
interrupted the king ; `` do you suppose I can not read your honest and obstinate face ? 
Do you suppose I did not mean what I said ? 
Acknowledge that I am right ! 
confess it , I command you ! '' 
`` If your majesty commands it , then I will acknowledge it . 
Yes , I did wish that your majesty had not empowered Baron von Thugut to return for further negotiations . 
It would have been well if your majesty had marched victorious to Vienna , to let the proud Hapsburgers see for once that Frederick of Prussia does not stand behind them , but at their side ; that he has created a new order of things ; that the old , mouldy , rotten statutes of the imperial sovereignty have fallen in the dust before Frederick the Great ; that Germany must be newly mapped out , in order to give room near the old man Austria for young Prussia . 
Yes , your majesty , I could have wished that you had even been less generous , less noble toward the supercilious , insolent enemy , and have accepted no conditions but those of ` equality for Prussia with Austria in the German empire ! ' '' 
`` My dear sir , I am truly astonished at the vigor with which you express yourself ; I am very glad to find you so enthusiastic , '' said Frederick , nodding to his minister ; `` but listen -- I will confide to you that which I do not wish you to repeat : I am no longer , to my regret , what you so flatteringly call me , ` Frederick the Great , ' but only ` Old Fritz . ' 
