`` Then , according to your opinion , his servants must be very fortunate , '' said the stranger , `` and yet they say that he is not very kind to them . '' 
`` Because the servant is a little man , '' cried Herr Wolff , `` and every one looks little to his belittling eyes . '' 
`` Yes , there are many others no more elevated than servants in the king 's surroundings , '' said the other . 
The youth reminded him that they must leave . 
`` Only wait a moment , friend , '' begged Herr Wolff , as he turned to the stranger , saying , `` I would like to continue our conversation of today . 
You live in Berlin . 
I will find you out if you will give me your name . '' 
`` I pray you to visit me ; my name is Moritz . 
I live in Kloster Strasse , near the gray convent . '' 
`` Your name is Moritz ? '' 
, asked Herr Wolff , earnestly . 
`` Then you are the author of the ` Journey to England ? ' '' 
`` Yes , the same , and my highest encomium is , that the work is not unknown to you , or the name of the author . '' 
`` All Germany knows it , and do you think I could possibly remain a stranger to it ? '' 
`` But your name , sir , '' said the stranger , with anxious curiosity . 
`` Will you not give me your name ? '' 
`` I will tell you when we are in your own room , '' said Herr Wolff , smiling . 
`` The air is yet enchanted and intoxicated with the breath of the Great Frederick ; it should not be desecrated with another name . 
-- Farewell , we will meet in Berlin . '' 
Not far from these gentlemen stood two others , wrapped in long military cloaks , both of striking and foreign appearance ; the one , of slight delicate figure , of dark complexion , noble and handsome face , must be an Italian , as his very black hair and eyes betrayed ; the other , tall , broad-shouldered , of Herculean stature , belonged to North Germany , as the blond hair , light blue eyes , and features indicated . 
A pleasing smile played around his thick , curled lips , and only when he glanced at his companion did it die away , and change to one of respectful devotion . 
At this instant the king passed . 
The Italian pressed the arm of his companion . 
`` The arch fiend himself , '' he murmured softly , `` the demon of unbelief , to whom nothing is sacred , and nothing intimidates . 
The contemptuously smiling spirit of negation , which is called enlightenment , and is but darkness , to whom belief is superstition , and enlightening only deception . 
Woe to him ! '' 
`` Woe to him ! '' 
repeated the other . 
The king was followed by his brilliant and select staff in motley confusion . 
First , Prince Henry , and then the Prince of Prussia . 
As the latter passed the two gentlemen , the Italian pressed the arm of his companion still harder . 
`` Look at him attentively , my son , '' said he , `` that is our future and our hope in this country . '' 
The Hercules turned hastily , with a look of astonishment , to the Italian . 
`` The Prince of Prussia ? '' 
asked he , with amazement . 
The Italian nodded . 
`` Do you doubt it ? '' 
he added , reproachfully . 
`` Would you doubt your lord and master , because he reveals to you what you can not seize with your clouded spirit ? '' 
`` No , no , master , I am only surprised that you hope for good from this lost-in-sin successor to the throne . '' 
`` Yes , you are poor , human children , '' sighed the Italian , compassionately smiling ; `` prompt to judge , mistaking light for darkness , and darkness for light . 
I have already remarked that to the celebrated and austere Minister Sully , as he complained to me of the levity and immorality of the French king , Henry IV . 
I told him that austere morals and moral laws suffered exceptions , and that those through whom the welfare of humanity should be furthered , had to transfer their heavenly bliss of love to the earthly sphere . 
Sully would contest the question with me , but I defeated him , while I repeated to him what the beautiful and unhappy Queen of Scotland , Mary Stuart , once said to me . '' 
`` Mary Stuart ! '' 
cried the other , vehemently . 
`` Yes , Mary Stuart , '' answered the Italian , earnestly . 
`` Come , my son , let us go . 
We have seen what we wished to see , and that is sufficient . 
Give me thy arm , and let us depart . '' 
They departed arm in arm , withdrawing from the crowd , and taking the broad walk which crossed to the park . 
`` You were about to relate to me the answer which Mary Stuart gave to you , sir , '' said the Hercules , timidly . 
`` True ; I will now relate it to you , '' he answered , with sadness . 
`` It was in Edinburgh I had surprised Mary -LRB- as I was admitted without ceremony -RRB- , in her boudoir , as the handsome Rizzio sat at her feet , and sang love-songs to her . 
She was resting upon a gold-embroidered divan , and her figure appeared to great advantage in the heavenly blue , silver-embroidered gauze robe , which covered her beautiful limbs like a cloud . 
In her hair sparkled two diamonds , like two stars fallen from heaven , and more glowing still were her eyes , which tenderly rested upon Rizzio . 
Leaning upon her elbow , she inclined toward Rizzio , who , lute in hand , was looking up to her with a countenance expressive of the deepest love . 
It was a glorious picture , this young and charming couple , in their bliss of love ; and never , in the course of this century , have I forgotten this exquisite picture -- never have its bright tints faded from my memory . 
How often have I begged my friend , Antonio Vandyck , to make this picture eternal , with his immortal pencil . 
He promised to do it , but at the moment he was occupied with the portraits of Charles I. and his family -- the grandson of Queen Mary . 
Later , as I was not with him , unfortunately , to save him , death seized him before he had fulfilled his promise . 
But her image is stamped upon my heart , and I see her now , as I saw her then , the beautiful queen , with the handsome singer at her feet . 
I had entered unawares , and stood a few moments at the door before they remarked me . 
As I approached , Rizzio suddenly ceased in the midst of a tender passage , and sprang to his feet . 
Mary signed to him , blushing , to withdraw . 
He glided noiselessly out , his lute under his arm , and I remained alone with the queen . 
I dared to chide her , gently , for her love affair with the handsome singer , and , above all , to exhort her to fidelity to her husband . 
Whereupon Mary answered me , with her accustomed smiling manner , ` There is but one fidelity which one must recognize , and that is to the god of gods -- Love ! 
Where he is not , I will not be . 
The god Hymen is a tedious , pedantic fellow , who burns to ashes all the fresh young love of the heart , and all the enthusiasm of the soul , with his intolerable tallow torch , for Love stands not at his side . 
I am faithful to the god Amor , therefore I can never be faithful to the god Hymen , as it would be unfaithful to Love ! ' 
That was the response of the beautiful Queen Mary . 
I could not contest the question , so I only looked at her and smiled . 
Suddenly , I felt a dagger , as it were , thrust at my heart , my spiritual eyes were opened , the lovely woman on the divan was fearfully changed . 
Instead of the gauze robe , sparkling with silver , a black cloth dress covered her emaciated limbs ; instead of brilliants , sparkling in her hair , a mourning veil covered her whitened locks . 
The beauty and roundness of her neck had disappeared , and I saw around it a broad dark-red stripe . 
Her head moved , and fell at my feet dissevered . 
I saw it all , as distinctly as if it really happened , and seized with unspeakable pity I prostrated myself at her feet -LRB- who was unknowing of my vision -RRB- , and besought her with all the anxiety and tenderness of friendship to leave Scotland , to fly from England , as there the death-tribunal awaited her . 
But Mary Stuart only laughed at my warning , and called me a melancholy fool , whom jealousy made prophetic . 
The more I begged and implored , the more wanton and gay the poor woman became . 
Then , as I saw all persuasion was vain , that no one could save her from her dreadful fate , I took a solemn oath that I would be at her side at the hour of her peril , and accompany her to the scaffold . 
Mary laughed aloud , and , with that mocking gayety so peculiarly her own , she accepted the oath , and reached me her white hand , sparkling with diamonds , to seal the vow with a kiss . 
I faithfully kept it . 
I had but just arrived in Rome when I received the account of her imprisonment . 
I presented myself immediately to the pope , the great Sixtus V. , who then occupied the chair of St. Peter . 
Fortunately , he was my friend , and I had formerly been useful to him , in assisting him to carry out his great and liberal ideas for the welfare of humanity . 
As a return , I prayed the Holy Father to give me a consecrated hostie for the unhappy Queen Mary Stuart , and the permission to carry it to her in her prison . 
The Holy Father was incredulous of my sad presentiments , as Mary Stuart herself had been , but he granted me the request . 
I quitted Rome , and travelled with relays day and night . 
Reaching Boulogne , a Dover packet-boat had just raised anchor ; I succeeded in boarding her , and arrived in London the next evening . 
The day following , the execution of the queen took place at Fotheringay . 
I was with her in her last hours , and from my hand she received the consecrated water of Pope Sixtus V. I had kept my oath . 
I accompanied her to the scaffold , and her head rolled at my feet , as I had seen it in my vision at Edinburgh . 
It was the 18th of April , 1587 , and it seems to me as but yesterday . 
To the intuitive , seeing spirit , time and space disappear ; eternity and immortality are to it omnipresent . '' 
Given up to his souvenirs and visions , the Italian appeared not to know where he wandered , and turned unintentionally to the retired , lonely places in the park . 
His companion heeded not the way either , occupied with the strange account of the Italian . 
A dreadful feeling of awe and horror took possession of his soul , and , with devoted respect , he hung upon the words which fell from the lips of his companion . 
`` It was in the year 1587 , '' said he , as the Italian ceased ; `` almost two hundred years since , and you were present ? '' 
The Italian replied : `` I was present . 
I have witnessed so many dreadful scenes , and been present at so many executions , that this sad spectacle was not an unusual one to me , and would not have remained fixed in my memory had I not loved , devotedly and fervently , the beautiful Queen Mary Stuart . 
For those who live in eternity , all horrors have ceased ; time rushes past in centuries , which seem to them but a day . '' 
`` Teach me so to live , master ; I thirst for knowledge , '' cried his companion , fervently . 
`` I know it , my son ; I penetrate thy soul , and I know that thou thirstest . 
Therefore I am here to quench thy thirst , and feed thy hungry heart . '' 
He remained standing upon the grass-plot , which he had reached by lonely paths , and which was encircled by trees and bushes . 
Not a sound interrupted the peaceful morning stillness of the place , except the distant music of the departing regiments dying away on the air . 
`` I will teach thee to live in eternity ! '' 
resumed the Italian , solemnly . 
`` My predecessor the apostle , George Schrepfer , has initiated thee in temporal life , and the knowledge of the present . 
By the pistol-shot , which disclosed to him the invisible world , and removed him from our earthly eyes , has he to thee , his most faithful and believing disciple , given the great doctrine of the decay of all things earthly , and prepared thee for the doctrine of the imperishableness of the celestial . 
The original of humanity sends me , to make known to thee this holy doctrine . 
When I met thee in Dresden , at the side of the Countess Dorothea von Medem , thee , whom I had never seen , I recognized by the blue flame which trembled above thy head , and which was nothing else than the soul of thy teacher , Schrepfer , wrestling in anguish , which has remained with thee , and hopes for delivery from thee . 
I greeted thee , therefore , not as a stranger but as a friend . 
No one called thy name , and yet it was known to me . 
I took thee by the hand , greeting thee . 
Hans Rudolph von Bischofswerder , be welcome . 
The blue flame which glows upon thy brow , guides me to thee , and the pistol-shot under the oaks centuries old , at Rosenthal , near Leipsic , was the summons which my spirit received among the pyramids of Egypt , and which recalled me to Europe , to my own , and thou art one of them . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : George Schrepfer , the founder of the Secret Free Mason Lodge -LRB- at the same time proprietor of a restaurant and a conjuror -RRB- , invited his intimate disciples and believers in the year 1774 , to whom Bischofswerder belonged , to meet him at Rosenthal , near Leipsic . 
He assembled them around him , beneath some old oaks , to take leave of them , as now he would render himself in the invisible realm , whence , as a spirit , he would distribute to some of his disciples gold , to others wisdom . 
He then commanded them to conceal their faces and pray . 
The praying ones suddenly heard a loud report , and , as they looked up Schrepfer fell dead . 
He had shot himself with a pistol . -RSB- 
`` And as thou spakest , oh master , I recognized thee , and I called -- ' Thou art here , who hast been announced to me . 
Thou art the master , and my master Schrepfer was the prophet , who preceded thee and prophesied thee . 
Thou art the great Kophta -- thou art Count Alexander Cagliostro ! ' 
As I uttered the name , the lights were extinguished , deep darkness and profound stillness reigned . 
The two countesses Dorothea von Medem and her sister , Eliza von der Necke , clung trembling to me , neither of them daring to break the silence even with a sigh . 
Suddenly the darkness disappeared , and , with trembling flashes of light , there stood written on the wall : ` Memento Domini Oagliostro et omnis mansuetudinis ejus . ' 
We sank upon our knees , and implored thee to aid us . 
By degrees the strange , secret characters disappeared , and darkness and silence reigned . 
The stillness disquieted me at last , and I called for lights . 
As the servant entered , the two countesses lay fainting upon the floor , and thou hadst disappeared . '' 
`` Only to appear to thee at another time , '' said Cagliostro , `` to receive thee with solemn ceremonies into the magic circle -- to initiate thee in the secret wisdom of spirits , and prepare thee for the invisible lodge . 
Recall what I said to thee , three days since , in Dresden . 
Do you still remember it ? '' 
`` I recall it . 
Thou saidst : ` The secret service calls me to Mittau , with the Countess Medem , to raise hidden treasure , of which the spirit has given me knowledge , and decipher important magical characters on the walls of a cloister . 
Before I leave , I will lead thee upon the way which thou hast to follow in order to find the light , and let it illuminate the soul which is worthy . 
Follow me , and I will lead thee to the path of glory , power , and immortality . ' 
These were thy words , master . '' 
`` I have now led thee hither , '' Cagliostro said to him , gently ; `` thy soul doubts and trembles , for thou art blind seeing eyes , and deaf with hearing ears . '' 
`` My soul doubts not , oh master -- it comprehends not . 
I have followed thee , devotedly and believingly . 
Thou knowest it , master , for thou readest the souls of thy children , and seest their hidden thoughts . 
Thou hast said to me in Dresden , ` Renounce your service to the Duke of Courland . ' 
I did it , and from equerry and lord chamberlain to the duke , became a simple , private gentleman . 
I have renounced my titles and dignities for thee , in happy trust in thee . 
My future lies in thy hands , and , anxious to learn the mysteries of immortality , as a grateful , trustful scholar , I would receive happiness and unhappiness at thy hand . '' 
`` Thou shalt receive not only happiness , '' said Cagliostro , solemnly , `` but thou art one of the elect . 
The blue flame glows upon thy brow , it will illuminate thy soul , and lead thee to the path of glory , power , and might . 
To-day thou art a simple , private gentleman , as thou sayst , but to-morrow thou wilt become a distinguished lord , before whom hundreds will bow . 
Fame awaits thee -- which thou hast longed for -- as power awaits thee . 
Whom have I named to thee as our future and our hope in this land ? '' 
`` Prince Frederick William of Prussia , '' answered Herr von Bischofswerder , humbly . 
`` As I spake this name , thou trembledst , and calledst him ` one lost in sin . ' 
Knowest thou , my son , from sin comes penitence , and from penitence elevation and purification . 
Thou art called and chosen to convert sinners , and lead back the earth-born child to heaven . 
Engrave these words upon thy memory , fill thy soul with them , as with glowing flames , repeat them in solitude the entire day , then heavenly spirits will arise and whisper the revelations of the future . 
Then , when thou art consecrated , I will introduce thee into the sacred halls of sublime wisdom . 
Thou shalt be received as a scholar in the temple hall , and it depends upon thee whether thou advancest to the altar which reaches to the invisible world of miracles . '' 
`` Oh , master , '' cried Bisehofswerder , with a countenance beaming with joy , and sinking upon his knees , `` wilt thou favor me , and introduce me to the temple hall ? 
Shall I be received in the sacred world of spirits ? '' 
`` Thou shalt , Hans Rudolph von Bischofswerder . 
The grand master of our order will bestow upon thee this happiness , and to-night shall the star of the future rise over thee . 
Hold thyself in readiness . 
At midnight , present thyself at the first portal of the royal palace in Berlin . 
A man will meet thee , and thou shalt ask , ` Who is our hope ? ' 
If he answers thee , ` The Prince of Prussia , ' then he is the messenger which I shall have sent thee -- follow him . 
Bow thy head in humility , shut thine eyes to all earthly things , turn thy thoughts inward , and lift them up to the great departed , which hovers over thy head , and speak with the blue flame which glows upon thy brow ! '' 
Bischofswerder bowed still lower , covered his face with his hands , as if inwardly praying , and knelt . 
Cagliostro bent over him , laid his hand upon his head , breathing three times upon his blond hair . 
`` I have breathed upon thee with the breath of my spirit , '' said he . 
`` Thy spirit receives power . 
Receive it in holy awe , in devotion , and remain immovable . '' 
Bischofswerder continued motionless , with bowed head and concealed face . 
Cagliostro raised himself , his black eyes fixed upon his disciple , and noiselessly disappeared . 
Herr von Bischofswerder still remained kneeling . 
After some time he raised his head , shyly looking about , and , as he found himself alone , he rose . 
`` He has soared away , '' he murmured , softly . 
`` I shall see him again , and he will consecrate me -- the consecration of immortals ! '' 
The king withdrew from the parade slowly , followed by his generals , in the direction of Sans-Souci . 
The streets of Potsdam were lined with the people , shouting their farewell to the king , who received them with a smiling face . 
Arriving at the grand entrance , he turned to his suite , saying , `` Gentlemen , we shall meet again in Bohemia ; I must now take leave of you , and forego the pleasure of receiving you again to-day . 
A king about to leave for the field has necessary arrangements to make for the future . 
I have much to occupy me , as I set out early to-morrow morning . 
You , also , have duties to attend to . 
Farewell , gentlemen . '' 
He raised his worn-out three-cornered hat , saluted his generals with a slight inclination of the head , and turned into the broad avenue which led to the park of Sans-Souci . 
No one followed him but two mounted footmen , who rode at a respectful distance , attentively regarding the king , of whom only the bowed back and hat were visible . 
Half way down the avenue his staff was raised above his hat , the sign the footmen awaited to dismount with the greyhounds , which rode before them upon the saddle . 
At the shrill barking of the animals , Frederick reined in his horse , and turned to look for them . 
They bounded forward , one upon each side of the king , who regarded them right and left , saying : `` Well , Alkmene , well Diana , let us see who will be the lady of honor to-day . '' 
Both dogs sprang with loud barking to the horse , as if understanding the words of their master . 
Alkmene , stronger , or more adroit , with one bound leaped to the saddle ; while poor Diana landed upon the crouper , and , as if ashamed , with hanging head and tail , withdrew behind the horse . 
`` Alkmene has won ! '' 
said Kretzschmar to his companion . 
`` Yes , Alkmene is the court-lady to-day , and Diana the companion , '' he nodded . 
`` She will be cross , and I do not blame her . '' 
`` Nor I , '' said Kretzschmar ; `` there is a great difference between the court-lady and the companion . 
The lady remains with the king all day ; he plays with her , takes her to walk , gives her bonbons , and the choice morsels of chicken , and only when she has eaten sufficient , can the companion enter to eat the remainder . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : This was the daily order of rank with the favorite dogs , for whose service two dog-lackeys , as they were called , were always in waiting . 
They took them to walk -RSB- `` One could almost envy the king 's greyhounds ! '' 
sighed the second footman . 
`` We get dogs ' wages , and they the chicken and good treatment . 
It is a pity ! '' 
`` The worst of it is , the king forbids us to marry ! '' 
said Kretzschmar sadly . 
`` All the others would leave him , but I pay no attention to old Fritz 's snarling and scolding , for he pays for it afterward ; first , it rains abusive words , then dollars , and if the stupid ass hits me over the head , he gives me at least a ducat for it . 
Why should not one endure scoldings when is well paid for it ? 
I remain the fine handsome fellow that I am , if the old bear does call me an ass ! 
His majesty might well be satisfied if he had my fine figure and good carriage . '' 
`` Yes , indeed , we are very different fellows from old Fritz ! '' 
said the second lackey , with a satisfied air . 
`` A princess once thought me a handsome fellow ! 
It is eleven years since , as I entered the guards on account of my delicate figure . 
I was guard of honor in the anteroom of the former crown princess of Prussia . 
It was my first experience . 
I did not know the ways of the lords and ladies . 
Suddenly , a charming and beautifully-dressed lady came into the anteroom , two other young ladies following her , joking and laughing , quite at their pleasure . 
All at once the elegantly-attired lady fixed her large black eyes upon me , so earnestly , that I grew quite red , and looked down . 
` See that handsome boy , ' she cried . ' 
I will bet that it is a girl dressed up ! ' 
She ran up to me , and began to stroke my cheek with her soft hand , and laughed . ' 
I am right . 
He has not the trace of a beard ; it is a girl ! ' 
And before I knew it she kissed me , then again , and a third time even . 
I stood still as if enchanted , and , as I thought another kiss was coming , whack went a stout box on my ear . 
` There is a punishment for you , ' said she , ` that you may know enough to return a kiss when a handsome lady gives you when the king did not wish them with him ; in summer , in an open wagon , the dogs upon the back-seat , and the footmen upon the forward seat , and whenever they reproved them , to bring them to order , they addressed them in the polite manner of one , and not stand like a libber , ' and with that she boxed me again . 
The other two ladies laughed , which made me angry , and my ears were very warm . 
` If that happens again , ' said I , ` by thunder , she will find I do not wait to be punished ! ' 
I laid down the arms , and at once sprang after the lady , when -- the folding-doors were thrown open , and two gentlemen , in splendid gold-embroidered dresses , entered . 
As they saw the little lady , they stood astonished , and made the three prescribed bows . 
I smelt the rat , and put on my sword quickly , and stood stiff as a puppet . 
The gentlemen said , that they must beg an interview with her royal highness , to deliver the king 's commands . 
The princess went into an adjoining room . 
One of the court-ladies stopped before me a moment , and said : ` If you ever dare to tell of this , you shall be put in the fortress . 
Remember it , and keep silent . ' 
I did so , and kept it a secret until to-day . '' 
`` Did the princess ever punish you again ? '' 
asked Kretzchmar , with a bold , spying look . 
`` No , never , '' answered the lackey Schultz . 
`` The princess was ordered to Stettin the next day , where she still lives as a prisoner for her gay pranks . 
I remembered her punishment , and when a lady has kissed me , I have bravely returned it . '' 
The footmen had followed the king up the slowly ascending horse-path to the terrace , and now they sprang quickly forward . 
Kretzschmar swung himself from his saddle , threw Schultz the reins , and , as the king drew up at the side-door of the palace of Sans-Souci , he stood ready to assist him to dismount . 
The king had given strict orders that no one should notice his going or coming , and to-day , as usual , he entered without pomp or ceremony into his private room , followed by Kretzschmar alone . 
He sank back into his armchair , the blue damask covering of which was torn and bitten by the dogs , so that the horse-hair stood out from the holes . 
`` Now relate to me , Kretzschmar , how your expedition succeeded . 
Did you go to Berlin to see Mademoiselle Enke last night ? '' 
`` Yes , your majesty , I was there , and have brought you the writing . '' 
`` Was she alone ? '' 
asked the king , bending over to caress Alkmene , who lay at his feet . 
`` Well , '' answered Kretzschmar , grinning , `` I do not know whether she was alone or not . 
I only know that , as I waited a little on the corner of the street , I saw a gentleman go out , wrapped in a cloak , a tall , broad-shouldered gentleman , whom I -- '' `` Whom you naturally did not recognize , '' said the king , interrupting him ; `` it was a dark night , and no moon , so that you could not see . '' 
`` At your service , your majesty , I could see no one ; I would only add that the unknown may have been at Mademoiselle Enke 's . '' 
`` And he may not have been , '' cried the king , harshly . 
`` What else did you learn ? '' 
`` Nothing at all worth speaking about . 
Only one thing I must say , the lackey Schultz is a prattling fool , and speaks very disrespectfully . '' 
`` Did he talk with you ? '' 
`` Yes , your majesty , with me . '' 
`` Then he knows well that it would be welcome . 
What did he say ? '' 
`` He related to me a love-affair with the crown princess of Prussia eleven years since . 
He plumes himself upon the crown princess having stroked his beard . '' 
`` Be quiet ! '' 
commanded the king , harshly . 
`` If Schultz was drunk , and talked in a crazy manner , how dare you repeat it to me ? 
Let this happen again , and I will dismiss you my service . 
Remember it , you ass ! '' 
`` Pardon me , your majesty , I thought I must relate all that I hear of importance . '' 
`` That was not important , and not worth the trouble of talking about . 
If Schultz is such a drunken fellow I did not know it , and he is to be pitied . 
You can go now ; I give you a day to make your farewells to your friends , and to console them with the hope of meeting you again . 
Put every thing in order that concerns you . 
If you have debts , pay them . '' 
`` I have no money to pay them , your majesty , '' sighed Kretzschmar . 
The king stepped to the iron coffer , of which no one possessed the key but himself , and looking within said : `` You can not have much money to-day , as the drawer which contains the money for the gossips and spies is quite empty , and you have had a good share of it . 
Five guldens remain for you . '' 
`` Alas ! 
your majesty , it is too little ; twenty-five guldens would not pay my debts . '' 
The king closed the drawer , saying : `` Judas only received twenty shillings for betraying his Master . 
Twenty-five is quite enough for Kretzschmar for betraying his comrade . '' 
Kretzschmar slunk away . 
The king fixed his great eyes upon him until the door closed . 
`` Man is a miserable race ; for gold he would sell his own brother -- would sell his own soul , if there could be found a purchaser , '' he murmured . 
`` Why do you growl , Alkmene , why trouble yourself , mademoiselle ? 
I was not speaking of your honorable race ; only of the pitiful race of men . 
Be quiet , my little dog , be quiet ; I love you , and you are my dear little dog , '' he said , pressing her caressingly to his breast . 
The footman Schultz appeared to announce the equerry Von Schwerin . 
`` Bid him enter , '' nodded the king . 
Von Schwerin entered , with a smiling face . 
`` Have you accomplished what I confided to you ? '' 
With a profound bow Von Schwerin drew a roll of paper from his breast-pocket , and handed it to the king , saying , `` I am so fortunate as to have accomplished your commands . '' 
`` Will Count Schmettau give up the villa at once ? '' 
`` Yes , your majesty , the new occupant could take possession to-day , with all the furniture and house arrangements , for seven thousand five hundred dollars . 
Here is the bill of sale , only the purchaser 's name is wanting . 
I have obeyed your majesty 's commands , and acted as if I were the purchaser . '' 
`` Schmettau is not such a stupid fellow as to believe that , for he knows that you can not keep your money . 
You say the contract is ready , only the signature of the purchaser is wanting and the money ? '' 
`` Pardon me , your majesty , the name of the present possessor has not been inserted . 
I did not presume to write it without the unmistakable command of your majesty . '' 
`` Do you know the name ? '' 
asked the king . 
`` I do not , but the generosity of my most gracious king and master allows me to divine it , and my heart is filled to bursting with thankfulness and joy . 
My whole life will not be long enough to prove to you my gratitude . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
asked the king , staring at Von Schwerin , quite surprised ; `` you can not suppose that I have purchased the villa for you ? '' 
Herr von Schwerin smilingly nodded . 
`` I think so , your majesty . '' 
Frederick laughed aloud . 
`` Schwerin , you are an uncommonly cunning fellow . 
You see the grass grow before the seed is sown . 
This time you deceived yourself -- the grass has not grown . 
What good would it do you ? 
You do not need grass , but thistles , and they do not grow at Charlottenburg . 
Take the contract to my minister Von Herzberg , whom you will find in the audience-room , and then walk a little upon the terrace to enjoy the fresh air . 
I promised you the privilege . 
First go to Von Herzberg , and say to him to send the Prince of Prussia to me immediately upon his arrival . 
Why do you wear so mournful a face all of a sudden ? 
Can it be possible that my chief equerry has so lowered himself as to go among the mechanics , and build chateaux en Espagne ? 
You know such houses are not suitable for our northern climate , and fall down . 
Now , do what I told you , and then go upon the terrace . '' 
The equerry glided away with sorrowful mien to Von Herzberg , and communicated the king 's commands to him . 
`` You have made a good purchase , '' said the minister , in a friendly manner . 
`` His majesty will be very much pleased with the extraordinary zeal and the great dexterity with which you have arranged the matter . 
Count Schmettau has just been here , and he could not sufficiently commend your zeal and prudence , and the sympathy and interest which you showed in the smallest matters , as if the purchase were for yourself . 
The count wishes to reserve two oil paintings in the saloon , which are an heirloom from his father . 
We can not but let the count retain them . '' 
`` Arrange it as you will , '' answered the equerry , fretfully ; `` I have nothing more to do with the affair -- it lies in your hands . '' 
`` But where are you going in such haste ? '' 
said Herzberg , as the equerry bowed hastily , and strode through the room toward the door . 
`` His majesty commanded me to go upon the terrace , '' he replied , morosely . 
Herr von Herzberg looked after him surprised . 
`` Something must have occurred , otherwise he is very tractable . 
Ah ! 
there comes the prince . 
I will go to meet him , and communicate to him the king 's command -- I will await your royal highness here until you have spoken with the king , if you will have the grace to seek me . '' 
`` I will return by all means , if you will have the kindness to wait for me , '' replied the prince , smiling , and hastened to the interview with his royal uncle . 
Frederick was seated in his arm-chair , upon his lap Alkmene , when the crown prince entered . 
`` Bon jour , mon neveu ! 
pardon me , '' said he , with a friendly nod , `` that I remain seated , and do not rise to greet the future King of Prussia . '' 
`` Sire , Heaven grant that many years pass before I succeed to the title which my great and unapproachable predecessor has borne with so much wisdom and fame , that one can well doubt the being able to emulate his example , and must content himself to live under the shadow of his intelligence and fame ! '' 
Frederick slowly shook his head . 
`` The people will not be satisfied , nor the coffers filled by fame . 
No one can live upon the great deeds of his ancestors ; he must be self-sustaining , not seek for the laurels in the past , but upon the naked field of the future , which lies before him . 
Sow the seeds of future laurels ; fame troubles me but little , and I advise you , my nephew , not to rely upon it . 
One must begin anew each day , and make fresh efforts for vigorous deeds . '' 
The crown prince bowed , and seated himself upon the tabouret , which the king , with a slight wave of the hand , signified to him . 
`` I will endeavor , sire , to follow the elevated sentiments of your majesty , that I may not dishonor my great teacher . '' 
`` You express yourself too modestly , my nephew , and I know that you think otherwise ; that your fiery spirit will never be contented to dishonor yourself or your ancestors . 
Fate is favorable to you , and offers the opportunity to confirm , what I judge you to be -- a brave soldier , a skilful captain -- in a word , a true Hohenzollern ! 
I would make you a commander of a division of my army , and I shall follow every movement -- every operation , with lively interest . '' 
A ray of joy beamed upon the face of the prince ; Frederick saw it with satisfaction , and his heart warmed toward his nephew . 
`` He has at least courage , '' he said to himself ; `` he is no sybarite to quail before the rough life of war . '' 
`` Will your majesty so greatly favor me as to accord me an independent position in the campaign ? '' 
`` I offer you what belongs to you as a general and heir to the throne . 
On me it devolves to direct the plans and operations , and on you to detail them and direct the execution . 
I shall rejoice to see that you understand the profession of war practically as well as theoretically . 
Therefore , this war is so far welcome , that it will give my crown prince an opportunity to win his first laurels , and adorn the brow which , until now , has been crowned with myrtle . '' 
`` Your majesty , I -- '' `` Be silent -- I do not reproach you , my nephew ; I understand human nature , and the seductive arts of women . 
It is time that you seek other ornament -- myrtle becomes a youthful brow , and the helmet adorns the man crowned with laurels . '' 
`` I have long desired it , and I am deeply grateful to your majesty for the opportunity to win it . 
This campaign is good fortune to me . '' 
`` War is never a good fortune , '' sighed the king -- `` for the people it is great misfortune . 
I would willingly have avoided it for their sake . 
But the arrogance and the passion for territorial aggrandizement of the young Emperor of Germany forces me to it . 
I dare not , and will not suffer Austria to enrich herself through foreign inheritance , ignoring the legitimate title of a German prince . 
Bavaria must remain an independent , free German principality , under a sovereign prince . 
It is inevitably necessary for the balance of power . 
I can not yield , therefore , as a German prince , that Austria increase her power in an illegitimate manner , but I will cast my good sword in the scales , that the balance is heavier on the side upon which depends the existence of Germany , that she may not be tossed in the air by Austria 's weight . 
These are my views and reasons for the war upon which I now enter with reluctance . 
When the greatness and equilibrium of Germany are at stake , no German prince should dare hesitate . 
Austria has already cost Germany much blood , and will cause her to shed still more . 
Believe it , my nephew , and guard yourself against Austria 's ambition for territorial aggrandizement . 
You see , I am like all old people , always teaching youth , while we have much to learn ourselves . 
We are all pupils , and our deeds are ever imperfect . '' 
`` Your majesty can not believe that of himself . 
The sage of Sans-Souci is the type , the master , and teacher of all Europe . '' 
`` My son , '' replied the king , `` the great men of antiquity recognized it as the acme of wisdom , that they must be mindful that ` in the midst of life we are in death . ' 
At the gay festivities and the luxurious feasts they were interrupted in the merry song and voluptuous dance , with the warning : ` Remember , O man , that thou must die ! ' 
Let us profit by their wisdom ! 
I have startled you from the banquet of life , and I doubt not that many singers and dancers will be enraged that I should put an end to the feasts of roses and the merry dance in such an abominable manner . 
It would be an evil omen in our warlike undertaking , if the rosy lips of the beauties should breathe curses to follow us ; therefore , we must try to conciliate them , and leave a good souvenir in their hearts . 
You smile , my prince , and you think it vain trouble for an old fellow ; that I can not win the favor of the ladies under any pretension ; so you must undertake for me the reconciliation and the hush-money . '' 
`` I am prepared for any thing which your majesty imposes upon me ; only I would defend myself against the interpretation which you give my smile -- and -- '' `` Which was very near the truth , '' interrupted the king . 
`` I have called you from the banquet of life , and I have interrupted the dancers , crowned with roses in the midst of their dance , which they would finish before you . 
I pray you , then , indemnify the enraged beauties , and let us go forth with a quiet conscience , that we in no respect are indebted to any one . '' 
`` Oh , sire , it will be impossible for me to go to the field with a quiet conscience upon this point . '' 
`` Permit me to extend to you the means to do so , '' replied the king , graciously smiling . 
`` Take this little box ; it contains a wonderful elixir , proof against all the infirmities and weaknesses of humanity , of one of the greatest philosophers of human nature . 
By the right use of it , tears of sorrow are changed to tears of joy , and a Megerea into a smiling angel , as by enchantment . 
Before going to the war , I pray you to prove the miraculous elixir upon one of the angry beauties . 
For , I repeat , we must put our house in order , and leave no debts behind us . 
The debts of gratitude must not be forgotten . 
Let us say ` Gesegnete Mahlzeit ' when we have been well feasted . '' 
The king handed the prince a little box , of beautiful workmanship , and smiled as he rather vehemently thanked him , and at the same time tried to open it . 
`` I remark with pleasure that you have a tolerably innocent heart , as you betray curiosity about the wonderful elixir . 
I supposed men , to say nothing of beautiful women , had long since instructed you that it was the only balsam for all the evils of life . 
