My minister Herzberg will give you the key of the little box , and advise you as to the right use of the elixir . 
Farewell , with the hope of soon seeing you again , my nephew . 
I start for Silesia to-morrow , as I must travel slower than you young people . 
You will follow me in a few days . 
Again farewell ! '' 
Extending his meagre white hand to the prince , he withdrew it quickly , as the latter was about to press it to his lips , and motioned to the door kindly . 
Prince Frederick William betook himself , with painful curiosity , to the audience-room , where the Minister von Herzberg awaited him . 
`` Your excellency , '' said he , `` his majesty refers me to you , for the true explanation of the miraculous elixir contained in this little box , and about which I am naturally very curious , and beg of you the key to open it . '' 
`` Will your royal highness , '' said the minister , smiling , `` have the grace to grant me a few moments ' conversation , which may serve as an explanation , for his majesty has not in reality given me a key ? '' 
`` I pray you , my dear excellency , to explain it , '' cried the prince , impatiently . 
`` Pardon me if I probe the tenderest feelings of your heart , my prince . 
The command of the king imposes this duty upon me . 
He has known for a long time of your connection with a certain person , to whom you are more devoted than to your wife . '' 
`` Say , rather , his majesty has twice forced me to marry two unloved and unknown princesses , when he knew that I already loved this certain person . 
Twice I have married , because the command of his king is law to the crown prince of Prussia . 
For my love and my sympathy there is no law but that of my own heart , and this alone have I followed . '' 
`` His majesty does not reproach you . 
The philosopher of Sans-Souci understands human nature , and he feels indulgent toward your weakness . 
He is quite satisfied that you have chosen this person , as friend and favorite , to console yourself for an unhappy marriage . 
Her low birth is a guaranty that she will never mingle in politics , an act which would be visited with his majesty 's highest displeasure . 
While his majesty permits you to continue this intimacy , and recognizes the existence of this woman , he wishes her to be provided for as becomes the mistress of a crown prince , and not as the grisette of a gentleman . 
She should have her own house , and the livery of her lord . '' 
`` As if it were my fault that this has not already been arranged ! '' 
cried the prince . 
`` Am I not daily and hourly tormented with poverty , and scarcely know how to turn , between necessary expenses and urgent creditors ? 
You know well yourself , your excellency , how stingy and parsimonious the king is to the crown prince . 
He scarcely affords me the means to support my family in a decent , to say nothing of a princely , manner . 
How dependent we all are , myself , my wife , and my children upon the king , whose economy increases , while our wants and expenses also increase every year ! 
It is sufficiently sad that I can not reward those who have proved to me during ten years their fidelity and love , but I must suffer them to live in dependence and want . '' 
`` His majesty understands that , and thinks that as your royal highness is to go to the field , and will be exposed , as a brave commander , to the uncertain fate of battle , that you should assure the future of all those who are dear to you , and arrange a certain competency for them . 
A good opportunity now offers to you . 
Count Schmettau will sell his villa at Charlottenburg , and it would be agreeable to his majesty that you should purchase it , and assign it to those dearest to you . 
In order to give you as little trouble as possible , his majesty has had the matter already arranged , through his equerry , Count Schmettau , and the purchase can be made this very hour . 
Here is the bill of sale ; only the name of the present possessor is wanting , the signature of the purchaser , and the payment of seven thousand five hundred thalers . '' 
`` The names can be quickly written ; but , your excellency , '' cried the prince , `` where will the money come from ? '' 
`` I have just given your royal highness the key to the little box : have the goodness to press hard upon the rosette . '' 
The prince touched the spring , the cover flew back -- it contained only a strip of paper ! 
Upon it was written , in the king 's own handwriting , `` Bill of exchange upon my treasurer . 
Pay to the order of the Prince of Prussia twenty thousand thalers . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : `` Memoirs of the Countess Lichtenau , '' vol .1 -RSB- The prince 's face lighted up with joy . 
`` Oh ! 
the king has indeed given me a miraculous elixir , that compensates for all misfortunes , heals all infirmities , and is a balsam for all possible griefs . 
I will bring it into use immediately , and sign the bill of sale . '' 
He signed the paper , and filled with haste the deficiency in the contract . 
`` It is done ! '' 
he cried , joyfully , `` the proprietress , Wilhelmine Enke ; purchaser , Frederick William of Prussia . 
Nothing remains to be done but to draw upon the king 's treasury , and pay Count Schmettau . '' 
`` Your royal highness is spared even that trouble . 
Here are twenty rolls , and each roll contains one hundred double Fredericks d'or , and , when your highness commands it , I will reserve seven rolls and pay Count Schmettau ; then there remain thirteen for yourself . 
Here is the contract , which you will give in person to the possessor . '' 
`` First , I must go to the king , '' said the prince ; `` my heart urges me to express my gratitude to him , and my deep sense of his goodness and tenderness . 
I feel ashamed without being humbled , like a repentant son , who has doubted the generosity and goodness of his father , because he has sometimes severely reprimanded his faults . 
I must go at once to the king . '' 
`` He will not receive your royal highness , '' answered Herzberg , smiling . 
`` You know our sovereign , who so fully deserves our admiration and love . 
His favor and goodness beam upon us all , and he desires neither thanks nor acknowledgment . 
He performs his noble , glorious deeds in a harsh manner , that he may relieve the recipients of his bounty from the burden of gratitude ; and often when he is the most morose and harsh , is he at heart the most gracious and affectionate . 
You and yours have experienced it to-day . 
He appeared to be angry , and enveloped himself in the toga of a severe judge of morals ; but , under this toga , there beat the kind , noble heart of a friend and father , who punishes with rigorous words , and forgives with generous , benevolent deeds . '' 
`` For this I must thank him -- he must listen to me ! '' 
cried the prince . 
`` He will be angry if your royal highness forces him to receive thanks when he would avoid them . 
He has expressly commanded me to entreat you never to allude to the affair , and never to speak of it to others , as it would not be agreeable to his majesty to have the family affairs known to the world . 
You would best please his majesty by following exactly his wishes , and when you meet him never allude to it . 
As I have said , this is the express wish and command of the king . '' 
`` Which I must naturally follow , '' sighed the prince , `` although I acknowledge that it is unpleasant to me to receive so much kindness from him without at least returning my most heart-felt thanks . 
Say to the king , that I am deeply , sensibly moved with his tender sympathy and generosity . 
And now I will hasten to Wilhelmine Enke ; but , it occurs to me that it may not be possible ; the king has made her a prisoner in her own house . '' 
`` Do not trouble yourself about that . 
If it is your royal highness 's pleasure , drive at once to Charlottenburg . 
You will find the new possessor there and she will relate to you her interview with the mayor of Berlin . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I shall drive at once to the villa . 
I am curious to learn what Von Kircheisen has told her . '' 
`` I imagined that you would be , and ordered your carriage here , as you could not well ride upon horseback with the heavy rolls of gold ; and if it is your pleasure , I will order the footman to place the box , into which I have put them , in the carriage . '' 
`` No , no ; I beg you to let me carry them , '' cried the prince , seizing the box with both hands . 
`` It is truly heavy , but an agreeable burden , and if it lames my arm I shall bethink myself of the miraculous elixir , which will give me courage and strength . 
Farewell , your excellency ; I shall hurry on to Charlottenburg ! '' 
The prince hastened to his carriage , and ordered the coachman to drive at full speed to the villa . 
Thanks to this order , he reached it in about an hour . 
No one was there to receive him upon his arrival . 
The hall was empty , and the rooms were closed . 
The prince passed on to the opposite end , where there was a door open , and stood upon a balcony , with steps descending into the garden , which , with its flower-beds , grass-plots , shrubbery , and the tall trees , formed a lovely background . 
The birds were singing , the trees rustled , and variegated butterflies fluttered over the odorous flowers . 
Upon the turf , forming a beautiful group , was Wilhelmine playing with her daughter , and the nurse with the little boy upon her lap , who laughingly stretched out his arms toward his mother . 
`` Wilhelmine -- Wilhelmine ! '' 
cried the prince . 
With a cry of joy she answered , and flew toward the house . 
`` You have come at last , my beloved lord , '' she cried , almost breathless , mounting the steps . 
`` I beg you to tell me what all this means ? 
I am dying of curiosity ! '' 
`` I also , '' said the prince , smiling . 
`` Have the goodness to lead me to one of the rooms , that I may set down this box . '' 
`` What does that hobgoblin contain , that it prevents your embracing me ? '' 
`` Do not ask , but hasten to assist me to relieve myself of the burden . '' 
They entered the house , and Wilhelmine opened the wide folding-doors , which led into a very tastefully-furnished room . 
Frederick William set the box upon the marble table , and sank upon a divan with Wilhelmine in his arms . 
`` First of all , tell me what Von Kircheisen said to you ? '' 
`` He commanded me , in the name of the king , to give up my dwelling at Berlin and at Potsdam , and to avoid showing myself in public at both places , that those who had the right to the love and fidelity of the Prince of Prussia should not be annoyed at the sight of me ; that I should live retired , and leave the appointed residence as little as possible , for then the king would be inclined to ignore my existence , and take no further notice of me . 
But , if I attempted to play a role , his majesty would take good care that it should be forever played out . '' 
`` Those were harsh , cruel words , '' sighed Frederick William . 
`` Harsh , cruel words , '' repeated Wilhelmine , sorrowfully . 
`` They pierced my soul , and I shrieked at last from agony . 
Herr von Kircheisen was quite frightened , and begged me to excuse him , that he must thus speak to me , but the king had commanded him to repeat his very words . 
The carriage was at the door , he said , ready to convey me to my future dwelling , for I must immediately leave Berlin , and the king be informed of my setting out . 
The coachman received the order , and here I am , without knowing what I am to do , or whether I shall remain here . '' 
`` Yes , Wilhelmine , you are to remain here ; at last we have a home , and a resting-place for our love and our children . 
This house is yours -- you are mistress here , and you must welcome me as your guest . '' 
`` This house is mine ! '' 
she cried , joyfully . 
`` Did you give it to me ? 
How generous , and how extravagant you are ! 
Protect me with the gift of your love , as if you were Jupiter and I Danae ! '' 
`` A beautiful picture , and , that it may be a reality , I will play the role of Jupiter and open the box . '' 
He took a roll of gold , and let it fall upon Wilhelmine 's head , her beautiful shoulders , and her arms , like a shower of gold . 
She shrieked and laughed , and sought to gather up the pieces which rolled ringing around her upon the floor . 
The prince seized another roll , and another still , till she was flooded with the glistening pieces . 
Then another and another , until Wilhelmine , laughing , screamed for grace , and sprang up , the gold rolling around her like teasing goblins . 
The Minister Herzberg had , in the mean time , an interview with the king , informing him of the concluded purchase of the Schmettau villa , and of the emotion and gratitude of the crown prince at his royal munificence . 
`` That affair is arranged , then , '' said Frederick . 
`` If Fate wills that the prince should not return from this campaign , then this certain person and the two poor worms are provided for , who are destined to wander through the world nameless and fatherless . '' 
`` Let us hope that fate will not deal so harshly with the prince , or bring such sorrow upon your majesty . '' 
`` My dear sir , Fate is a hard-hearted creature , the tears of mankind are of no more importance to her than the raindrops falling from the roof . 
She strides with gigantic power over men , crushing them all in dust -- the great as well as the little -- the king as well as the beggar . 
For my part I yield to Fate without a murmur . 
Politicians and warriors are mere puppets in the hands of Providence . 
We act without knowing why , for we are unknowingly the tools of an invisible hand . 
Often the result of our actions is the reverse of our hopes ! 
Let all things take their course , as it best pleases God , and let us not think to master Fate . 
-LSB- Footnote : The king 's words . 
-- `` Posthumous Works , '' vol . 
x. , p. 256 . -RSB- 
That is my creed , Herzberg , and if I do not return from this infamous campaign , you will know that I have yielded to Fate without murmuring . 
You understand my wishes in all things ; the current affairs of government should go on regularly . 
If any thing extraordinary occurs , let me be informed at once . 
Is there any news , Herzberg ? '' 
`` Nothing worth recounting , sire , except that the young Duke of Weimar is in town . '' 
`` I know it ; he has announced himself . 
I can not speak with him . 
I have asked my brother Henry to arrange the conditions under which he will allow us to enlist men for my army in his duchy . 
I hope he will be reasonable , and not prevent it . 
That is no news that the Duke of Weimar has arrived ! '' 
`` Not only the duke has arrived , but he has brought his dear friend with him whom the people in Saxe-Weimar say makes the good and bad weather . '' 
`` Who is the weather-maker ? '' 
`` Your majesty , this weather-maker is the author of ` The Sorrows of Young Werther , ' Johann Wolfgang Goethe , who for four years has aroused the hearts and excited the imaginations of all Germany . 
If I am not deceived , a great future opens for this poet , and he will be a star of the first magnitude in the sky of German literature . 
I believe it would be well worth the trouble for your majesty to see him . '' 
`` Do not trouble me with your German literature , and your stars of the first magnitude ! 
We must acknowledge our poverty with humility ; belles-lettres have never achieved success upon our soil . 
Moreover , this star of the first magnitude -- this Herr Goethe -- I remember him well ; I wish to know nothing of him . 
He has quite turned the heads of all the love-sick fools with his ` Sorrows of Young Werther . ' 
You can not count that a merit . 
The youth of Germany were sufficiently enamoured , without the love-whining romances of Herr Goethe to pour oil on the fire . '' 
`` Pardon me , sire , that I should presume to differ from you ; but this book which your majesty condemns has not only produced a furor in Germany , but throughout Europe -- throughout the world even . 
That which public opinion sustains in such a marked manner can not be wholly unworthy . 
` Vox populi , vox dei , ' is a true maxim in all ages . '' 
`` It is not true ! '' 
cried the king . 
`` The old Roman maxim is not applicable to our effeminate , degraded people . 
Nowadays , whoever flatters the people and glorifies their weaknesses , is a good fellow , and he is extolled to the skies . 
Public opinion calls him a genius and a Messiah . 
Away with your nonsense ! 
The ` Werther ' of Herr Goethe has wrought no good ; it has made the healthy sick , and has not restored invalids to health . 
Since its appearance a mad love-fever has seized all the young people , and silly sentimentalities and flirtations have become the fashion . 
These modern Werthers behave as if love were a tarantula , with the bite of which they must become mad , to be considered model young men . 
They groan and sigh , take moonlight walks , but they have no courage in their souls , and will never make good soldiers . 
This is the fault of Herr Werther , and his abominable lamentations . 
It is a miserable work , and not worth the trouble of talking about , for no earnest man will read it ! '' 
`` Pardon me , sire ; your majesty has graciously permitted me to enter the lists as knight and champion of German literature , and sometimes to defend the German Muse , who stands unnoticed and unknown under the shadow of your throne ; while the French lady , with her brilliant attire and painted cheeks , is always welcomed . 
I beg your majesty to believe that , although this romance may have done some harm , it has , on the other hand , done infinite service . 
A great and immortal merit can not be denied to it . '' 
`` What merit ? '' 
demanded the king , slowly taking a pinch of snuff ; `` I am very curious to know what merit that crazy , love-sick book has . '' 
`` Sire , it has the great merit to have enriched the German literature with a work whose masterly language alone raises it above every thing heretofore produced by a German author . 
It has emancipated our country 's literature from its clumsy , awkward childhood , and presented it as an ardent , inspired youth , ready for combat , upon the lips of whom the gods have placed the right word to express every feeling and every thought -- a youth who is capable of probing the depths of the human heart . '' 
`` I wish all this might have remained in the depths , '' cried Frederick , annoyed . 
`` You have defended the German Muse before ; but you remember that I am incorrigible . 
You can not persuade me that bungling is master-work . 
It is not the poverty of the mind , but the fault of the language , which is not capable of expressing with brevity and precision . 
For how could any one translate Tacitus into German without adding a mass of words and phrases ? 
In French it is not necessary ; one can express himself with brevity , and to the point . '' 
`` Sire , I shall permit myself to prove to you that the brevity of Tacitus can be imitated in the German language . 
I will translate a part of Tacitus , to give your majesty a proof . '' 
`` I will take you at your word ! 
And I will answer you in a treatise upon German literature , its short-comings , and the means for its improvement . 
-LSB- Footnote : This treatise appeared during the Bavarian war of succession , in the winter of 1779 -RSB- Until then , a truce . 
I insist upon it -- good German authors are entirely wanting to us Germans . 
They may appear a long time after I have joined Voltaire and Algarotti in the Elysian Fields . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : The king 's words . 
-- See `` Posthumous Works , '' vol . 
II. , p. 293 . -RSB- 
`` They are already here , '' cried Herzberg , zealously . 
`` We have , for example , Lessing , who has written two dramas , of which every nation might be proud -- ` Minna von Barnhelm , and Emilia Calotti . ' '' 
`` I know nothing of them , '' said the king , with indifference . 
`` I have never heard of your Lessing . '' 
`` Your majesty , this wonderful comedy , ` Minna von Barnhelm , ' was written for your majesty 's glorification . '' 
`` The more the reason why I should not read it ! 
A German comedy ! 
That must be fine stuff for the German theatre , the most miserable of all . 
In Germany , Melpomene has untutored admirers , some walking on stilts , others crawling in the mire , from the altars of the goddess . 
The Germans will ever be repulsed , as they are rebels to her laws , and understand not the art to move and interest the heart . '' 
`` But , sire , you have never deigned to become acquainted with ` Minna von Barnhelm ' nor 'Em ilia Calotti . ' '' 
`` Well , well , Herzberg , do not be so furious ; you are a lover of German literature , and some allowance must be made for those who are in love . 
You will not persuade me to read your things which you call German comedies and tragedies . 
I will take good care ; my teeth are not strong enough to grind such hard bits . 
Now do not be angry , Herzberg . 
The first leisure hours that I have in this campaign I shall employ on my treatise . '' 
`` And the first leisure hours that I have , '' growled the minister , `` I shall employ to translate a portion of Tacitus into our beautiful German language , to send to your majesty . '' 
`` You are incorrigible , '' said Frederick , smiling . 
`` We shall see , and until then let us keep the peace , Herzberg . 
When one is about to go to war , it is well to be at peace with one 's conscience and with his friends ; so let us be good friends . '' 
`` Your majesty , your graciousness and kindness make me truly ashamed , '' said the minister , feelingly . 
`` I beg pardon a thousand times , if I have allowed myself to be carried away with unbecoming violence in my zeal for our poor neglected German literature . '' 
`` I approve of your zeal , and it pleases me that you are a faithful knight , sans peur et sans reproche . 
I do not ascribe its poverty to the German nation , who have as much spirit and genius as any nation , the mental development of which has been retarded by outward circumstances , which prevented her rising to an equality with her neighbors . 
We shall one day have classical writers , and every one will read them to cultivate himself . 
Our neighbors will learn German , and it will be spoken with pleasure at courts ; and it can well happen that our language , when perfectly formed , will spread throughout Europe . 
We shall have our German classics also . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : The king 's words -- see `` Posthumous Works , '' vol . 
III . -RSB- 
The king smiled , well pleased , as he observed by stolen glances the noble , intelligent face of Herzberg brighten , and the gloomy clouds dispersed which had overshadowed it . 
`` Now , is it not true that you are again contented ? '' 
said the king , graciously . 
`` I am delighted with the prophecy for the German language , your majesty ; and may I add something ? '' 
`` It will weigh on your heart if you do not tell it , '' said the king . 
`` I prophesy that this Goethe will one day belong to the classic authors , and therefore I would beg once more of your majesty to grant him a gracious look , and invite him to your presence . 
If you find no pleasure in ` The Sorrows of Werther , ' Goethe has created other beautiful works . 
He is the author of the tragedy of ` Stella . ' '' 
`` That sentimental , immoral piece , which we forbid the representation of in Berlin , because it portrays a fellow who made love to two women at once , playing the double role of lover to his wife and his paramour , while he had a grown-up daughter ! 
It is an immoral piece , which excites the tear-glands , and ends as ` Werther , ' by the hero blowing his brains out . 
It is directed against all morals , and against marriage ; therefore it was forbidden . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : The tragedy of `` Stella '' was represented in Berlin with great applause , and denounced by the king as immoral , in the year 1776 , and the further representation forbidden . 
-- See Plumke , `` History of the Berlin Theatres . '' -RSB- 
`` But , sire , Herr Goethe has not only written ` Stella , ' but ` Clavigo ' also , which -- '' `` Which he has copied exactly from the ` Memoires de Beaumarchais , ' '' interrupted the king . 
`` That is not a German , but a French production . '' 
`` Allow me to cite a genuine German production , which Johann Wolfgang Goethe has written . 
I mean the drama ` Gotz von Berlichingen . ' '' 
`` Stop ! 
-- it is sufficient . 
I do not wish to hear any thing more , '' cried the king , indignant , and rising . 
`` It is bad enough that such pieces should appear upon the German stage as this ` Gotz von Berlichingen . ' 
They are nothing less than abominable imitations of the bad English pieces of Shakespeare ! 
The pit applauds them , and demands with enthusiasm these very disgusting platitudes . 
-LSB- Footnote : The king 's own words . 
-- See `` Posthumous Works , '' vol . 
iii . -RSB- 
Do not be angry again , you must have patience with the old boy ! 
I shall rejoice heartily if this Herr Goethe becomes a classic writer one day , as you say . 
I shall not live to witness it . 
I only see the embryo where you see the full-grown author . 
We will talk further about it when we meet in the Elysian Fields ; then we will see , when you present this Herr Johann Wolfgang Goethe , as a German classic writer , to Homer , Horace , Virgil , and Corneille , if they do not turn their backs upon him . 
Now adieu , Herzberg ! 
So soon as circumstances permit , I shall send for you to go to Silesia , and then you can give me your German translation of Tacitus . '' 
The king nodded in a friendly manner to his minister , and slowly walked back and forth , while he took leave and withdrew . 
After a few moments he rang , and the summons was immediately answered by the footman Schultz . 
The king fixed upon him one of those searching glances of his fiery eyes which confounded and confused the footman . 
He remained standing and embarrassed , with downcast look . 
`` What are you standing there for ? '' 
asked the king . 
`` Did I not ring for you , and do you not know what you have to do ? '' 
Frederick continued to regard him , with flashing eyes , which increased the lackey 's confusion . 
He forgot entirely that the summons was for his majesty 's lunch , and all that he had to do was to open the door to the adjoining room , where it stood already prepared . 
Frederick waited a moment , but the footman still stood irresolute , when his majesty indicated to him to approach . 
He approached , staggering under the puzzling glance of his master . 
`` Oh ! 
I see what it is , '' said Frederick , shrugging his shoulders ; `` you are drunk again , as you often are , and -- '' `` Your majesty , '' cried Schultz , amazed , `` I drunk ! '' 
`` Silence ! 
-- will you be bold enough to reason with me ? 
I say that you are drunk , and I want no drunken footmen . 
They must be well-behaved , sober fellows , who keep their ears open and their mouths shut -- who are neither drunkards nor gossips , and do not take for truth what they have experienced in their drunken fits . 
I do not want such fellows as you are at all ; you are only fit food for cannon , and for that you shall serve . 
Go to General Alvensleben , and present yourself to enter the guards . 
You are lucky to go to the field at once ; to-morrow you will set off . 
Say to the general that I sent you , and that you are to enter as a common soldier . '' 
`` But , your majesty , I do not know what I have done , '' cried Schultz , whiningly . 
`` I really am not drunk . 
I -- '' `` Silence ! '' 
thundered the king . 
`` Do as I command you ! 
Go to General Alvensleben , and present yourself to enter the guards at once . 
Away with you ! 
I do not need drunken , gossiping footmen in my service . 
Away with you ! '' 
The footman slunk slowly away , his head hanging down , with difficulty restraining the tears which stood in large drops in his eyes . 
The king followed him with his glance , which softened and grew gentler from sympathy . 
`` I pity him , the poor fellow ! 
but I must teach him a lesson . 
I want no gossips around me . 
He need only wear the uniform two weeks or so , that will bring him to reason . 
Then I will pardon him , and receive him into my service again . 
He is a good-natured fellow , and would not betray any one as Kretzschmar betrayed him . '' 
The king stepped to the window to look at the gentleman who was eagerly engaged in conversation with the castellan of Sans-Souci . 
At this instant the footman entered with a sealed note for the king . 
`` From his royal highness Prince Henry , '' said he . 
`` Who brought it ? '' 
`` The gentleman who speaks with the castellan upon the terrace . 
I wait your majesty 's commands . '' 
`` Wait , then . '' 
The note ran thus : `` Your majesty , my dearly-beloved brother : The bearer , Johann Wolfgang Goethe , one of the literati , and a poet , and at this time secretary of legation to the duchy of Saxe-Weimar , is a great favorite of the duke 's , our nephew . 
I met him returning from the parade in company with the duke , who expressed to me the strong desire his secretary had to visit the celebrated house of the great philosopher of Sans-Souci , and see the room once occupied by Voltaire . 
I could not well refuse , and therefore address these few lines to your majesty before returning to Berlin with the duke , who will dine with me , accompanied by his secretary . 
I am your majesty 's most humble servant and brother , HENRY . '' 
`` Tell the castellan that I grant him permission to show the house and park to the stranger ; he shall take care not to come in my way , so that I shall be obliged to meet him . 
Tell this aside , that you may not be overheard . 
Hasten , for they have already been waiting some time . '' 
The king walked again to the window , and , hidden by the curtain , peeped out . 
`` So , this is Herr Goethe , is it ? 
What assurance ! 
There he stands , sketching the house . 
What wonderful eyes the man has ! 
With what a proud , confident manner he looks around ! 
What a brow ! 
Truly he is a handsome fellow , and Herzberg may be right after all . 
That brow betokens thought , and from those eyes there flashes a divine light . 
But he looks overbearing and proud . 
Now , I am doubly pleased that I refused Herzberg to have any thing to do with him . 
Such presumptive geniuses must be rather kept back ; then they feel their power , and strive to bring themselves forward . 
Yes ! 
I believe that man has a future . 
He looks like the youthful god Apollo , who may have condescended to descend to earth ! 
He shall not entrap me with his beautiful head . 
If he is the man who makes good and bad weather in Weimar , he shall learn that rain and sunshine at Sans-Souci do not depend upon him ; that the sun and clouds here do not care whether Herr Goethe is in the world or not . 
For sunshine and storm we depend upon the Great Weather-Maker , to whom we must all bow ; evil and good days in Prussia shall emanate from me , so long as I live . 
Sometimes I succeed in causing a little sunshine , '' continued the king . 
`` I believe the Prince of Prussia has to-day felt the happy influence of the sun 's rays ; and while it is dull and lonely at Sans-Souei , may it be brighter and more cheerful at Charlottenburg ! 
Eh bien ! 
old boy , '' said the king , stopping , `` you are playing the sentimental , and eulogizing your loneliness . 
Well , well , do not complain . 
-- Oh , come to me , spirits of my friends , and hold converse with me ! 
Voltaire , D'Argens , and my beloved Lord-Marshal Keith ! 
Come to me , departed souls , with the memories of happier days , and hover with thy cheering , sunny influence over the wrinkled brow of old Fritz ! '' 
While the lonely king implored the spirits of his friends , to brighten with their presence the quiet , gloomy apartment at Sans-Souci , the sun shone in full splendor at Charlottenburg -- the sunshine beaming from the munificence of Frederick . 
Wilhelmine Enke had passed the whole day in admiring the beautiful and tasteful arrangement of the villa . 
Every piece of furniture , every ornament , she examined attentively -- all filled her with delight . 
The prince , who accompanied her from room to room , listened to her outbursts of pleasure , rejoicing . 
`` I wish that I could often prepare such happiness for you , dearest , for my heart is twice gladdened to see your beaming face . '' 
`` Reflected from your own . 
You are my good genius upon earth . 
You have caused the poor , neglected child to become the rich and happy woman . 
To you I owe this home , this foot of earth , which I can call my own . 
Here blossom the flowers for me -- here I am mistress , and those who enter must come as my guests , and honor me . 
All this I owe to you . '' 
`` Not to me , '' said the prince , smiling ; `` I only gave to you what was given to me ! 
To the king belong your thanks . 
Harsh in words , but gentle in deeds , he has given you this refuge , freeing you from the slavery of poverty , from the sorrow of being homeless . 
But tell it not , Wilhelmine . 
The king would be angry if it were known that he not only tolerated but showed great generosity to you . 
It is a secret that I ought not even to disclose to you . 
I could not receive your thanks , for I have not deserved them . 
From the king comes your good fortune , not from me . 
The day will come when I can requite you , when the poor crown prince becomes the rich king . 
On that day the golden rain shall again shower upon you , never to cease , and , vying with the shower of gold , the brightest sunbeams play continually around you . 
As king , I will reward your fidelity and love , which you have proved to the poor crown prince , with splendor , power , and riches . 
Until then rejoice with the little that his grace has accorded you , and await the much that love will one day bring you . 
Farewell , Wilhelmine , the evening sets in , and I must forth to Potsdam . 
The king would never pardon me if I did not pass the last evening with my wife in the circle of my family . 
Farewell ! '' 
He embraced her tenderly , and Wilhelmine accompanied the prince to the carriage , and returned to survey anew the beautiful rooms which were now her own possession . 
An unspeakable , unknown feeling was roused in her , and voices , which she had never heard , spoke to her from the depths of her heart . 
`` You are no longer a despised , homeless creature , '' they whispered . 
`` You have a home , a foot of earth to call your own . 
Make yourself a name , that you may be of consequence in the world . 
You are clever and beautiful , and with your prudence and beauty you can win a glorious future ! 
Remember the Marquise de Pompadour , neglected and scorned as you , until a king loved her , and she became the wife of a king , and all France bowed down to her . 
Even the Empress Maria Theresa honored her with her notice , and called her cousin . 
I am also the favorite of a future king , and I will also become the queen of my king ! '' 
Wilhelmine had remained standing in the midst of the great drawing-room , which she was passing through , listening to these seductive voices , to these strange pictures of the future . 
In her imagination she saw herself in this room surrounded with splendor and magnificence , and sparkling with gems . 
She saw around her elegantly-attired ladies and gentlemen , in brilliant uniforms , glittering with orders ; saw every-where smiling faces , and respectful manners . 
She saw all eyes turned to her , and heard only flattering words , which resounded for her from every lip -- for her , once so despised and scorned ! 
`` It shall be , yes , it shall be , '' cried she aloud . 
`` I will be the queen of my king ! 
I will become the Prussian Marquise de Pompadour ; that I swear by the heads of my children , by -- '' `` Rather swear by thy own beautiful head , Wilhelmine , '' said a voice behind her . 
Startled , she turned , and beheld the tall figure of a man , wrapped in a long cloak , who stood in the open door . 
`` Who are you ? '' 
she cried , amazed . 
`` How dare you enter here ? '' 
The figure closed the door , without answering , and , slowly approaching Wilhelmine , fixed his black eyes upon her with a searching gaze . 
She tried to summon help , but the words died on her lips ; her cheeks blanched with terror , and , as if rooted to the floor , she stood with outstretched arms imploring the approaching form . 
The figure smiled , but there was something commanding in its manner , and in the fiery eyes , which rested upon her . 
When quite near her , it raised its right hand with an impatient movement . 
Immediately her arms fell at her side , her cheeks glowed , and a bright smile lighted up her face . 
Then it lifted the three-cornered , gold-bordered hat which shaded its face , nodding to her . 
`` Do you recognize me , Wilhelmine ? '' 
he asked , in a sweet , melodious voice . 
`` Yes , '' she answered , her eyes still fixed upon him . 
`` You are Cagliostro , the great ruler and magician . '' 
`` Where did we meet ? '' 
`` I remember ; it was in Paris , at the house of the governor of the Bastile , M. Delaunay . 
You caused me to read in a glass the future -- a bright , glorious future . 
I was surrounded with splendor and magnificence . 
I saw myself glittering with gems ; a king knelt at my feet . 
I was encircled by richly-attired courtiers , who bowed before me , and honored me , whispering : ` We salute you , O beautiful countess ; be gracious to us , exalted princess ! ' 
It sounded like heavenly music , and I shouted with delight . '' 
`` Was that all ? '' 
said Cagliostro , solemnly , `` that the crystal showed you . '' 
Shuddering , she murmured : `` The splendor , glory , and power vanished , and all was changed to a fearful picture . 
I saw myself in a plain , dark dress , in a deserted , lonely room , with iron-barred windows , and a small iron door closed in the dreary white walls -- it was a prison ! 
And I heard whispered around me : ` Woe to you , fallen and dethroned one ! 
You have wasted away the days of your splendor , submit in patience to the days of your shame and humiliation . ' 
