You have addressed me in the name of the League , as president of this council , and have insulted me , as if I were its greatest enemy . 
I have , therefore , no other answer to give , than , in following your orders , to saddle my horse ; but I now most decidedly declare , assuredly no longer in your service . 
My honour forbids my remaining under your colours ; I therefore pronounce myself henceforth free and unshackled from you for ever ; -- farewell . '' 
The young man spoke with vigour and firmness , and turned around to depart . 
`` Albert , '' called Fronsberg , springing from his seat , `` son of my friend ! 
-- '' `` Not so rash , young man , '' cried the rest , and cast looks of disapprobation at Waldburg ; but Albert walked out of the apartment without looking back ; the iron latch of the door rang sharply as it fell ; heavy oaken pannels lay between him and the recall of the better-intentioned members of the council , and separated Albert von Sturmfeder for ever from the Swabian League . 
Oh , when , enveloped in a night of grief , Thy wounded heart can nowhere find relief ; When the sun plunges in the western sea , Ah , let the star of love not set to thee . 
P. CONY . 
Albert felt much relieved when he got to his room , and reflected on what had just happened . 
He rejoiced that the weight which had oppressed his mind ever since he promised to quit the service of the League , was now removed , in a way which could not have been more à propos , and which he conceived to be every way honourable to his feelings . 
He determined , therefore , without delay , to leave Ulm , letting Truchses take all the blame of this step to himself . 
How rapidly had everything changed in the last four days ! 
how different were his feelings when he first entered the town , from those which were about to drive him from its walls ! 
At that time , when the thunder of cannon , mingling with the deep tolling of the church bells , celebrated the entrance of the League 's troops , and the animating sound of trumpets saluted his ear , seeming to give applause to the part he had taken in the coming straggle ; how his heart then beat for the opportunity of proving himself worthy of his love ! 
And when he was first presented to Fronsberg , how elevated and encouraging was the thought of emulating the reputation of his father , and reaping praise under the eye of that great commander ! 
But now , all those bright hopes were blasted . 
He had learned the intentions of the League . 
Excited by motives of sordid interest and cupidity , their only object was plunder . 
He blushed to draw his sword in such a cause : -- the brilliancy with which his youthful imagination had coloured his future prospects was gone for ever . 
And then again , how painful the thought of being opposed to Bertha 's father , the faithful friend of the unfortunate Duke , perchance to encounter him in the struggle . 
It would break his love 's heart , which beat so true for him . 
`` No ! '' 
said he , looking up to heaven , in gratitude , `` all has been ordained for my good . 
Upon any other who had stood in my situation this day , destruction might have fallen , but I have been saved ! '' 
In thankfulness for the mercies apparently vouchsafed to him , he cast away the gloomy forebodings with which his mind had been haunted ; his natural cheerfulness returned , and he sang a song as merrily as in his former happy mood . 
Herr von Kraft beheld him with astonishment , as he entered the room . 
`` Well , that is curious , '' said he ; `` I hastened home to console my guest in his distress , and find him merrier than ever : how do these two things rhyme together ? '' 
`` Have you never heard , Herr Dieterich , '' replied Albert , who thought it advisable to conceal his joy , `` have you never heard that one can laugh in anger and sing in pain ? '' 
`` I have certainly heard it , but never witnessed it till this moment , '' answered Kraft . 
`` Well , and so you have heard of my vexatious affair with the grand council ? '' 
asked Albert . 
`` I suppose it has run through all the streets already ? '' 
`` Oh no ! '' 
answered the secretary to the council ; `` no one knows any thing of it ; for it would not do to trumpet forth your intended secret embassy to Würtemberg . 
No , thank God ! 
I have my private sources , and learn many things the very hour they are done or spoken . 
But , do n't be offended , if I say that I think you have acted a foolish part . '' 
`` Really , '' answered Albert ; `` and in what way ? '' 
`` Could there have been a better opportunity offered you to distinguish yourself ? 
To whom would the commanders of the League have been under greater obligations than to him who -- '' `` Out with it at once , '' interrupted Albert -- `` than to him , you mean , who would steal into the enemy 's country as a spy , worm out their secrets , and then , like other villains , betray them . 
I only regret that the name and honour of my father had not secured for me a higher and brighter destination . '' 
`` Those are scruples which I would not have thought to find in you . 
Really , if I were as well acquainted as you are with that neighbourhood , they should not have asked me a second time . '' 
`` You , perhaps , in this country , possess different principles upon this point from us in Franconia , '' replied Albert , not without disdain : `` Truchses von Waldburg should have thought of that , and appointed an Ulmer to the service . '' 
`` You remind me now of another subject ; the general of the forces ! 
How could you think of making him your enemy ? 
He will never forgive what has taken place , you may depend upon that . '' 
`` That is the least I care about , '' answered Albert ; `` but one thing annoys me , which is , that I can not meet that insolent arrogant fellow at the end of my sword , and prove to him , who has already vilified my father 's name upon other occasions , that the arm which he has this day thrust from him , is not quite so despicable as he supposes . '' 
`` For God 's sake , '' said Kraft , `` do n't speak so loud ; it might come to his ears . 
Above all , you must be very cautious what you say , if you intend still to serve in the army under him . '' 
`` I intend soon to free Truchses of my hateful person . 
With God 's will , I have seen the sun set for the last time in Ulm ! '' 
`` And is it really true what I also heard , but which I can not believe , '' asked Kraft , with astonishment , `` that Albert von Sturmfeder would quit our good cause on account of this trifle ? '' 
`` To wound a man 's honour is by no means a trifle , '' replied Albert , gravely ; `` at least , according to my mind . 
But having carefully reconsidered what you call your good cause , I find I should have to draw my sword neither in an honourable nor a just one , but only to satisfy the cupidity of a few unwashed townsfolk . '' 
The unfavourable impression which the last words , in particular , seemed to make on the secretary , did not escape Albert ; he went on to say , therefore , in a milder tone , taking his hand at the same time , with a friendly squeeze : `` Do not take what I have said amiss , my kind host ; God knows , I did not intend to offend you ; but from your own mouth I have learnt the object of the different parties in this army . 
You may , therefore , attribute my actions partly to your own explanations ; for you had already taken the bandage off my eyes . '' 
`` You are not quite so wrong , after all , good sir ; strange things will come to pass when once these gentlemen begin to divide that fine country among themselves . 
But I have thought , if they go to a certain spot , you might also claim your mite . 
It is said , -- you must not be offended with me , -- that your house is somewhat dilapidated ; therefore it appeared to me -- '' `` Nothing more upon that subject , '' said Albert , hastily , touched by the kind hint of his well-meaning friend . 
`` The house of my ancestors is indeed in ruins , the doors hang on their broken hinges , grass grows upon the drawbridge , and owls inhabit the watch-tower . 
In fifty years hence a tower or a bit of a wall may still be standing , to remind the wanderer , that once upon a time a knighted race dwelt there . 
But should the decayed wall fall upon me , and bury the last of my family under its ruin , no one shall ever say of me -- He drew his father 's sword in an unjust cause . '' 
`` Every one to his thinking , '' answered Dieterick ; `` all this sounds very fine , but I , for my part , would stretch a point for the sake of re-establishing my house , and making it habitable . 
But whether you change your determination or not , I hope , at all events , you will remain with me a few days longer . '' 
`` I am grateful for your kindness , '' answered Albert ; `` but , you see , under existing circumstances , I have nothing more to do in this town . 
I propose leaving it by daybreak tomorrow . '' 
`` Well , then , one may send a remembrance to a friend by you , I suppose ? '' 
said the secretary , with a most crafty smile : `` of course you ride the direct road to Lichtenstein ? '' 
The young man blushed up to the forehead . 
Since Bertha 's departure she had not been the subject of conversation between him and his host , and therefore his sly question took him so much the more by surprise . 
`` I perceive , '' said he , `` that you do not understand me yet . 
You believe I have only turned my back on the League for the purpose of joining the enemy ? 
How can you think so ill of me ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
away with you , '' replied the wary scribe ; `` no one else but my charming cousin has influenced your conduct . 
You would have shut an eye to every thing the League did , had old Lichtenstein been on our side ; but now that you know he belongs to the other party , you think yourself justified in joining it also . '' 
Albert might defend himself as well as he could ; the secretary was too firmly rooted in his opinion to allow himself to be talked out of it . 
Moreover , he thought this step very natural , and saw nothing in it dishonourable or blamable . 
With a hearty remembrance to his cousin in Lichtenstein , he left the room of his guest . 
But on the threshold of the door he turned round again , and said , `` I had almost forgotten to mention , that I met George von Fronsberg in the street , who begs you will go and see him this evening at his house . '' 
Albert had already determined not to depart without taking leave of Fronsberg , but he felt nervous at appearing before a man whose intentions towards him were kind , but whose plans he had thwarted . 
He buckled on his sword , thinking upon this painful meeting , and was arranging his cloak , when his attention was drawn to an unusual noise on the stairs . 
Heavy steps of a party of men approached his door ; he thought he heard the clatter of swords and halberts on the stone floor of the ante-room . 
He stepped quickly towards the door to ascertain the cause of this visit ; but before he reached it , it opened , and by the light of a few candles he perceived many armed men about to enter . 
The same old soldier who had received him when he went to the council of war , stepped forward . 
`` Albert von Sturmfeder ! '' 
said he to the young man , who retreated a step in astonishment , `` by order of the grand council of war I make you my prisoner . '' 
`` Me -- prisoner ? '' 
said Albert , with consternation . 
`` Why ? 
what am I guilty of ? '' 
`` That ' a not my affair , '' answered the old man , surlily , `` but probably you will not be left long in ignorance . 
Be so good to deliver up your sword to me , and follow me to the town hall . '' 
`` How ? 
give up my sword ? '' 
replied the young man in the rage of insulted pride . 
`` Who are you that dares to demand my weapon ? 
The council must send men of a different stamp for that purpose before I submit ; I know too well what your profession is . '' 
`` For God 's sake give up your sword , '' cried his friend , the secretary , who forced himself through the crowd to his side , `` obey the order -- resistance were vain . 
You have to do with Truchses , '' he whispered : `` he is a fearful enemy ; do not force him to extremities . '' 
The old soldier , interrupting the secretary , said , `` It is perhaps the first time , sir , you have been arrested ; therefore I forgive the hasty language you have made use of against a man who has slept in the same tent with your father . 
You may , however , retain your sword : I well know its hilt and scabbard , and I have witnessed many a deed of glory achieved with its blade . 
It is praiseworthy of you to be jealous of its falling into other hands . 
But you must come with me to the town hall , for it were folly in you to bid defiance to power . '' 
The young man , to whom every thing appeared a dream , submitted quietly to his fate . 
He whispered to his friend the secretary to go to Fronsberg , and inform him of his arrest , and concealing his person as much as possible under his cloak , to avoid the unpleasant gaze of the crowd in the streets , followed the old leader , surrounded by his party . 
The iron door upon its hinges creaks , A lurid light upon the prison breaks , The captive , starting at a footstep 's sound , Springs from his lonely couch , to gaze around . 
WIELAND . 
The troop , surrounding their prisoner , moved on in silence towards the town hall . 
A single torch was their only light on the way , and Albert thanked Heaven that it gave but a feeble glare ; for he fancied that every one who met him must suppose he was being led to prison . 
But this was not the only thought which engrossed his mind . 
This was the first time in his life he had been in any dilemma , and it was not without dread that he figured to himself all the horrors of a damp dreary dungeon , remembering to have visited the one in his old castle . 
He was on the point of speaking to his leader on the subject , when it struck him he might be accused of a childish fear , and therefore he proceeded in silence . 
He was , however , not a little surprised when he was led into a large handsome room , not very habitable indeed , as its furniture consisted only of a bedstead , and an uncommon large fire-place , but it was a palace compared to what his imagination had conjured up . 
The old soldier wished his prisoner a good night , and retired with the rest of his party . 
A little thin old man then made his appearance ; a large bunch of keys , which hung by his side , rattling like a chain when he moved , announced him as the gaoler or servant of the town hall . 
He laid some large logs of wood in the fire-place , and made a blazing fire ; a cheering companion on a cold night in March . 
He then spread an ample woollen covering on the bedstead , and the first word that Albert heard from him was a friendly invitation to make himself comfortable . 
He thanked the old man for his kind attention , though his place of rest for the night did not offer much to tempt him to repose . 
`` This apartment is set aside for knights in your situation , '' said the old gaoler ; `` the common people are confined under ground , and are not so well off . '' 
`` Is it long since any one lodged here ? '' 
asked Albert , looking around the room . 
`` A Herr von Berger was the last ; he died on that very bed seven years ago : God be merciful to his soul ! 
He appeared to be fond of this place , for he often rises from his coffin at midnight to visit his old quarters . '' 
`` How ? '' 
said Albert , smiling , `` has he been seen since his death ? '' 
The old man looked fearfully around the room , now faintly lighted by the dying embers of the fire : he put another log on , and murmured , `` Ah , many strange stories are about . '' 
`` Did he die on that covering ? '' 
said Albert , whilst an involuntary shudder came over him . 
`` Yes , sir , '' whispered the gaoler , `` he breathed his last on that very covering ; God grant he may not have descended lower than purgatory ! 
That covering is now called his winding-sheet , and this apartment the knight 's death-room ! '' 
With this , the old man quietly slipt out of the room , as if he were afraid the slightest noise might awaken the departed knight . 
`` And so I am to sleep on the winding-sheet in the death-room of the knight , '' thought Albert , and felt his heart beat quicker , for his nurse and old servants had often related ghost stories to him in his boyhood . 
He was undecided whether he should lay himself on the bed . 
There was neither stool nor bench in the room ; and the brick paved floor was still colder and harder than the appointed place of repose ; but he began to feel ashamed of his fears , and at once rolled himself in the winding-sheet on the death-bed of the knight . 
A clear conscience softens a hard bed . 
Albert said his prayers , and soon fell asleep . 
But it did not last long , for he was awoke by strange noises , which appeared to be in the room . 
He thought it was a dream ; he took courage -- he listened -- he listened again : it was no deception -- he heard heavy footsteps in his apartment . 
The fire at this moment blazed up , and threw its light upon a large dark figure . 
The distance of the fire-place from the bed was not great . 
The figure moved towards him ; he felt the winding-sheet shake ; he was unable to control a momentary shudder , when a cold hand , endeavouring to remove the covering , fell on his forehead . 
He sprang up , and eyeing the figure which stood before him by the light of the fire , he recognised the well-known features of George von Fronsberg . 
`` Is it you , general ? '' 
said Albert , who now breathed more freely , and threw his cloak aside to receive the knight with proper respect . 
`` Remain , remain where you are , '' said the other , and gently compelled him to resume his seat ; `` I will set myself beside you , and have half an hour 's talk , for it is only just past nine o'clock , and no one is yet in bed in Ulm , excepting such hot-brained fellows as you , whose heads require cooling on a hard pillow . '' 
`` Oh ! 
how can I merit this kind consideration at your hands , '' said Albert , `` after having treated your good intentions towards me with apparent ingratitude ? '' 
`` No excuse , my young friend , '' answered the general , `` you are but the counterpart of your father ; just like him , precipitate in praise and blame , in decision and speech . 
That he was an honorable man , I know , and I know also how unhappy his violent temper made him , as well as his obstinacy , which he called firmness . '' 
`` But tell me , dear sir , '' replied Albert , `` could I have acted otherwise to-day ? 
Did not the conduct of Truchses push me to extremities ? '' 
`` You might have acted otherwise , if you had humoured the ways of that man , who gave you a specimen of his character the other day . 
You ought to have known also that there were many present who would not have seen you imposed upon . 
But you threw away the good with the bad , or as the proverb says , ` You threw away the child out of the bathing tub with the water , ' and flew out of the room . '' 
`` Age and experience will , I trust , cool my blood in due time , '' replied Albert ; `` I can put up with harshness and severity , when they do not affect my honour . 
But premeditated insult , contempt for the misfortunes of my family , is beyond all bearing . 
What pleasure could a man of his high station find in wounding my feelings ? '' 
`` His wrath always manifests itself in that way , '' Fronsberg informed him ; `` the more cool and collected he appears outwardly , the more fiercely he burns within . 
It was his idea alone to send you to Tübingen , partly because he knew of no one else who was so well acquainted with the place , partly because he wished to repair the injustice he had done you . 
But you have affronted him by your refusal , and lowered him in the eyes of the council of war . '' 
`` How ! '' 
cried Albert , `` Truchses himself proposed me ? 
I thought it was your doing . '' 
`` No , '' answered the General , with a significant smile ; `` no , I did all I could to prevent it ; but to no purpose , for I could not tell him the real state of the case . 
I knew , before you came before us , that you would decline accepting the office . 
But do not open your eyes so wide , as if you would pierce through one 's leather jacket , and look into my heart . 
I know enough of the history of my young hot-brain ! '' 
Albert felt confused . 
`` Were not my reasons satisfactory ? '' 
said he : `` is there any thing more you wish to know , and which you may think mysterious ? '' 
`` There is nothing exactly mysterious ; but you should have decided upon your line of action beforehand , for if you do not wish to be noticed , you ought not to conduct yourself at balls as if you were afflicted with St. Vitus ' dance , nor visit a couple of pretty girls at three o'clock in the afternoon . 
Yes , yes , my son , I know many things , '' he added , whilst he good-naturedly threatened with his finger : `` I know also that that impetuous heart of yours beats for Würtemberg . '' 
Albert blushed ; and would gladly have avoided the piercing look of the knight . 
`` Beats for Würtemberg ? '' 
he replied : `` you do me wrong ; you can not call that going over to the enemy ; upon my honour , I swear -- '' `` Do not swear , '' Fronsberg quickly interrupted him : `` an oath is an easy thing to take , but not so easy to be absolved from ; it is like an oppressive chain which we can not shake off . 
I am convinced your honour will not suffer by your actions . 
Instead of an oath , you must promise one thing to the League , namely , not to draw your sword against us for the next fourteen days ; and on these conditions only will you be released from arrest . '' 
`` I see you still entertain a false opinion of me , '' said Albert , agitated : `` I could not have thought it ! 
how unnecessary is that promise ! 
To whom else should I offer my services ? 
The Swiss have withdrawn their aid from the Duke , the peasantry have dispersed , the knights guard the fortresses , and will take care not to let the army of the League within their walls ; the Duke himself has fled -- '' `` Fled ! '' 
cried Fronsberg : `` that 's not quite so certain ; -- where did you hear this ? 
Have you been tampering with any of the members of the council of war ? 
or is it true , as some maintain , that you carry on a suspicious correspondence with Würtemberg ? '' 
`` Who dares assert that ? '' 
cried Albert . 
The piercing eye of Fronsberg darted a searching look at Albert . 
`` You are too young , and I believe too honourable , to be guilty of such a villanous deed , '' said he ; `` and should you even have had such an intention , we know you would have scarcely quitted the League , but have remained among us as Würtemberg 's spy . 
This clears you in my mind . 
Appearances , however , are against you . '' 
`` Am I then so evil spoken against ? 
If you have a particle of regard for me , tell me who is the wretch that has thus calumniated me , '' said Albert , starting up in anger . 
`` Do not be so violent , '' replied Fronsberg . 
`` Do you suppose , that if George von Fronsberg had heard such things spoken of in public , or believed the report , he would have come to visit you ? 
But there must be some foundation for the report . 
A suspicious-looking countryman often came to old Lichtenstein in the town ; he was not at first particularly noticed among the many assembled here . 
But it was hinted to us , that this man , a cunning , crafty fellow , was a confidential messenger from Würtemberg . 
Lichtenstein took his departure ; and the countryman and his mysterious occupation were forgotten . 
He appeared , however , again this morning , and had a long conversation with you outside the town ; and was seen afterwards in your house . 
Now what is the meaning of this ? '' 
Albert heard his friend with increasing astonishment . 
`` As true as God lives , '' said he , when Fronsberg had finished , `` I am innocent . 
A countryman came to me this morning -- '' Albert was silent . 
`` Well , why are you silent all at once ? '' 
asked Fronsberg ; `` you colour up to the eyes : what have you to do with this messenger ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
I feel ashamed of myself ; but you have already guessed every thing ; he only brought me a -- a few words from -- , my love . '' 
The young man then opened his waistcoat , and produced the strip of parchment which he had concealed on his person . 
`` There ; this is all he brought to me , '' said Albert , as he gave it to Fronsberg . 
`` And is that really all , '' laughed Fronsberg , after reading the contents : `` poor young fellow ! 
and you know nothing more of that man ? 
Do you not know who he is ? '' 
`` No ; he is nothing more to my knowledge than our messenger of love -- I am certain of it ! '' 
`` A pretty love messenger , who at the same time pries into our affairs ! 
Are you not aware that that dangerous man is the fifer of Hardt ? '' 
`` The fifer of Hardt ? '' 
asked Albert : `` this is the first time I have heard that name ; what does it mean ? '' 
`` Nobody knows exactly ; but he was one of the most formidable leaders in the insurrection of Poor Conrad , for which he , however , afterwards obtained pardon ; since that time he leads a restless , roving life , and is now a spy of the Duke of Würtemberg . '' 
`` Is he arrested ? '' 
inquired Albert , for he involuntarily felt a warm interest in his new servant . 
`` No ; it is just that which is so incomprehensible ; whatever notice we may have of his being in Ulm , though communicated in the quietest manner possible , becomes known to him immediately ; for example , when we heard of his being in your stable , and sent secretly to arrest him , he was not to be found . 
But I trust to your honour that he comes to you on no other business . 
You may be assured of this , however , if it be the same man I mean , he does not visit Ulm for your sake alone . 
Should you ever meet him again , be guarded how you trust such a vagabond . 
But the watchman now calls ten o'clock . 
Lay down again , and dream away your confinement . 
But before I go , give me your word about the fourteen days ; and , I can tell you , if you leave Ulm without saying farewell to old Fronsberg -- '' `` I will not fail to do so ! '' 
cried Albert , touched by the pain which he perceived his revered friend felt at parting , and which he tried to smother under a smile . 
He gave him his hand as a pledge of his promise , according to the desire of the council of war , upon which the knight left the room , with long measured steps . 
`` Could I but once that face so dear Behold before we sever ; And once again those accents hear , Before we part for ever . '' 
C. GRÜNEISEN . 
On the following day a horseman , oppressed by the heat of the mid-day sun , was bending his way over that part of the Swabian Alb which leads towards Franconia . 
He was young , more slim than strong built , and rode a large brown horse ; he was well armed with cuirass , dagger , and sword ; some parts of his defensive apparel , such as his helmet , and steel plates to cover his limbs , hung to his saddle . 
The striped light blue and white scarf , which passed across his breast over the right shoulder -LRB- the distinguishing prerogative of high rank in those days -RRB- , shewed the young man to be of noble birth . 
He had reached the summit of a hill , which afforded a view into the valley below , and stopping his horse , he turned on one side to enjoy the beautiful prospect . 
Before him lay an extended plain , bounded on each side by wooded heights , through which flowed the green waters of the Danube ; on his right the chain of hills of the Würtemberg Alb ; on his left the distant snow-capped Tyrolean Alps . 
The blue vault of heaven encircled the scene , and its soft colouring brought out in strong relief the dark walls of Ulm , its massive spire , and the whole extent of the town , which lay at the foot of the mountain . 
Noon was announced at this moment by the tolling of the bells of the cathedral ; their solemn tones resounded throughout the town and its extended plain , until they were lost among the distant mountains . 
`` The same sounds accompany my departure which greeted my arrival , '' thought the young man : `` but how different did I interpret their brazen voices , when for the first time they reached my ear , and guided me to my love ; and now that I depart disconsolate , and without object , the same tones follow me ! 
They celebrated the birth of my hope , and now ring its knell . 
It is the picture of life ! '' 
he added , as he took a last farewell of the town in the valley beneath , and turned his horse away : `` it is , indeed , the picture of life ! 
These same sounds float over cradle and coffin ; and the bells of the chapel of my house which rang a merry peal at my baptism , will also accompany the last of the Sturmfeders to the grave . '' 
The mountain now became steeper ; and Albert , whom the reader will have recognised as the young cavalier , allowed his horse to have his own way . 
Upon quitting Ulm , he had determined to return to his home in Franconia , and there wait events , or at any rate the expiration of the fourteen days ' truce he had promised his friend Fronsberg . 
His heart naturally would lead him to Lichtenstein , the contrary way to the path he was now pursuing ; yet he felt he had chosen the one most honourable to his engagements . 
The balance , however , between the two was very equally poised , and had he had a friend to decide for him and convince him that he was now a free agent to travel whither he pleased , provided he took no part in the contest for fourteen days , he felt that the bent of his inclinations would turn the scale in favour of the neighbourhood of his love . 
The comparison between his present situation and the former position which he had held only a few days back , did not tend to cheer his spirits . 
Sudden changes -- violent emotions -- his confinement on the day before -- and , above all , the pain of taking leave of men who had his welfare at heart , produced recollections which almost unmanned him . 
Dieterick von Kraft , above all , bewailed his departure . 
From the first moment of their acquaintance in the room of the town hall when they pledged each other in a bumper , to the last hour when they bid adieu in a parting cup , that excellent friend had manifested the same uninterrupted good feeling towards him . 
And how had he requited his kindness ? 
Occupied solely with self , he had but partially expressed his sense of obligation to him ; and to the honest , straightforward Breitenstein , who , as well as Fronsberg , had held him up as their favourite in the army , what return had he made ? 
Truly there is nothing more painful to a noble mind than the thought of being ungrateful where its object is to be esteemed . 
Full of these gloomy thoughts , he proceeded some distance on his journey . 
Feeling the rays of the March sun oppressive , and the mountain path becoming more rugged , he determined to repose himself and horse under the shade of an oak tree . 
He dismounted , loosened the girths of his saddle , and let his weary beast make the most of the stunted grass in the neighbourhood . 
He stretched himself under the tree , and though his fatiguing ride and the cool shade invited him to rest , still the unquiet state of the country , so near the theatre of war , the care of his horse and of his weapons , kept him awake until he at last sank into that state between watching and sleep , which the body combats in vain . 
V He might have been about half an hour in this situation , when the neighing of his horse roused him ; he looked about , and perceived a man with his back towards him , occupying himself with the beast . 
His first thought was , that taking advantage of his carelessness , the man intended to make away with his steed ; he sprang upon his legs , drew his sword , and in a trice was by his side . 
`` Stop , villain ! 
what have you to do with that horse ? '' 
he cried , at the same time taking him by the collar rather roughly . 
`` Have you already discharged me from your service , sir ? '' 
said the man , whom Albert immediately recognised as the messenger Bertha had sent to him . 
The young man was undecided what line of conduct to pursue ; for Fronsberg 's warning made him distrustful of the man , whilst Bertha 's confidence in him recommended him . 
The countryman continued his conversation , showing him at the same time a handful of hay ; `` I guessed you would not have provided fodder for your journey ; and as there is not much grass to be picked up on the mountains , I brought an armful with me for the brown horse . '' 
So spoke the peasant , and continued feeding the beast . 
`` And where do you now come from ? '' 
asked Albert , having recovered from his astonishment . 
`` Why , you rode away from Ulm in such haste , I was not able to follow you immediately , '' he answered . 
`` Do n't tell me a falsehood , '' said the young man , `` otherwise I can not trust you any more . 
You do not come from that town at present . '' 
`` Well , I suppose you will not be angry , if I was a little earlier than you on the road ? '' 
said the countryman , and turned away ; but the cunning smile on his countenance did not escape Albert . 
`` Let my horse alone , '' said Albert , impatiently . 
`` Come , sit down with me under that oak , and tell me , without hesitation , why you left the town so suddenly yesterday evening ? '' 
`` It was not with the Ulmers ' good will ; for they even wanted to induce me to remain longer with them , and to give me board and lodging gratis , '' replied the man . 
`` Yes , they would have put you in the lowest cell of the prison , where you would have seen neither sun nor moon , the place appropriated to spies and such like gentry . '' 
`` Excuse me , sir , '' replied the messenger , `` though I might have been somewhat lower , we should both have been under the same roof . '' 
`` Dog of a spy ! '' 
cried Albert , with anger burning on his cheek ; `` would you place my father 's son in the same rank with the fifer of Hardt ? '' 
`` What is that you say ? '' 
replied the other with menacing tone ; `` what name is that you mentioned ? 
do you know the fifer of Hardt ? '' 
At these words he grasped his axe , though perhaps involuntarily . 
His compact , broad-chested figure , spite of his low stature , gave him the appearance of an adversary not to be despised : and many a man , single handed , would have been staggered at his determined countenance and fierce eye . 
But the young man leaped up , threw back his long hair , and met the dark look of his companion with one full of pride and dignity ; he seized his sword , and said calmly , `` What do you mean by placing yourself in that threatening position ? 
If I do not mistake , you are the man I mentioned , the mover and leader of those rebellious hounds ; away with you or I will show you how such outcasts ought to be treated ! '' 
The countryman struggled with rage ; he threw His axe with a powerful swing into the tree , and stood unarmed before Albert . 
`` Allow me , '' said he , `` to give you another piece of advice , namely , never to let your adversary stand between you and your horse , for if I had taken immediate advantage of your order to take myself off , I should have had by far the best of it . '' 
A look at his horse proved the truth of what the man said , and Albert blushed for his inexperience . 
He quitted the grasp of his sword , and , without replying , seated himself again on the ground . 
The countryman followed his example , but at a respectable distance , and said , `` You are perfectly justified in being suspicious of me , Albert von Sturmfeder ; but if you knew the pain that the name you have just mentioned gives me , you would pardon my violent conduct . 
Yes , I am he who goes by that name ; but I have an abhorrence to be called by it : my friends call me Hans -- my enemies the fifer of Hardt , which they know I so much detest . '' 
`` What has that name to do with you ? '' 
asked Albert ; `` why are you called by it ? 
and why do you dislike it ? '' 
`` Why do people call me so ? '' 
answered the other : `` I came from a village of the name of Hardt ; it lies in the low country , not far from Nürtingen . 
I follow the profession of music , and play at fairs and wakes , and when young people want to dance . 
For this reason I go by the appellation of the fifer of Hardt ; but as this name was stained with crime and blood in an evil moment , I have dropped it , and can not bear the sound of it any longer . '' 
Albert measured him with a searching look , and said , `` I know very well the evil moment to which you allude : when you peasants rebelled against your Duke , you were one of the worst among them . 
Is it not true ? '' 
`` I see you are acquainted with the history of an unfortunate man , '' said the countryman , with penitent downcast looks : `` but you must not believe that I am still the same person ; the Holy One saved me and changed my way of thinking , so that I may now say , I am an honest man . '' 
`` Oh ! 
tell me , '' interrupted Albert , `` what was the cause of the insurrection ? 
How were you saved ? 
and how is it that you now serve the Duke ? '' 
`` I will spare you this information for a more fitting occasion , '' he replied , `` for I trust this will not be the last time we meet ; allow me to ask you instead , where does this road lead to ? 
It does not lead to Lichtenstein ! '' 
`` I am not going there , '' said Albert , dejected ; `` this way leads to Franconia , to my old uncle ; you can tell the lady my plans , when you go to Lichtenstein . '' 
`` And what are you going to do at your old uncle 's ? 
To hunt ? 
you can do so elsewhere ; or perhaps to kill time ? 
you can do that cheap enough all over the world . 
Take my advice in a few words , '' he added , with a good-humoured smile ; `` turn your horse 's head the other way , and take a ride with me for a couple of days about Würtemberg . 
I know the country well enough to keep you out of harm 's way , and though war is declared , the roads are tolerably safe yet . '' 
The fifer gave him this assurance , in order to encourage him to bend his steps towards Lichtenstein , which he knew would gratify the wishes of the lady who had entrusted him with her message of love . 
He was fully aware of the possibility there was of falling in with the patroles of the League , which were scattered over the country ; but he had , at the same time , sufficient confidence in his knowledge of the unfrequented paths among the mountains , to be able to escape their vigilance . 
`` I have given the League my word , not to serve against it for fourteen days ; how can I remain , therefore , in Würtemberg ? '' 
`` Do you call that fighting for Würtemberg , if you only travel peaceably on the roads ? 
In fourteen days , did you say ? 
Do they think the war will be over in fourteen days ? 
Many a head will be broken against the walls of Tübingen long after that time . 
Come with me ; it is not against your oath . '' 
`` And what shall I do in Würtemberg ? '' 
cried Albert : `` shall I go and see my old companions in arms reaping glory under the walls of the fortresses ? 
shall I go and meet the colours of the League again , to which I have bid an eternal farewell ? 
No ; I will return to my home in Franconia , and bury myself among its walls , and dream how happy I might have been . '' 
`` That is a fine determination for a young man of your spirit and determination ? 
Have you no other interest in Würtemberg than to wish to storm the tottering castles of the Duke ? 
Well , go , in God 's name ! '' 
continued the countryman , looking at Albert with a cunning smile ; `` but just try for once whether the ancient castle of Lichtenstein may not be taken by storm ? '' 
The young man blushed deeply ; and said , half angrily , half smiling , `` I do n't like your joke . '' 
`` I had no intention to joke with my young master , '' answered his companion ; `` I am serious when I wish to persuade you to go there . '' 
`` And what to do ? '' 
`` Why , to win over the old gentleman , to be sure , and dry the tears of the young lady , who weeps day and night on your account . '' 
`` But how can I go to Lichtenstein ? 
Bertha 's father does not know me ; how shall I make his acquaintance ? '' 
`` Are you the first knight who has ever demanded free quarters in a castle , according to the custom of our forefathers ? 
If you will leave that to me , I will promise to satisfy your scruples . '' 
The young man pondered over his friend 's proposal for some time ; he carefully weighed all the reasons for and against it ; he considered whether it was not against his honour , to be in the neighbourhood where the war would in all probability be carried on , instead of retiring from the theatre of it . 
But when he reflected upon the mild manner in which the commanders of the League had received his retreat from their cause , and the easy conditions which they had laid on him ; but above all , when he called to his memory the unhappy position of his beloved Bertha , his inclination to proceed to Würtemberg turned the scale . 
`` I will see and speak with her once more , '' thought he to himself . 
-- `` Well , then , '' he called to the countryman , `` if you will promise never to say a word to me about joining the Würtemberg cause , and assure me that I shall not be looked upon as a partizan of your Duke , but merely a guest of Lichtenstein , I will follow you . '' 
`` As far as lies in me , I can safely promise you , '' said his companion ; `` but it is impossible for me to answer for what the knight of Lichtenstein might propose . 
He is the Duke 's warmest friend , and it is not unlikely he may endeavour to persuade you to join his cause . '' 
`` I already know the terms you are upon with him , that you often visited him in Ulm , and brought him secret intelligence of all kinds . 
He has confidence in you , and therefore I wish to put you on your guard , not to acquaint him with the state of my affairs ; for I have my reasons to keep them as yet unknown to him . '' 
The fifer of Hardt eyed the young man some time with a look of astonishment . 
`` Where did you learn that I had been the bearer of secret intelligence to the knight of Lichtenstein ? 
But it signifies little to me what my persecutors may have told you . 
I have a debt to pay , and until it is fully discharged , I call not my life my own . 
My death , I hope , will absolve me from my creditor . '' 
With these portending words , he promised to follow Albert 's wishes to the letter , and added , `` Now mount your horse , whilst I lead on , and you shall be welcome in the castle of Lichtenstein . '' 
The herdsman says , `` If you will trust in me And follow boldly , I will bring you free ; -- A secret path there is , to man unknown , And trodden by the mountain goat alone . '' 
L. UHLAND . 
There were two ways from the spot where Albert had decided upon following his mysterious guide , leading to the neighbourhood of Reutlingen , in which the castle of Lichtenstein was situated . 
One was the high road from Ulm to Tübingen . 
It went through the beautiful Blauthal , or blue valley ; when , reaching the town of Blaubeuren , at the foot of the Alb , it crossed immediately over that mountain , passing the fortress of Hohen Urach , near the villages of St. John and Pfullingen . 
This was the usual and most convenient road for travellers on horseback , in litters , or carriages ; but at the time of our story , when Albert and the fifer of Hardt had to cross the country , it was not advisable to choose this route . 
The troops of the League already occupied Blaubeuren , their advanced posts stretched as far as Urach , and any one whom they found on the road , that did not belong to the army , or acknowledge their party , were rudely handled and otherwise ill-treated . 
Albert , therefore , had good reason to avoid this road ; and his companion was too mindful of his own safety to dissuade him from it . 
The other , a mere footpath , and known only to the inhabitants of the country , passed through thick woods , and deep ravines , where but a few single detached houses were to be met with , scattered over a distance of twelve hours -LRB- stunden -RRB- , or between thirty to forty miles . 
Here and there the track made a circuit to avoid the high road , and for this reason possessed the greater advantage of security . 
It was very fatiguing , and , indeed , in many places scarcely passable for horses . 
The fifer of Hardt chose this route , which his young master joyfully acceded to , as being the least likely to fall in with the League 's troops . 
They set forward accordingly , the countryman walking on Albert 's side : in the difficult parts of the path , he carefully led the horse by the bridle , and showed so much attention generally , for both man and horse , that Albert by degrees began to lose sight of Fronsberg 's warning , and to look upon his companion as a trustworthy servant . 
They conversed upon different subjects , when the peasant reasoned and argued in so clear-sighted a manner , upon many things which in general do not come within the compass of a common countryman 's mind , that his master could not at times control an involuntary smile . 
He had stories to relate of every tower and castle they saw in the distance , through the break of the forest ; and the clearness and liveliness with which he described them , proved that he had been present as musician at many a marriage feast and village dance ; but as often as Albert endeavoured to turn the conversation to the subject of his own life , and particularly to that period when the fifer of Hardt played so prominent a part in the insurrection of Poor Conrad , he either cut it short or turned it to some other channel , with a facility which bespoke a man of discernment . 
In this way they proceeded on their journey , without stopping , except to refresh man and beast . 
Hans was well acquainted with the places where they would find accommodation . 
He was known everywhere , and received in a friendly manner , though , as it appeared to Albert , his appearance excited astonishment at times . 
He generally had a quarter of an hour 's whisper with the host , during the time that the bustling hostess would wait on the young knight with bread , butter , and pure home-made cider ; whilst the little boys and girls were lost in admiration at the tall figure of the guest , with his fine clothes , his brilliant scarf , and the waving plumes of his cap . 
After the frugal meal was finished , the whole family accompanied the travellers to the door ; but , strange to say , the young cavalier could never induce the good people , upon any account , to accept a remuneration for their hospitality . 
When he asked his conductor to solve this riddle , his answer , `` that when they visit Hardt , they always come to my house , '' appeared a mere parry to the question . 
They passed the night in one of those solitary houses , where the hostess , with equal readiness , prepared a bed for her distinguished guest , and sacrificed , in honour of him , a couple of pigeons for his supper , served up with a dish of oatmeal . 
They pursued their journey the following day in the same manner , excepting that it struck Albert , his leader appeared more cautious than on the day before : for , when they came within five hundred paces of a dwelling , he bid his master stop , whilst he approached it warily ; and not till after he was perfectly satisfied that all was right , did he make him a sign to follow . 
In vain did Albert question him , whether the road was now more dangerous , or whether the troops of the League were in the neighbourhood ? 
He could not elicit a direct answer . 
Towards noon , as the country became more open , and the path descended into the plain , their route consequently was attended with more danger . 
The musician of Hardt , thinking it no longer prudent to approach any habitation , had provided himself at the last place with a sack of fodder for the horse , and a sufficient supply of provisions for his master and himself ; he sought the most unfrequented paths , and it appeared to Albert that they did not follow the first direction , but had turned sharp to the right . 
They halted on the skirt of a shady beechwood , by the side of a clear stream with fresh grass on its banks , which invited them to repose . 
Albert dismounted , whilst his provident guide produced the contents of his wallet , and set before him a good dinner . 
After he had looked to the horse , he placed himself at the feet of the young knight , and set to eating , with a hearty appetite . 
Albert having satisfied his hunger , surveyed the neighbourhood with an attentive eye . 
He looked down upon a beautiful broad valley , at the bottom of which flowed a small rapid rivulet ; the surrounding fields , with inclosed orchards here and there , appeared in high state of cultivation , a cheerful village reared its head on a hill at the further end of the valley , and the whole country was of a more pleasing description than that over which they had passed on the crest of the mountain . 
`` We have now quitted the district of the Alb , it seems , '' said the young man , as he turned to his companion ; `` this valley and those hills greet the eye with much more cheerful effect than the rugged rocks and deserted meadows we traversed yesterday . 
The air also feels milder and warmer here than higher up on the hills , where the wind was so piercing . '' 
`` You have spoken rightly , sir , '' said Hans , as he carefully put the remains of their meal into the wallet ; `` these vallies form part of the lowland , and that rivulet which you see yonder flows into the Neckar . '' 
`` But how comes it that we have gone so much out of the way ? '' 
Albert asked . 
`` I noticed that circumstance when we were on the mountain , but you would not listen to me then . 
As far as I know about the situation of Lichtenstein , this road will take us much too far to the right . '' 
`` Well , now I 'll tell you the reason , '' answered the countryman , `` why we have made this circuit . 
I did not wish to create an unnecessary anxiety in your mind when we were on the Alb , but at present , with God 's will , we are in safety ; for , let the worst come to the worst , we are scarcely four hours distant from Hardt , where no harm can happen to us . '' 
`` In safety , '' Albert interrupted him in astonishment , `` what have we to fear ? '' 
