So far as I can recollect , it appears to me that the monk maintained that it could not be he who had caused the death of the Baroness von F -- and Hermogen , but that they had both been murdered by the Count Victorin . '' 
`` Strange , very strange ! '' 
said the physician . 
`` But wherefore did you conceal this mysterious adventure at your trial ? '' 
`` How could I imagine , '' answered I , `` that the judge would attach any importance to such a story ? 
At best , it must have appeared to him a mere romance ; and will any enlightened court of justice receive evidence which even borders on the visionary and supernatural ? '' 
`` At least , '' replied the physician , `` you might have at once supposed that people were confounding you with this insane monk , and should have pointed out him as the real Capuchin Medardus ? '' 
`` Ay , forsooth , '' answered I ; `` and in the face of the venerable Father Cyrillus , -LRB- such , I believe , was his name , -RRB- an old dotard , who would absolutely have me , right or wrong , to be his Capuchin brother ? 
Besides , it did not occur to me either that the insane monk was Medardus , or that the crime which he had confessed to me was the object of the present process . 
But the keeper of the forst-haus told me the monk had never given up his name . 
How , then , did people here make the discovery ? '' 
`` In the simplest manner , '' said the physician . 
`` The monk , as you know , had been a considerable time with the forester . 
Now and then , it seemed as if he were completely cured ; but at last he broke out again into insanity so frightful , that the forester was obliged to send him hither , where he was shut up in the mad-house . 
There he sat night and day , with staring eyes , and motionless as a statue . 
He never uttered a word , and must be fed , as he never moved a hand . 
Various methods were tried to rouse him from this lethargy , but in vain ; and his attendants were afraid to try severe measures , for fear of bringing back his outrageous madness . 
`` A few days ago , the forester 's eldest son came to the residenz , and desired admittance into the mad-house , to see the monk , which , accordingly , was granted him . 
Quite shocked at the hopeless state in which he found the unhappy man , he was leaving the prison , just as Father Cyrillus , from the Capuchin Convent in Königswald , happened to be going past . 
He spoke to the latter , and begged of him to visit a poor unhappy brother , who was shut up here , as , perhaps , the conversation of one of his own order might be beneficial to the maniac . 
`` To this Cyrillus agreed ; but as soon as he saw the monk , he started back , with a loud exclamation -- ` Medardus ! ' 
cried he ; ` unhappy Medardus ! ' 
And at that name the monk , who before scarcely shewed signs of life , began to open his eyes , and attend to what went forward . 
He even rose from his seat ; but had scarcely done so , when , seemingly overpowered by his cruel malady , -LRB- of which he was himself not unconscious , -RRB- he uttered a strange hollow cry , and fell prostrate on the ground . 
`` Cyrillus , accompanied by the forester 's son and others , went directly to the judge by whom you had been tried , and announced this new discovery . 
The judge went back with them to the prison , where they found the monk in a state of great weakness ; but -LRB- judging by his conversation -RRB- not at all under the influence of delirium . 
He confessed that he was Medardus , from the Capuchin Convent in Königswald ; and Cyrillus agreed on his side , that your inconceivable resemblance to this Medardus had completely deceived him . 
`` Now , however , he remarked many circumstances of language , tone , and gesture , in which Mr Leonard differed from the real Capuchin . 
What is most of all remarkable is , that they discovered on the neck of the madman the same mark , in the form of a cross , to which so much importance was attached at your trial . 
Several questions also were now put to the monk , as to the horrid incidents at the castle of the Baron von F -- , to which the only answers they could then obtain were in broken exclamations . ' 
I am , indeed , ' said he , ` an accursed and abandoned criminal ; but I repent deeply of all that I have done . 
Alas ! 
I allowed myself to be cheated , by temptations of the devil , out of my own reason , and out of my immortal soul . 
Let my accusers but have some compassion on me , and allow me time -- I shall confess all . ' 
`` The Prince being duly advised of what had happened , commanded that the proceedings against you should be brought to an end , and that you should be immediately released from prison . 
This is the history of your liberation . 
The monk has been brought from the mad-house into one of the dungeons for criminals . '' 
`` And has he yet confessed all ? 
Is he the murderer of Euphemia , Baroness von F -- , and of Hermogen ? 
How stands public belief with regard to the Count Victorin ? '' 
`` So far as I know , '' said the physician , `` the trial of the monk was only to begin this day . 
As to Count Victorin , it appears that nothing farther must be said of him . 
Whatever connection those former events at our court may seem to have with the present , all is to remain in mystery and oblivion . '' 
`` But , '' said I , `` how the catastrophe at the Baron 's castle can be connected with these events at your Prince 's court , I am unable to perceive . '' 
`` Properly , '' answered the physician , `` I allude more to the dramatis personæ than to the incidents . '' 
`` I do not understand you , '' said I. `` Do you not remember , '' said the physician , `` my relation of the circumstances attending the Duke 's death ? '' 
`` Certainly , '' answered I. `` Has it not then become clear to you , '' resumed the doctor , `` that Francesco entertained a criminal attachment towards the Italian Countess ? 
That it was he who made his entrance secretly into the bridal chamber , and who poniarded the Duke ? 
Victorin , as you know , was the off-spring of that crime . 
He and Medardus , therefore , are sons of one father . 
Victorin has vanished from the world , without leaving a trace of his fate . 
All inquiries after him have been in vain . '' 
`` The monk , '' said I , `` hurled him down into the Devil 's Abyss , amid the Thuringian mountains . 
Curses on the delirious fratricide ! '' 
Softly , at the moment after I had pronounced these words , there came on my ears , from underneath the floor whereon we stood , the same measured knocking which I had heard in my dungeon . 
Whether this were imagination or reality , the effect on my feelings was the same . 
I could not contend against the horror which now seized me . 
The physician seemed neither to remark my agitation , nor the mysterious noise . 
`` What ! '' 
said he , `` did the monk then confess to you that Victorin also fell by his hand ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered I. `` At least I drew this conclusion from various passages in his confused and broken confessions -- connecting them also in my own mind with the sudden disappearance of Victorin . 
Woe -- woe to the relentless fratricide ! '' 
The knocking was now more powerful . 
There was again a moaning and sobbing . 
Methought a shrill laughter sounded through the air , and I heard the same stammering voice -- `` Me-dar-dus -- Me-dar-dus ! 
-- He -- he -- he -- Help , help ! 
-- He -- he -- he -- Help , help ! '' 
-- I was amazed that the physician took no notice of this , but he quietly resumed . 
`` An extraordinary degree of mystery seems to rest upon Francesco 's appearance at our court . 
It is highly probable that he also was related to our Prince 's house . 
This much ; at least , is certain , that Euphemia , Baroness von F -- , was the daughter -- '' With a tremendous stroke , so that the bolts and hinges seemed broken into splinters , methought the door flew open , and I heard the voice of the spectre absolutely scream with laughter . 
I could not bear this any longer . 
`` Ho -- ho -- ho ! 
Brüd-er-lein ! '' 
cried I. `` Here am I -- Here am I ! 
-- Come on -- come on quickly , if thou would ` st fight with me -- Now the owl holds his wedding-feast , and we shall mount to the roof , and contend with each other . 
There the weather-cock sings aloud , and he who knocks the other down , is king , and may drink blood ! '' 
`` How now ? '' 
cried the physician , starting up , and seizing me by the arm . 
`` What the devil is all that ? 
You are ill , Mr Leonard , dangerously ill . 
Away -- away with you to bed ! '' 
I continued , however , staring at the open door , momentarily expecting that it would open , and that my horrible double would enter in propria persona . 
Nothing appeared , however , and I soon recovered from the delirium and horror which had seized upon me . 
The physician insisted that I was much worse than I supposed myself to be , and attributed all the mental derangement and wildness that I had betrayed , to the effects of my long imprisonment , and the agitation which , on account of my trial , I must have undergone . 
I submissively used whatever sedative remedies he prescribed ; but what most of all contributed to my recovery was , that the horrible knocking was not heard any more , and that the intolerable double seemed to have forsaken me altogether . 
The delightful season of spring had now once more returned . 
Every morning the birds serenaded me at the window of my lodgings , which were in a garden-house , near a street called the Parterre , not far from the river . 
Doubtless , the year is never so delightful and interesting as when all things are yet undeveloped , and in their prime ; when the gardener is yet going about , with his hatchet , and bill-hook , and large sheers , lopping the branches , though the flourishing boughs are already redolent of green buds , that give out their fresh odours in the warm sun . 
One says to himself -- Let the gardener , or pruner , do his worst -- let him remove every unprofitable branch , so that the daylight may fall into the most secret recesses , where the loves of a former year have been celebrated and are gone by , yet the trees will , ere long , be in their full luxuriance -- all that he has lopped away will soon be more than amply replaced . 
It is the season of hope and bright anticipations . 
Every new flower that rises from the teeming earth , and every bright green leaf that breaks forth along the southern slope of the forest , calls forth responsive feelings of buoyancy and delight in the soul . 
Thus it happened , that one morning the vernal sun darted his unclouded golden gleams into my chamber . 
Sweet odours of flowers streamed through the open window , for the wind was in the south-west . 
The birds , as usual , cheered me with their songs . 
An irresistible longing urged me to go forth , and wander at will through the open country . 
Despising , therefore , the directions of my physician , I dressed , went down stairs , and betook myself , in the first place , to the Prince 's park . 
There the trees and shrubs , rustling with their new-born green leaves , greeted the weakly convalescent . 
It seemed as if I had just awoke from a long and heavy dream ; and deep sighs were the inexpressive tokens of rapture which I breathed forth , amid the joyous carolling of birds , the humming of insects , and gladness of all nature . 
Ay , life itself now appeared to me like a heavy and frightful dream , not only for the time lately passed , but through the whole interval since I had left the convent . 
I now found myself in a walk , shaded by dark platanus trees , which give out their green leaves very early in the year ; and gradually I became lost in reverie . 
Methought I was once more in the garden of the Capuchin Convent at Königswald . 
Out of the distant thickets rose already the well-known lofty crucifix , at which I had so often prayed with fervent devotion for strength to resist all temptation . 
The cross seemed to me to be now that only goal , after which I ought to strive ; there , prostrate in the dust , to do penance for the sinful dreams in which I had indulged , for the guilty delusions into which I had been led by the Arch-fiend . 
I stepped forward , therefore , with my clasped hands lifted up , and with my eyes fixed upon the cross . 
Methought I heard the pious hymns of the monks borne upon the air ; but it was only the mysterious voice of the woods , where the wind was up amid the yet dry branches and the verdant foliage . 
Its influence was more than in my weakly condition I could yet bear . 
I was soon obliged to support myself against a tree , and even to lie down on the turf : yet I never lost sight of the cross , but collecting my whole strength , rose again , and tottered on . 
However , I could only reach a rustic moss-seat , in front of the consecrated thicket , where , like a weak old man , I sat languidly down , and in hollow groans tried to lighten the anguish of my oppressed heart . 
How long I remained in this situation , I know not . 
But at last I heard a rustling , and the sounds of light steps on the walk . 
Instinctively , I knew whom I was to expect -- AURELIA ! 
Scarcely had I formed the thought , when , turning the corner of an opposite walk leading towards the seat , she stood visibly before me ! 
Description here fails me , nor indeed have I in this narrative often attempted to describe . 
Tears glistened in her heavenly blue eyes ; but through those tears gleamed a kindling light of love , which was , perhaps , foreign to the saint-like character of Aurelia . 
This expression , however , reminded me at once of that mysterious visitant of the confessional , whom in my cherished dreams I had so often beheld . 
Aurelia advanced towards me . 
She accepted my proffered hand . 
`` Can you , '' said she in a low voice -- `` Can you ever forgive me ? '' 
Then losing all self-possession , I threw myself on the ground before her . 
I seized her hand , and bathed it with my tears . 
-- `` Aurelia , Aurelia ! '' 
cried I , `` for thy sake , gladly would I endure martyrdom ! 
-- I would die a thousand deaths ! '' 
I felt myself gently lifted up . 
It was Aurelia who raised me , and who afterwards sunk into my arms . 
I scarcely know how these moments passed . 
Probably our interview was short , for I remember only these words -- `` All my best hopes are now fulfilled -- all the mysterious fears that have haunted me are at an end ! 
-- But see ! 
we are observed . '' 
She quickly disengaged herself from my embrace , and I saw the Princess coming up one of the walks . 
Not wishing at present to venture an interview with one whom I had never dared to look on as a friend , I retired into the thicket , where I discovered that the object which I had mistaken for a crucifix , was only the grey withered stem of an old pollard willow . 
From that moment , I no longer felt any effects of my severe illness , far less any influence of melancholy . 
The kiss of reconciliation which I had thus received from Aurelia , inspired me with new life ; and it seemed as if , for the first time , I enjoyed the mysterious raptures of which even this our terrestrial existence is susceptible . 
For the first time , I knew the happiness of mutual love ! 
I stood upon the highest pinnacle of worldly fortune , and my path must , from henceforth , lead downwards , in order to conduct me to that goal which the powers of darkness had seemed to mark out for my final destination . 
It was a dream of happiness like this to which I alluded , when I before painted the delights of my first meeting again with Aurelia at the Prince 's court . 
Then I addressed myself to thee , oh stranger ! 
who may one day read these pages . 
I requested thee to recall the bright sunny days of thy first love , and to imagine that dark disappointment had annihilated every prospect painted for thee by the fairy hands of Hope -- then would ` st thou be able to sympathize with the unhappy monk , who , in his solitary prison , moaning over the remembrance of his early visions , lay the victim of despair . 
Yet once more I beg of you to recall that happy time -- but now let there be no thought nor apprehension of disappointment -- and I need not then attempt to describe to thee the supernatural light that was now shed on my path by my fortunate love . 
No gloomy thoughts had longer any influence over my mind ; I began even to entertain a firm conviction that I was not the reckless criminal who , at the Baron 's castle , had killed Hermogen and Euphemia , but that it was actually the delirious monk whom I had met at the forst-haus , that had been the culprit . 
All , therefore , that I had said to the physician appeared to me no longer the fiction of my own brain , but the true narrative of events which to myself remained mysterious and inexplicable . 
The Prince had received me with the utmost kindness as a valued friend , whom he had believed lost , and by whose unexpected return he had been greatly rejoiced . 
This conduct of the Sovereign naturally gave the tone to that of all my former acquaintances at court ; only the Princess seemed still to look upon me with coldness and reserve . 
I had now the opportunity of daily meetings with Aurelia , nor did any one venture remarks on our attachment . 
Many times our interviews were without witnesses ; but on these occasions her saint-like purity , mildness , and timidity of character , which I could not but observe , inspired me with an involuntary awe and reverence . 
I felt that she placed in me implicit confidence , and with no one , not even with the nearest relation , could such meetings have been more safe . 
* * * * * For several days I had not seen Aurelia . 
She had gone with the Princess to a neighbouring summer-house in the forest . 
At last I could not bear her absence , but determined on a pedestrian excursion thither . 
When I arrived , it was already late in the evening . 
The sun had declined in red effulgence in the west . 
The air was filled with the odoriferous breath of young leaves and flowers , and the woods resounded with the sweetest notes of unnumbered nightingales . 
The approach to the Princess 's country-house was through a very long avenue of magnificent pine-trees , whose massy down-hanging branches swept the ground , waving in the balmy evening breeze with a mysterious murmur ; and , notwithstanding all the enchantments of the hour and scene , methought I almost heard a warning voice pronounce the word , `` Beware ! '' 
whereupon I only quickened my pace , and with a beating heart arrived at the garden-gate of the summer-house . 
In the garden I met with one of the maids of honour , who pointed out to me the wing of the chateau in which were Aurelia 's apartments , for I by no means wished to encounter the Princess . 
Softly I opened the door of the anti-room , from which the warm breath of flowers and exotic plants greeted me with their almost too-powerful fragrance . 
Remembrance was busy with her dim illusions . 
`` Is not this , '' said I , `` the identical chamber of Aurelia at the Baron 's castle , where , on that fatal night -- '' Scarcely had I formed this idea , when methought a dark form reared itself up in gigantic height behind me , and , with terror that shook my inmost heart , I heard a voice pronounce the name , `` Hermogen ! '' 
Losing all self-possession , I tottered onwards . 
I intended to knock , but the door of the cabinet was ajar , and I saw Aurelia kneeling at a tabourett , on which there was an open book , and above it a crucifix . 
I looked back trembling , to see if the spectre was yet there , but it was now vanished ; then , in a tone of rapture , though not such as to alarm her , I called out , `` Aurelia -- Aurelia ! '' 
`` Is it possible , '' said she , softly -- `` Leonard , my beloved , how came you hither ? '' 
She arose , and in the next moment was folded in my arms . 
Her luxuriant hair hung dishevelled over my head and shoulder . 
I felt her heart beat , and saw her eyes gleam with unwonted fire ; but at that moment there was a noise behind us as if from the strong and powerful beating of wings . 
A moan like the death-cry of one mortally wounded , sounded through the chamber . 
`` Hermogen ! '' 
cried Aurelia , and sunk fainting out of my arms . 
I placed her on the sofa , but , in a voice of horror , she cried to me , `` Away -- away ! 
I command , I beseech you , begone ! '' 
Scarcely knowing what I did , I left the room , and soon afterwards found myself , unawares , in the entrance-hall of the ground-floor , where I was met by the Princess . 
She looked at me gravely and haughtily . 
`` Mr Leonard , '' said she , `` I am indeed not a little surprised to find you here -- What means this intrusion ? '' 
By a violent effort , combating my distraction , I stammered out some incoherent apologies , by which I perceived , from the looks of the Princess , that she was by no means satisfied . 
On the contrary , I durst not venture to remain longer in the house , but , after a hasty obeisance , betook myself to the front-gate , and departed . 
As I passed once more through the darkness amid the waving pine-trees , methought I no longer walked alone ! 
On the contrary , it seemed to me as if some person ran all the way very near me , keeping time with my steps , and as if I heard a stammering voice , which pronounced the words , `` Ev-er -- ev-er am I with thee ! 
Broth-er -- broth-er Me-dar-dus ! 
Go whither thou wilt , east , north , or south , I am ever with thee ! '' 
Hereupon I paused and looked round me ; I became convinced that this horrible double , by whom I was haunted , had his existence only in my own disturbed imagination . 
However , I could by no means get rid of the frightful image ; he continued to run along by my side , and to speak with me at intervals , till at last it seemed to me as if I must actually enter into conversation , and relate to him the recent adventures of my life . 
Accordingly , I confessed that I had just now been very foolish , and had allowed myself once more to be terrified by the insane Hermogen ; however , that St Rosalia should now very soon be irrevocably mine , and that , for her sake only , I had become a monk , and received the investiture and consecration . 
Then my detestable double laughed and groaned as he had before done , and stuttered out -- `` But lose no time -- lose no time -- Quick-ly , quick-ly ! '' 
`` Nay , have a little patience , '' said I , `` and all will go well . 
Only , the blow that I struck Hermogen has not been deep enough . 
He has got one of those damned protecting crosses in the throat , even as thou hast , and I have ! 
But my stiletto , which thou hast preserved for me , is still sharp and bright ! '' 
-- `` He -- he -- he ! 
-- He -- he -- he ! 
-- Strike him well , then -- strike him well ! '' 
Such were the accents of my infernal companion , amid the dark rushing of the pine-tree woods ; nor did they end there . 
The same persecution accompanied me almost the whole way homeward into town , until at last , the fresh morning wind cooled the burning fever of my brow , and a roseate splendour advancing in the east , announced the dawn of a new vernal day . 
I had enjoyed only about two hours ' broken rest at my lodgings , when I received a summons to attend the Prince . 
I betook myself immediately to the palace , where he received me very cordially . 
`` In truth , Mr Leonard , '' he began , `` you have won my good opinion in the highest degree . 
I can not conceal from you that my prepossessions in your favour have ripened into real friendship . 
I should be sorry to lose you , and would rejoice in contributing to your happiness . 
Besides , it is our duty to atone to you as much as possible , for all that you have been made to suffer among us . 
By the way , Mr Leonard , do you know what was the direct cause of the process against you -- that is , who first accused you ? '' 
`` No , sire , '' answered I. `` Baroness Aurelia , '' said the Prince , -- `` you are astonished . 
Nay , it is very true , Baroness Aurelia , Mr Leonard , mistook you for a Capuchin . '' 
-- -LRB- He laughed heartily . -RRB- 
-- `` Now , if you are a Capuchin , you are certainly the politest and best-favoured of that order that has ever fallen under my notice . 
Say , in truth , Mr Leonard , have you ever been a monk ? '' 
`` Sire , '' answered I , `` I know not by what wicked fatality I am always to be transformed into a monk ; but -- '' `` Well , well ! '' 
interrupted the Prince , `` I am no inquisitor . 
It would be a serious disaster , however , if you were bound by any clerical vows . 
But to the point -- Would you not like to have your revenge on Aurelia for the mischief that she has brought on you ? '' 
`` In what mortal 's breast , '' said I , `` would such a thought as that of revenge arise against the amiable Baroness ? '' 
`` Do you not love Aurelia ? '' 
said the Prince . 
I was silent , but replied by an expressive gesture , laying my hand on my heart . 
`` I know it , '' resumed his highness . 
`` You have loved this young lady since that moment when she , for the first time , made her appearance here with the Princess . 
Your affection is returned , and indeed with a fervour of which I scarcely believed the mild Aurelia to be capable . 
The Princess has told me all , and I know that she lives only for you . 
Would you believe , that after your imprisonment , Aurelia gave herself up to a mood of utter despondency , and became at last so ill , that we entertained serious apprehensions for her life ? 
She at that time looked upon you as the murderer of her brother , and her grief , therefore , appeared to us unaccountable ; but the truth was , that even then she loved you . 
`` Now , Mr Leonard , or Mr von Krczinski , -LRB- for you are by birth noble , -RRB- I shall fix you at the court in a manner that will be agreeable to you . 
You shall marry Aurelia , and in a few days we shall solemnize the betrothment . 
I myself will act in place of the bride 's father . 
Meanwhile , adieu ! '' 
The Prince , in his usual abrupt manner , then left the audience-chamber . 
Aurelia my wife ! 
-- the wife of a perjured and apostate monk ! 
It may seem incredible that my mind could undergo so many changes ; but it is nevertheless true , that though this idea had so long been cherished , and had been familiar to myself , yet now , when I for the first time heard it announced by another , it was attended by a clear perception of its unfitness , and the almost utter unfeasibility of its realization . 
No ! 
said I to myself , the dark powers by whom my actions have been instigated , whatever else of evil they may have in store , can not have resolved on this ! 
I endeavoured to combat these fears , but in vain ; and yet to determine on voluntary separation from Aurelia was impossible . 
It was the idea of the marriage ceremony , which filled me with a degree of terror to myself inexplicable . 
I believed , indeed , that if the perjured monk dared to kneel before the altar , making a mockery of sacred vows , then , of necessity , the figure of that spectral omnipresent painter , not with a demeanour mild and friendly as in the prison , but announcing vengeance and destruction , would appear -- as at Francesco 's marriage -- to overwhelm me with disgrace and misery . 
But then methought I heard , in a deep solemn tone , the words , `` And yet must Aurelia be thine ! 
Weak-minded fool ! 
How durst thou think of changing that destiny which hangs over her and thee ? '' 
Scarcely were these words uttered , when another voice rose within me -- `` Down -- down ! 
throw thyself into the dust , thou blind wicked mortal ! 
Never can she be thine ! 
-- It is the blessed St Rosalia herself , whom thou madly think ` st to clasp in the embraces of terrestrial passion ! '' 
Thus utterly at variance with myself , tost hither and thither by contending impulses , I had left the palace , and wandered through the park , in a state of such distraction , that , to arrive at any rational plan for my future conduct , was wholly impossible . 
Past and gone was now that happier mood , in which I had looked upon my whole former life , and especially on my adventures at the Baron 's castle , as a frightful dream ! 
On the contrary , I saw in myself only a base criminal , and hypocritical deceiver . 
All that I had said to the physician and the judge was only a collection of foolish and badly invented falsehoods , by no means inspired , as I had before persuaded myself , by any supernatural voice , but the off-spring of my own feeble ingenuity . 
Lost and wrapt up in these bitter reflections , I was hurrying through the streets towards my lodgings , when I was overtaken by one of the Prince 's carriages , which immediately stopped . 
I heard my own name pronounced aloud , and saw that I was beckoned to by the physician , who alighted , and immediately took me with him to his apartments . 
`` What means all this ? '' 
said he , `` you violent unreasonable man ! 
You have thought proper , it seems , to make your appearance like a ghost to the Baroness Aurelia , in the gloom of night too , so suddenly , that the poor nervous young lady has been almost frightened out of her senses , and has been attacked by serious indisposition -- Well , well , '' -LRB- continued he , perceiving a change in my countenance , -RRB- `` I must not frighten you . 
Her illness has not lasted long . 
She has again been out walking , and will return to-morrow with the Princess into town . 
Of you , Mr Leonard , the Baroness has in confidence said much to me . 
She longs greatly to see you again , and to excuse herself ; for she allows , that her conduct at your last visit , must have appeared to you both childish and silly . '' 
When I reflected on what had really passed at the summer-house , I was at a loss how to interpret these expressions of Aurelia . 
The physician , however , gave me no time to brood over this , but indulged in his usual vein of loquacity . 
He gave me to understand , that he was perfectly aware of the Prince 's views for my advancement in rank , and marriage with Aurelia . 
Hereupon reverting to her late fit of nervous irritability , he gave , wickedly enough , such a caricature -LRB- for he was an excellent mimic -RRB- of her conduct and expressions , when he had arrived express at the summer-house , contrasting these also , with the grave ceremonious hauteur of the Princess , that I was forced , even against my will , to laugh , -LRB- for the good humour of the physician was infectious , -RRB- and gradually recovered a degree of cheerfulness , which , but a few minutes before , I had supposed lost for ever . 
`` Could the imagination of any man , '' said the physician , `` have anticipated , when you came to our residenz , that so many wonderful events would , in so short a time , have taken place : First , the absurd misunderstanding which brought you as a criminal before the Justiciary Court -- Then the truly enviable fortune which has acquired for you the special friendship and patronage of the Prince ! '' 
`` His highness , '' said I , `` no doubt treated me from the first with marked condescension and politeness . 
As to the advances that I have lately made in his good graces , I ascribe this to his recollection of the unjust prosecution by which I suffered , and which he is now desirous to atone for . '' 
`` The Prince 's favour , '' said the physician , `` perhaps is not owing so much to this , as to another circumstance , which you , no doubt , can guess . '' 
`` I can not , '' answered I. `` The people , it is true , '' resumed the physician , `` continue to give you the same name which you assumed on your first arrival . 
Every one knows , however , that you are by birth noble , as the intelligence which has been received from Poland confirms all that you had asserted ! '' 
`` Admitting this intelligence to have been received , '' said I , `` I know not why it should have any influence on my reception at court , since , at my first introduction there , I declared that I had no pretensions to any rank beyond that of a citizen particulier , and yet was treated by all with kindness , and even respect . '' 
To this the physician replied , by a harangue , which lasted nearly an hour , on the true principles which regulate the distinction of ranks ; and the lecture being delivered with his usual vivacity , had at least the beneficial effect of engaging my attention , and putting to flight the gloomy thoughts by which I had been overwhelmed . 
I could not but feel also a kind of triumph at the manner in which I had again seemed to rule over my own destiny , as by accidentally choosing the Polish name of Kwicziczwo in conversation with the old lady , on the evening of my first presentation at court , I had created for myself that patent of nobility which induced the Prince to bestow on me the Baroness in marriage . 
* * * * * As soon as I ascertained that the Princess was returned to the palace , I hastened to Aurelia , and immediately obtained an interview . 
The desire to excuse herself for the needless and capricious agitation , to which she had given way on my last visit , gave a new tone to her voice and manner , and new expression to her eyes , so that her timidity being less , I could once more say to myself , `` The prize will yet be thine ! '' 
Tears glistened in her beautiful eyes , and her tone was that of earnest and plaintive supplication . 
Still haunted by the idea of my spectral double , I wished to learn from her explicitly what had been the real cause of her terror . 
`` Aurelia , '' said I , `` I conjure you by all the saints , tell me what horrible phantom was it that then appeared to you ? '' 
At this question she gazed at me with obvious astonishment -- her looks became always more and more fixed , as if in deep thought -- then suddenly started up as if to go , but stood irresolute . 
At last , with both hands pressed on her eyes , she sobbed out -- `` No -- no -- no ; -- It is not -- it can not be he ! '' 
-- Unconsciously she allowed me to support her to a chair , into which she sank down exhausted . 
`` For God 's sake , Aurelia , who is it that you mean ? '' 
cried I , though I had already dark anticipations of what was passing through her mind . 
`` Alas ! '' 
said she , `` my beloved friend , were I to confess to you the whole truth , would you not look on me as an insane visionary ? 
A horrible phantom accompanies me through life , and mars , by its irresistible influence , every enjoyment , even at the times when I should otherwise be most happy . 
At our very first meeting , this frightful dream hovered , as if on dark wings , over me , spreading an ice-cold atmosphere of death around us , where there should have prevailed only a buoyant spirit of cheerfulness and hope . 
`` In like manner , when you came into my room at the Princess 's country-house , the same evil power acquired its full dominion over me . 
But this persecution is not without its especial cause . 
Precisely in the same manner in which you entered my apartments , though at a later hour of the night , an accursed monk of the Capuchin order once surprised me . 
Spare me the repetition of what then occurred . 
Suffice it , that he became the murderer of my brother ; and now , your features -- your tone of voice -- your figure -- But no more -- no more of this -- let me be silent on that subject for ever , and forgive , if possible , my weakness in this betrayal ! '' 
Aurelia reclined on the sofa on which I had placed her , and seemed unconscious of that freedom with which I now contemplated the exquisite contour of her shape , and the angelic beauty of her features . 
Once more -- all better inspirations -- all doubts and fears vanished from my mind -- with a fiendlike scorn and contempt , I said in a low voice -- `` Thou unhappy fated girl ! 
Thou bought and sold of Satan ! 
Thou , forsooth , believest that thou hast escaped from thine old enemy -- from the Capuchin monk , who long ago would have led thee on to ruin and despair ! 
But now , thou art his bride ; and in unconscious mockery of the religion which thou cherishest , art doomed to kneel with him at the altar of the Most High ! '' 
The powers of darkness had , for a time , acquired over me supreme dominion . 
I exulted over Aurelia as my devoted prey , and began to think , like a professed libertine , that her destruction would form the noblest epoch in my life . 
Our present interview , however , was not suffered to be of long duration , for Aurelia was summoned to attend the Princess , and I was left alone . 
Her expressions in apologizing for her conduct at the Princess 's chateau , had convinced me that there existed some mystery betwixt us , of the nature of which I was yet unaware , and which I had not the means of unravelling , for I perceived that there was no chance of inducing Aurelia to speak more explicitly on the subject . 
Accident soon after revealed to me that which she had been so determined to conceal . 
One day I happened to be in the apartment of that officer of the court , whose business it was to take charge of the receipt and delivery of letters . 
He was suddenly called out , when Aurelia 's waiting-maid came with a large packet , and placed it among others which were already on the table . 
A fleeting glance confirmed me that the hand-writing was that of the Baroness , and I perceived that the superscription was to the Abbess of the Cistertian Nunnery at Kreuzberg . 
With the rapidity of lightning the thought vibrated through me , that this packet would afford the key to many yet unexplored mysteries , and before the officer returned , I had retired , and taken with me Aurelia 's letter -- of which now follows a transcript . 
`` BARONESS AURELIA VON F -- , to the Abbess of the Cistertian Convent at Kreuzberg : -- `` My dear kind Mother -- How shall I find adequate words to announce to you that your daughter is fortunate and happy -- that at length the horrid spectre is banished , whose terrific influence , blighting every flower , and clouding every sun-gleam , had , for a long interval , rendered her existence utterly wretched ! 
`` But now self-reproach falls heavy on my heart . 
When after my unhappy brother 's death , and when my father perished from grief and disappointment , you received and supported me during my otherwise hopeless affliction , I ought then , not only to have confessed my sins , but to have acquainted you fully and explicitly with the strange and mysterious impressions , by which my tranquillity had been broken . 
`` I was unwilling , however , to disturb you by a detail , which would have seemed rather like the fantastic illusions of a disordered imagination , than reality , and of which the malignant influence then admitted of no cure nor antidote . 
Circumstances are now changed , and I can freely write to you of that secret , which has so long been deeply concealed in my own breast . 
It seems to me , indeed , as if that mysterious power by whom I have been haunted , had mocked , like a demon , at my every prospect of happiness ! 
I have been tost about hither and thither , as if on the waves of a stormy sea , and left ever and anon to perish without hope of rescue ! 
Yet Heaven has almost miraculously assisted me , even at the moment when I was on the point of being irrecoverably lost . 
`` In order to render my disclosures intelligible , I must look back to the period of my earliest recollections , for even at that time , the foundation was laid in my heart of those apprehensions which have since grown with my growth , and strengthened with my strength . 
`` It happened when I was only about four years old , that one day , when the spring season was at its brightest and loveliest , I was busily engaged with Hermogen at play in the castle gardens . 
Hermogen had run about supplying me with a thousand varieties of flowers , which he also assisted me to weave into garlands , with which I adorned myself , till being completely decked out like a fairy queen , and covered with flowers , I said , ` Now , let me go ! 
-- I must shew myself to my mother ! ' 
`` Hermogen , as you know , was older than I was , and exercised a kind of authority over his sister . 
At these words of mine , he started up , ` Stay here , Aurelia , ' said he , in a commanding voice -- ` Thy mother is in her blue closet , and speaks with the devil ! ' 
I could not tell what my brother meant by this , but , quite overcome with terror , I began to weep bitterly -- ` Foolish Aurelia , ' said Hermogen , ` wherefore weepest thou ? 
-- Your mother speaks every day with the devil . 
But let us keep out of his way , and he will do us no harm ! ' 
He spoke , and looked angrily , so that I was obliged to be silent . 
`` My mother was even then in very feeble health -- she was attacked often by frightful convulsions , which left her in a state of deathlike weakness . 
This happened once in presence of Hermogen , and myself . 
We were ordered out of the room , and I wept bitterly ; but Hermogen only said , ` It is the devil that has done this to her ! ' 
`` Thus the belief was firmly impressed on my mind , that my mother every day held conversations with some frightful spectre , whom , even to look upon , would , to any one else , be death . 
-LRB- As to religious instructions , they were , of course , yet wholly beyond my comprehension . -RRB- 
One day , after rambling through the castle , I was horrified to find myself alone in the blue cabinet which had been alluded to by Hermogen . 
`` I should instantly have taken refuge in flight , but my mother came in with a deadly paleness on her countenance , and without observing me , -LRB- for I stood in a corner , -RRB- in a deep melancholy tone , she pronounced the name , ` Francesco -- Francesco ! ' 
There was then a strange rustling and rattling behind the oak pannels of the wall . 
The boards began to move , and drew themselves asunder . 
I then saw a full-length portrait , so admirably painted , that it had all the animation of life , representing a man in a foreign dress , with a dark violet-coloured mantle . 
`` The figure and expressive countenance of this unknown , made on me an indescribable impression , which I never afterwards forgot . 
My admiration was such that I could no longer be silent , but uttered an exclamation of joy , which , for the first time , made my mother aware of my presence . 
Her temper , which was generally mild and equable , was now more ruffled than on any former occasion . 
-- ` What would ` st thou here , Aurelia ? ' 
said she , in an angry tone ; ` who brought thee hither ? ' 
-- ` They left me all alone , ' cried I , bursting into tears . ' 
I know not how I came hither , and had no wish to be here ! ' 
`` Meanwhile the pannels were again put in motion , and the portrait disappeared . 
-- ` Alas ! ' 
said I , ` the beautiful picture -- Mother , dearest mother , why is it gone ? ' 
-- The Baroness lifted me up in her arms , and caressed me . 
-- ` Thou art my dear good child , ' said she ; ` but no one must see that picture , nor speak of its having been there . 
It is now gone , Aurelia , and will never come again ! ' 
`` Accordingly , as long as I remembered this warning , I intrusted to no one what I had observed in the mysterious blue cabinet . 
Only to Hermogen , I once said -- ` Dearest brother , it is not with the devil , as you supposed , that our mother speaks , but with a young handsome man . 
However , he is only a picture , and starts out of the wall when she calls for him . ' 
-- ` The devil , ' answered Hermogen , with a fixed serious look , ` may look as he will , -- so says our father confessor . 
But as to the Baroness , he dare no longer trouble her ! ' 
-- Horror seized on me at these words , and I begged of Hermogen , that he never would speak of the devil again . 
`` Soon after this we went to the residenz , and the picture almost vanished from my remembrance ; nor did I think of it till after my mother 's death , when we came back to the country . 
The wing of the castle in which was that blue cabinet , remained uninhabited . 
Here had been my late mother 's favourite apartments ; and my father could not enter them without suffering from the most painful recollections . 
`` At last , after an interval of several years , it became necessary to order some repairs in that wing ; and being now in my fourteenth year , restless and wild , I happened to come into the blue cabinet , just at the time when the workmen were about to tear up the floor . 
When one of them was in the act of lifting a heavy table , which stood in the middle of the room , there was a strange noise heard behind the wall , the pannels burst asunder , and the portrait of the unknown again became visible . 
`` On examination , they discovered a spring in the floor , which being pressed down , brought into motion certain machinery behind the wainscot , which was accordingly drawn aside , as already described , so as to exhibit the picture . 
Once more that extraordinary event of my childhood was brought vividly to my remembrance ; and , at the recollection of my beloved mother , tears started into my eyes . 
Yet I could not turn away my looks from the expressive and interesting features of the unknown , which were so admirably painted , that they seemed more like life and reality , than any work of art . 
Above all , his eyes were so animated , that their glance seemed to penetrate into my very soul . 
`` Probably the workmen had sent word to my father , of the discovery which they had made ; for while I yet stood gazing on the unknown , he hastily entered the room . 
He had scarcely cast a fleeting glance on the picture , when he appeared almost petrified by some mysterious emotion , and murmured to himself , in a deep tone , the name ' Francesco ! ' 
-- `` Then suddenly , as if awoke from a painful reverie , he turned round to the workmen , and , with a stern voice , commanded them , that they should directly tear the painting from the wall , roll it up , and give it in charge to Reinhold . 
I was greatly distressed by this order . 
It seemed to me as if I should never more behold that form , so heroic , noble , and interesting ; who , in his foreign garb , appeared to me almost like some prince of the spiritual world ! 
Yet an unconquerable timidity prevented me from requesting of my father , that he would not allow the portrait to be destroyed . 
`` In a few days , however , these impressions altogether vanished ; nor did they recur till after a long interval . 
I was now carried away by the volatility and light-heartedness of youth . 
A thousand sports , of my own devising , every day engaged my attention ; and my father often said , that Hermogen , at this time , had the quiet , timid manners of a well-behaved girl ; while I , on the contrary , behaved like a wild romping boy ! 
`` These characteristics , however , were soon to be changed . 
Hermogen was already past the years of adolescence , and began to devote his whole attention to his own professional pursuits as a young soldier . 
He thought only of hardening his frame to endure every possible fatigue -- of parades and reviews -- of military tactics -- above all , of actual service in time of danger ; and in these views , his father -LRB- having determined on his son 's destination -RRB- wholly concurred . 
`` For my part , my whole existence now underwent a complete revolution , which I was then unable to interpret , and which I yet can not adequately describe . 
The solitude in which I lived probably contributed to heighten every fantastic impression . 
If any new feeling arose within me , being wholly undiverted by any external influence , or by the usual dissipations of society to which others can have recourse , it naturally grew into excess . 
I became thoughtful , melancholy , nervous , and discontented . 
By night , I was visited by strange and unaccountable dreams ; and during the day , I was , by fits , extravagantly merry , or , on the slightest provocation , burst into a passion of tears . 
`` My father observed these changes , which he ascribed to irritability of nerves , and called in a physician , who prescribed for me all sorts of remedies , without the slightest good effect . 
At this time -- I know not myself how it could have happened -- but one night the half-forgotten image of the unknown appeared before me , in colours so vivid and lively , that he was no longer a dead phantom on canvass , but a corporeal and living being , who gazed on me with an aspect of kindness and compassion . '' 
` Alas ! ' 
cried I , ` must I then die ? 
What is it by which I am thus so unspeakably tormented ? ' 
-- ` Thou lovest me , Aurelia , ' said the vision , ` and this is the cause of thy present illness and distraction . 
But canst thou dissolve the vows of one already devoted to heaven ? ' 
To my astonishment , I now perceived that the unknown wore the robes of a monk . 
`` Summoning my whole strength , I endeavoured to break the spells with which the detestable dream had fettered my senses ; and , for the present moment , I succeeded in this ; but I could not prevent the same phantom from recurring to my imagination , and persecuting me with tenfold power . 
I perceived only too well , that for me the mysteries of a first love were revealed , -- that , with a passionate fervour , of which only the youthful heart is capable , I was attached to the nameless and visionary unknown ! 
My indisposition seemed , however , to have attained its crisis , and I became perceptibly better . 
My nervous irritability decreased , and I was able again to mix in society ; only the constant presence of that image , my fantastic love of a being who existed only in my own brain , rendered me so distraite , that I frequently gave absurd answers when questioned ; and being wholly wrapt up in my own reveries , must have appeared to others either an affected prude , or an unidea 'd simpleton . 
`` About this time , I had found , among other romances , in my brother 's room , one containing the history of a monk , who , being overcome by temptations of the devil , renounced his vows , and fell in love with a young lady , who in consequence perished miserably . 
This I read with avidity , and though the lessons that it contained might have been expected to open my eyes to the dangers which I was drawing on myself , yet it had an effect directly the reverse , by fixing my attention more and more on those visions which I ought to have banished for ever from my mind . 
Frequently I thought of Hermogen 's words -- ` Thy mother speaks with the devil ; ' and began to think , that the unknown was , in truth , an agent of the Arch-fiend , employed to entice me to destruction . 
Yet I could not cease to love him ; and when Reinhold came back , on one occasion , from a journey , and talked much of a certain Brother Medardus , whom he had heard preach in the town of Königswald , there arose within me an obscure dim apprehension , that the original of the beloved and yet dreaded vision might be that very Medardus ; and this belief Reinhold 's description of the preacher 's features and person seemed amply to sanction . 
Thereafter , the wild dreams and internal conflicts by which I was persecuted , were increased tenfold . 
It happened that a monk -LRB- as was often the case -RRB- came to visit at my father 's house ; and this person chose , in a very diffuse lecture , to describe the manifold temptations of the devil , and the wretched delusions to which especially youthful minds were subjected , if they did not sufficiently resist his influence . 
My father seemed to approve of this discourse , and I believed it was aimed particularly at me . 
-- ` Only unbounded trust and confidence , ' said the clergyman , ` not only in religion , but in her servants , and submissive obedience to their injunctions and advice , can afford hopes of rescue . ' 
`` Not long after this , I accompanied my father to the town of Königswald , whither he went to attend a law process which Reinhold had been unable to finish alone . 
We lived at the garden-house of the Graf van M -- , which is close by the celebrated chapel of the Capuchin Convent ; and remembering the lecture which I had heard just before leaving home , I resolved not to lose that opportunity of fulfilling the sacred duty of confession . '' 
-LSB- Aurelia 's letter is very long , and contains a recapitulation , in a diffuse rambling style , of events that are already known to the reader . 
In the first place , there is her interview with Medardus in the church , which has been described already in the first volume of these Memoirs . 
After this , it appears that Aurelia was seized by a long and dangerous illness , by which her passion for Medardus was , for a time , completely subdued and alienated . 
To this change his vehement exhortation to her in the confessional had also contributed ; but , for the future , she looked on the whole transaction as a dream , with which she had been visited , in order that her eyes should be opened to the errors into which she had , by a youthful imagination , been led . 
Secondly , there is a full explanation of her conduct at the time when Medardus appeared at the castle of her father the Baron von F -- . 
Though she at once recognized the former object of her affections , yet , with an unshaken perseverance , she persisted in her determination , on no occasion whatever to betray this recognition . 
