Bertha rose from her seat , and went to look for her work-box , turning her back at the same time upon both her cousins , in order to conceal a blush which flew to her forehead , and which proved that not one word of Dieterick 's conversation was lost upon her . 
`` Come , that is very kind of you , cousin , '' said Marie , as he finished : `` I believe it is the first time you have ventured to have a guest in your house . 
I should like to have seen the face of old Sabina , when master Dieter , as she calls you , brought a stranger home so late at night . '' 
`` Oh , '' said the scribe , `` she resembled the dragon attacking St. George ; but I gave her to understand pretty clearly , that it was not at all improbable , I might soon bring home one of my pretty cousins -- '' `` Ah , get away with you , and do n't talk nonsense , '' resumed Marie , as she tried to withdraw her hand , which he had taken , blushing highly at the same time . 
She had never appeared so pretty in his eyes as at this moment . 
Bertha 's serious face , in proportion as this flirtation increased , lost its attraction in his estimation , the balance of his devotion was all in favour of the animated Marie , who now sat before him in all the bloom of blushing beauty . 
Bertha having slipt out of the room , Marie escaped the tender grasp of Dieterick 's hand , and profited by this opportunity to turn the subject of the conversation . 
`` There she goes , '' she said , as she looked after her cousin ; `` I would wager she is going to her room to weep again . 
She cried so violently yesterday , that it has made me also quite melancholy . '' 
`` What is the matter with her ? '' 
asked Dieterick , with interest . 
`` I am as ignorant of the cause of her grief as ever , '' answered Marie ; `` I have asked her over and over again ; but she only shakes her head , as if there was no hope left . 
` This unhappy war ! ' 
is all she ever gave me for answer . '' 
`` And is old Lichtenstein still determined to take her back to his castle ? '' 
`` Certainly , '' answered Marie ; `` you should have heard how the old man swore yesterday , when the confederates entered ! 
Well , he is devoted to his Duke , heart and soul , so he may go , with all my heart . 
As soon as war is declared , he intends taking his departure with her . '' 
Herr Dieterick appeared very thoughtful ; he rested his head upon his hand , and listened to his cousin in silence . 
`` And only think , '' she continued , `` yesterday , after the entrance of the leaguists into the town , she wept more than ever . 
You know she was always serious and melancholy ; but as if that circumstance were to decide the fate of the war , she is now quite disconsolate , I do n't believe it is the idea of leaving Ulm that affects her ; but I suspect , '' she added , mysteriously , `` she has some secret attachment at heart . '' 
`` Yes , I have long remarked that , '' sighed Herr Dieterick ; `` but how can I help it ? '' 
`` You ! 
how can you help it ? '' 
laughed Marie , all signs of sorrow on Bertha 's account vanishing from her face at these words . 
`` No , indeed , you need not flatter yourself that you are the cause of her suffering . 
She was in this state long before you ever saw her . '' 
The worthy secretary was very much put out by this assurance . 
He thought in his heart that a farewell from him was the real cause of Bertha 's state , and her care-worn countenance at this moment almost regained the preponderance in his changeable heart . 
Marie went on to deride his conceitedness , when all of a sudden he recollected the main object of his visit , which he had lost sight of during the conversation . 
Marie sprang up with a scream of joy , as her cousin imparted to her the news of the ball . 
`` Bertha , Bertha ! '' 
she cried out , at the height of her voice , so that her cousin , startled , and fearing lest some accident had happened , hastened to her assistance . 
But before she had scarcely had time to enter the room , Marie said again , `` Bertha , a ball at the town-hall this evening ! '' 
This news was a happy surprise to her also . 
`` When ? 
are the strangers invited also ? '' 
were her rapid questions , whilst a deep red covered her cheeks , and a ray of joy shot from her sorrowful eyes , scarcely able to contain their tears . 
Marie and her cousin Kraft were both astonished at Bertha 's rapid change from depression of spirits to sudden joy , and Dieterick could not help remarking , that he supposed she must be passionately fond of dancing . 
But he was equally mistaken in this instance , as he was when he mistook Albert von Sturmfeder for a connoisseur of wine . 
Herr Kraft , supposing his cousins would now wish to occupy themselves with the important preparation of dress , rather than listen to anything else he might have to say , took his departure , to fulfil the rest of his weighty duties . 
He hastened to give the requisite orders , and to invite , in person , the principal guests , and higher families . 
He was received everywhere as the messenger of good news ; for tradition says , that the pleasure of dancing is not the passion of the present day only . 
His arrangements were soon accomplished . 
In those days , in order to be merry and cheerful , it was not absolutely necessary there should be a long suite of apartments , lighted up with flaming chandeliers , and furnished with numerous unmeaning things , which encumber the fashionable apartments of the present age . 
All was simple . 
The room in the town-hall was , from its size , well adapted for the purpose , and the humble rude-shaped lamps which hung on the walls , had , up to that time , thrown out light enough to show off the dresses and illumine the pretty faces of the maidens of Ulm . 
But not only had the arrangements of the active scribe succeeded in everything he had undertaken on this important occasion ; he had also in the course of his visits learned some secret intelligence which had been confided solely to the committee of the council , and the principal officers of the League . 
Satisfied with the result of his various avocations , he returned home at noon , when his first step was to inquire after his guest . 
Albert had been employed , during the absence of his host , in looking over a beautifully-written book of chronicles , which he found in his room . 
The neat painted figures which formed the first letter of the chapters , the pictures of fields of battle , and triumphal entries of victorious troops , delineated with a bold outline , and painted with peculiar care and labour , and which were dispersed throughout the volume , had amused him for some time . 
His mind being full of the warlike figures he had been examining , induced him to think of his own weapons , and of polishing his helmet , armour , and the sword which he had inherited from his father . 
He accordingly set to work , at the same time singing sometimes a cheerful , sometimes a serious song , to the great annoyance of the unmusical organs of Frau Sabina . 
Dieterick heard the sounds of his agreeable voice as he walked up stairs , and he could not resist listening at the door until he had finished his song . 
It was one of those touching strains , bordering almost on the melancholy , which has been brought down to our times , and is to be heard even now in the mouth of the Swabians . 
Often and with pleasure have we listened to those strains on the charming banks of the Neckar , struck with the beautiful simplicity and lengthened sound of their harmony . 
Albert went on singing : Swift as thought All our pleasures come to nought ! 
The charger yesterday he press 'd , To-day the death-shot pierced his breast , To-morrow opes the chilly grave . 
Such the measure Of all earthly bliss and pleasure ! 
In that comely cheek of thine , The lily and the rose combine ; But rose and lily fade and die . 
Then resigned To God 's will , I yield my mind : Should the trumpet sound a call , Should it be my fate to fall , Say `` A gallant soldier 's gone . '' 
`` Really you have a fine voice , '' said his host , as he entered the apartment ; `` but why sing such melancholy songs ? 
I prefer a merry and cheerful one , such as a young fellow of twenty-eight ought to sing . '' 
Albert put his sword aside , and gave his hand to his friend . 
`` Every one to his taste , '' said he , `` but I think that to those whose occupation is war , and whose life is in constant jeopardy , a song which carries consolation and encouragement to the heart of the soldier , gives death a milder aspect . '' 
`` That 's just what I mean , also , '' said Dieterick ; `` but what is the use of being melancholy upon a subject which is certainly the lot of all ? 
` If you paint the devil on the wall , he will surely appear , ' says the proverb ; however , that saying does not hold good as the case now stands . '' 
`` How ? 
is not war decided , '' asked Albert , with curiosity ; `` has the Würtemberger accepted conditions ? '' 
`` Conditions ? 
none will be made with him , '' answered the secretary , with an air of contempt ; `` he has lived his longest day as Duke ; it is our turn now to govern . 
I will let you into a secret , '' added he , looking big with importance and mystery , `` but it must be strictly between us . 
Your hand ! 
You think the Duke has fourteen thousand Swiss with him ? 
They are scattered to the winds . 
The messenger we despatched to Zurich and Bern has returned . 
All the Swiss at Blaubeuren and on the Alb will be obliged to return home immediately . '' 
`` Return home ? '' 
said Albert , with astonishment , `` and for what purpose ? 
Are they at war themselves in their own country ? '' 
`` No , '' was the answer , `` they are in profound peace , but have no money . 
Believe me , before a week passes over our heads , messengers will arrive to order the whole army home . '' 
`` But will they go ? 
they came to the Duke 's assistance of their own accord ; who can order them to leave his colours ? '' 
`` That 's very easily managed ; do you suppose they will disobey the orders of their magistrates at the risk of the loss of their property , and imprisonment ? 
Ulerich has too little money to retain them , and they will not serve him upon mere promises . '' 
`` But you can not call that behaving honourably , '' remarked Albert , `` to deprive the enemy of the arms with which he wishes to meet you in fair contest . '' 
`` In politics , as we call it , '' answered the scribe , thinking to establish his knowledge of state affairs in the mind of the inexperienced young soldier , `` in politics , honour at best is assumed but for appearance sake ; for example , the Swiss will explain to the Duke , in excuse for deserting him , that it would be against their conscience to allow their troops to serve against the independence of the free towns ; but the truth is , that we can fill the pockets of the bears with more gold florins in order to keep them at home , than the Duke can to assist him . '' 
`` Well , after all , let the Swiss desert the Duke , '' said Albert , `` Würtemberg will still be able of herself to send forth valiant and ready hearts sufficient to prevent any dog passing the Alb . '' 
`` We have thought of an expedient in that case also , '' replied the scribe , in explanation ; `` we will address a letter to the states of Würtemberg , and warn them against the insufferable government of their Duke , exhorting them at the same time to cast off their allegiance to him , and join the League in the laudable undertaking of crushing his tyrannous conduct . '' 
`` How ! '' 
cried Albert , with horror , whose generous mind was as yet unacquainted with the intrigues of politics : `` I call that playing the traitor . 
Would you force the Duke out of his country by such underhand , unworthy means , and corrupt his confiding subjects to induce them to become his bitterest enemies ? '' 
`` I believe you have been thinking , all along , that we wish nothing more than that he should restore Reutlingen again to its former rank of a town of the empire ? 
But how then is Hutten , with his forty-two associates , to be remunerated ? 
In what way is Sickingen to satisfy the demands of his thousand cavalry and twelve thousand infantry , if he does not get a good slice of the country to pay them ? 
And the Duke of Bavaria , do you suppose he will not require a share of it also ? 
And we Ulmers , our frontier borders on Würtemberg -- '' `` But the Princes of Germany , '' interrupted Albert , impatiently , `` do you suppose they will quietly look on and see you parcel out his rightful possession among strangers ? 
The Emperor , surely , will not suffer you to hunt a Duke of the empire out of his country ! '' 
Herr Dieterick had a ready answer to this question also . 
`` There is no doubt , '' said he , `` that Charles succeeds his father the Emperor : we shall then offer to place the country under his protection , and , should Austria throw her mantle over it , who can resist her power ? 
But what makes you look so downcast ? 
if you thirst for war , you will readily find means to gratify your wish . 
The nobility still hold to the Duke , and many a one will have his head broken before his castle walls . 
But we shall lose our dinner if we go on talking thus , come soon , and we 'll see what old Sabina has provided for us . '' 
Upon which the secretary left the room of his guest with a proud step , as if he himself were already installed in the office of protector of Würtemberg . 
Albert did not send the most friendly look after his host as he withdrew . 
He replaced his helmet again in the corner , which he had but an hour ago taken such pleasure in polishing ; with sorrow he looked at his sword , that faithful piece of steel , which his father had proved in many a hard conflict , and which he had sent to his orphan son from the field of battle , as his sole legacy . 
`` Fight honourably , '' was the device engraved on its blade , and he asked himself , could he now draw it in a cause , which bore injustice on its front ? 
Instead of the contest being decided by the military talents of experienced men , and the bravery of individuals , as he had supposed , he now learned that secret intrigue , designated by Herr Dieterick `` politics , '' was to settle the question ! 
Instead of the exhilirating clash of arms , and the prospect of glory , which had induced him to take part in the struggle , he perceived that he was to promote the covetous plans of designing men ! 
Would his honour permit him to assist these low-minded Philistines of townsfolk , in expelling an ancient princely house from its rights , which his ancestors had served with willing arm ? 
No , the thought was intolerable ; and to be tutored by this Kraft was still more repugnant to his feelings . 
He could not however long entertain any ill-will against his kind-hearted host , when he considered that this plan was not concocted by his own brain , and that men , like this political scribe , when they get hold of a state secret , or some great political scheme , foster it as their own , and as such try to instil it into the minds of their adopted children , as if the wisdom of Minerva had sprung out of their own thick heads . 
He therefore met his friend in good humour , when dinner was announced . 
The conversation between them was dull and common-place . 
The scribe 's thoughts appeared to be occupied with some important project ; and Albert taking a review in his mind of the whole state of affairs as they stood , consoled himself with the idea that , as the father of Bertha had sided with the League as he supposed , and such men as Fronsberg had proffered their services in the same cause , there might be less reason to doubt the justice of it than he imagined . 
Youth 's ever ready with its word ; it seizes The first that comes to hand , as ` twould a knife : And thus ye cry or `` shame , '' or `` nobly done , '' On every thing -- all 's either good or bad . 
These words of the poet well describe the feelings of Albert at this moment , and the sudden change in his sentiments was also to be attributed to his inexperienced mind in worldly affairs , acting as he did alone , without the aid and advice of any tried friend . 
Anticipating , therefore , the happy moment of meeting his love at the ball in the evenings where he would be able to speak with her , and from her lips have his doubts cleared up respecting her father 's intentions , the gloom with which his mind had been overcast in his conversation with his friend the secretary gave away to the pleasing prospect of seeing her again . 
`` And in the merry dance , she whispers , to impart , In soft accents , the sorrows of her heart . '' 
L. UHLAND . 
If we had ransacked all the pawnbrokers ' shops , and attended the auction of an antiquary 's goods , to find `` a pocket-book giving a description of the social pleasures , with the fashionable figure dances , of the year 1519 , '' we could not have been more fortunate than in the fund of information which chance has thrown in our way upon that subject . 
Having arrived at that part of the present history which is to treat of a ball so far back as 1519 , a difficulty arose of ascertaining what were the figures , and how they were danced in those days . 
We might , indeed , have simply said , `` they danced ; '' but how easily might some of our fair readers have made an anachronism , and imagined an old veteran such as George von Fronsberg , booted and spurred , standing up in a cotillon . 
In this embarrassment a very rare book fell in our way , entitled , `` The beginning , origin , and customs of tournaments in the holy Roman Empire . 
Frankfort , 1564 . '' 
We found in these precious pages , among other well executed wood-cuts , the representation of a ball in the time of the Emperor Maximilian , which was about a year before the date of this history . 
We may , therefore , take it for granted , that the ball in the town-hall of Ulm differed in nothing from the explanations afforded by the above-mentioned drawing , and consequently we shall be able to give a better idea of the amusements of those days , by giving a description of the picture , than by our own delineation . 
The foreground is occupied by the spectators ; and the musicians , composed of fifers , drummers , and trumpeters , placed in a gallery , `` sound a blast , '' according to the expression in the tournament book . 
On either side , towards the further end of the room , are arranged those who intend to join in the dance , dressed in rich heavy stuffs . 
In our days , we see only two standing colours on such occasions , black and white , in which the ladies and gentlemen are divided as night and day . 
Not so in former times . 
An extraordinary brilliancy of colours shoot their rays from the picture . 
The most beautiful red , from fiery scarlet to the deepest purple , accompanied by rich deep blue which surprises us in the paintings of the old masters , form the cheerful colours of their picturesque drapery and dresses . 
The centre of the apartment is occupied by the actual performers . 
The dance resembles very much the Polonaise of the present day , in which the gentleman , with his partner , walk around the room in procession . 
Four trumpeters , bearing heraldic flags suspended to their instruments , open the procession , followed by the first couple . 
The rank alone of the gentleman entitles him , with his lady , to the honour of leading ; and at each change of the dance , the next in precedence takes his place . 
Then come two torch-bearers , followed by the rest of the dancers in pairs . 
The ladies walked with modest and reserved demeanour ; and the men placed their feet in a singular position , as if they were on the point of making a high leap . 
Some appear also to stamp with their high heels in time to the music ; a custom even now seen in the Swabian village festivals . 
Such was the ball in Ulm . 
The first blast of the trumpets had sounded before Albert von Sturmfeder entered the room . 
His eye flew through the ranks of the dancers , and soon fell upon his beloved . 
She was led by a young Franconian knight of his acquaintance ; but she did not appear to heed the animated conversation which he addressed to her . 
Her eyes sought the ground , her look expressed seriousness , bordering on sorrow ; very different from the rest of the female part of the company , who , floating in all the pleasures of the ball , gave one ear to the music , the other to their partner ; accompanied by inquisitive looks , now to their acquaintances for the purpose of reading approbation in their choice of their cavalier , now towards him , to ascertain if his attention was exclusively taken up with them . 
The cornets and trumpets having sounded a finale in lengthened tones , put an end to the first dance . 
Dieterick von Kraft having remarked the arrival of his guest , came to lead him to his cousins , according to his promise . 
He whispered to him , that , having himself already engaged Marie for the next dance , he had asked Bertha 's hand for him . 
Both the girls had been prepared for the appearance of the interesting stranger ; nevertheless , upon the recollection of the remark she had made upon him when he passed under her window , Marie 's lively features were covered with a deep blush when he was introduced to them . 
She was unable to account to herself for the embarrassment his presence now produced on her , having only seen him once in her life , and never heard of him before . 
Whether it was that she had selected him as the most striking cavalier in the procession , or whether , among the young citizens of Ulm , she thought none were to be compared with him in appearance ; such was the effect of this sudden attack on her feelings , one to which she had hitherto been a stranger , that she had no little difficulty in endeavouring to conceal her confusion from his observation . 
Though Bertha was timid of betraying the secret of her heart before her cousin , she had no such feeling to struggle with in regard to Albert . 
Their mutual attachment was of long standing and deep-rooted . 
The first time she had seen him since their separation in Tübingen was in the ranks of the confederates , to whom her father was inveterately opposed . 
From that moment her peace of mind had vanished . 
Her soul was troubled with cruel doubts and misgivings ; and all her hopes appeared for ever blasted . 
She nevertheless had sufficient command over herself , and for a moment the weight which oppressed her mind gave way to joy now that he stood before her ; and she returned his salutation with the same endearing smile which she was wont to do in the days of their unclouded happiness . 
And had her cousin not been taken up in concealing her own state of embarrassment , she could not have failed to discover , in the tender glance of Bertha 's eye , something which expressed more than common courtesy . 
`` I bring you Albert von Sturmfeder , my worthy guest , '' began the scribe to Marie , `` who begs to have the pleasure of dancing with you . '' 
`` Were I not already engaged to my cousin Kraft for the next , '' said Marie to the young knight , with recovered self-possession , `` I would , with pleasure ; but Bertha is disengaged . '' 
`` If you are not engaged , may I have that pleasure ? '' 
said he , turning to Bertha . 
`` I am engaged to you , '' she answered . 
Then it was that Albert heard again , after so long an absence , that voice which had often called him by the most endearing name ; and he dwelt on those eyes which still looked on him with undiminished fidelity . 
The trumpets again sounded throughout the room . 
The second in command of the army of the League , Waldburg Truchses , having the precedence in the coming dance , came forth with his lady : the torch-bearers followed ; the couples arranged themselves , and Albert also , taking Bertha 's hand , placed himself in the ranks . 
Her eyes now no longer sought the ground , but were directed solely to him . 
But in the expression of her countenance , Albert could plainly perceive , there was something hanging on her mind indicative of mental suffering . 
Joy at meeting him again , which had but a moment before brightened up her features , was now succeeded by an expression of dejection , which he could in no wise account for . 
So much was he struck by the sudden change in her manner , that he was on the point of upbraiding her , and taxing her unjustly with an alteration of love towards him . 
Grieved at the pain he appeared to suffer , she gently begged him to wait a fitting moment , and then she would explain every thing . 
She looked cautiously behind her at Dieterick and Marie , who were the next couple to them , to see if they were near enough to overhear her conversation . 
Finding they were at some distance , she said , `` Ah ! 
Albert , what unlucky star has brought you into this army ? '' 
`` You were that star , Bertha , '' he replied : `` I thought your father would be on the side of the League , and I am glad not to find myself mistaken . 
Can you blame me for having thrown aside the learned books , and taken to the profession of arms ? 
No other inheritance has fallen to my lot than the sword of my father . 
I will put it to usury ; and prove to your father , that he who loves his daughter is not unworthy of her . '' 
`` Oh , God ! 
I trust you have not yet sworn allegiance to the League ? '' 
she exclaimed , interrupting him . 
`` Do not frighten yourself so , dearest ; I have not yet fully bound myself to it , but I intend to do so in a day or two . 
Will you not allow your Albert to gain some little fame ! 
What is it that makes you so anxious about me ? 
Your father is old , and still he goes with us . '' 
`` Ah ! 
my father , my father ! '' 
Bertha said , in a desponding tone , `` he is indeed -- but stop , Albert , stop , Marie notices us . 
But I must speak with you to-morrow -- I must , should it cost me my happiness . 
Oh if I but knew how to manage it . '' 
`` But what is it that agitates you in this way , beloved ? '' 
asked Albert , to whom it was inexplicable how Bertha should only think of the danger that awaited him , instead of being overjoyed at this meeting . 
`` The danger is not so great as you imagine , '' he whispered to her : `` think only of the happiness of being together again , that I can press your hand , and that we can see each other face to face . 
Enjoy the present moment , and be cheerful . '' 
`` Cheerful ? 
Oh , those times are gone by , Albert . 
Hear me , and be firm ; -- my father is opposed to the League . '' 
She said this in a low subdued tone . 
`` Good Heavens ! 
what do you say ? '' 
cried the young man ; and leant towards Bertha , as if he had not distinctly heard the ill-foreboding words . 
`` Oh ! 
tell me ; is not your father at present in Ulm ? '' 
The poor girl had thought herself strong enough to withstand the shock she felt at this moment , but it was too powerful ; it deprived her of utterance , and she could scarcely contain her tears . 
She answered only by a slight pressure of her hand ; and with downcast eyes went to seek Kraft , led by Albert , in order to gain a little time to combat the grief she experienced . 
The strong mind of this young maiden at last triumphed over the weakness of her nature ; and she whispered to her lover , in a composed tone , `` My father is Duke Ulerich 's warmest friend ; and so soon as war is declared , he will take me back to Lichtenstein . '' 
The noise of the drums at this instant was deafening ; the trumpets clanged in their fullest tones as they saluted Truchses , who how passed by the musicians ; and , according to the custom of those days , threw them some pieces of silver , which caused the trumpets to redouble their deafening sounds . 
The whispered conversation of our two lovers was overpowered by the confounding noise of the instruments ; but their eyes had so much the more to say to each other in this apparent shipwreck of their hopes , so that they did not notice the observations , which were passed on them by the surrounding spectators , as being the handsomest couple in the room . 
Marie 's ear was not shut to the passing remarks of the crowd . 
She was too kind-hearted to be envious of her cousin 's praise , and consoled herself with the idea , that , were she in her place , beside the handsome young man , the couple would not be less attractive . 
But it was the animated conversation which Bertha kept up with her partner , that particularly attracted her attention . 
Her reserved cousin , who seldom or ever talked long with any man , now appeared to speak with even more earnestness than he did . 
The music and noise , however , hindered Marie from overhearing the subject of their conversation . 
This excited her curiosity to such a degree -LRB- a feeling -- perhaps , not without justice -- attributed specially to young ladies -RRB- , that she drew her own partner nearer to them , for the purpose of listening ; but whether it was by accident or design , that the conversation either dropped or was kept up in a subdued tone , the nearer she approached , she could not catch a word of it . 
Marie 's interest in the young man increased with these obstacles to her curiosity . 
Her good cousin Kraft had never appeared so great a bore to her as now , for all the pretty sayings with which he endeavoured to fix her attention , were only so many hindrances to her observing the others more closely . 
She was therefore glad when the dance was over . 
She hoped the next would be more agreeable , with the young knight for her partner . 
Albert came and engaged her , when she sprang with joy to the hand which he offered ; but she deceived herself in finding him the agreeable partner she had anticipated . 
Indifferent , reserved , sunk in deep thought , giving short answers to her questions , it was too clear he was not the same person who had but a moment before conversed in so animated a manner with her cousin . 
`` Was this the courteous knight , '' thought Marie , `` who had saluted them in so polite a manner , without ever having seen them before ? 
Was it the same cheerful and merry person whom cousin Kraft had introduced ? 
the same who had spoken with Bertha so earnestly ? 
or could she -- yes , it was too evident that Bertha had pleased him better than herself -- perhaps , because she was the first to dance with him . '' 
Marie had been little accustomed to see her reserved cousin preferred before her , which this apparent victory seemed to indicate . 
Her vanity was piqued , she felt herself estranged from Bertha , and conceived herself bound to exert her talents and winning arts to re-establish herself in her lost rights . 
She therefore , in her usual merry mood , carried on the conversation about the coming war , which she contrived to lengthen out till the end of the dance . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` and how many campaigns have you gone through , Albert von Sturmfeder ? '' 
`` This will be my first , '' he answered , abruptly , for he was annoyed that she kept up the conversation , as he wished so much to speak to Bertha again . 
`` Your first ! '' 
said Marie , in astonishment . 
`` You surely want to deceive me , for I perceive a large scar on your forehead . '' 
`` I got that at the university , '' he replied . 
`` How ? 
are you a scholar ? '' 
asked Marie , her curiosity still more excited . 
`` Well , then , I suppose you have visited distant countries , Padua or Bologna , or perhaps even the heretics in Wittenberg ? '' 
`` Not so far as you think , '' said he , as he turned to Bertha : `` I have never been further than Tübingen . '' 
`` In Tübingen ? '' 
cried Marie , surprised . 
This single word , like lightning , unravelled in a moment every thing in her mind which before had been obscure . 
A glance at Bertha , who stood before her with downcast eyes , her cheeks suffused with the blush of confusion , convinced her that , on that word , hung the key to a long list of inferences which had occupied her thoughts . 
It was now quite clear why the courteous knight saluted them ; the cause of Bertha 's tears could be no other , than that of finding Albert had joined the opposite party ; the earnest conversation between them , and Sturmfeder 's reserve to herself , were satisfactorily explained to her mind . 
There was no question of their having long known each other . 
Indignation was the first feeling that ruffled Marie 's breast . 
She blushed for herself , when she felt she had endeavoured to attract the attention of a young man whose heart was fully occupied by another object . 
Ill humour , on account of Bertha 's secrecy , clouded her features . 
She sought excuse for her own conduct , and found it only in the duplicity of her cousin . 
If she had but acknowledged , she said to herself , the feeling which existed between her and the young knight , she never would have shown the interest she took in him ; he would have been perfectly indifferent to her ; she never would have experienced this painful confusion . 
Marie did not deign to give the unhappy young man another look during the evening , and he was too much occupied with the painful sensations of his own mind , to be aware of her ill will towards him . 
He was also so unfortunate as to be scarcely able to say another word alone and unobserved to Bertha . 
The ball ended , and left him in doubt as to what her future fate , or the intentions of her father were likely to be . 
She seized , however , a favourable moment to whisper to him on the staircase , when she was going home , begging him to remain in the town on the morrow , in the hope of finding an opportunity to speak with him . 
The two girls went home , both ill at ease with each other . 
Marie gave short , snappish answers to Bertha 's questions , who , whether it was that she suspected what was passing in her cousin 's mind , or whether she was overwhelmed by grief , became more melancholy and reserved than ever . 
But when they entered their room , silent and cold towards each other , then it was that they both felt how painful was the interruption of their hitherto affectionate intercourse . 
Up to this eventful evening , they had always assisted each other in all those little services , which unite young girls in friendship . 
How different was it now ? 
Marie had taken the silver pin out of her rich light hair , which fell in long ringlets over her beautiful neck . 
She attempted to put it up under her cap , but unaccustomed to arrange it without Bertha 's help , and too proud to let her enemy , as she now called her cousin in her mind , notice her embarrassment , she threw it away in a corner , and seized a handkerchief to tie it up . 
Bertha , unconscious of having offended her cousin , could not fail noticing her change of affection towards her , and felt acutely the apparent sting of her ruffled temper . 
She quietly picked up the cap , and came to render her cousin her usual assistance . 
`` Away with you , you false one ! '' 
said the angry Marie , as she pushed away the helping hand . 
`` Dearest Marie , have I deserved this of you ? '' 
said Bertha , gently , and with tenderness . 
`` Oh , if you but knew how unhappy I am , you would not be so harsh with me . '' 
`` Unhappy , indeed ! '' 
loudly laughed the other , `` unhappy ! 
because the courteous knight only danced with you once , I suppose . '' 
`` You are very hard , Marie , '' replied Bertha ; `` you are angry with me , and will not even tell me the cause of your displeasure . '' 
`` Really ! 
so you do not know how you have deceived me ? 
but you can not keep your duplicity a secret any longer , which has subjected me to scorn and confusion . 
I never could have thought you would have acted so ungenerously , so falsely by me ! '' 
The wounded feeling of being out-done by her cousin , and as she thought , despised by Sturmfeder , was again awakened in Marie 's mind ; her tears flowed , she laid her heated forehead in her hand , and her rich locks fell over and hid her face . 
Tears are the symptoms of gentle suffering , they say : Bertha had experienced it , and continued her conversation with confidence . 
`` Marie ! 
you have accused me of keeping a secret from you . 
I see you have discovered that , which I never could have divulged . 
Put yourself in my situation -- ah ! 
you yourself , cheerful and frank as you are , would never have confided to me your inmost secret . 
But I will conceal it no longer -- you have guessed what my lips shunned to express . 
I love him ! 
Yes , and my love is returned . 
This mutual feeling dates much further back than yesterday . 
Will you hear me ? 
and I will tell you all . '' 
Marie 's tears still flowed on . 
She made no answer to Bertha 's last question , who now related to her the way in which they became acquainted with each other in the house of her good aunt in Tübingen ; how she liked him , long before he acknowledged his love of her ; and narrated many endearing recollections of the past -- the happy moments they had spent together , their oath of fidelity at their separation . 
`` And now , '' she continued , with a painful smile , `` he has been induced to join the League in this unhappy war , because we were in Ulm , thinking , very naturally , that my father was embarked in the same cause . 
He hopes to render himself worthy of me by the aid of his sword ; for he is poor , very poor . 
Oh ! 
Marie , you know my father -- how good he is , but also how stern , when any thing runs counter to his opinion . 
Would he give his daughter to a man who has drawn his sword against Würtemberg ? 
Certainly not . 
This is the cause of all the trouble and grief I suffer . 
Often have I wished to unburden my heart to you , but an uncontrollable feeling closed my lips . 
But now that you know the whole truth , can you still be angry with me ? 
shall I lose my friend also , as well as my beloved ? '' 
Poor Bertha could contain her tears no longer , and wept aloud . 
Marie , overpowered by the grief of her friend , embraced her cousin with the warm affection of a tender heart sympathising in her painful situation , and all feeling of enmity was in a moment extinguished in her breast . 
`` In a few days , '' said Bertha , after a short silence , `` my father will quit Ulm , and I must accompany him . 
But I must see Albert again , if it were only for a quarter of an hour . 
Marie , your ingenuity can easily find us an opportunity ; only for a very short quarter of an hour ! '' 
`` But you do not wish to make him desert the good cause ? '' 
asked Marie . 
`` I know not what you call the good cause , '' replied Bertha . 
`` The Duke 's cause is , perhaps , not less good than yours . 
You talk thus because you belong to the League . 
I am a Würtemberger , and my father is faithful to his Duke . 
But shall we girls decide upon the merits of the war ? 
rather let us think of the means , whereby I may see him again . '' 
Marie had listened with so much interest to the history of her cousin , that she quite forgot having ever entertained any ill-will towards her . 
Besides which , being naturally fond of any thing involved in mystery , she was glad of an opportunity , such as the present , to exercise her wits . 
She felt all the importance and honour of being a confidant , and consequently determined to spare no pains in serving the lovers in their critical position . 
After a few moments ' thought , she said , `` I have it ; we 'll invite him at once into our garden . '' 
`` In the garden ! '' 
asked Bertha , fearful and incredulous ; `` and by whom ? '' 
`` His host , good cousin Dieterich himself shall bring him , '' answered Marie . 
`` That 's a good thought ! 
and he shall not know anything of the plot ; leave that alone to me . '' 
Though Bertha was strong and determined in matters of importance , she trembled for the result of this rash step . 
But her bold and cheerful little cousin knew how to combat her scruples and fears . 
With renewed hope , then , in the success of their scheme for the morrow , and their hearts being restored again to their former mutual confidence , the girls embraced each other with tender affection , and retired to rest . 
As like a spirit of the air She hangs upon his neck , In falt ` ring tones the lovely fair At last essays to speak ; `` And wilt thou , then , thy true love leave For ever ? '' 
-- thus the fair Began , when , overcome by grief , Her words are lost in air . 
SCHUBART . 
Albert was sitting in his room , in the forenoon of the day after the ball , thoughtful and dejected . 
He had paid a visit to his friend Breitenstein , from whom he heard little that was consoling to his hopes . 
A council of war had been assembled early in the morning , and war was irrevocably decided upon . 
Twelve pages were despatched through the Goecklinger gate to convey the declarations of defiance of the Duke of Bavaria , the nobility , and assembled states , to the Würtembergers at Blaubeuren . 
This news was speedily spread from mouth to mouth through the streets , and joy at the prospect of marching at last into the field , was visibly depicted on every countenance . 
To one alone was the announcement a terrible blow . 
Grief drove him from the circle of the joyous multitude , who adjourned to the wine shops , to celebrate , by loud carousal , the birthday of the war , and to cast lots for the booty of anticipated victory . 
Ah ! 
his lot was already cast ! 
A bloody field of battle was spread between him and his beloved ; she was lost to him for a length of time , perhaps for ever . 
Hurried steps ascending the staircase , roused him out of his melancholy mood . 
His friend the scribe put his head in at the door , crying out , `` Good luck , my boy ! 
the dance is about to commence in good earnest . 
Have you heard the news ? 
war is announced , and our messengers have been despatched an hour ago , with the declaration to the enemy . '' 
`` I know that already , '' said his gloomy guest . 
`` Well , and does not your heart jump more freely ? 
Have you also heard -- no , you could not , '' continued Dieterich , as he approached him in confidence -- `` the Swiss have withdrawn their aid from the Duke . '' 
`` How ? 
Have they deserted him ? '' 
replied Albert . 
`` Well , then , I suppose that will put an end to the war . '' 
`` I would not be quite certain of that , '' said the scribe , doubtfully . 
`` The Duke of Würtemberg is young and bold , and has many knights and followers at his command . 
He will not , indeed , run the risk of fighting a battle in the field , but many fortified castles and cities remain faithful to his cause . 
Höllenstein , defended by Stephen von Lichow , Göppingen , which Philip von Rechberg will not give up at the first shot , Schorndorf , Rothenberg , Arsperg , but , above all , Tübingen , which he has strongly fortified , still hold faithful to him . 
Many a one will bite the grass before your steed drinks of the water of the Neckar . '' 
`` Well , well ! '' 
he continued , perceiving this news did not cheer up his silent guest , `` if this warlike message does not please you , you will , perhaps , lend a willing ear to a more peaceful commission . 
Tell me , have you not a cousin somewhere or other ? '' 
`` A cousin , yes ; but why do you ask ? '' 
`` Only think ! 
now I understand the confused conversation I had with Marie a little while ago . 
As I came out of the town hall , she winked to me from her window to come to her , when she desired me to bring my guest this afternoon into her garden on the Danube . 
Bertha , who knows your cousin very well , has something of importance to send to her , and hopes you will be so kind as to be the bearer of it . 
Such secrets and commissions generally consist in mere trifles . 
I would bet , it is nothing but a little model of a weaver 's loom , or a pattern of fine wool , or some mysterious secret in the art of cooking ; perhaps a few seeds of some rare flower , for Bertha is a great florist . 
However , if these girls pleased you yesterday , you will have no objection to accompany me to-day . '' 
In the midst of his painful thoughts , on the hour of separation from his love , Albert could scarce refrain from laughing at the cunning ingenuity of the girls ; he proffered his hand heartily to the welcome messenger , and prepared to follow his friend . 
The garden was situated on the banks of the Danube , about two thousand paces below the bridge . 
It was not large , and bore the appearance of being kept with care and attention . 
The fruit trees were as yet not clothed with foliage , neither were the curiously formed flower beds ornamented with flowers ; a long walk of yew trees skirting the bank of the river , and terminating in a large arbour , formed a pleasing picture by their bright green colour , and gave sufficient protection to a white neck and arm , against the piercing rays of a burning sun . 
The two girls , awaiting the arrival of the young men , were seated on a commodious stone bench in the arbour , and had an extended view , up and down the Danube , through apertures made in the side of it . 
Bertha sat there in sorrowful thought , her arm resting on one of the apertures , and her head , weary from grief and weeping , supported on her hand . 
Her dark glossy hair threw out in strong relief her beautiful white complexion , which sorrow had rendered a deadly pale colour ; sleepless nights had robbed her brilliant blue eye of its usual animation , and given to it a languishing -- perhaps so much the more interesting -- look of melancholy . 
Beside her sat the rosy Marie , fresh and plump , a perfect specimen of a merry heart . 
Her golden tresses , animated round face , bright hazel eyes , light and lively movements , were peculiarly striking when compared with the dark locks , oval careworn countenance , and thoughtful look of her dejected cousin . 
Marie appeared to have summoned up her most agreeable mood , expressly for the purpose of consoling her cousin , or at least to dissipate her pain . 
She prattled about indifferent things -- she laughed at and mimicked the gestures and peculiarities of many of their acquaintances -- she tried a thousand little arts , with which nature had endowed her -- but with little success ; for only now and then a painful smile spread over Bertha 's beautiful features . 
As a last resource , she took to her lute , which stood in the corner . 
Bertha was an accomplished performer on this instrument , and Marie would not have been easily persuaded to play before so expert a mistress on any other occasion ; but now , she hoped to be able to elicit a smile , at least , if it were only on account of her bad performance . 
`` What is Love , I 'm ask 'd to tell : Fain we would his nature know ; You who 've studied it so well , Why he pains us , prithee show . 
Joy it brings , if love be there ; If pain , of love ' t is not the spell ; -- Oh , then , I know the name that it should bear . '' 
`` Where did you get that old Swabian song ? '' 
asked Bertha , who had lent a willing ear to the music and words . 
`` It is pretty , is it not ? 
but the remainder is still more so ; would you like to hear it ? '' 
said Marie . 
`` A music master , Hans Sacks , taught it me in Nürnberg . 
It is not his own composition , but Walther 's , the bird-feeder , who lived and loved a good three hundred years ago . 
But listen : `` How I rightly may divine Love 's enigma , prithee say . 
'T is the charm of pow ' r to join Two hearts , where each must own its sway ; One heart avails not , each must share Its influence : dear mistress mine , Say , wilt thou share with me , thou lovely May ? 
`` Well , though you have shared your love equally with the poor young man , '' said the playful Marie , `` I pity you , from my heart , the painful burden of its weight . 
If such be its chains , cousin Kraft , who would willingly give me a portion of his , must wait awhile , and groan under the load of carrying the whole charge of it on his own shoulders . 
But I see you are again absorbed in thought , '' she added , `` so I must sing you another of Walther 's songs : `` I know not what has chanced , I ween My sight was never on this wise . 
Since in my heart she first was seen , I see her still without my eyes . 
What miracle is this ? 
What pow ' r Enables me , without the aid of sight , To see her every day and every hour ? 
`` Would you then learn the organs and the art , By which I see to earth 's extremest zone ? 
They are the thoughts I nourish in my heart ; They penetrate through walls of brick and stone ; And , should these watchers fail , her presence still Is evermore , as ' t were , before my eyes , Seen by my heart , my spirit , and my will . '' 
