`` The Baron took every opportunity of becoming quite eloquent in praise of Euphemia ; and here , for the first time , probably , in our lives , it happened that he and I were completely at variance . 
`` In society I was generally a spectator merely , rather than an actor , in whatever was going forward . 
In this way , looking on Euphemia as an object worthy of investigation , I had considered her with great attention . 
On her part , she had only , in compliance with her system of not neglecting any one , now and then interchanged with me a few insignificant words . 
`` I must confess , that she was , above all other women , beautiful and attractive ; -- that whatever she said was marked by sense and sensibility , -LRB- in other words , by tact and by prudence ;-RRB- yet , notwithstanding all this , I was conscious to myself of an inexplicable feeling of distrust and aversion . 
Nay , whenever she addressed her discourse to me , or her looks by chance fell upon me , I could not escape from a certain disquietude and apprehension that were quite overpowering . 
Her eyes , especially when she believed herself unobserved , glowed with an extraordinary and quite peculiar light , as if some unquenchable fire dwelt within her , which , at all times with difficulty kept down , had then irresistibly broken forth . 
`` Besides all this , there was too often on her otherwise finely formed lips , the expression of a hateful irony -- the decided indication even of a malignant and fiendish scorn , at which my very heart shuddered . 
`` In this manner , especially , she often looked at Hermogen , who , for his part , troubled himself very little about her ; -- but such looks alone were quite sufficient to convince me , that , under a specious and beautiful mask , much was concealed , of which no one but myself suspected the existence . 
`` Against the unmeasured praise of the Baron , '' continued the old man , `` I had indeed nothing to offer , but my own physiognomical observations , to which he did not allow the slightest importance ; but , on the contrary , perceived in my dislike of Euphemia only a highly absurd species of idiosyncrasy . 
He even confessed to me , that the young lady would soon become one of his family , as he would do all in his power to bring about a marriage betwixt her and Hermogen . 
`` The latter happened to come into the room just as we spoke with considerable warmth on this subject , and when I was endeavouring to defend my notions about Euphemia . 
The Baron , accustomed always to act openly , and on the spur of the moment , made his son instantly acquainted with all his plans and wishes . 
`` Hermogen very quietly listened to his father 's enthusiastic praises of the young lady ; and when the eulogy was ended , answered that he did not feel himself in the least attracted towards Euphemia ; that he could never love her ; and therefore earnestly begged that any schemes for a marriage between her and himself might be given over . 
`` The Baron was not a little confounded , when all his favourite projects were thus at once set aside , but at the same time , said the less to Hermogen , as he recollected that Euphemia herself had never been consulted on the subject . 
With a cheerfulness and good humour which are indeed quite his own , he soon began to jest over the complete failure of his endeavours , and said that Hermogen evidently shared in my idiosyncrasy ; though , for his part , how a beautiful young woman could inspire such dislike , he was quite unable to perceive . 
`` His own intercourse with Euphemia of course remained the same as before . 
He had been so accustomed to her society , that he was unable to spend any day without seeing her . 
* * * * * `` Consequently , it soon after happened , that one day , in a careless and cheerful humour , he remarked to her , that there was but one individual within her enchanted circle , who had not become enamoured , and that was Hermogen . 
The latter , he added , had flatly refused to listen to a plan of marriage , which his father had wished to set on foot for him . 
`` Euphemia , in the same style of badinage , replied , that it might have been as well to consult her also on the subject , and that although she would gladly be more nearly allied to the Baron , yet this must by no means take place through Hermogen , who was for her far too serious , and too particular in his humour . 
`` From the time that this discourse took place with the Baron , -LRB- who immediately communicated it to me , -RRB- Euphemia continued , even in an unusual degree , her attentions towards him and Aurelia . 
At last , by many slight but intelligible hints , she gradually brought the Baron to the idea that a union with herself would exactly realize the beau ideal which she had formed of happiness in marriage . 
Every objection which could be urged on the score of years , or otherwise , she was able in the most convincing manner to refute , and with-all , advanced in her operations so gradually , delicately , and imperceptibly , that the Baron believed all the ideas which she directly put into his head to be the growth of his own feelings and his own ingenuity . 
`` Still sound and unbroken in health , and by nature lively and energetic , he now felt himself inspired , even like a young man , by a glowing and fervent passion . 
I could no longer damp nor restrain this wild flight , for it was already too late . 
In short , not long afterwards , to the astonishment of all the residenz , Euphemia became the wife of the Baron !! 
`` It seemed to me now , as if this formidable being , whom even I had before regarded with such distrust , having thus stepped at last into our very domestic circle , I must now be doubly and trebly on the watch for my friend and for myself . 
Hermogen attended the marriage of his father with the coldest indifference , but Aurelia , the dear child , who was haunted with a thousand indefinable apprehensions , burst into tears . 
`` Soon after the marriage , Euphemia longed to visit the Baron 's castle here among the mountains . 
Her wish was gratified accordingly , and I must confess , that her whole behaviour was , for a long time , so consistent and correct , that she extorted from me involuntary admiration . 
Thus , two years flowed on in perfect quietness and domestic enjoyment . 
Both winters we spent in the residenz , but even there too , the Baroness shewed towards her husband so much unfeigned respect , and such attention even to his slightest wishes , that even the voice of envy and detraction were at last put to silence , and not one of the young libertines who thought that they would here have sufficient scope for their gallantry , allowed themselves even the least freedom in her presence . 
During the last winter , I was probably the only one left , who , still influenced by the old idiosyncrasy , ventured to cherish doubts and mistrust against her . 
`` Before the Baron 's marriage , a certain Count Victorin , major in the Prince 's Garde d'Honneur , and only now and then professionally established at the residenz , was one of Euphemia 's regular suitors , and the only one of whom it could ever have been said , that he at times appeared to be honoured by her particular regard . 
It had once been whispered indeed , that a much nearer and more intimate acquaintance existed between them , than was yet indicated by their outward behaviour . 
But the rumour immediately died away , as obscurely as it had arisen . 
`` Be that as it may , the Count Victorin was again this last winter in the residenz , and of course , made his appearance in the circles of the Baroness . 
He seemed , however , not in the least to concern himself about her , but rather even to avoid her conversation . 
Notwithstanding all this , I imagined that frequently their looks met , when they believed themselves unobserved ; and that in these looks -- but I shall not describe more particularly -- suffice it to say , that their expression was such , as in my opinion could not be misunderstood , and such as to cause to me the utmost disquietude . 
`` More especially , it happened one night at the house of the Governor , where a large party was assembled , that I stood crowded and squeezed up into a window , where I was more than half concealed by the furniture drapery , and only two or three steps before me was the Count Victorin . 
`` Then Euphemia , more than ever brilliant and tasteful in her dress , and beaming in luxuriant beauty , swept up to him as if to pass by . 
No one , probably , remarked them but myself . 
He seized her arm , with a kind of passionate vehemence , but so that it was observed by me alone . 
Their eyes met ; her expressive looks were turned directly and full upon him . 
She whispered some words , of which I could not seize the import . 
Euphemia must have seen me . 
She turned round quickly ; but I distinctly heard the words , ` We are observed ! ' 
`` I stood as if petrified by the shock of this discovery . 
Alas ! 
reverend sir , think of my conflicting feelings at that moment -- think of my gratitude and respect -- of that faithful attachment with which I was devoted to the Baron -- and recollect , too , the apprehensions by which I had been so long persecuted , and which were thus so cruelly and unequivocally realized ! 
`` These few words , however unimportant in themselves , had completely revealed to me that there was a secret understanding between the Baroness and the Count ! 
For the present I was obliged to be silent ; but I was resolved to watch Euphemia with Argus eyes , and then , as soon as I had obtained proofs of her crime , to break asunder at once the disgraceful bands in which she had fettered my unhappy friend . 
`` Yet who is able to counteract successfully the contrivances of devilish cunning and hypocrisy ? 
My endeavours , at least , were all utterly in vain , and it would only have been absurd to impart to the Baron what I had seen and heard . 
My opponents would directly have found ways and means to represent me as a half-witted , tiresome visionary . 
`` The snow still lay upon the mountains , when we came , last spring , over to the castle ; but I made my usual excursions over all the grounds . 
One morning I met , in a neighbouring village , a bauer , who had something odd in his walk and gestures . 
Happening to turn round his head , he betrayed to me , on the first glance , the features of the Count Victorin ! 
However , in the same moment he had vanished among the houses , and was no more to be seen . 
`` Any mistake on my part was here impossible . 
And what could have led him to this disguise , but the continuance of his old intrigue with the Baroness ? 
Even now , I know for certain that he is again in this neighbourhood , for I have seen his chasseur riding past ; and yet it is inexplicable to me how it happened that he did not rather attend the Baroness in town . 
`` It is now three months since we received intelligence that her uncle the Governor was attacked by severe and dangerous illness . 
Without delay , therefore , she obtained the Baron 's consent to visit her relation , and set off , taking only Aurelia with her , indisposition preventing the Baron from accompanying her at that time ; and he has since chosen to remain here . 
`` Now , however , misfortune had begun to make determined inroads into our house ; for the Baroness had not been long absent before she wrote home , that Hermogen was suddenly seized by a melancholy , on which no society or advice of physicians seemed to have any beneficial influence ; and that this even broke out oftentimes into fits of delirious rage . 
Day after day he wandered about all alone , cursing and denouncing himself and his cruel destiny ; while all endeavours of his friends to recover him from this frightful state had been hitherto ineffectual . 
`` You may suppose , reverend sir , how painful and distressing was the impression that all this made upon the Baron . 
The sight of his son under such a fearful malady , would , in his present state , have agitated him too much . 
I therefore went to town alone . 
`` By the strong measures that had been adopted , Hermogen was already cured of these violent out-breakings of madness described by the Baroness ; but a settled melancholy had fallen upon him , against which the physicians seemed to think that all aid would be unavailing . 
`` On seeing me , he was deeply moved . 
He told me that an unhappy destiny , with which it was in vain to struggle , drove him to renounce for ever the station which he had till then held ; and that only as a monk could he hope for tranquillity in this world , or rescue his soul from eternal destruction . 
Accordingly , I found him already in the dress , in which you , reverend sir , may have observed him this morning ; but notwithstanding his resistance , I succeeded in bringing him hither . 
`` He is now tranquil , but never for a moment relinquishes the one insane idea which has taken possession of him ; and all attempts to extort a disclosure of the event which has brought him into his misery remain fruitless , though the revealing of this secret would probably afford the first means of contributing to its alleviation . 
`` Some time ago the Baroness wrote , that , by advice of her confessor , she would send hither a monk of his acquaintance , whose intercourse and consoling admonitions would probably have more influence than anything else on Hermogen , as his madness had evidently taken a devotional turn . 
I am greatly rejoiced , sir , that the choice has fallen on you , whom a chance the most fortunate for us had led to the residenz . 
By attending to the directions that I now give you , I trust that you may restore to a broken-hearted and deeply-afflicted family , that repose which they have so long lost . 
`` Your endeavours ought , in my opinion , to be directed to two especial objects . 
In the first place , inquire out this horrible secret , by which Hermogen is oppressed . 
His bosom will be lighter if it is once disclosed , whether in ordinary conversation , or in the confessional ; and the church , instead of burying him within its walls , will again restore him to the world . 
`` In the second place , you should make yourself better acquainted with the Baroness . 
You know all that I have to communicate -- You are probably already of my opinion , though I have not sufficient proofs for entering into an open accusation ; but I know , that when you see , and become intimate with Euphemia , you will entertain the same conviction that I do . 
She is , however , by temperament , inclined to religion , at least her imagination is easily roused . 
Perhaps , therefore , by your extraordinary gifts of eloquence , you may penetrate deeply into her heart . 
You may agitate and terrify her into repentance of her crimes , and of that treachery against her best friends , by which , of necessity , she must work for herself everlasting torments . 
`` Yet one remark more , reverend sir , I must hazard . 
Many times it has appeared to me as if the Baron , too , had on his mind some secret grief , of which he conceals from me the cause . 
Besides his openly declared anxiety on account of Hermogen , he contends visibly with painful thoughts , which constantly harass him . 
It has often suggested itself to me , that he may perhaps , by some evil chance , have discovered the Baroness 's criminality , and this by traces more certain and unambiguous than those which have occurred to me . 
Therefore , reverend sir , I must finally recommend also the Baron to your spiritual care and attention . '' 
With these words Reinhold closed his long narrative , which had , meanwhile , in a hundred different ways , tormented me . 
The most extraordinary and irreconcilable contradictions laboured , crossing and re-crossing each other , through my brain . 
My very identity , my individuality , was cruelly become the game -- the mere plaything , of chance , while as it were , losing myself , and melting away into forms and features not my own , I swam , without hold or stay , upon that wild sea of events , which broke in upon me like raging waves . 
I had , indeed , virtually lost myself , for I could no longer recover any power of voluntary action . 
It was through the interference of my arm that Victorin had been hurled into the abyss ; but it was chance , and no impulse of volition , by which I was guided on that occasion . 
`` Now , '' said I to myself , `` I come into his place ; but then Reinhold knows Father Medardus , the preacher in the Capuchin Convent , and thus in his estimation I appear only that which I truly am . 
On the other hand , the adventure with the Baroness , which the Count had in contemplation , falls upon my shoulders , so that in this respect I become again Victorin ! 
To myself an inexplicable riddle , thought becomes a mere chaos . 
Like the fabulous knight , who fought with his DOUBLE in the dark forest , I am at variance , and combating with myself . '' 
Notwithstanding these internal commotions , I succeeded in counterfeiting tolerably well such composure as is becoming to a priest ; and in this mood I came for the first time into the presence of the Baron . 
I found him a man advanced in years ; but in his now shrunk features , lay yet the evidences of the strength and vivacity which he had once possessed . 
Not age , indeed , but grief , had ploughed wrinkles in his forehead , and blanched his hair . 
Notwithstanding this , there prevailed in all that he said , and in his whole behaviour , a cheerfulness and good humour , by which every one must be attracted , and prepossessed in his favour . 
When the old steward presented me to him as the monk , whose intended arrival had been noticed by the Baroness , his looks , at first rather doubtful and suspicious , became always more friendly , as , in the meanwhile , Reinhold related how he had heard me preach in the Capuchin Convent of Königswald , and had there convinced himself of my extraordinary gifts of piety and eloquence . 
`` I know not , my dear Reinhold , '' said the Baron , `` how , or for what reason , the features of this reverend gentleman interest me so much at our first meeting . 
They certainly awake some remembrance , which yet struggles in vain to come clearly and fully into light . '' 
It seemed to me , as if he would , in that very moment , break out with the name `` Count Victorin ! '' 
-- In truth , however miraculous it may appear , I had now become actually persuaded that I was the Count ; and thereby -LRB- aided perhaps by the wine at breakfast , not to speak of the draught from the basket bottle , -RRB- I felt the circulation of the blood more powerfully in every vein , and colouring my cheeks with a deeper crimson . 
I depended , however , upon Reinhold , who indeed knew me as Brother Medardus , though this now appeared to myself a mere fiction ! 
Nothing could untie or unravel those intricate knots , by which the strange web of my destiny was thus bound together . 
According to the Baron 's wishes , I was immediately to make acquaintance with Hermogen ; but he was nowhere to be found . 
He had been seen wandering towards the mountains ; but the family were on that score quite unconcerned , as he had frequently for days together absented himself in that manner . 
Accordingly , through the whole afternoon , I remained in the society of the Baron and Reinhold , and by degrees recollected myself so completely , that towards evening I became quite calm , and courageous enough to grapple with the wonderful events and difficulties which now seemed to lie in wait for me . 
In the solitude of the night , I opened the Count 's portfolio , and convinced myself more particularly that it was Count Victorin who had been hurled into the abyss ; yet the letters addressed to him were but of indifferent import , and not one of them gave me any very clear insight as to his real circumstances and condition in life . 
Without , therefore , harassing my brain any farther about the matter , I resolved to accommodate myself as skilfully as I could to whatever course chance might point out for me ; especially , it was requisite that I should wait the issue of my first interview with the mysterious Euphemia . 
* * * * * On the very next day , the Baroness , with Aurelia , unexpectedly made her appearance . 
I saw them alight from their carriage , and , received by the Baron , entering the gates of the castle . 
Unnerved and disquieted , I stepped restlessly up and down in my chamber , under a tempest of extraordinary anticipations . 
This , however , did not continue long , ere I was summoned down stairs . 
The Baroness came forward to meet me . 
She was an eminently beautiful woman , still in the full bloom of her charms . 
There was in her countenance and tout ensemble a voluptuous tranquillity , diversified only by the restless gleam of her eyes , which were to an unparalleled degree fiery and expressive . 
As soon as she beheld me she seemed involuntarily to start , and betrayed extraordinary emotion . 
Her voice faltered , she could scarcely command words . 
This visible embarrassment on her part gave me courage . 
I looked her boldly in the face , and , in the conventual manner , gave her my blessing . 
Hereupon she became all at once deadly pale , and was obliged to seat herself on a sofa . 
Reinhold meanwhile looked on me as if quite satisfied , and even with smiles of good humour . 
At that moment the door opened , and the Baron entered with Aurelia . 
As soon as I had set eyes on this girl , it seemed as if a gleam of light from heaven flashed around me , and penetrated to my very heart , kindling up mysterious and long-lost emotions -- the most ardent longings -- the raptures of the most fervent love . 
All indeed that I had formerly felt seemed only like obscure and shadowy indications of that which now stepped forth at once into reality and life . 
Nay , life itself dawned for the first time , glittering , variegated , and splendid before me , and all that I had known before lay cold and dead , as if under the desolate shadows of night . 
It was she herself -- the same mysterious unknown whom I had beheld in the vision of the confessional . 
The melancholy , pious , childlike expression of the dark blue eyes -- the delicately formed lips -- the neck gently bent down , as if in devout prayer -- the tall , slender , yet voluptuous form ; all these -- they belonged not to Aurelia -- it was herself , the blessed St Rosalia ! 
Even the minutest particulars of dress -- for example , the sky-blue shawl , which the young Baroness had now thrown over her shoulders , was precisely the same worn by the saint in the picture , and by the unknown of my vision . 
What was now the luxuriant beauty of Euphemia compared with the divine charms of this celestial visitant ? 
Only her , her alone could I behold , while all around was faded into coldness and obscurity . 
It was impossible that my inward emotion could escape the notice of the by-standers . 
`` What is the matter with you , reverend sir ? '' 
said the Baron ; `` you seem agitated in an extraordinary degree . '' 
-- By these words I was directly brought to myself , and I felt rising up within me a supernatural power , -- a courage till then unknown , -- to encounter all obstacles , if she -- if Aurelia were to be the prize to reward me for the combat . 
`` Rejoice , Herr Baron ! '' 
cried I , as if seized by a sudden fit of inspiration -- `` rejoice , for a female saint is sent down from heaven among us . 
The heavens , too , will soon be opened in cloudless serenity , and the immaculate St Rosalia will diffuse blessings and consolation on the devout souls who humbly and faithfully pay to her their homage and adoration . 
Even now I hear the anthem , -- the choral notes of glorified spirits , who long for the society of the saint , and who , calling on her in song , hover down from their resplendent thrones . 
I see her features , beaming in the divine halo of beatification , lifted up towards the seraphic choir , that are already visible to her eyes . 
Sancta Rosalia , ora pro nobis ! '' 
Hereupon I fell on my knees , with mine eyes uplifted to heaven , my hands folded in prayer , and all present mechanically followed my example . 
No one ventured to question me any farther . 
This sudden ebullition was imputed to some extraordinary inspiration , and the Baron gravely resolved to have mass said at the altar of St Rosalia in the residenz . 
In this manner I had completely rescued myself from my present embarrassment ; and I was resolved from henceforward to venture all things , for Aurelia was at stake , who was now far dearer to me than life . 
The Baroness meanwhile appeared in a very strange and inexplicable mood . 
Her looks followed me ; but when I met them , quite composedly and unconcerned , she averted her eyes , which then wandered about unsteadily and wildly . 
As for Aurelia , I could only guess at her agitation ; for she had drawn down her veil , and gazed stedfastly on a cross which was hung by a rosary from her neck . 
At last the family retired into another chamber . 
I made use of the opportunity , and hastened down into the garden , where , in a state of the wildest excitement , I rushed through the walks , labouring with , and revolving a thousand resolutions , ideas , and plans , for my future life in the castle . 
* * * * * Through this day I did not again meet Aurelia . 
It was already evening , when Reinhold appeared , and said that the Baroness , who had been deeply affected by my pious and inspired discourse of that morning , wished to speak with me alone in her chamber . 
* * * * * When I had entered the room , and had , by her directions , closed and bolted the door , she advanced a few steps towards me , then taking me by both arms , and looking fixedly in my face , `` Is it possible ? '' 
said she -- `` art thou Medardus , the Capuchin monk ? 
-- But the voice -- the figure -- your eyes -- your hair , -- speak , or I shall perish in this torment of suspense and apprehension ! '' 
`` VICTORIN ! '' 
replied I , in a whisper ; and again this word was not mine , but suggested to me by some unknown and supernatural power ; -- then , to my utter astonishment and consternation -- -LSB- There is a hiatus in the MS. at this place . -RSB- 
It was in my power , doubtless , to have fled from the castle , but in doing so -- in saving myself from new crimes -- I must have fled also from Aurelia . 
I had made the resolution -LRB- in which I was determined to persevere -RRB- to venture all things for her sake , and especially for the chance of renewing that conversation which the sanctity of the confessional wholly prohibited . 
It was on her account , therefore , that I had now involved myself in enormous guilt ; but though conscious of this as the cause , I did not escape the torments of remorse and the bitterest self-condemnation . 
A kind of horror seized on me when I thought of meeting Aurelia again , which , however , was very soon to happen , namely , at the supper-table . 
It seemed as if her pious angelic looks would directly accuse me of mortal sin , and as if , unmasked and detected , I should sink into utter disgrace and annihilation . 
From similar reasons , also , I could not bear to see the Baroness immediately after that interview , and all this induced me , under the pretext of having my devotions to perform , to shut myself up in my room , and remain there , when intimation was sent to me that supper was ready . 
Only a few days , however , were required in order to banish all fear and embarrassment . 
The outward behaviour of the Baroness was in the highest degree guarded and amiable ; and the more that , in my character of Count Victorin , I acquired ascendancy over her , the more she seemed to redouble her attention and affectionate solicitude for the Baron . 
She confessed to me , however , that she many times laboured under the most fearful perplexity ; that my tonsure , my long beard , and my genuine conventual gait , -LRB- which last , however , I did not now keep up so strictly as before , -RRB- had caused to her a thousand indefinable apprehensions ; nay , upon my sudden inspired invocation of St Rosalia , she had become almost persuaded that some extraordinary fatality had annihilated the plan which , along with Victorin , she had so admirably laid , and had brought a miserable Capuchin monk into his place . 
She admired , however , the extent of my precautions in actually taking the tonsure , in allowing my beard to grow , and in having studied my part so exactly , that , even now , she was obliged often to look me sharply in the face , to avoid falling again into painful doubts . 
* * * * * Meanwhile , Victorin 's chasseur , disguised as a bauer , made his appearance now and then at the end of the park , and I did not neglect to speak with him privately , and admonish him to hold himself in readiness for momentary flight , if any evil chance should render this necessary . 
As for the Baron and Reinhold , they seemed , on the whole , perfectly satisfied , yet frequently troubled me with urgent suggestions that I should direct the best energies of my mind to acquire an influence over the deeply pensive and obstinate Hermogen . 
On the contrary , however , I had never been able to interchange with him a single word , so sedulously did he avoid every opportunity of being alone with me ; and if by chance we met in the society of his father and the steward , he looked upon me with an expression so marked and extraordinary , that I had considerable difficulty in avoiding obvious embarrassment . 
It seemed almost as if he could read my very soul , and spy out my most secret thoughts ; and as often as he was thus forced into my presence , an unconquerable ill-humour , a malicious irony , and indeed rage , with difficulty restrained , were visible on his pale features . 
It happened that once when I was taking a walk in the park , I perceived him , quite unexpectedly , coming up to meet me . 
I held this for the fittest possible moment to clear up the painful circumstances in which I was placed with regard to him ; and accordingly , when , as usual , he wished to escape , I ventured to take him by the arm , and my old talent of eloquence enabled me now to speak so impressively , and with so much energy , that at last he could not help being attentive , and shewed , as I thought , some favourable symptoms of emotion . 
We had seated ourselves on a stone bench at the end of a walk which led towards the castle . 
In discourse , my inspiration , as usual , increased . 
I maintained , that it was in the highest degree sinful for a man , thus devoured by inward grief , to despise the consolation and assistance of the church , which can raise up the fallen , and might enable him to fulfil all purposes and duties of this life , which , by the goodness of the Supreme Power , were yet held invitingly before him . 
I insisted , that even the most depraved criminal need not doubt of the grace and favour of Heaven , and that the indulgence of such doubts might alone deprive him of the temporal happiness , and salvation hereafter , which he would otherwise obtain . 
At last I demanded that he should directly unload his conscience by confessing to me , promising him , at the same time , on the usual conditions of contrition , penance , and amendment , absolution for every sin that he might have committed . 
Hereupon he rose up . 
His frame seemed to heave and dilate with indignation ; -- his brows were contracted -- his eyes glared -- a burning red flew at once over his before pale countenance . 
`` Art thou , '' cried he , with a voice , by the depth and wildness of whose tones I was involuntarily agitated , -- `` art thou then thyself free from sin , that thou venturest , like the most pure -- nay , like the Divinity whom thou blasphemest , to look into the secrets of my bosom ? 
-- Thou , forsooth , would ` st promise me forgiveness -- thou , who for thyself wilt vainly strive for pardon , and against whom the regions of the blest are for ever closed ! 
-- Miserable hypocrite ! 
soon will the hour of retribution be at hand , and trodden into the dust like a poisonous reptile , shalt thou writhe in misery and death , struggling in vain for aid and release from thy nameless torment , till thou perishest in madness and despair ! '' 
Hereupon he turned round , and quickly disappeared . 
I had no power to detain him -- I was , indeed , utterly crushed and annihilated . 
All my composure and courage had fled , and I saw no means by which confidence and safety could again be recovered . 
* * * * * At length I observed the Baroness coming out of the castle , dressed as if for a walk . 
With her only , in this difficulty , could I hope to find assistance or consolation . 
I hastened , therefore , to meet her . 
At first she seemed terrified at my disordered appearance -- inquired after the cause of it ; and I described to her the whole scene which I had just now encountered with the insane Hermogen , expressing also my terror and apprehension , lest he might , perhaps , by some inexplicable chance , have got possession of , and might betray , our secret intercourse . 
By all this Euphemia did not appear in the least moved . 
On the contrary , she smiled with an expression of irony and malice so extraordinary , that I was seized with involuntary horror . 
`` Let us go deeper into the park , '' said she , `` for here we might be observed , and it might be deemed mysterious if the reverend Father Medardus were to speak to me with such vehemence . '' 
-LSB- A few sentences are here left out by the Editor . -RSB- 
`` Be composed then , Victorin , '' said Euphemia ; `` you may make yourself perfectly tranquil as to all this , which has brought you into such fear and trouble . 
Indeed , it is on the whole fortunate , that this adventure has happened with Hermogen ; for I have thus an opportunity of speaking to you on many things of which I had too long been silent . 
`` You must confess , that I wield a strange kind of intellectual supremacy over all those by whom I am in this life surrounded ; and to possess and exercise this privilege , is , I believe , much more easy for a woman than for a man . 
Not only , however , must we for this purpose enjoy that superiority of personal beauty which Nature has granted to us , but also many peculiar attributes of mind . 
Above all , the individual , who , in such undertakings , expects to succeed , must possess the power of stepping , as it were , out of herself , -- of contemplating her own individuality from an external point , -LRB- that is to say , as it is beheld by others ;-RRB- for our own identity , when viewed in this manner , serves like an obedient implement -- a passive means of obtaining whatever object we have proposed to ourselves , as the highest and most desirable in life . 
`` Can there be anything more admirable than an existence which rules over that of others , so that we may exert perfect empire over the insipid beings -- the phantom shapes , by which we are here surrounded , and command them , as if by magic spells , to minister to our enjoyments ? 
`` You , Victorin , belong to the few who have hitherto understood me . 
You had also acquired this power of looking , as if with others ' eyes , upon yourself ; and I have therefore judged you not unworthy to be raised as my partner on the throne of this intellectual kingdom . 
The mystery which we were obliged to keep up , heightened the charm of this union ; our apparent separation only gave wider scope for our fantastic humour , which played with and scorned the conventional laws of ordinary life . 
`` Do not our present meetings constitute the boldest piece of adventure , that spirits , mocking at all conventional limitations , ever dared to encounter ? 
Even in this new character which you have assumed , the metamorphosis depends not on your dress merely . 
It seems , also , as if the mind , accommodating itself to the ruling principle , worked outwardly in such a manner , that even the bodily form becomes plastic and obedient , moulding itself in turns , according to that plan and destination which the higher powers of volition had conceived and laid down . 
`` How completely I myself despise all ordinary rules , you , Victorin , are already aware . 
The Baron has now become , in my estimation , a disgusting , worn-out implement , which , having been used for my past purposes , lies dead , like a run-down piece of clock-work , before me -- Reinhold is too contemptible and narrow-minded to be worthy of a thought -- Aurelia is a good , pious , and simple-hearted child -- We have nothing to do but with Hermogen . 
`` Already have I confessed to you , that the first time I saw this youth , he made on me a wonderful and indelible impression ; but of what afterwards passed betwixt us , you have never yet been fully aware . 
I had even looked on him as capable of entering into those lofty schemes , into that higher sphere of enjoyment , which I could have opened for him ; but for once , I was completely deceived . 
There existed within him some principle inimical and hostile towards me , which manifested itself in perpetual contradiction to my plans -- nay , the very spells by which I fettered others , had on him an effect quite opposite and repelling . 
He remained always cold , darkly reserved , or , at best , utterly indifferent , till at last my resentment was roused ; I determined on revenge , but , above all , I resolved that my former power should not be thus meanly baffled and subdued , and that his indifference should sooner or later be fearfully overcome . 
`` On this combat I had already decided , when the Baron happened to say , that he had proposed for me a marriage with Hermogen , to which the latter would by no means agree . 
Like a gleam of inspiration , the thought at that moment rose within me , that I might myself , by a marriage with the Baron , at once clear away those conventional limitations which had hitherto at times disgustingly forced themselves in my way . 
`` But as to that marriage , Victorin , I have already frequently spoken with you . 
To your doubts , as to whether it could ever take place , I soon opposed actual performance . 
In short , as you know , in the course of a few days , I succeeded in transforming the grave old gentleman into a silly tender lover . 
Nay , he was forced to look on those plans which wholly originated from my agency , -LRB- and to which he scarcely dared to give utterance , -RRB- as the offspring of his own foolish brain , and the fulfilment of his own heartfelt wishes . 
Still , in the back ground , concealed indeed , but not less deeply traced , lay the thoughts of my revenge on Hermogen , which would now be more easy , and in execution far more perfect . 
`` If I knew less of your character , if I were not aware that you are fully capable of entering into my views , I would no doubt hesitate to inform you of what afterwards occurred . 
`` I took various opportunities of attracting Hermogen 's attention . 
When in the residenz , I appeared gloomy and reserved -- and afforded , in this respect , a powerful contrast with himself , for he was then cheerful and active in his own pursuits , and , to most people , frank and disengaged in manner . 
The interval was long and tedious , however , before my designs could be brought into execution . 
`` During my last visit in town , my uncle 's illness forbade all brilliant assemblies , and I was obliged even to decline the visits of my nearest acquaintance . 
Hermogen called upon me , perhaps only to fulfil the duty which he owed to a step-mother . 
He found me sunk in the most gloomy reflections ; and when , astonished at this sudden revolution , he anxiously inquired the cause , I confessed to him that the Baron 's infirm state of health , which he only with difficulty concealed , made me afraid that I should soon lose him , which idea was to me terrible and insupportable . 
`` On hearing this , he was obviously affected ; and when I went on to paint to him , in the liveliest colours , the happiness of my domestic circumstances with the Baron , entering into minute details of our mode of life in the country -- when , moreover , I spoke at greater length of the Baron 's admirable disposition , and represented his whole character in the most glowing terms , so that it always appeared more and more how deeply I honoured him , nay , how my very existence depended on his , -- then , obviously , Hermogen 's astonishment and perplexity increased to an even unexpected degree . 
He visibly struggled and contended with himself , but I had already triumphed . 
The principle , whatever it was , that lived within him , and had hitherto so hostilely acted against me , was overcome -- he had spoken with me alone , and was deeply moved -- he had beheld me in a new light -- his indifference was subdued , and his tranquillity lost . 
My triumph became the more certain , when , on the following evening , he came again to visit me . 
`` He found me alone , still more gloomy and more agitated than on the preceding night . 
I spoke as before of the Baron , and of my inexpressible longing to return to the country , and to see him again . 
Hermogen soon lost all self-possession -- he hung enraptured on my looks , and their light fell like consuming fire into his heart . 
* * * * * `` In a word , I succeeded . 
The consequences were more horrible than I had supposed ; yet on this account my victory was the more brilliant . 
The dominion which I had now so unequivocally gained over Hermogen had utterly broken his spirit . 
He fell , as you know , into madness , though till now you were not aware of the exact reason of this . 
`` It is a peculiar attribute of madmen , that they can often look more deeply than others into the hearts of those by whom they are surrounded . 
It seems as if their own minds , being free from rational control , stand in nearer relationship with the spiritual world , and are more liable to be excited sympathetically by the emotions of another . 
Thus oftentimes they pronounce aloud our own thoughts , like a supernatural echo , whence we are startled as if we heard the voice even of a second self . 
`` On these principles , it may indeed have happened that Hermogen , considering the peculiar footing on which we stand , has actually looked through your disguise , and on this account is hostilely disposed toward us ; but as to any danger from him on this account , that is by no means to be apprehended . 
Suppose even that he were to break out into open enmity -- should proclaim aloud , ` Trust not this cowled priest -- he is not what he seems ! ' 
yet who would look upon this as less or more than a delirious phantasm of his malady , more especially as Reinhold has been so good as to recognize in you the reverend Father Medardus ? 
`` In the meanwhile , however , it remains certain , that you can not , as I had hoped , gain a favourable influence over Hermogen . 
My revenge , however , is fulfilled , and I now look upon him , even as I regard the Baron , like a broken marionette -- a worn-out plaything ; become , at last , so much the more tiresome , as he probably considers his meeting with me here as an act of penitence , and , on this account , haunts and persecutes me , as you must have observed , with his dead-alive , staring , and spectral eyes . 
`` In short , he must , in one way or another , be got rid of ; and I thought , by your acquiring an influence over him , he might have been confirmed in his notions of going into a convent , and to have contrived , that the Baron and Reinhold should be persuaded of the propriety of this design . 
Hermogen , to say the truth , is to me , in the highest degree , intolerable . 
His looks often agitate me , so that I can hardly command myself ; and , for certain , he must , by some means or other , be removed . 
`` The only person before whom he appears quite in a different character , is Aurelia . 
By means of that girl only , can you gain any influence over Hermogen ; for which reason , I shall take care that , for the future , you may to her also obtain nearer access . 
`` If you find a suitable opportunity , you may communicate to the Baron and Reinhold , that Hermogen has disclosed to you , in confession , a heavy crime , which , according to your religious vows , you are obliged to conceal . 
But of this , more at another time : act for the best , and only be stedfast and faithful . 
Let us reign together over this contemptible world of puppets , which move around us only according to our sovereign will and pleasure . 
This life must bestow on us its best enjoyments , without forcing on our necks the yoke of its narrow and despicable laws ! '' 
We now saw the Baron at a distance , and went towards him , as if occupied in pious and edifying discourse . 
There had been nothing wanting , perhaps , but this explanation from Euphemia , to render me fully sensible of my own powers and advantages . 
I was now placed in a situation from which all things appeared in wholly new colours . 
As to Euphemia 's boast of her mental energy and power over the conduct of others , it only rendered her , in my estimation , worthy of utter contempt . 
At the very moment when this miserable woman believed that she sported in safety with all laws and regulations of this life , she was in reality given up a helpless victim to that destiny , which my hand might in a moment wield against her . 
It was , indeed , only by means of that spiritual influence and empire lent to me by the powers of darkness , that she could have been led to look on that being as a friend and trust-worthy companion , who , wearing only for her destruction the countenance and figure of her former lover , held her like a demon in his relentless grasp , so that liberation and escape were for her no longer possible . 
Euphemia , under the dominion of this wretched illusion , became every moment more despicable in my estimation , and the intercourse which I was obliged to keep up with her , became so much the more disgusting , as Aurelia 's image had every day acquired more and more power over my heart ; -- and it was for her sake only , that I had involved myself in society and in crimes , from which I should otherwise have fled with horror . 
I resolved , therefore , from henceforth , to exercise , in the fullest extent , the powers that I now felt were given to me ; to seize with mine own hands , that enchanter 's rod , of which Euphemia so vainly boasted the possession ; and with it , to describe the magic circle , in which the beings around me should move only according to my sovereign wishes . 
The Baron and Reinhold were still void of all suspicions , and continued to vie with each other in their endeavours to render my abode at the castle as agreeable as possible . 
They had not the most distant apprehensions of the circumstances in which I stood with regard to Euphemia . 
On the contrary , the Baron frequently became eloquent in expressions of gratitude , even assuring me in confidence , that by my interference her affections had been completely restored to him ; whereupon I recollected Reinhold 's notion , that the Baron , by some means or other , had received intimation of his wife 's former infidelity . 
Hermogen I now saw but very seldom . 
He visibly avoided me with fear and trembling , which the Baron and Reinhold very kindly interpreted into devoted awe and reverence for the sanctity and intuitive energy of my character , of which he could not bear the scrutiny . 
Aurelia , too , appeared to avoid me as much as possible ; and if , by chance , I spoke with her , she was , like Hermogen , timid and embarrassed . 
I had , therefore , no doubt that the latter had imparted to his sister those apprehensions by which I had been so much alarmed ; and yet it seemed to me by no means impracticable to counteract their evil influence . 
Probably by the instigation of the Baroness , who wished to bring me nearer to Aurelia , in order that , through her , I might acquire an ascendancy over Hermogen , the Baron requested , that I would give a share of my time to the instruction of his daughter in the higher mysteries of religion . 
Thus Euphemia herself unconsciously supplied me with the means of arriving at that wished-for goal , which formed the climax of all my most sanguine prospects , and which imagination had so often painted in the most glowing colours . 
I shall pass rapidly over the rest of my adventures during my residence in the Baron 's castle , the impression of which remains like that of an hideous dream , on which I have no desire to dwell longer than is requisite to preserve connection in the narrative . 
For some days , indeed , I remained influenced , for the most part , by the most sanguine hopes , which were yet constantly liable to disappointment . 
I had hitherto seen Aurelia only at short intervals , and in the society of others ; -- then , at every meeting , her beauty appeared more and more heavenly ; her voice breathed more exquisite music ; and the passionate impressions under which I laboured , were such , that I used , after these interviews , to run forth , if possible , into the park -- search out some covert the wildest and most secluded , where I threw myself on the ground , and gave up my whole soul to the delirium of love . 
At other times , I sought in meetings with the Baroness a temporary refuge from agitations , with which I could scarcely contend . 
I formed a thousand plans for leaving the castle , and of inducing Aurelia to be the companion of my flight ; but all were one by one renounced as hopeless . 
Now , however , I was to meet her frequently -- and alone . 
I summoned , therefore , all my talents of eloquence and energies of mind , to clothe my religious instructions in such language , that I might by this means direct her affections to her instructor , until , overpowered by her own feelings , she should at last throw herself into my arms . 
Instead , however , of succeeding in my designs against Aurelia , the only consequence of my endeavours was to augment tenfold my own intolerable disquietude . 
A thousand times did I say to myself , How is this possible ? 
Can Aurelia be the same Unknown -- the visitant of the confessional ? 
Devoutly , with folded hands and downcast eyes , she listened to me ; but not one symptom of emotion , not the slightest sigh , betrayed any deeper operation of my words . 
Even if I dropt obscure hints of our former meeting , she remained unmoved . 
I was therefore , of necessity , brought back to the belief and conviction , that the adventure of the confessional was but a dream . 
Yet if so , what import could be attached to the supernatural liveliness of that vision , except that it must have been an anticipation of what was now to come -- the promise of a higher power , that Aurelia -- the living realization of that phantom -- was yet to be mine ? 
Baffled , however , in all my attempts , -- driven oftentimes to rage and despondency , -- I brooded over new plans ; and while obliged to counterfeit pleasure in the society of Euphemia , and feeling only hatred and impatience , my looks and behaviour assumed a horrible expression , at which she seemed involuntarily to tremble . 
Still , of the real mystery concealed in my bosom , she had no suspicion , but gave way without a struggle to that supremacy which I exerted over her , and which daily continued to increase . 
Frequently the thought occurred to my mind , that , by assuming proper courage , by one decisive step , however violent , I might put an end to the torments of suspense under which I laboured , -- that on my very next meeting with Aurelia , I might cast off the mask , and renounce all subterfuge and stratagem . 
I went to her more than once , resolved to carry some plan of this kind into effect ; but when I looked at Aurelia , and beheld the calm piety , the energy of innocence in her seraphic features , it seemed as if an angel stood by her , protecting her , and bidding defiance to the power of the enemy . 
At such times , a cold shuddering vibrated through my limbs , and my former resolutions were completely broken . 
At last , the thought occurred to me of joining with her more frequently in prayer . 
-LSB- One page is here left out by the Editor . -RSB- 
I had no power to prevent this . 
I was crushed and annihilated , as if a thunderbolt had struck me to the earth . 
She fled instantly to the next room . 
The door opened , and there appeared -- Hermogen ! 
He stood glaring upon me with the fixed , horrid look of the wildest insanity . 
Then , recollecting that such persons are most likely to be tamed by cool , and daring defiance , I collected all my strength , and went up to him . 
-- `` Madman , '' cried I , with a deep commanding voice , `` wherefore this intrusion ? 
What wouldst thou here ? '' 
In this plan , however , I was completely baffled . 
Hermogen stretched out his right hand , and , in a hollow , frightful tone , -- `` I would contend with thee , '' said he , `` but I have no sword ; and there is blood on thy face ! 
Thou art a murderer ! '' 
Thereupon he abruptly vanished , slamming the door violently behind him , and left me alone , grinding my teeth with rage and despair . 
No one appeared , however . 
It was evident that he had not spread any immediate alarm , so that I had time to recover self-possession , and began , ere long , to feel confident , that I should yet fall on means to avoid any evil consequences of this error . 
* * * * * -LSB- The monk here goes on to relate , that he remained yet several days in the Baron 's castle , during which he encountered many adventures , which it is thought not advisable to transcribe . 
Indeed , perhaps the whole of this section might have well been condensed , or given but in outline . 
It is requisite to observe , that these adventures are wound up by the death of the Baroness and of Hermogen ; that of the former , by means of poison , which she had prepared for Medardus ; and of the latter , in single combat with the monk , who , in self-defence , killed his antagonist . -RSB- 
-LSB- At this point the Editor recommences his transcription . -RSB- 
When Hermogen fell , I ran in wild frenzy down stairs . 
Then I heard shrilling voices through the castle , that cried aloud , `` Murder ! 
murder ! '' 
Lights hovered about here and there , and I heard hasty steps sounding along the corridor and passages . 
Terror now utterly overpowered me , so that , from exhaustion , I fell down on a remote private staircase . 
The noise always became louder , and there was more and more light in the castle . 
I heard too that the outcries came nearer and nearer -- `` Murder ! 
murder ! '' 
At last I distinguished the voices of the Baron and Reinhold , who spoke violently with the servants . 
Whither now could I possibly fly ? 
Where conceal myself ? 
Only a few moments before , when I had spoken , for the last time , with the detestable Euphemia , it had seemed to me , as if , with the deadly weapon in my hand , I could have boldly stepped forth , and that no one would have dared to withstand me . 
Now , however , I contended in vain with my unconquerable fear . 
At last , I found myself on the great staircase . 
The tumult had withdrawn itself to the chambers of the Baroness , and there was an interval , therefore , of comparative tranquillity . 
I roused myself accordingly ; and , with three vehement bounds , clinging by the staircase rail , I was arrived at the ground-floor , and within a few steps of the outward gate . 
Then , suddenly , I heard a frightful piercing shriek , which reverberated through the vaulted passages , and resembled that which I had observed on the preceding night . 
`` She is dead , '' said I to myself , in a hollow voice ; `` she has worked her own destruction , by means of the poison that she had prepared for me ! '' 
But now , once more , I heard new and fearful shrieks from the apartments of the Baroness . 
It was the voice of Aurelia , screaming in terror , for help ; and , by this , my whole feelings were once more changed . 
Again the reiterated cry of `` Murder ! 
murder ! '' 
sounded through the castle . 
The footsteps approached nearer through a staircase leading downwards . 
They were bearing , as I conceived , the dead body of Hermogen . 
`` Haste , haste , after him ! 
-- seize the murderer ! '' 
These words were uttered in the voice of Reinhold . 
Hereupon I broke out into a vehement and horrid laughter , so that my voice echoed through the vaulted corridors , and I cried aloud , `` Poor insane wretches ! 
would you strive to interfere with and arrest that destiny , which inflicts only just and righteous punishment on the guilty ? '' 
They stopped suddenly . 
They remained as if rooted to one spot on the staircase . 
I wished no longer to fly . 
I thought rather of advancing decidedly and boldly to meet them , and announcing the vengeance of God in words of thunder on the wicked . 
But , oh horrible sight ! 
at that moment arose , and stood bodily before me , the hideous blood-stained and distorted figure of Victorin ! 
Methought it was not I , but he , that had spoken the words in which I thought to triumph ! 
At the first glance of this apparition , -LRB- whether real or imaginary , -RRB- my hair stood on end with horror . 
I thought no longer of resistance , but of flight . 
I rushed through the gates of the castle , and fled in delirious terror away through the well-known walks of the park . 
I was soon in the free , open country ; but I had intuitively chosen the road towards the village where Victorin 's chasseur had been stationed . 
Yet I thought not of this . 
It was instinct only , or chance , that had guided me thither . 
I heard behind me the trampling of horses , and summoned up my whole strength to avoid the pursuit which , of course , awaited me . 
My speed , however , would have availed little ; for , though the moon was up , yet dark shadows crossed over my path . 
At last I fell against the root of a tree , almost fainting and insensible , to the ground . 
Soon after , the horses that I had heard came up to me , and halted . 
Fortunately , my pursuer retained his senses , though I had lost mine . 
It was Victorin 's chasseur . 
`` For God 's sake , my lord , '' said he , `` what has happened in the castle ! 
There is a cry of murder . 
Already the whole village is in an uproar . '' 
To this I made him no answer ; indeed I was unable to speak . 
`` Well , whatever the truth may be , '' continued he , `` some good genius has put it into my head to pack up , and to ride hither from the village . 
Everything is in the small portmanteau on your horse , my lord ; for , of course , we shall have to separate for some time . 
Something dangerous must have happened . 
Is it not so ? '' 
I raised myself up without a word , and not without great difficulty mounting my horse , I directed the chasseur to return to the village , and there to await my farther commands . 
As soon as he had disappeared amid the darkness , finding that to ride was disagreeable , I dismounted , and carefully led my horse through the thickets of the pine-tree forest , which now wildly spread itself out before me . 
When the first gleams of the morning sun broke through the dense wood , I found myself on the borders of a clear rivulet , rapidly flowing over a bright bed of pebbles . 
The horse , which I had laboriously led through the thicket , stood quietly beside me ; and I had nothing better to do , than to search into the contents of the portmanteau , with which he was loaded . 
Accordingly , having found the keys in the portefeuille , I unlocked the small military equipage , and discovered suits of clothes , linen , etc. , and , what was of most importance , a purse well filled with ducats and Frederichs d'or . 
I resolved immediately to change my dress , and disguise as much as possible my appearance . 
With the help of scissars and a comb , which I found in a dressing-case , I cut off my beard , and brought my head of hair , as well as I could , into order . 
I then threw off my monk 's habit , in which I still found the fatal stiletto , Victorin 's letters , and the basket-bottle , with the remainder of the Devil 's Elixir . 
In a short time I stood there in a lay dress , which fitted well enough , and with a travelling-cap upon my head ; so that when I saw my reflection in the rivulet , I could scarcely recognize myself . 
Soon afterwards , having packed up the portmanteau , and resumed my journey , I came to the outskirts of the wood , and a smoke , which I saw rising before me , accompanied by the clear sound of a bell , gave me to understand that there was a town or hamlet at no great distance . 
Scarcely had I reached the summit of a rising ground opposite , when a pleasant well-cultivated valley expanded itself before me , in which there was a large flourishing village . 
I struck , forthwith , into the broad carriage-road which wound thither , and as soon as the declivity became less steep , mounted my horse , that I might accustom myself as much as possible to riding , in which I had hitherto had no practice whatever . 
My character seemed to have changed with my dress . 
As for my capuchin robes , I had thrown them into the hollow of a decayed tree , and with them had dismissed and banished from my thoughts all the hideous adventures in the castle . 
I found myself once more spirited and courageous . 
It now seemed to me that the horrid phantom of Victorin had been only a vision of my own fevered brain , but that my last address to the inhabitants of the castle had indeed been an effect of divine inspiration . 
It seemed as if I had thus unconsciously wound up and completed the purposes of that mysterious destiny which led me to the Baron 's house , and that , like the agent of Omnipotent Providence , I had stepped in , inflicting just vengeance on the guilty . 
Only the delightful image of Aurelia lived , as before , unchanged in my remembrance ; and I could not think on my thus inevitable separation from her , without extreme pain and affliction . 
Yet oftentimes it appeared to me , as if , perhaps in some far distant land , I should yet behold her again , -- nay , as if borne away by irresistible impulse , she must , at one period or another , become mine . 
* * * * * I observed that the people whom I met on the road , invariably stood still to look and gaze after me , so that there must have been something quite unusual and unaccountable in my appearance . 
I was not interrupted , however , but arrived in due time at the village . 
It was of considerable extent , badly paved , and composed of poor ill-furnished houses , many of which were more like animated monsters , like gigantic visages mounted on claw feet , after the distorted imagination of Teniers , than dwellings to reside in . 
The soil on which they stood was damp , therefore most of them were raised on wooden posts , as if on legs , from the ground . 
The roofs , moreover , had sky-lights like protruding eyes , while the door , with its staircase , might be compared to mouth and chin , and the windows would , in a drawing , have served for cheek-bones . 
It was a grotesque town ; a spot such as can only be found in the retired inland parts of Germany , where trade exists not , husbandry is but indifferent , and where the post-roads are not much frequented . 
