Notwithstanding that the Count was of the Catholic religion , both he and his tutor seemed to have little or no faith in sacred legends . 
They both indulged in an exuberance of odd fancies and witty remarks on this comical devil , who had carried about bottles under his ragged mantle . 
At last , the tutor thought proper to assume a serious demeanour , and spoke as follows : -- `` Do not , reverend sir , be offended with the levity of us men of the world . 
Be assured , on the contrary , that we both honour the Saints , and look on them as the most admirable examples of mortals inspired by religion , who , for the salvation of their souls , and edification of mankind , sacrificed all the enjoyments of life , and even life itself . 
But as to legends and stories such as you have just now related , in my opinion , these are , though not always , yet in many instances , -LRB- of which this is one , -RRB- only ingenious allegories , which , by misconception , are absurdly supposed to be histories of events that took place in real life . '' 
With these words , the tutor had suddenly drawn aside the sliding cover of the box , and taken out the black strangely-formed bottle . 
Now , indeed , as brother Cyrillus had remarked to me , there spread itself abroad a strong odour , which appeared , however , anything rather than stupifying . 
It was , in a high degree , agreeable , generous , and refreshing . 
`` Hah ! '' 
exclaimed the Count , `` now would I take any bet , that the Devil 's Elixir is neither more nor less , than excellent old wine of Syracuse ! '' 
`` Unquestionably , '' said the tutor ; `` and if the bottle really came from the posthumous property of St Anthony , then , brother , you are more fortunate than the King of Naples , who , on one occasion , expected to be able to taste real old Roman wine ; but , from the bad custom among the Romans , of pouring oil into the necks of their bottles instead of using corks , was debarred that gratification . 
`` Though this bottle , '' continued he , `` is by no means so old as the Augustan age , yet , having been St Anthony 's , it is certainly by far the most ancient that we are likely to meet with ; and , therefore , reverend sir , you would , in my opinion , do well to apply the relic to your own use , and to sip up its contents with good faith and courage . '' 
`` Undoubtedly , '' resumed the Count , `` this old Syracusan wine would pour new strength into your veins , and put to flight that bodily indisposition under which , reverend sir , you now seem to labour . '' 
Hereupon the tutor pulled a cork-screw from his pocket , and , notwithstanding all my protestations to the contrary , opened the bottle . 
It seemed to me , as if , upon drawing the cork , a blue flame ascended into the air , which directly afterwards vanished . 
More powerfully then , the vaporous odour mounted out of the flask , and spread itself through the chamber ! 
The tutor tasted in the first place , and cried out with rapture -- `` Admirable , admirable Syracusan ! 
In truth , the wine cellar of St Anthony was by no means a bad one ; and if the devil really was his butler , then certainly he had no such evil intentions towards the Saint as people commonly suppose ! 
-- Now , my Lord Count , taste the wine ! '' 
The Count did so , and confirmed what the tutor had said . 
Indeed he took a long draught , instead of a taste , from the bottle . 
They renewed their witticisms and merriment over the relic , which , according to them , was decidedly the finest in all the collection . 
They wished heartily , that they could have a whole cellar of such rarities , etc. etc. . 
I heard all this in silence , with my head sunk down , and with eyes fixed on the ground . 
The badinage of the strangers was to me , in my present mood of mind , abhorrent and tormenting . 
In vain did they urge me to taste the wine of St Anthony ! 
I resolutely refused , and at last was allowed to shut up the bottle , well corked , into its proper receptacle . 
Thus , then , I had for once triumphed and escaped . 
The strangers , indeed , would have endeavoured to prove , that this trial of the wine was but a venial transgression ; but even of venial transgressions , I had at that time a proper abhorrence , knowing that they formed the sure and ample foundation for mortal sins . 
The strangers left the monastery . 
But , as I sat alone in my cell , I could not disguise from myself , or deny , that I felt a certain cheerfulness of mind , and exhilaration of spirit . 
It was obvious that the powerful and spirituous odour of the wine had revived me . 
No trace or symptom of the bad effects of which Cyrillus had spoken did I experience . 
On the contrary , an influence the most opposite became decidedly manifest . 
* * * * * The more that I now meditated on the legend of St. Anthony , and the more livelily that I called to mind the words of the tutor , the more certain did it appear to me , that the explanations of the latter were correct and well-founded . 
Then , first , with the rapidity and vehemence of lightning , the thought rushed through me , that on that unhappy day , when the horrible vision broke the thread of my discourse , I too had been on the point of interpreting the legend of St Anthony in the same manner as an ingenious allegory . 
With this thought another soon was united , which filled my mind so completely , that every other consideration almost faded away . 
`` How , '' said I to myself , `` if this extraordinary and odoriferous drink actually possessed the secret efficacy of restoring thy strength , and rekindling that intellectual fire which has been so frightfully extinguished ? 
What , if already some mysterious relationship of thy spirit , with the mystical powers contained in that bottle , has been plainly indicated , and even proved , if it were no more than by this , -- that the very same odour which stunned and distracted the weakly Cyrillus , has , on thee , only produced the most beneficial effects ? '' 
* * * * * When already I had at various times even resolved to follow the counsel of the strangers , and was in the act of walking through the church towards the reliquary room , I perceived an inward , and , to myself , inexplicable resistance , which held me back . 
Nay , once , when on the very point of unlocking the cabinet , it seemed to me as if I beheld in the powerful alto relievo of the antique carvings on the pannel , the horrible countenance of the painter , with his fixed glaring eyes , of which the intolerable expression still penetrated through my heart , and vehemently seized by a supernatural horror , I fled from the room , in order to prostrate myself at one of the altars in the church , and repent of my temerity ! 
But , notwithstanding all my endeavours , the same thought continued to persecute me , that only by participation in that miraculous wine could my now sunk spirit be refreshed and restored . 
The behaviour of the Prior and the monks , who treated me with the most mortifying , however well intended , kindness , as a person disordered in intellect , brought me to absolute despair ; and as Leonardus granted me a dispensation from the usual devotional exercises , in order that I might completely recover my strength , I had more time for reflection . 
In the course of one long sleepless night , persecuted and tortured by my inward sense of degradation , I resolved that I would venture all things , even to death , and the eternal destruction of my soul , in order to regain the station that I had lost . 
I was , in short , determined to obtain my former powers of mind , or to perish in the attempt . 
I rose from bed , and glided like a ghost through the great aisle of the church towards the reliquary chamber . 
I had my lamp with me , which I lighted at the altar of the Virgin . 
Illuminated by the glimmering radiance , the sacred portraits of the Saints seemed to move and start into life . 
Methought they looked down upon me with an aspect of compassion . 
In the hollow murmurs of the night wind , which poured in through the high and partly broken windows of the choir , I heard melancholy warning voices . 
Among others , I distinguished that of my mother . 
Though from a far distance , these words were clearly audible : -- `` Medardus ! 
Son Medardus ! 
What wouldst thou do ? 
-- Renounce , oh ! 
renounce , ere it is too late , this fearful undertaking ! '' 
I disregarded them all , however : for my courage was wound up by despair . 
As I came into the ghastly old chamber of relics , all was silent and tranquil . 
I walked with rapid and resolved steps across the floor , so that my lamp was almost extinguished . 
I unlocked the cabinet -- I seized the box -- opened it -- beheld the bottle -- drew the cork -- and in an instant had swallowed a deep and powerful draught ! 
It seemed immediately as if fire streamed through my veins , and filled me with a sensation of indescribable delight ! 
I drank once more , -LRB- but sparingly , -RRB- and the raptures of a new and glorious life began at once to dawn on my perception . 
In haste , as if from dread of being overlooked , I locked up the empty box into the cabinet , and rapidly fled with the inestimable treasure into my cell , where I placed it carefully in my secretaire . 
At that moment , while turning over my papers , the identical small key fell into my hands , which formerly , in order to escape from temptation , I had separated from the rest ; and yet , notwithstanding my precaution , I had found , both on this occasion , and at the time when the strangers were with me , the means of unlocking the cabinet ! 
I examined my bunch of keys , and found among them one strangely shaped and unknown , with which I had now , and without , in my distraction , remarking it , made my way to the relic . 
Hereupon I shuddered involuntarily ; but my terror soon wore away . 
As if on the transparent medium of a phantasmagorie , one bright and smiling image chased another before the mind 's eye -- before that mind , which now , for the first time , seemed to be awoke from deep sleep ; yet the visions of my youth awoke not -- I thought not of the past ; but , under the feverish excitement of newly acquired energy , dwelt only -LRB- if thought could be said to dwell where all was restless confusion -RRB- on the brilliant prospects which awaited me for the future . 
It was ambition that possessed me . 
I should have once more the power of obtaining that noblest of earthly supremacies , an empire over the minds of others ! 
I had no sleep nor rest through the night , but eagerly waited till the brightness of the next morning beamed through the high window into my cell , when I hastened down into the monastery gardens to bask in the warm splendour of the rising sun , which now ascended fieryly , and glowing red from behind the mountains . 
Leonardus and the brethren directly remarked the change which had taken place in my outward appearance and behaviour . 
Instead of being , as formerly , reserved and wrapt up within myself , without uttering a word , I was now become once more lively and cheerful , and spoke again in the same tone with which I used to address the assembled multitudes , and with the fervid eloquence which used to be peculiarly my own . 
On being at last left alone with Leonardus , he looked stedfastly at me for a long space , as if he would read my inmost thoughts . 
Then , while a slight ironical smile coursed over his features , he said only , `` Brother Medardus has had some new vision perhaps -- has drawn fresh energy and new life from supernatural revelations ? '' 
The irony with which the virtuous , the prudent , and immaculate , treat a fallen brother , is seldom beneficial in its influence ; seldom indeed is it really consistent with virtue . 
It commonly proceeds either from selfish coldness of heart , -LRB- this utter antithesis of christian charity , -RRB- or from that sort of worldly knowledge , which consists in believing that no one is to be trusted . 
Hanging down my head , and with eyes fixed on the ground , I stood without uttering a word , and as for Leonardus , he departed and left me to my own contemplations . 
I had already been but too much afraid that the state of excitement produced by wine could not possibly continue long , but , on the contrary , might , to my utter grief and discomfiture , draw after it a state of yet more miserable weakness than that which I had already experienced . 
It was not so , however ; with the perfect recovery of my health , I experienced a degree even of long-lost youthful courage . 
I felt once more that restless and vehement striving after the highest and most extended sphere of action , which the convent could allow to me . 
Accordingly , I insisted on being allowed to preach again on the next holiday , which after some consideration was granted to me . 
Shortly before mounting the pulpit , I allowed myself another draught of the miraculous wine . 
The effects were even beyond my most sanguine expectations . 
Never had I spoken more ardently , impressively , or with greater onction , than on this day . 
My audience , as before , were confounded , and the rumour of my complete recovery was with inconceivable rapidity spread abroad . 
Henceforward the church was regularly crowded , as on the first weeks of my former celebrity ; but the more that I gained the applause of the people , the more serious and reserved did Leonardus appear , so that I began at last with my whole soul to hate him . 
My object , in acquiring an ascendancy over the multitude , was now fully attained ; but in all other respects , my mind was disappointed , disquieted , and gloomy . 
In the friendship of my brethren I had lost all confidence . 
As for Leonardus , I believed that he was wholly actuated by selfish pride , and mean-spirited envy . 
* * * * * The grand festival of St Bernard drew near , and I burned with impatience to let my light shine in its fullest lustre before the Lady Abbess ; on which account , I begged the Prior to form his arrangements in such a manner , that I might be appointed on that day to preach in the Cistertian Convent . 
Leonardus seemed greatly surprised by my request . 
He confessed to me , without hesitation , that he himself had intended to preach in the Cistertian Monastery ; and had already fixed his plans accordingly . 
`` However , '' added he , `` it will no doubt be on this account the more easy for me to comply with your request ; as I can excuse myself , on the plea of illness , and appoint you to attend in my place . '' 
I attempted no apology for the indelicacy of such conduct ; for my mind was possessed wholly by one object . 
The Prior changed his arrangements in the manner he had promised . 
I went to Kreuzberg , and saw my mother and the Princess on the evening preceding the ceremony . 
My thoughts , however , were so much taken up with the discourse that I was to deliver , of which the eloquence was to reach the very climax of excellence , that the meeting with them again made but a very trifling impression upon me . 
I was at the old farm-house , too , in which my early days had passed away like a dream . 
I walked again through the neglected garden , where the trees were now in their fullest luxuriance . 
I stood upon the moss-grown terrace , mounted upon the tottering altan , -LSB- 1 -RSB- on the top of the old tower , at one end , the better to behold the features of the landscape . 
Thence I saw the wanderings of the Saale gleaming amid the pine-tree forests ; the towers of Kreuzberg and Heidebach on the north , and the Thuringian mountains , with the spires of Königswald , in the distance towards the south . 
The sunbeams played and shifted over the landscape ; -- the summer winds breathed fragrance , wafting to my ears the choral anthems from the Monastery , and from the assembled pilgrims . 
The scenes and their influences were the same , but I saw them with unheeding eyes . 
I felt them not ; the days of innocence were already past , and my heart was agitated with earthly passions . 
-LSB- Footnote 1 : Balcony or Platform . -RSB- 
I felt no reproaching pangs of conscience , however , no sadness , nor regret ; I pursued my ONE and only object , elated with the certainty of success . 
* * * * * The report had been duly spread through the town , that I was to preach , instead of the invalid Leonardus ; and , therefore , an audience , perhaps greater than on any former occasion , was drawn together . 
Without having written a single note , and merely arranging mentally into parts the discourse which I was about to deliver , I mounted the pulpit , trusting only to that inspiration which the solemnity of the occasion , the multitude of devout listeners , and the lofty-vaulted church , would of necessity excite in my peculiarly constituted mind . 
In this , indeed , I had not been mistaken . 
Like a fiery lava stream , the torrent of my eloquence flowed irresistibly onward . 
With many real anecdotes out of the life of St Bernard , I interwove ingenious pictures from my own invention , and the most pious applications of his glorious examples to the conduct of ordinary mortals , till in the looks of all , which were universally directed towards me , I read only astonishment and admiration . 
Thus my triumph was complete , and methought the trophy would be more brilliant than any that I had before won . 
* * * * * How anxiously were wound up my anticipations as to the reception which I was to receive from the Princess ! 
How confidently , indeed , did I look for the highest and most unqualified expression of her delight ! 
Nay , it seemed to me , as if she , in her turn , must now pay the homage of respect and deference to that individual , whom , but a few years before , she had filled with awe and unlimited veneration . 
But in these hopes I was miserably disappointed . 
Having desired an interview , I received from her a message , that being attacked by sudden illness , she could not speak with any one . 
This notice was so much the more vexatious , since , according to my proud anticipations , illness should have only inclined her the more to receive consolation and spiritual aid from a being so nobly gifted and so highly inspired . 
As to my mother , she seemed oppressed , and weighed down by a secret and overpowering grief , as to the cause of which , I did not venture to inquire , because the silent admonitions of my own conscience almost convinced me , that I myself had brought this distress upon her ; although the particular means by which it had been produced , I was unable to define . 
She gave me a small billet from the Princess , of which , till my return to the Capuchin Monastery , I was not to break the seal . 
For the rest of the day , -LRB- which was , as usual , spent in feasting and mirth , -RRB- I could think of nothing else , and scarcely was I arrived at home and in my cell , when with the utmost impatience I broke the seal , and read what follows : `` My dear son , -LRB- for still must I address you in this manner , the slightest variation of expression is like an external farewell to those whom we love , -RRB- by your discourse of to-day , you have thrown me into the deepest affliction . 
No longer has your eloquence been that of a heart whose affections are turned towards Heaven . 
Your inspiration was not that which bears the pious soul as if on seraph 's wings aloft , so that it is enabled , in holy rapture and by anticipation , to behold the kingdoms of the blest . 
Alas ! 
the pompous adornments of your discourse , -- your visible effort , only to utter that which might be striking and brilliant , have sufficiently proved to me , that instead of labouring to instruct the community , and to stir up among them pious affections , you have striven only to acquire the approbation and wonder of the light and worldly-minded multitude . 
You have hypocritically counterfeited feelings which have no real existence in your heart . 
Nay , like a profane actor on the stage , you have practised gestures and a studied mien , all for the sake of the same base meed of wonder and applause . 
The demon of deceit has taken possession of you , and , if you do not return into yourself , and renounce the sins by which you are beset , will soon bring you to destruction . 
`` For , sinful , very sinful , are your present actions and conduct ; in so much the more , as , by your vows , you are bound to renounce the world and its vanities . 
May the blessed St Bernard , whom to-day you have so shamefully offended , according to his celestial patience and long sufferance , forgive you , and enlighten your mind , so that you may recover the right path , from which , by stratagems of the devil , you have been thus distracted ; and may he intercede for the salvation of your soul ! 
-- Farewell ! '' 
As if I had been pierced by an hundred fiery daggers , these words of the Princess struck to my very heart ; and , instead of receiving such admonitions gratefully , as a trial of patience and obedience , I burned with rage and resentment . 
Nothing appeared to me more unequivocal , than that the Prior had taken advantage of the overstrained piety -LRB- or methodism -RRB- of the Abbess , and sedulously prejudiced her against me . 
Henceforth I could scarcely bear to look upon him without trembling with indignation . 
Nay , there often came into my mind thoughts of revenge , at which I myself could not help shuddering . 
The reproaches of the Abbess and the Prior were to me , on this account , only the more intolerable , that I was obliged , from the very bottom of my soul , to acknowledge their validity and truth . 
Yet always more and more firmly persisting in my course , and strengthening myself from time to time , with a few drops of the mysterious wine , I went on adorning my sermons with all the arts of rhetoric , and studying theatric gestures and gesticulations . 
Thus I secured always more and more the meed of applause and admiration . 
The beams of the morning sun broke in roseate deep lustre through the painted windows of the church . 
Alone , and lost in deep thought , I sat in the confessional . 
Only the steps of the officiating lay brother , whose duty it was to sweep the church , sounded through the vaulted roof . 
I did not expect any visitors at such an hour ; but suddenly I heard near me a rustling sound ; and , behold ! 
there came a tall , slender , but exquisitely proportioned , figure of a young woman , in a foreign dress , with a long veil over her face , who must have entered at one of the private doors , and was approaching me as if for confession . 
In her movements was indescribable grace -- she drew nearer -- she entered the confessional , and kneeled down . 
Deep sighs , as if involuntarily , were heaved from her bosom . 
It seemed as if , even before she spoke , some irresistible spell of enchantment pervaded the atmosphere , and overpowered me with emotions , such as , till now , I had never experienced . 
How can I describe the tone of her voice , which was wholly new and peculiar ; but which penetrated even into my inmost heart ! 
She began her confession . 
Every word that she uttered rivetted more and more my attention , and ruled , like a supernatural charm , over my feelings . 
She confessed , in the first place , that she cherished a forbidden love , with which she had long struggled in vain ; and this love was so much the more sinful , because holy vows for ever fettered the object of her affection . 
Yet , in this hopeless delirium of her despair , she had many times cursed the bonds , however sacred , which held them thus asunder . 
-- She here faltered -- paused -- then , with a torrent of tears , which almost stifled her utterance , added , `` Thou thyself , Medardus , art the consecrated being whom I so unspeakably love ! '' 
As if in deadly convulsions , all my nerves irresistibly vibrated . 
I was out of myself . 
An impulse , till now never known , almost raged in my bosom . 
A passionate desire to behold her features -- to press her to my heart -- to perish at once in delight and despair -- wholly took possession of me ! 
A moment of pleasure to be purchased by an eternity of pain ! 
She was now silent ; but I heard still the deep heaving of her breath . 
In a kind of wild despair , I violently summoned up all my strength . 
In what words I answered her , I can not now remember , nor durst I look on her as she departed ; but I perceived that she silently rose up , and retired ; while , with the cloth curtains firmly pressed upon my eyelids , I remained fixed , motionless , and almost unconscious , in the confessional . 
* * * * * By good chance , no one else came into the church , and I had an opportunity , therefore , to escape quietly into my cell . 
How completely different all things now appeared to me ! 
How foolish -- how insipid all my former endeavours ! 
I had not seen the countenance of the unknown ; and yet , by the force of my own imagination , her image lived within my heart . 
She looked on me with her mild blue eyes , in which tears were glistening , and from which glances fell into my soul like consuming fire , which no prayer and no penitential exercises any more could extinguish . 
Such penitence , indeed , I did not spare ; but , on the contrary , chastised myself with the knotted cords of our order , till blood streamed from my mangled flesh , that I might , if possible , escape from that eternal destruction by which I was now threatened . 
* * * * * There was an altar in our church dedicated to St Rosalia ; and her picture , admirably painted , was hung over it , representing the Saint at the moment when she suffered martyrdom . 
In this picture , which had never particularly struck me before , I now at once recognised the likeness of my beloved ! 
Even her dress exactly resembled the foreign habit of the unknown ! 
Here , therefore , like a victim of the most horrible insanity , I used to lie , for hours together , prostrate upon the steps of the altar , uttering hideous groans , and even howling in despair , so that the monks were terrified , and fled from me in dismay . 
In more tranquil moments , I used to walk hurriedly up and down the convent garden . 
I beheld her well-known from wandering through the misty fragrant regions of the distant landscape . 
I saw her emerging from the thickets of the dense wood , rising like a naiad from the fountains -- hovering , like some goddess of the olden time , over the flowery meadows . 
Everywhere I beheld her , and lived but for her alone . 
Then I cursed my vows , and my now miserable existence . 
I resolved to go forth into the world , and not to rest until I had discovered her , and purchased happiness , though at the expense of my soul 's eternal weal ! 
At last , however , I succeeded so far , that I could , at least in presence of the Prior and the monks , moderate the ebullitions of my -LRB- to them -RRB- unaccountable delirium . 
I could appear more tranquil ; yet , by this means , my inward agitations were only the more wasting and destructive . 
No slumber , no rest by night or by day ! 
Incessantly persecuted and tormented by one and the same phantom , I passed , especially the night , always in intolerable conflicts . 
I called , severally , on all the Saints ; but not to rescue me from the seductive image by which I was beset -- not to save my soul from eternal misery -- No ! 
but to bestow on me the object of my affections -- to annihilate my vows , and to give me freedom , that I might , without double guilt , fall into the abyss of sin . 
* * * * * At last , I had firmly resolved , that I would make an end of my torments , by a sudden flight from the convent . 
For , by some strange hallucination , nothing more than freedom from my monastic engagements seemed to me necessary to bring the unknown within my arms , and to put an end to the passions by which I was tormented . 
I resolved that , having disguised my appearance sufficiently by cutting off my long beard , and assuming a lay dress , I would linger and wander about in the town till I had found her . 
I never once took into consideration how difficult , nay , how impossible , this would prove , or that , perhaps , having no money , I would not be able to live for a single day beyond the walls of the monastery . 
* * * * * The last day that I intended to spend among the capuchins had now arrived . 
By a lucky chance , I had been able to obtain a genteel dress , like that of an ordinary citizen . 
On the following night , I was resolved to leave the convent , never more to return . 
* * * * * Evening had already closed in , when , suddenly , I received from the Prior a summons to attend him . 
I trembled involuntarily at the message ; for nothing appeared to me more certain , than that he had discovered more or less of my secret plans . 
Leonardus received me with unusual gravity -- nay , with an imposing dignity of demeanour , by which I was quite overawed . 
`` Brother Medardus , '' he began , `` your unreasonable behaviour , which I look upon only as the too powerful ebullition of mental excitement , -LRB- but which excitement you have for a long time , perhaps not with the purest intentions , sought to foster , -RRB- -- this behaviour , I say , has utterly disturbed our community , and torn asunder those peaceful bands by which the society was here united . 
Such conduct operates in the most destructive manner against that cheerfulness and good humour which , till now , I had successfully striven to establish among the monks , as the surest proof and demonstration of a consistent and pious life . 
`` Perhaps , however , some peculiar and unfortunate event during your sojourn among us bears the blame of all this . 
You should , however , have sought consolation from me , as from a friend and father , to whom you might confide all things ; but you have been silent , and I am the less inclined now to trouble you with questions , as the possession of such a secret might , in a great measure , deprive me of that mental freedom and tranquillity , which , at my years , I prize above all earthly treasures . 
`` You have many times , and especially at the altar of St Rosalia , by horrible and extraordinary expressions , which seemed to escape from you in the unconsciousness of delirium , given great scandal , not only to the brethren , but to strangers who happened to be visiting among us . 
Therefore , according to the laws of the monastery , I could punish you severely ; but I shall not do so , since , perhaps , some evil influence , some demon , or , in short , the Arch-fiend himself , against whom you have not sufficiently striven , is the direct cause of your errors ; and I shall only give you up to the guidance of your own conscience , with the injunction to be ardent and faithful in penitence and prayer . 
-- Medardus , I can read deep into thy soul ! 
-- Thou wishest for freedom , and to be abroad in the world . '' 
Leonardus fixed on me his most penetrating glances , which I was quite unable to encounter ; but , on the contrary , felt myself wholly overpowered , and , conscious of my own wicked designs , remained silent . 
`` I understand you , '' said Leonardus , `` and believe , indeed , that this world , if you walk through it piously , may contribute more to your welfare than the lonely life in our convent . 
An occurrence , involving the best interests of our order , renders it necessary to send one of the brethren to Rome -- I have chosen you for this purpose ; and , even to-morrow , you may be provided with the necessary powers and instructions , and set forward on your journey . 
You are so much the better qualified for this expedition , being still young and active , clever in business , and a perfect master of the Italian language . 
`` Betake yourself now to your cell -- pray with fervour for the welfare of your soul . 
I shall meanwhile offer up my prayers for you ; but leave out all corporeal chastisement , which would only weaken you , and render you unfit for the journey . 
At day-break , I shall await you in my chamber . '' 
Like a gleam from Heaven , these words of Leonardus fell upon the darkness of my soul . 
Instead of the hatred which I had been cherishing , the attachment which I had before felt towards him regained its full sway . 
I even burst into tears ; for it appeared to me as if he indeed read my most secret thoughts , and bestowed on me the free liberty of giving myself up to that imperious destiny , which , perhaps , after granting a few moments of delusive pleasure , might precipitate me into an abyss of irremediable destruction . 
Flight and secrecy were now become wholly needless . 
I could openly leave the convent , and freely give myself up to my own plans of following that being , without whom there could be for me no happiness upon earth , and whom I was resolved , at all rides , to discover . 
The journey to Rome , and the commissions with which I was to be charged , appeared to me only inventions of Leonardus , in order that I might , in a becoming manner , quit the monastery . 
I passed the night , according to his injunctions , in prayer and in preparation for the journey . 
The rest of the miraculous wine I put into a basket-bottle , in order to guard it as a precious cordial , and afterwards , going to the relic room , deposited the empty flask in the cabinet . 
It was not without astonishment that when , on the following day , I waited on the Prior , I perceived , from his diffuse and serious instructions , that there was a real cause for my being sent to Rome , and that the dispatches to which he had alluded were of considerable weight and importance . 
The reflection , therefore , fell heavily on my conscience , that , after receiving these credentials , I should yet be determined , from the moment that I left the convent , to give myself wholly up to my own impulses , without the slightest regard to any duty whatever . 
The thoughts , however , of her -- the mistress of my soul -- failed not to encourage me again , and I resolved to remain faithful to my own plans . 
The brethren soon after assembled together ; and my leave-taking of them , and especially of the Prior Leonardus , filled me with the deepest melancholy . 
At last , the convent gates closed behind me , and I was equipped for my journey into a far distant land . 
I had walked for nearly an hour , and had now come to a rising ground . 
I looked back to have a last prospect of the convent and the town , whose well-known outlines were already become obscured by distance , and by the white masses of vapour that yet lingered in the valley . 
But on the eminence to which I had arrived , the fresh morning breezes awoke , and played coolly on my brows . 
Methought I heard music in the air . 
It was the pious hymns of the monks that were yet borne up towards me , as if to express once more their parting blessing and long farewell . 
Involuntarily I joined in the anthem , and lingered on the spot , unwilling to break a train of intricate associations , which it would require volumes to analyse and develope . 
But now the sun rose in full glory over the towers of Königswald . 
The glossy foliage of the trees , already tinged by the first hues of autumn , shone in his dazzling golden light . 
There was pleasure even in the rustling sound of the dew-drops that fell like showers of diamonds , amid the myriads of insects that danced hummingly through the stilly air of the sheltering thickets . 
The birds , too , were awake , and fluttered , singing and rejoicing in amorous play , through the woods . 
To crown all , it was a holiday , and there came a religious procession of peasant lads and girls , in their best attire , up the hill side . 
Never had I before enjoyed such a mood of mind . 
I seemed to myself wholly metamorphosed ; and as if inspired by some newly awoke energies , I strode rapidly down the opposite side of the hill . 
To the first bauer whom I happened to meet , I put the question , whether he knew the place where , according to the route that had been given to me , I was first to pass the night ; and he described to me very accurately a footpath leading off from the high road , and winding through the mountains , by which I should reach more rapidly than by any other course , the place of my destination . 
I had parted with the Bauer , and had walked on for a considerable space in complete solitude , when , for the first time since my setting out , the thoughts occurred to me of the unknown beauty , and my fantastical plan of going in search of her . 
But , as if by some new and supernatural influence , her image had now vanished almost quite away ; so that it was with difficulty I could trace the pale disfigured lineaments . 
The more that I laboured to retain this apparition firmly in my remembrance , the more fallaciously it melted , as if into vapour , from my sight ; only my extravagant behaviour in the convent , after that mysterious adventure , remained fresh in my recollection . 
It was now even to myself inconceivable with what patience the Prior had borne with all this ; and how , instead of inflicting the punishment I so justly deserved , he had sent me forth into the world . 
I soon became convinced , that the visit of the unknown beauty had been nothing more nor less than a vision , the consequence of too stedfast application . 
Instead of imputing this , as I would formerly have done , to any direct interference of the devil , I ascribed it to the natural deception of my own disordered senses . 
Nay , the circumstance of the stranger being dressed exactly like St Rosalia , seemed to prove , that the animated and excellent picture of that saint , which , in an oblique direction , I could behold from the confessional , had a great share in producing my delusion . 
Deeply did I admire the wisdom of the Prior , who had chosen the only proper means for my recovery ; for , shut up within the convent walls , always brooding over my own gloomy thoughts , and surrounded ever by the same objects , I must irretrievably have fallen into utter madness . 
Becoming always more reconciled to the rational conclusion , that I had but dreamed , I could scarcely help laughing at myself ; nay , with a levity which before had been most remote from my character , I made a jest of my own supposition , that a female saint had fallen in love with me ; whereupon I recollected also , with equal merriment , that I had once imagined myself to be transformed into St Anthony . 
* * * * * One morning , -LRB- it was after I had been already several days wandering amid the mountains , -RRB- I found myself amid bold , frightfully piled up masses of rock , and was obliged to proceed by narrow , dangerous footpaths , beneath which the mountain rivulets roared and foamed in their contracted ravines . 
The path became always more lonely , wild , and arduous . 
The autumnal sun -LRB- it was in September -RRB- rose high in heaven , and burned upon my uncovered head . 
I panted for thirst , for no spring was near , and I could not reach the torrents , though their voice was audible ; moreover , there was yet no sign of my approach to the village , which had been marked for my next resting place . 
At last , quite exhausted , I sat down upon a mass of rocks , and could not resist taking a draught from my basket-bottle , notwithstanding that I wished to reserve as much as possible of the extraordinary liquor . 
I felt instantly the mantling glow of quickened circulation in every vein , and energetic bracing of every fibre , while , refreshed and strengthened , I boldly marched forward , in order to gain the appointed station , which now could not be far distant . 
The dark pine-tree woods became always more and more dense , and the ground more steep and uneven . 
Suddenly I heard near me a rustling in the thickets , and then a horse neighed aloud , which was there bound to a tree . 
I advanced some steps farther , as the path guided me onwards , till , almost petrified with terror , I suddenly found myself on the verge of a tremendous precipice , beyond which the river , which I have already mentioned , was thundering and foaming at an immeasurable distance below . 
With astonishment , too , I beheld , on a projecting point of rock which jutted over the chasm , what appeared to me the figure of a man . 
At first , I suspected some new delusion ; but , recovering in some degree from my fear , I ventured nearer , and perceived a young man in uniform , on the very outermost point of the rocky cliff . 
His sabre , his hat , with a high plume of feathers , and a portefeuille , lay beside him ; -- with half his body hanging over the abyss , he seemed to be asleep , and always to sink down lower and lower ! 
His fall was inevitable ! 
I ventured nearer . 
Seizing him with one hand , and endeavouring to pull him back , I shouted aloud , `` For God 's sake , sir , awake ! 
For Heaven 's sake , beware ! '' 
-- I said no more ; for , at that moment , starting from his sleep , and at the same moment losing his equilibrium , he fell down into the cataract ! 
His mangled form must have dashed from point to point of the rocks in his descent . 
I heard one piercing yell of agony , which echoed through the immeasurable abyss , from which at last only a hollow moaning arose , which soon also died away . 
Struck with unutterable horror , I stood silent and motionless . 
At last , by a momentary impulse , I seized the hat , the sword , the portefeuille , and wished to withdraw myself as quickly as possible from the fatal spot . 
Now , however , I observed a young man dressed as a chasseur emerge from the wood , and coming forward to meet me . 
At first , he looked at me earnestly and scrutinizingly -- then , all at once , broke out into immoderate laughter ; whereat an ice-cold shuddering vibrated through all my frame . '' 
Sapperment ! 
my Lord Count , '' said the youth , `` your masquerade is indeed admirable and complete ; and if the Lady Baroness were not apprized before hand , I question if even she would recognize you in this disguise . 
-- But what have you done with the uniform , my lord ? '' 
`` As for that , '' replied I , `` I threw it down the rocks into the water . '' 
-- Yet these words were not mine ! 
I only gave utterance , involuntarily and almost unconsciously , to expressions , which , by means of some supernatural influence , rose up within me . 
I stood afterwards silent , and absorbed in thought , with my staring eyes always turned to the rocks , as if from thence the mangled frame of the unfortunate Count would ascend to bear witness against me . 
My conscience accused me as his murderer ; but , though thus unnerved , I continued to hold the hat , the sword , and the portefeuille , convulsively firm in my grasp . 
`` Now , my lord , '' resumed the chasseur , `` I shall ride on by the carriage road to the village , where I shall keep myself incognito in the small house to the left-hand side of the gate . 
Of course , you will now walk down to the castle , where you are probably expected by this time . 
Your hat and sword I shall take with me . '' 
I gave them to him accordingly . 
-- `` Now , farewell , my lord , '' added the youth ; `` much pleasure attend you in the castle ! '' 
Hereupon , whistling and singing , he vanished away into the woods . 
I heard him afterwards untie the horse , that was there bound to a tree , and ride off . 
When I had recovered myself in some measure from my confusion , and reflected on the adventure , I was obliged to confess , that I had become wholly the victim of chance or destiny , which had at once thrown me into the most extraordinary circumstances . 
It was quite obvious , that an exact resemblance of my face and figure with those of the unfortunate Count , had deceived the chasseur ; and that his master must have chosen the dress of a capuchin , in order to carry on some adventure in the castle , of which the completion had now devolved upon me ! 
Death had overtaken him , and at the same moment a wonderful fatality had forced me into his place . 
An inward irresistible impulse to act the part of the deceased Count , overpowered every doubt , and stunned the warning voice of conscience , which accused me of murder now , and of shameless intended crimes yet to come ! 
I now opened the portefeuille . 
Letters , money , and bank-bills , to a considerable amount , fell into my hands . 
I wished to go through the papers , one by one , in order that I might be aware of the late Count 's situation . 
But my internal disquietude , the confusion of a thousand strange ideas , which crowded through my brain , did not admit of this . 
After walking a few paces , I again stood still . 
I seated myself on a rock , and endeavoured to force myself into a quieter mood of mind . 
I saw the danger of stepping , thus wholly unprepared , into a circle of people , of whom I knew nothing . 
Then suddenly I heard a sound of hunting horns through the wood , and voices shouting and rejoicing , which came always nearer and nearer . 
My heart beat with violence -- my breath faltered . 
-- Now , indeed , a new life , a new world , were about to be opened upon me ! 
I turned into a small , narrow footpath , which led me down a steep declivity . 
On stepping out of the thicket , I beheld an extensive , nobly built castle , lying beneath me in the valley . 
There , of course , was the intended scene of the adventure which the late Count had in contemplation , and I walked courageously onwards . 
I soon found myself in the finely kept walks of the park , by which the castle was surrounded . 
At last , in a dark side allée , in a kind of berçeau , I saw two male figures , of whom one was in the dress of a lay monk . 
They came nearer , but were engaged in deep discourse , and never once observed me . 
The lay monk was a young man , on whose features lay the death-like paleness of a deeply corroding and inward grief . 
Of the other I could only say , that he was plainly , but genteelly dressed , and was considerably advanced in years . 
They seated themselves on a stone bench , with their backs turned towards me . 
I could understand every word that they said . 
`` Hermogen , '' said the old man , `` by this obstinate silence , you bring your nearest friends to utter despair . 
Your dark melancholy increases ; your youthful strength is withered . 
This extravagant resolution of becoming a monk , ruins all your father 's hopes and wishes . 
Yet he would willingly give up the hopes that he had formed , if , from youth onwards , you had shewn any real tendency of character to loneliness and monachism . 
In such case , he certainly would not struggle against the fate that hung over him and you . 
`` But the sudden and violent change in your whole disposition , has proved only too plainly , that some concealed and unfortunate event -- some mysterious adventure , at which we can not guess , is the cause of your melancholy ; which cause , however remote , still continues to exercise over you the same destructive influence . 
`` Your mind in former days was invariably cheerful , buoyant , and disengaged . 
What , then , can all at once have rendered you so misanthropical , that you should now suppose there can not be in the breast of any living mortal , counsel or consolation for your afflictions ? 
-- You are silent -- you stare only with your eyes fixed on vacancy . 
`` Hermogen , you once not only respected , but loved your father . 
If it has now become impossible for you to open your heart , and to have confidence in him , yet , at least , do not torment him by the daily sight of this dress , which announces only your perseverance in the most inimical and fantastic resolutions . 
I conjure you , Hermogen , to lay aside this hateful garb . 
Believe me , there lies in such outward things , more consequence than is usually ascribed to them . 
Surely you will not misunderstand , or suspect me of levity , when I remind you of the effect produced by dress on an actor . 
On assuming the costume of any character , he experiences in himself a corresponding change of feelings . 
Are you not yourself of opinion , that if these detestable long garments did not come in your way to confine you , you would be able to walk and run -- nay , to skip , jump , and dance , just as readily and lightly as before ? 
The gleam and glitter of the bright dazzling epaulet , which formerly shone upon your shoulders , might again reflect upon your pale cheeks their wonted colour ; and the clang of your military accoutrements would sound like cheering music in the ears of your noble horse , who would come neighing and prancing with joy to meet you , bending his neck proudly before his beloved master . 
`` Rouse yourself , then , Baron ! 
-- Away with these black robes , which , to tell the truth , are by no means becoming . 
-- Say , shall Frederick now run and search out your uniform ? '' 
The old man rose up as if to go . 
The youth detained him , and , evidently quite overpowered by emotion , fell into his arms . 
-- `` Alas ! 
Reinhold , '' said he , `` you torment me indeed inexpressibly . 
The more that you endeavour in this manner to awaken within me those chords which formerly sounded harmoniously , the more forcibly I feel how my relentless fate , as with an iron hand , has seized upon me , and crushed my whole frame , mental and bodily ; so that , like a broken lute , I must either be silent , or respond in discord . '' 
`` These , Baron , '' said Reinhold , `` are but your own delusions . 
You speak of some horrible and monstrous destiny which tyrannizes over you ; but as to wherein or how this destiny exists , you are invariably silent . 
Yet , be that as it may , a young man like you , endowed both with mental energy , and courage which is the natural result of animal spirits , should be able to arm himself against those demons -- those invisible foes , with their iron fangs , of whom you so often speak . 
As if aided by divine inspiration , he should exalt himself above that destiny , which would otherwise crush him into the earth ; and , cherishing within his own heart the principles of life , wing his way above the petty torments of this world . 
Indeed , I can scarcely imagine to myself any circumstances that will not finally yield to a patient , reasonable , and yet energetic inward volition . '' 
Hereupon Hermogen drew himself one step backwards , and fixing on the old man , a dark , gloomy look , almost with an expression of repressed rage , which was truly frightful : -- `` Know , then , '' said he , `` that I myself am the destiny -- the demon , as thou sayest , by whom I am persecuted and destroyed , that my conscience is loaded with guilt , nay , with the stain of a shameful , infamous , and mortal crime , which I thus endeavour to expiate in misery and in despair ! 
-- Therefore , I beseech you , be compassionate , and implore , too , my father 's consent , that he may allow me to go into a monastery ! '' 
`` Hermogen , '' said the old man , `` you are now in a situation peculiar to those who are disordered both in body and in mind -- you , therefore , can not judge for yourself ; and , in short , you should , on no account , go from hence . 
Besides , in a few days the Baroness will return home with Aurelia , and you must of necessity stay to see them . '' 
A smile of bitter mockery coursed over the young man 's features . 
He even laughed aloud , and cried , in a voice at which my heart recoiled and shuddered , '' Must stay ? 
-- Must therefore stay ? 
-- Ay , truly , old man , thou art in the right -- I must indeed stay ; and my penitence will be here far more frightful than in the dreariest cloister . '' 
With these words , he broke away , and disappeared in the thicket , leaving the old man motionless , and apparently lost in the most gloomy reflections . '' 
Gelobt sey Jesu Christus ! '' 
said I , pronouncing the conventual salutation in my best manner , and advancing towards him . 
He started , looked at me with surprise , and then seemed to call something to mind that he already knew , but could not clearly remember . 
At last , `` Reverend sir , '' said he , `` it was perhaps to your coming that the Baroness alluded in a letter received by us four days ago ; and you are sent hither for the benefit and consolation of this afflicted family . '' 
I answered without hesitation in the affirmative , and the stranger -LRB- or Reinhold , as he has been styled -RRB- then immediately recovered that cheerfulness which seemed natural to his disposition . 
We walked on together through a very beautiful park , and came at last to a boskett near the castle , from whence there was a magnificent prospect towards the mountains . 
On his giving orders to a servant , who just then appeared near us , a plentiful dejeuner a-la-fourchette was immediately served up , with a bottle of excellent French wine . 
On joining glasses , and looking at each other , it appeared to me as if Reinhold watched me with great attention , and seemed labouring with some obscure reminiscence . 
At last he broke out -- `` Good Heaven ! 
reverend sir , I must be grossly deceiving myself if you are not Brother Medardus , from the capuchin convent in Königswald : And yet , how is this possible ? 
But , certainly , there can be no doubt ! 
-- Speak only , I beg of you , and clear up this mystery . '' 
As if struck to the earth by lightning , I was , by these words of Reinhold , quite paralyzed and overpowered . 
I saw myself at once discovered , unmasked -- accused , perhaps , as a murderer ! 
Despair gave me strength . 
Life and death depended on that moment . 
`` I am indeed Brother Medardus , from the capuchin convent in Königswald , '' said I ; `` and am now employed on a diplomatic mission as legate from our monastery to Rome . '' 
These words I uttered with all the quiet and composure which I was able to counterfeit . 
`` Perhaps , then , '' said Reinhold , `` it is only chance that brought you hither . 
You may have wandered from the high road . 
Or , if otherwise , how could it happen that the Baroness became acquainted with you , and sent you hither ? '' 
Without a moment 's reflection , but once more only repeating words which seemed by some strange voice to be whispered into my ears , I replied , `` On my journey I became acquainted with the Baroness 's confessor , and , at his request , I agreed to come hither . '' 
`` True , '' said Reinhold ; `` now I remember that the Baroness indeed wrote somewhat to this effect : Well , Heaven be praised that it is so , and that you have been induced to come to our assistance . 
I was , by chance , some years ago , in Königswald , and heard one of your admirable discourses , in which you seemed to be indeed gifted with divine inspiration . 
To your piety , your unaffected eloquence , your true calling to be the champion of souls otherwise lost , I can safely trust for the fulfilment of that , which , to all of us , would have been impossible . 
`` I consider myself particularly fortunate , however , in having met you before you were introduced to the Baron , and will take advantage of this opportunity to make you acquainted with the circumstances of the family , and to be perfectly sincere and undisguised , as is fitting before a man of your sanctity and dignified character . 
It is indeed requisite , that , in order to give the proper tendency and guidance to your endeavours , you should receive from me hints on many points , on which -LRB- for other reasons -RRB- I would rather have been silent . 
I shall endeavour , however , to go through the whole in as few words as possible . 
`` With the Baron I was brought up from infancy . 
A certain similarity of temper made us like brothers , and annihilated those barriers which difference of birth would otherwise have raised up betwixt us . 
I was never absent from him ; and , accordingly , after his father 's death , and when he had finished his academical studies , he directly appointed me steward over his paternal property in these mountains . 
`` I continued still to be his most intimate friend and companion ; nor were the most secret occurrences and circumstances of the house concealed from me . 
The late Baron had wished for his son 's connection by marriage with an Italian family , whom he had highly respected ; and my patron so much the more readily fulfilled his father 's wishes , as he found himself irresistibly attracted to the young lady , who was by nature beautiful , and by education highly accomplished . 
`` Seldom , in truth , are the wishes and plans of parents either so judiciously framed , or so prosperously fulfilled , as in this instance . 
The young couple seemed to have been born for each other , -- and of this happy marriage , a son and daughter , Hermogen and Aurelia , were the offspring . 
`` For the most part , we spent our winters in the town ; but when , soon after the birth of Aurelia , the Baroness began to decline in health , we remained there for the summer also , as she indispensably required the assistance of physicians . 
She died just as , on the approach of another spring , her visible amendment had filled the Baron with the most delightful hopes . 
`` We then fled to the country , and there only time could meliorate the deep-consuming grief by which he had become wholly possessed . 
Hermogen , meanwhile , grew up to be a fine youth , and Aurelia became every day more and more the image of her mother . 
The careful education of these children was our daily task and delight . 
Hermogen shewed a decided turn for the military life , and this constrained the Baron to send him into town , in order that he might begin his career there under the care of our old friend the governor of the fort . 
`` For the first time , three years ago , we again spent a winter together , as in old times , at the residenz ; partly in order that the Baron might be near his son , and partly that he might visit his old acquaintances , who had constantly beset him with letters complaining of his absence . 
`` Universal attention was at that time excited by the appearance of a niece of the governor 's , who had come hither out of the neighbouring residenz of R -- . 
She was an orphan , and had betaken herself to her uncle 's house for protection ; though there she had a whole wing of the castle to herself , had also her own private economie , and was in the habit of assembling the beau monde around her . 
`` Without describing Mademoiselle Euphemia too minutely , -LRB- which is the more needless , as you , reverend sir , will soon see her , and judge for yourself , -RRB- suffice it to say , that in all that she said or did , there was an indescribable grace , refinement , and self-possession , by which the natural charms of her beauty were heightened to an almost irresistible degree . 
`` Wherever she appeared , all that were around her seemed to be animated with new spirit ; and every one , with the most glowing enthusiasm , paid her homage . 
Indeed the more insignificant and lifeless characters appeared in her company to be carried quite out of themselves , and to be so completely warmed with fire not their own , that , as if inspired , they revelled in enjoyments , of which till then they had never been capable . 
`` Of course , there was no want of lovers , who daily paid their court to this new divinity . 
They were numerous and indefatigable in their attentions . 
But meanwhile , one could never with certainty say , that she distinguished either this or that individual from his competitors ; but , on the contrary , with a kind of playful , yet wicked irony , which provoked without giving absolute offence , she contrived to involve them all in a perplexing , but indissoluble , kind of thraldom . 
They moved about her , completely under subjection , as if within the limits of some enchanted circle . 
`` On the Baron , this new Circe had gradually and imperceptibly made a wonderful impression . 
Immediately on his first appearance , she shewed to him a degree of attention , which appeared to be the result of youthful , almost childish , veneration . 
In conversation afterwards , she displayed her usual skill , proving herself -LRB- in his estimation at least -RRB- to be possessed of the most cultivated understanding and the deepest sensibility , such as , till now , he had scarcely ever found among women . 
`` With indescribable delicacy , she sought for and obtained Aurelia 's friendship , and took such a warm interest in her fate , that by degrees she began to perform for her all the duties of her untimely lost mother . 
In brilliant circles especially , she knew how to assist the modest , inexperienced girl ; and , without being observed , to set off Aurelia 's natural good sense and talents to such advantage , that the latter became every day more distinguished , admired , and sought after . 
