What means the drum , that deeply rolls ? 
What means this warlike cry ? 
I 'll to the casement , tho ' my soul 's Misgivings tell me why . 
L. UHLAND . 
After a succession of gloomy days the imperial town of Ulm , on the 12th of March 1519 , at length was enlivened by a fine bright morning . 
Mists from the Danube , which at such a season generally hung heavily over the town , had on this occasion been dispelled before noon by the sun , and as it rose , the view of the plain on the opposite side of the river became gradually clearer and more extended . 
The narrow , cold streets , inclosed by their dark gable-ended houses , were also lighted up more bright than usual , and shone with a brilliancy and cheerfulness which accorded well with the festive appearance of the town on that day . 
The main street , called the Herdbrucker street , leading from the Danube gate to the town hall , was on this morning thronged with people , whose heads were so closely packed on either side against the houses -LRB- like stones of a wall -RRB- that they left but a narrow passage through the middle . 
A hollow murmur , the indication of great expectation , which issued from the crowd , was only occasionally interrupted by a loud laugh , caused by the severity of the city guard , celebrated for its strictness and its antiquity , who , using their long halberds , pushed back with appropriate rudeness whoever was unfortunate enough to be squeezed out of his place into the middle of the street ; or perchance by some wag , who , by way of joke , would exclaim , `` Here they come , here they come ! '' 
causing disappointment to the anxious assemblage of spectators . 
The throng was still more dense in the spot where the termination of the Herdbrucker street enters the square before the town hall . 
It was there that the different trades were posted ; the guild of boatmen , with their masters at their head , the weavers , the carpenters , the brewers , all displaying their banners and the emblems of their vocation , were drawn up , clad in their Sunday dresses and well armed . 
But if the multitude in the streets presented a jovial holiday spectacle , much more was that the case in the lofty surrounding houses . 
Well dressed women and young girls crowded the windows , which were adorned with many-coloured carpets and floating drapery , giving to the whole an appearance of beautiful paintings set in splendid frames . 
The corner bow-window of the house of Hans von Besserer presented the greatest attraction . 
Within it stood two young maidens , each strikingly conspicuous by their uncommon beauty , but so much differing in looks , height , and dress , that whoever remarked them from the street , might remain some time in doubt to which to give the preference . 
Both appeared to be under eighteen years of age : the tallest of the two was delicately made ; rich auburn hair encircled a fine open forehead , the vaulted arch of her dark eyebrows , the placid blue eye , the delicately turned mouth , the soft colour of her cheek , were unrivalled . 
She altogether formed a picture , which , among the beauties of the present day , would not have failed to be distinguished ; but in those times , when a higher colour , upon a face partaking of the form of an apple , was more admired , it was principally by her graceful demeanor that she drew attention . 
The other , smaller , and possessing in a greater degree the attractive qualities suited to the times , was one of those thoughtless , merry beings , who are conscious that they possess the power of pleasing . 
Her brilliant fair hair , according to the fashion of the ladles of Ulm , fell in long braids behind and in ringlets in front , and was partly covered by a neat white cap , full of small tasteful plaits . 
Her round fresh face was ever in motion : her lively eyes , still more restless , wandered through the crowd below ; and her laughing mouth , exhibiting at every moment a set of beautiful teeth , evidently showed that objects were not wanting , among the numerous groups and figures of adventurers , upon which to exercise the playfulness of her wit . 
Behind them stood a large , broad-shouldered , elderly man , with deep , stern features , thick eyebrows , long thin beard , already sprinkled with grey hairs , and his dress so entirely black , that its hue contrasted strangely with the rich and lively colours of those about him . 
He wore a thoughtful , almost a sorrowful look , scarcely ever relaxing into one more cheerful , excepting when a momentary gleam of kindness would shoot through his countenance , like a flash of lightning , at some happy remark of the merry fair one . 
This group , so varied in colours and dress as well as in character , attracted much of the attention of the bystanders immediately beneath them . 
Many an eye gazed upon the pretty girls , whose fascinating appearance helped to beguile the time of the idle and staring multitude , now growing impatient to witness the sight for which they were assembled . 
The time was now approaching the hour of noon . 
The crowd became restless at the long delay , and manifested an increased impatience , by pressing and pushing upon each other in rather a turbulent manner ; whilst here and there , tired of standing , several of the more sober members of the trades seated themselves on the ground . 
When , however , the report of three guns , fired from the fort on the hill on the furthermost side of the river , and the sound of the cathedral bells in deep tones began to echo over the town , order was speedily restored throughout the anxious ranks . 
`` They are coming , Bertha , they are coming ! '' 
said the fair girl in the balcony window , and put her arm around the waist of her companion , as she stretched out her neck to the utmost . 
The house of the Herrn von Besserer formed the corner of the forenamed street , having a window on one side of it looking towards the Danube gate , and another on the other side commanding a view of the town hall , by which means the party were in a good position to see the expected sight . 
The space between the two rows of the people was , in the meantime , with difficulty kept sufficiently open by the town guards . 
Anxious stillness now reigned throughout the immense crowd , whilst the deep tolling of the bells alone broke the silence . 
The deadened sound of drums , blended with the shrill clang of trumpets , was shortly after heard , and a long brilliant train of horsemen moved slowly through the gate . 
The appearance of the town drummers and trumpeters , and the mounted body of the sons of the patricians of Ulm , was too much of an everyday occurrence to excite any great sensation on the present occasion ; but when the black and white banners of the town , emblazoned with the imperial eagle , accompanied by flags and standards of all sizes and colours , came floating in the breeze through the gate , the spectators then became sure that the long wished-for moment was arrived . 
The curiosity of our two young beauties in the balcony became doubly excited when they observed the crowd in the lower part of the street respectfully take off their caps . 
Mounted upon a strong bony horse a man approached , whose stately carriage , affable and open countenance , contrasted strangely with a deep stern brow , and whose hair and beard were slightly tinged with grey . 
He wore a hat pointed at the crown , adorned with many feathers , a cuirass over a close-fitted red jacket , and leather buskins slashed with silk , which might have been handsome when new , but by dint of bad weather and hard work had now assumed an uninterrupted dark-brown colour , -- large heavy riding boots came up to his knees ; his only weapon , a singularly large sword , with a long handle , and without basket-guard , completed the figure of the warrior . 
The sole ornament worn by this man was a long gold chain of massive rings , twisted five times around his neck , having a medallion of merit of the same metal attached to it , which hung upon his breast . 
`` Tell me , quickly , uncle , who is that stately man , who at once looks so young and so old ? '' 
said the fair girl , as she turned her head a little towards the man in black standing behind her . 
`` I can tell you , Marie , '' he answered ; `` that is George von Fronsberg , commander of the confederate infantry ; an honourable man , did he but serve a better cause . '' 
`` Keep your remarks to yourself , Mr. Würtemberger , '' she replied , whilst she playfully threatened him with her finger ; `` you know that the maidens of Ulm are staunch confederates . '' 
Her uncle , however , not heeding her reply , proceeded : `` That one on the grey horse is Truchses von Waldburg , second in command . 
He also owes a debt of gratitude to our Würtemberg . 
Behind him come the colonels of the League . 
By heaven ! 
they look like hungry wolves seeking for prey . '' 
`` Oh ! 
what a set of miserable figures , '' remarked Marie to her cousin Bertha , `` they surely are not worth the trouble we have taken of dressing ; but hold , who is that young man in black on the brown horse ? 
just look at his pale countenance , with his fiery black eyes ; on his shield is written , ' I have ventured . ' '' 
`` That is the knight Ulerich von Hutten , '' replied the old man . 
`` May God forgive his calumny against our Duke . 
Children ! 
he is a learned , pious man , but the Duke 's bitterest enemy ; and I say so , for what is true must remain true . 
And there , those are Sickingen 's colours . 
Truly , he is there himself ! 
Look this way , girls ; that is Franz von Sickingen . 
It is said he brings a thousand horsemen into the field ; that is him , with the plain cuirass and red feather . '' 
`` But tell me , uncle , '' asked Marie again , `` which of them is Götz von Berlichingen , of whom cousin Kraft has related so much to us ; he is a powerful man , by all accounts , and has a hand of iron ; does not he ride among the burghers ? '' 
`` Do not name Götz and the burghers in the same breath , '' said the old man , seriously ; `` he holds for Würtemberg . '' 
The greatest part of the procession had , during this conversation , passed by under the windows ; and Marie remarked , with astonishment , the indifference and unconcern with which her relation Bertha viewed it . 
The usual manner of her cousin was thoughtful ; indeed , at times she appeared in a state of absence to all surrounding objects ; but on such a day as this , to be so perfectly insensible to the brilliancy of the passing scene , was , in Marie 's mind , to be guilty almost of impropriety . 
She was just on the point of upbraiding her , when her attention was called to a sudden noise in the street . 
A large , powerful horse was prancing immediately under their window , having probably taken fright at the waving ensigns of the trades . 
The high crest and flowing main of the steed sheltered the rider 's face , and the feathers only of his cap were visible to the spectators at the window ; but the adroitness and ease with which he managed his horse and kept him under command , proved him to be a skilful cavalier . 
In his exertion to quiet him , his light-brown hair had fallen over his face , and as he threw it back , his look fell on the bow-window of the corner house . 
`` Well at last there is a handsome young man , '' whispered Marie to her neighbour , so softly and secretly as if she feared to be overheard by him ; `` and how polite and courteous he is ! 
Look ! 
I really think he has saluted us , without knowing who we are . '' 
Marie 's curiosity was too much excited at the moment to notice the sudden change which her remark had produced on her cousin 's countenance , who , to conceal her embarrassment , feigned to pay no attention to what she said . 
Bertha had hitherto sat unconcerned , viewing the passing procession with apparent cold indifference ; but when she recognised the young cavalier , and returned his salutation with a slight inclination of the head , her cheek was suddenly suffused with a burning blush , her thoughtful eye was animated into an expression in which tender love and fearful anticipation predominated ; and though the smile about her mouth might bespeak joy at the sight of the unexpected apparition , a keen observer could not have failed to discover , that it betrayed somewhat of pain and regret . 
Her accustomed self-possession , however , quickly regained the ascendancy over these conflicting feelings , and thus her merry cousin , whose quick penetration at any other moment would have been startled into surprise at the alteration exhibited on the features of her whom she considered wanting in tender sentiment , lost the opportunity of rallying her upon this occasion . 
Marie , pulling the old man by the cloak , cried , `` Here , quickly , uncle ; tell me who is this with the light-brown scarf trimmed with silver ? 
-- well ? '' 
`` Dear child , '' answered her uncle , `` I have never seen him before . 
Judging from his colours , he is in no particular service , but he , as well as many others , wages war against the Duke my Lord for his own individual pleasure and profit . '' 
`` Ah ! 
there is no getting anything out of you , '' said Marie , and turned away , annoyed at her uncle 's indifference ; `` you can distinguish all the old and learned men more than at a hundred yards off ; but when one asks you a question about a young and polite cavalier , you can tell one nothing . 
And you too , Bertha , you open your eyes upon the procession below as if the host were passing . 
I 'll wager you did not see the handsomest man of all ; and thought only of old Fronsberg , when quite a different set of men rode by . '' 
By the time she had finished these her angry remarks , the principal part of the procession had reached their station before the town hall ; the few remaining cavalry of the league which came up the street possessed little interest for the two damsels . 
When the officers had dismounted and gone into the town-hall for refreshment , and when the members of the trades had been dismissed , the people by degrees began to separate , and then the party in the balcony withdrew also from the window . 
Marie did not appear perfectly pleased . 
Her curiosity was only half satisfied . 
She took care , however , not to let her stern old uncle remark her disappointment ; but when he left the room , she turned to Bertha , who had retired to the window again , and stood there in deep thought . 
`` Well , '' she said , `` after all our anticipated expectations about this procession , there was nothing worth making such a fuss about . 
But I wonder who that handsome young cavalier was ? 
I should like very much to know his name ! 
How very stupid it was of you , Bertha , not to notice him ; did I not push you when he saluted us ? 
Light-brown hair , very long and smooth , -- friendly dark eyes , -- the countenance a little tanned , but handsome , very handsome ! 
Small mustachios on the upper lip . 
No ; I tell you -- but how red you get again all of a sudden , as if two maidens , when they are alone , dare not speak of the pretty mouth of a young man . 
We often converse upon such topics here in Ulm ; but I suppose at your good aunt 's at Tübingen , and your strict father 's in Lichtenstein , such things were never mentioned ; but I see you are dreaming again about something or other , so I must look out for some thorough Ulmer girl when I want to have a little gossip . '' 
Bertha answered only by a smile , which expressed more than she dared to utter ; and Marie , taking a large bunch of keys which hung on the door , hummed a song , and went to prepare for dinner . 
Though she might have been accused of being rather over curious at the momentary appearance of a courteous young cavalier , still that did not make her neglectful of the important duties of a housekeeper . 
She skipped out of the room , and left Bertha to her thoughts , which we also will not disturb , whilst she now recalls to her mind the endearing remembrance at gone-by days , which the appearance of the afore-mentioned young cavalier called up at once from the depth of her faithful heart . 
She dwelt on that time , when a hasty glance from him would cheer the passing hours ; she pondered on those nights when in her retired room , undisturbed by her good aunt , she worked that scarf , whose well-known colours awoke her now as out of a dream . 
We will not at present pause to inquire the reason why , when blushing and with downcast eyes , she asked herself , whether cousin Marie had rightly described the sweet mouth of her beloved ? 
And do n't your heart now burn While hope succeeds to fear ? 
Do n't even youth return To Swabia 's land so dear ? 
J. SCHWAB . 
The reader will have learned from the introductory preface the state of affairs . 
Duke Ulerich of Würtemberg had brought upon himself the bitter hatred of the Swabian League , by the obstinacy with which he braved so many confederated princes and knights , by the furious expression of his rage and threats of revenge , by the boldness with which he alone bid them defiance , and last of all by the sudden military occupation of the imperial town of Reutlingen . 
These were some of the principal circumstances which led to the rupture . 
Others of a more private nature fostered the bloody thoughts and thirst for revenge and plunder of those who made a plea of individual insult the cause of uniting their banners , for the downfall of the Duke and the partition of his possessions . 
The principal officers of the Swabian League were the Duke of Bavaria , whose object was to procure satisfaction for the ill treatment of his sister Sabina , Ulerich 's wife -- the knights of the Huttens to revenge the supposed murder of the cousin of their ancestor -- Dieterich von Spät and his companions to wash out the disgrace of family insult in Würtemberg 's misfortunes -- and to these were added the authorities of the towns and boroughs , who desired to recover Reutlingen again from the occupation of Duke Ulerich 's troops . 
They headed the pompous entry into Ulm we have described in the foregoing pages , and arrived on the same day from Augsburg , where they had assembled . 
War was therefore now inevitable , for it was not to be supposed that they would propose terms of peace to the Duke , after having proceeded thus far . 
But of a much more peaceable and cheerful cast were the ideas of Albert von Sturmfeder , that `` courteous , polite cavalier , '' who had so highly awaken Marie 's curiosity , and whose unexpected appearance had coloured the cheeks of Bertha with so deep a red . 
He scarcely knew himself how he came to take part in this campaign ; for though he was acquainted with the use of arms , yet he had not been trained to them . 
Sprung from a poor but not obscure family of Franconia , he became an orphan at an early age , and was brought up by his father 's brother . 
A learned education began even in those days to be considered an ornament to the nobility , and his uncle , therefore , chose the path of literature for him . 
It is not mentioned whether he made much progress in learning in the university of Tübingen , then in its infancy ; thus much , however , is known , that he took a warmer interest in the daughter of the knight of Lichtenstein , who lived with her aunt in that town of the Muses , than in the lectures of the most celebrated doctors . 
It is also related that she resisted with pertinacious determination the different attacks with which many a young student assailed her heart . 
But although all kinds of man -LSB- oe -RSB- uvres to conquer a hard heart were well understood in those days , -LRB- for the youth of ancient Tübingen had , perhaps , studied their Ovid better than those of the present -RRB- , neither nocturnal love-complaints , nor yet furious encounters between rivals to gain possession of her , could soften the maiden 's apparent obduracy . 
One only succeeded in winning this heart , and that one was Albert . 
The lovers , indeed , divulged to no one when and where the first ray of tender feeling dawned in their hearts , and far be it from us to wish to penetrate the veil of mystery of first love , or even to relate things which we can not substantiate ; we can nevertheless assert this much , that they had already reached to that degree of love , when true lovers swear eternal fidelity , amidst the interruptions of external circumstances , and which , in the painful hour of separation , proved their only consolation . 
Her much-loved aunt having died , the knight of Lichtenstein sent for his daughter to Ulm , for the purpose of finishing her education there , under the roof of a married sister . 
Bertha 's nurse , old Rosel , remarked that the burning tears which she shed , and the longing eyes with which Bertha over and over again looked back as they left the town , could not have been given alone to the hilly country to which she was bidding adieu . 
Shortly after Bertha 's departure , Albert received a communication from his uncle , in which the question was put to him , whether after four years ' study he was not now learned enough ? 
He readily complied with this hint , and , without a moment 's hesitation , prepared to quit the university ; for since Bertha 's absence , the lectures of the learned doctors , and even the charming valley of the Neckar , were become hateful to him . 
The fresh air from the hills invigorated him with renewed force , as he rode through the gate of Tübingen towards his home , on a fine morning in February . 
In proportion as his bodily frame was braced by the freshness of the morning , so was his soul raised to that cheerful elevation of spirits so natural to his age . 
Youth vainly imagines itself capable , by its own powers , to bring about its most anxious wishes , and it is this reliance on self which inspires more confidence than assistance from others . 
When Albert was left to his own thoughts as he paced his lonely way homewards , the contemplation of his future prospects were wrapped in mysterious uncertainty , which led his mind to compare his present position with the clear lake which reflects on its surface the cheerful objects rising around its banks , but veils the treacherous depth of its waters by its bright colours . 
Such was the feeling of Albert von Sturmfeder as he rode through the beechwood forest towards his home . 
This road did not , indeed , lead him nearer to his beloved ; neither could he properly call anything his own besides the horse which he bestrode , and the ruined castle of his ancestors . 
Upon this castle there was a popular joke , which ran thus : -- A house on three props you 'll find : Whoever enters in front , Has no room to sit behind . 
But although he was well aware of his poverty , and was awake to his needy circumstances , still he knew that with a determined will a hundred paths were open to him by which he might attain his object , and that the old Roman saying , Fortes fortuna juvat , had never yet deceived him . 
The present state of excitement in the country appeared to afford him an opportunity by which , after some active employment , he might hope soon to realise the object of his wishes . 
The result of the contest which was about to commence , appeared at that time very uncertain . 
The Swabian League , though it possessed experienced commanders and disciplined soldiers , was nevertheless weakened through disunion . 
Duke Ulerich , on his side , had enlisted 14,000 Swiss , brave and experienced warriors ; he could bring into the field , out of his own country , numerous and hardy troops , but not so experienced as the others ; and thus stood the state of affairs in February 1519 . 
When every one around him was taking an active part , Albert also determined not to remain an idle spectator : a war , he thought , might open a path to lead him sooner towards the object of his desire than any other , and by which he might hope to render himself worthy of meriting the hand of his beloved . 
Neither of the contending parties had , indeed , any claim upon his heart . 
People of the country spoke ill of the duke , whilst the views of the League did not appear to be influenced by the purest motives . 
But when he heard that several knights and counts , whose properties adjoined the duke 's , urged by the loud , and , as he thought , just complaints of the Huttens , against the tyrannical conduct of Ulerich , had withdrawn their allegiance from him , he was induced to join the League ; being unaware that they had been corrupted by money , and the seductive prospect of rich plunder , to overrun his country . 
But the news of the count of Lichtenstein being in Ulm with his daughter was , in truth , the mainspring which influenced and confirmed his determination ; for he thought he could not be far wrong if he took the side on which Bertha 's father acted , and therefore tendered his services to the confederates . 
The knights of Franconia , headed by Ludwig von Hutten , approached Augsburg at the beginning of March , for the purpose of joining Ludwig von Baiern , and the rest of the members of the League . 
The army being collected , their march resembled more a triumphal procession as they approached the territory of their enemy , than regular military proceedings . 
Duke Ulerich was encamped at Blaubeuren , the frontier town of his possessions towards Bavaria and Ulm . 
In the latter place the great council of war of the League was appointed to deliberate upon the plan of the campaign , and they then hoped , in a short time , to force the Würtembergers to a decisive battle . 
Things having gone thus far , negotiations for peace were out of the question : war was the watchword , and victory the only thought of the army . 
Albert 's heart beat high when he thought that his first trial in the career of arms would soon be put to the test ; but whoever may have been placed in a similar situation will readily find excuses for him , if feelings of a more tender nature at times possessed his soul , and made him forget his dreams of battle and victory . 
As the army approached the town , a fresh east wind wafted towards them the salute of the heavy artillery on the walls , and the sound of all the bells ringing to welcome their arrival from the opposite side of the river . 
He first obtained sight of the lofty cathedral in the distance , emerging from a fog , which , gradually clearing away as he drew near , displayed the town with its dark brick houses and high entrance-towers to his view . 
At that moment the conflicting doubts and anxieties which had long assailed his breast oppressed him more than ever . 
`` Do those walls indeed inclose my beloved ? 
May not her father , perhaps , contrary to my hopes , be the faithful friend of the duke , and concealed among his enemies ? 
and if such be the case , dare I , whose only hope is to gain his good will -- dare I stand opposed to him without blasting my own happiness ? 
And should her father have really taken part with the enemy , can his daughter possibly be with him ? 
But even were my best hopes realised , and should she be among the spectators assembled to witness the entry of the army , shall I find her still true to that faith she has plighted ? '' 
These and many other anxious thoughts passed through his mind in rapid succession . 
The last distressing thought , however , gave way to a pleasing certainty ; for if all kind of disaster were leagued against him Bertha 's fidelity , he felt convinced , remained unaltered . 
He pressed the scarf she had given him to his breast ; and now , as the Ulm cavalry fell into the line , their trumpets and cornets playing martial music , his natural cheerfulness returned , he rose prouder in his saddle , and as they passed up the gaily adorned streets , his quick eye examined all the windows of the lofty houses , seeking her alone . 
There he perceived her , serious and thoughtful , as she viewed the passing scene . 
He fancied her thoughts might be occupied with him , whom she supposed to be far distant from her . 
He gave his horse the spur , which made him bound in the air , and the pavement resound under the clash of his hoofs . 
But as she turned towards him , and their eyes met , and judging by the joyful blush which animated her features , that she assured him he was recognised and still beloved , then it was that poor Albert nearly lost all recollection of his situation ; for though he followed the march to the town-hall , so great was his desire to linger in the neighbourhood of his beloved , that little was wanting to make him forget all other considerations , and be irresistibly drawn to the corner house with the bow window . 
He had already made the first step in that direction , when he felt his arm grasped by a powerful hand . 
`` What drives you in this direction , young man ? '' 
said a deep , well-known voice ; `` this is not the way to the town-hall . 
Hallo ! 
I really believe you are faint from fatigue : no wonder , indeed , that you should be , for the breakfast was a very meagre one . 
But never mind , my lad , come along . 
The Ulmers give good wine , and we will treat you to some of the best sort , old Remsthaler . '' 
Though the transition from the raptured joy in which his mind for some moments floated , when he first saw his love , to the bustle before the town-hall in Ulm , was somewhat sudden , he could not help being thankful to his friend , old Herrn von Breitenstein , his nearest neighbour on the frontier of Franconia , for awakening him out of his momentary dream , and saving him from making a precipitate , foolish step . 
He therefore took the advice of the old gentleman in a friendly way , and with him followed the rest of the knights and nobles , whose appetites were well sharpened by their long morning ride for the good mid-day meal , which was prepared for them by the imperial free city in the town-hall . 
The sound or music greets my ear , The castle glares with light : What means these varied sounds I hear ? 
Who banquets here to-night ? 
SCHILLER . 
The saloon of the town-hall , into which the guests were ushered , formed a large oblong . 
The walls , and the ceiling , low in proportion to the size of the room , were wainscoted with brown wood ; numerous round windows , on which were painted the arms of the nobles of Ulm in bright colors , occupied one side of it ; whilst on the walls opposite were suspended the portraits of renowned burgomasters and councillors of the town . 
They were all painted in the same position , that is , the left hand supported on the hip , the right resting on a table covered with rich cloth , and looking down on the guests of their descendants with grave and solemn , aspect . 
The assembled company crowded in mixed groups about the table , which being in the form of a horseshoe , occupied nearly the whole length of the apartment . 
The brilliant festive costume of the grand council and patricians , who were to do the honours of the day in the name of the town , was not in keeping when compared with that of their guests , who , covered with dust , and clad in leather and steel , discomposed the silk cloaks and velvet dresses of their entertainers in no very ceremonious manner , and much to their annoyance . 
They waited some time for the Duke of Bavaria , who , having arrived in Ulm a few days before , had accepted the invitation to this brilliant feast ; but when his page brought an excuse that he could not attend , the signal by sound of trumpet was given to take places . 
The rush to the table in consequence was so impetuous that it was impossible to put the preconcerted friendly intentions of the council into execution , by which a citizen of Ulm was to sit between each two of their guests . 
Breitenstein secured a seat for Albert at the lower end of the table , which he said was one of the best places . 
`` I could have put you , '' said the old man , `` among our seniors , near Fronsberg , Sickingen , Hutten , and Waldburg at the head of the table , but in such company etiquette and reserve will infringe upon the more important consideration of gratifying the cravings of hunger with ease and comfort . 
We might have gone further up also , among the Nürnbergers and Augsburgers ; there where the roasted peacock is , which I declare is not a bad place ; but I know you do not like such townsfolk , and therefore brought you here . 
Look around you , is it not a capital position ? 
As we do not know the faces hereabouts it will not be necessary to talk much . 
On the right we have a smoking hot pig 's head , with a lemon stuck in its mouth ; on the left a magnificent trout biting its tail for joy ; and in our front a roebuck , not to be matched for its tender meat and quantity of fat the whole length of the table or elsewhere . '' 
Albert thanked him for his kindness , and took a hasty glance at those immediately about him . 
On his right sat a good-looking young man about twenty-five or twenty-six years of age . 
His neat-combed hair , throwing out a perfume of some highly-scented ointment , his small beard , evidently having just gone through the ordeal of warm curling irons , made Albert suspect , even before he was further convinced of it by his dialect , that he was a gay Ulmer citizen . 
The young man , perceiving himself to be the object of his neighbour 's observation , made himself very officious . 
He filled Albert 's glass from a large silver tankard , and pledged him to drink to a better acquaintance and good fellowship ; he then offered to help him the best slices of roebuck , hare , pork , pheasant , and wild duck , which lay before them in great profusion on large silver dishes . 
But neither the officious kindness of his neighbour , nor the uncommon appetite of Breitenstein , could provoke Albert to eat . 
His mind was too much occupied with the beloved object he had seen in entering the town to follow the example of his neighbours . 
He sat full of thought , looking into his tankard , which he still held in his hand ; and as the bubbles on the surface of the sparkling wine dispersed , he fancied he saw the portrait of his love in the gilded bottom of it . 
No wonder then that his sociable friend on his right , seeing how his guest held his tankard , and refused every dish which he offered him , took him for an incorrigible wine-bibber . 
His keen eye , which was fixed upon the object before him , appeared to point the youth out as one of those perfect connoisseurs of wine , whose refined taste liked to dwell upon the quality of the noble beverage . 
For the purpose of seconding the good intentions of the grand council , namely , that of rendering the feast as pleasant as possible to their guests , the young Ulmer sought all means to discover the weak point of his neighbour . 
It was , indeed , contrary to his moderate habits to drink much wine ; but , in the hopes of rendering himself agreeable to Albert , he thought he would stretch a point this once . 
He filled his goblet full , and said , `` Do n't you think , neighbour , this wine has fire in it , and is high flavoured ? 
It is not , indeed , Würtemberger wine , such as you are accustomed to drink in Franconia , but it is real Elfinger , out of the cellar of the senate , and calls itself eighty years old . '' 
Astonished at this address , Albert put down his tankard , and answered with a short , `` Yes , yes . '' 
His neighbour , however , would not let him off so easily . 
`` It appears , nevertheless , '' he went on to say , `` that it is not quite the thing you like , but I know a remedy . 
Holloa , there ! '' 
he called to a servant , `` bring a can of Uhlbacher here . 
Now just taste this ; it grows hard by the castle of Würtemberg . 
You must pledge me in this toast : ' A short war and glorious victory . ' '' 
Albert , to whom this conversation was in no wise agreeable , thought to turn it to something which might lead to a more interesting topic . 
`` You have much beauty here in Ulm , '' said he ; `` at least , in passing through the town , I remarked many pretty faces at the windows . '' 
`` Yes , in truth , '' answered the Ulmer , `` the streets might be paved with them . '' 
`` That would not be amiss , '' replied Albert , `` for the pavement of your streets is bad indeed . 
But tell me who lives in that corner house with the bow-window ? '' 
pointing to the situation of it : `` if I do not mistake , two young ladies were looking out of the window as we rode by . '' 
`` So ! 
you have remarked them already ? '' 
laughed the other : `` upon my word , you have a quick eye , and are a good judge . 
They are my pretty cousins , on my mother 's side : the little blonde is the daughter of the Herrn von Besserer , the other is the lady of Lichtenstein , a Würtemberger , staying with her on a visit . '' 
Albert thanked heaven for having been placed so near a relation of Bertha , and determined at once to take advantage of his good fortune . 
He turned to him , and in the most friendly manner said , `` You have a couple of pretty cousins , Herr von Besserer . '' 
`` I call myself Dieterick von Kraft , secretary to the grand council , with your permission . '' 
`` A pair of pretty cousins , Herr von Kraft ; do you visit them often ? '' 
`` Yes , I do , '' answered the secretary , `` and particularly since the daughter of Lichtenstein is in the house . 
Before her arrival , cousin Marie and I were one heart and soul , but she is somewhat jealous now , being piqued by the attentions I bestow upon her charming cousin , Bertha von Lichtenstein , which she thinks belong to her alone . '' 
This confidential communication of the secretary to a perfect stranger , was not a little surprising to Albert , who very soon discovered that a certain portion of vanity was one of his weak points , though in other respects there was much to like in him . 
This avowal , however , on the part of his new acquaintance , did not sound agreeable to Albert 's ear , which caused him to press his lips together , whilst his cheeks assumed a deeper colour . 
`` Laugh as you will , '' proceeded the scribe , whose head began to feel the effects of the wine , to which he was unaccustomed ; `` if you only knew how they pull caps about me ! 
My Lichtenstein cousin has , however , a disagreeable , odd way of showing her friendship ; she is so ladylike and reserved , that one is afraid to joke in her presence , much less to be as familiar with her as with Marie ; but it is just that which renders her so attractive in my eyes , for if she sends me away ten times , I am sure to return to her the eleventh : -- the reason is , '' he murmured to himself , `` that her old strict father is present , of whom she is rather shy ; let him but once cross the boundary of Ulm , and I 'll soon tame her . '' 
Finding his new acquaintance so very communicative , Albert resolved to question him respecting the knight of Lichtenstein 's view of the coming struggle , because that was an essential point , upon which his dearest hopes turned , and one upon which he had his doubts ; but just as he was about to begin , he was interrupted by the sound of peculiar strange voices near him . 
He thought he had heard them before amidst the noise and clatter of the ghosts , as they recited in a drawling uniform tone a couple of short sentences , the purport of which he could not well understand . 
But now that he heard them repeated close to him , he soon learnt the subject of their monotonous import . 
It was the fashion in those good old times , particularly in the imperial towns , for the father of the family and his wife , when they entertained company , to rise about the middle of the repast , go round to each individual guest , and in a short sentence of customary usage press him to eat and drink . 
This fashion was one of such old standing in Ulm , that the grand council would on no account dispense with it on the present occasion , and , therefore , appointed the father of a family and his wife , in the persons of the burgomaster and the oldest of the councillors , to perform the office . 
Having gone round two sides of the table on their '' pressing '' embassy , it was not to be wondered at , that their voices became , by their efforts , rather husky , so that at last their friendly exhortation assumed almost the tone of a threat . 
A rough voice sounded in Albert 's ear , `` Why do n't you eat , why do n't you drink ? '' 
Startling , he turned round , and beheld a large man with a red face , who had addressed these words to him , and before he had time to give an answer , a little short man , with a high shrill voice saluted his ear , on the other side . 
`` But eat and drink and take your fill -- Such is our magisterial will . '' 
`` I have long thought it would come to that , '' said old Breitenstein , as he took breath for a moment from the vigorous attack he had been making on a haunch of roebuck ; `` there he sits and talks , instead of enjoying the excellent dishes of roast meats , which have been put before us in such profusion . '' 
`` With your permission , '' said Dieterick von Kraft , interrupting him , `` though the young man eats nothing , he is a lover o # wine , and a capital judge of it ; I found it out immediately , for he can not keep his eyes from the bottom of his cup ; therefore do not blame him if he prefers old Uhlbacher before anything else . '' 
Albert had no idea how he had become the subject of this extraordinary apology ; he was on the point of making an excuse , when another event drew his attention . 
Breitenstein had now taken pity upon the pig 's head with the lemon stuck in its mouth , which he very cleverly extracted from its jaws , and undertook , with great avidity and experienced hand , its further dissection . 
Just as he was in the act of swallowing the first mouthful of one of the choicest bits , the burgomaster came to him also , with the same exhortation , `` Why do n't you eat , why do n't you drink ? '' 
Breitenstein looked at him with astonishment , but his speaking organs had no time to exercise their functions ; he however nodded his head , and pointed to the well-polished bone of the haunch of roebuck in his plate . 
The little man , also , with the cracked voice , though it appeared unnecessary , would not be debarred repeating his friendly exhortation -- `` But eat and drink and take your fill , -- Such is our magisterial will . '' 
And thus it was in the good old times . 
At least no one could complain of being invited to a mere parade dinner . 
The table soon after assumed a different appearance . 
The large dishes and plates were removed , and were replaced by spacious bowls and large jugs filled with generous wine . 
The wine passed freely , and the frequent drinking of healths , at that time very much the custom in Swabia , soon produced its usual effects . 
Dieterick Spät and his companions sang burlesque songs on Duke Ulerich , and confirmed each oath or bit of coarse wit with a horse laugh or a deep draught . 
The Franconian knights called for dice , threw for the duke 's estates , and drank to the taking of the castle of Tübingen . 
Ulerich von Hutten and his friends carried on a controversy in Latin with some Italians about a recent attack on the papal chair , which a monk of Wittemberg of no reputation had undertaken . 
The Nürnbergers , Augsburgers , and some few Ulmers had got together , and disputed upon the merits of their respective republics ; in short , the room resounded with the din of laughter , singing , quarrelling , and the clatter of silver and pewter tankards . 
But at the upper end of the table a much more becoming and sober hilarity prevailed . 
George von Fronsberg , old Ludwig Hutten , Waldburg Truchses , Franz von Sickingen , and other elderly grave men occupied seats there . 
Hans von Breitenstein , who was a captain of the League , having now fully satisfied his appetite , turned his eyes in that direction , and said to Albert , `` The noise about us here is not at all agreeable , -- what say you ? 
would you like to be presented to Fronsberg now , as you told me a few days ago you wished so to be ? '' 
Albert , whose desire it had long been to become acquainted with the general , gladly accepted the offer , and getting up , followed his old friend . 
We will not stay to inquire the reason why his heart beat quicker on this occasion , why his face assumed a higher colour , or why his steps , as he approached him , were slower or less firm . 
Who has not experienced in his youth similar feelings on being introduced to the notice of a brilliant character , crowned with glory ? 
Whose darling self , `` I , '' has not sunk into utter insignificance before the giant-like idea we have formed of a renowned man ! 
George von Fronsberg was accounted one of the most famous generals of his day . 
Italy , France , and Germany had witnessed his victories , and his name will go down to posterity in the annuls of the art of war , as the author and founder of a regular system , by which a body of infantry is trained to fight in ranks and companies . 
Tradition and chronicles have brought down the exploits of this noble personage to our times , and who can help calling to mind the heroes of Homer , when they read the following description of this man : -- `` He had such strength in his limbs , that with the middle finger of his right hand he could displace the strongest man from his seat , let him hold himself as firm as he might ; he could seize the bridle of a horse on the full gallop , and stop him ; and he could carry alone , from one place to another , the largest gun and battering ram of the time . '' 
Breitenstein conducted the young man to him . 
`` Who do you bring us now , Hans ? '' 
said George von Fronsberg , as he noticed the well-grown youth with interest . 
`` Look at him well , noble sir , '' answered Breitenstein , `` and you will not fall to recognise the house whence he sprung . '' 
The general regarded him with still greater attention ; old Truchses von Waldburg also run his scrutinizing eye over his person . 
Albert was timid and shy before these great men ; but whether it was that the friendly , frank manner of Fronsberg gave him confidence , or whether he felt how important that moment was to his future prospects , he overcame the shame of being put out of countenance by the looks of so many renowned men , and faced them with determination and courage . 
`` I recognise you at once by that look , '' said Fronsberg , and gave him his hand : `` you are a Sturmfeder . '' 
`` Albert von Sturmfeder , '' answered the young man : `` my father was Burkhardt Sturmfeder ; he fell by your side in Italy : so it has been told me . '' 
`` He was a brave man , '' said the general , whose eye rested thoughtfully on Albert 's features , `` he remained faithful by my side in many a warm day of battle , and fell covered with glory and honour in defence of my person . 
And you , '' he added , `` have you determined to follow his steps ? 
Methinks you have left your nest somewhat early , for you are scarcely fledged . '' 
Waldburg , a weather-beaten , hard featured old soldier , interrupted Fronsberg , and said , with a gruff , surly voice , `` I suppose that young bird is seeking a few flocks of wool to repair the dilapidated family nest . '' 
This rude allusion to the ruined castle of his ancestors , called up a crimson blush on the cheek of the young man . 
He had never been ashamed of his poverty , but these words sounded so full of scorn and insult that he felt himself , for the first time , really poor , as he stood before the more affluent derider of his name . 
His eye at that moment passing over Truchses Waldburg , fell on that well-known bow window , where , thinking he perceived the person of his love , his usual courage resumed its dominion . 
`` Every struggle has its price . 
Sir Knight , '' he replied ; `` I have proffered head and arm to the League ; the motive of this step can be but indifferent to you . '' 
`` Well , well , '' answered the other , `` we shall see what the arm can do ; but as to the head it can not be quite so clear , if you take in earnest what was meant as a mere joke . '' 
The offended youth was about to make an angry reply , when Fronsberg , taking him kindly by the hand , said , `` Just like your father ; dear young man ! 
you will in time become like him , a stinging nettle also , -- we shall require friends whose hearts are in the right place . 
You will not be the last thought of , you may rest assured . '' 
These few words , from the lips of a man who had won so high a reputation among his contemporaries by bravery and experience in war , produced such an effect on the mind of Albert , that the unguarded answer which floated on his tongue sank harmless . 
He withdrew from the table to a window , partly for the sake of not interrupting the conversation of the officers , partly to convince himself with greater certainty , whether the momentary apparition which he had seen was really his beloved . 
When Albert left the table , Fronsberg turned to Waldburg ; `` That is not the way , Herr Truchses , to win over a staunch ally to our cause . 
I 'll wager he has not quitted us with the same zeal he brought with him . '' 
`` Do you consider yourself called upon to raise your voice in favour of that hot-headed youth ? '' 
said the other ; `` it is not at all necessary ; he must learn to take a joke from his superiors . '' 
`` With your permission , '' interrupted Breitenstein , `` it is no joke to be jeer 'd on account of unavoidable poverty ; but I know you never bore his father any good will . '' 
`` And , '' continued Fronsberg , `` you have no controul over him in any way , for he has not yet taken the oath of alliance to the League and is therefore at perfect liberty to go wheresoever he pleases . 
Should he serve under your colours , I would advise you not to push him too far , as he does not appear much inclined to submit to insult or contumely . '' 
Speechless from rage upon being contradicted , which he never in his life could brook , Truchses first looked at one and then at the other with such fury , that Ludwig von Hutten , fearful of further strife , interposed between them , and said , `` Come , an end with these old stories . 
It is high time to rise from table . 
It is now getting dark , and the wine is becoming too powerful for our friends lower down there . 
Dieterick von Spät has already drank twice to Würtemberg 's death , and the Franconians have not yet quite settled whether his castles shall be burnt to the ground or divided among them . '' 
`` Let them alone , '' laughed Waldburg , scornfully , `` those gentry may do and say what they please to-day ; Fronsberg will soon bring them to their senses . '' 
`` No , '' said Ludwig von Hutten , `` if any one has a right to talk in such terms , I am the one , the avenger of my son 's blood ; but until war be declared , intemperate conversation must be restrained . 
My cousin Ulerich speaks much too violently with the Italians about the monk of Wittemberg , and when he is out of temper , divulges things which ought to be kept secret . '' 
Fronsberg and Sickingen now rose from table , and those about them following their example , the break-up was general . 
The eyes with which I gaze on her Can pierce thro ' wood and stone : They 're seated in my heart so true , That beats for her alone . 
WALTHER VON DER VOGELWEIDE . 
The small distance which separated the table from the window , to which Albert had retired , permitted his hearing every word of the dispute mentioned in the latter part of the last chapter . 
He rejoiced to perceive the warm interest which Fronsberg took in him , an inexperienced orphan ; but , at the same time , he could not conceal from himself that his first step in his military career , had also brought upon him a formidable , bitter enemy . 
The unbending pride of Truchses von Waldburg was so well known in the army , that Albert had little reason to hope Hutten 's mediatory and conciliatory words would have much effect in soothing the unfavourable impression , which he feared his warmth in upholding the name of his family might have created in the mind of the general . 
And he was well aware that men of weight and consequence , governed by a violent , imperious temper , such as Waldburg 's , do not readily enter into the feelings of those who have excited their anger , nor forgive the ebullition of a generous mind when assailed in its most vulnerable point . 
A slight tap on the shoulder interrupted his thoughts , and as he turned round , his friendly neighbour at table , the scribe to the grand council , stood before him . 
`` I 'll bet , you have not looked out for a lodging yet , '' said Dieterick von Kraft , `` and it might be now somewhat difficult to find one , as it is getting dark , and the town is very full . '' 
Albert acknowledged he had not thought about it ; he hoped however to find a room in one of the public inns . 
`` I would not have you be quite so sure of that , '' answered the other , `` and , should you find a corner in one of those houses , you must reckon upon being but badly off . 
But if my lodging would not appear too small for you , it is very much at your service . '' 
The good secretary of the council pressed Albert with so much cordiality , that he did not hesitate to take advantage of his invitation , though he almost feared lest , when the effects of the wine had passed off , his host might regret his proffered hospitality to him , a perfect stranger . 
Dieterick von Kraft , however , appeared rejoiced at the readiness with which his proposal was accepted , and taking Albert 's arm , with a hearty shake of the hand , led him out of the room . 
The square before the town-hall was in the mean time the scene of much bustle and confusion . 
The days were still short , and the evening having broken in upon the dinner-party , torches were lighted , the glare of which illumined but sparingly the large space , and played on the windows of the opposite houses , and on the polished helmets and cuirasses of the knights . 
Loud calls for horses and attendants sounding through the town-hall , the clatter of swords , the running here and there of many men , coupled with the barking of dogs , the neighing and pawing of impatient horses , formed a scene , which resembled more the surprise of a military post in the night by an enemy , than the breaking up of a convivial festival . 
Albert remained in the hall in a state of amazement at the sight of so many jovial faces and powerful figures , who , having mounted their horses , retired in small groups , singing and springing about in all the hilarity of youth . 
This nocturnal , fleeting scene , forcibly impressed him with the conviction of the uncertainty and changeableness of all worldly events . 
These same joyous associates , thought he , would soon be engaged in the dangerous concerns of war , when many of them , even before the spring should be fully advanced , would cover the green grass with their bodies , with no other price offered for their blood than the tear of a comrade , or the short-lived glory of having fallen before the enemy as brave men . 
His eye turned instinctively to that quarter where he knew the reward which he hoped would crown the success of his present undertaking awaited him . 
He there saw many figures at the window , but soon the black smoke of the torches , which suddenly , as a cloud , almost covered the square , veiled the objects so as to give them the appearance of mere shadows . 
He turned away in disappointment , saying to himself , `` Such are my prospects also ; at one moment the present indeed looks bright , but in the next , how dark , how uncertain is the prospect of the future ! '' 
His kind friend roused him from this foreboding frame of mind , with the question , `` Where are your servants with your horses ? '' 
Had the spot where they stood been better lighted , our good Kraft might , perhaps , have discovered a passing blush upon the cheek of his friend at this inquiry . 
`` A young soldier , '' answered Albert , quickly recovering his composure , `` must learn to look after his own affairs as well as he can , without the assistance and trouble of servants , and therefore I have not brought one with me . 
I have given Breitenstein 's groom charge of my horse . '' 
The scribe of the council applauded the young man for the self-denial which he exercised ; but he could not help making the remark , that when once in the field he would not be able to assert his independence so easily . 
The attention which his companion paid to his own person , his well-combed hair , his neatly curled beard , convinced Albert that he spoke from his heart , and the snug comfortable lodging into which he was introduced did not belie this opinion . 
The ménage of Herrn von Kraft was , in fact , a young bachelor 's establishment , for his parents died before he attained the age of manhood . 
He had often thought of looking for a partner to share his comforts with him , but he hesitated to renounce the charm of independence ; an advantage he thought not to be despised , flattered as he was by being honored and looked upon by the ladies of Ulm as a desirable match . 
But ill-natured folks whispered abroad , that it was principally owing to the decided disinclination of his old nurse and housekeeper to have a young mistress in the house , which deterred him from taking so important a step . 
Herr Dieterick possessed a large house not far from the cathedral , a pretty garden on St. Michael 's Hill , furniture in high preservation , large oak chests full of the finest linen , made of the yarn which the ladies of the house of Kraft , with their female domestics , had for many generations passed their long winter evenings in spinning ; and an iron chest in the bed-room , containing a large stock of gold florins . 
As to his person , he was a good-looking , substantial man , always spruce in his dress , tight-laced , and proud of the fine linen which he wore : his deportment in the council was serious and full of business ; he was well conversant in state affairs , as well as in those of his own household ; and being sprung from a good old family , it was no wonder that he was respected and looked up to by the whole town , and that any pretty young Ulmer damsel would have thought herself too happy to become mistress of these united advantages . 
Upon a nearer inspection , however , the interior of his friend 's establishment appeared to Albert any thing but enviable . 
The only domestic companions of Herr Dieterick were an old grey-headed man-servant , two large cats , and the above-mentioned unsightly fat nurse . 
These four creatures stared at the new guest with large wondering eyes , which convinced him how little accustomed they were to receive any increase of guests in the establishment . 
The cats went round him mewing with raised backs ; the old woman , in a cross manner , fidgeted her large high round cap , ornamented with gold fringe , out of its accustomed perpendicular position , and asked whether she should prepare supper for two ? 
When she heard her question not only affirmed , but was ordered also -LRB- it was not quite clear whether it was an order or a petition -RRB- to prepare the corner room on the second floor for the stranger , her patience appeared exhausted ; she shot a look of fury at her young master , and left the room rattling a large bunch of keys , which were suspended from her girdle . 
The hollow sound of her footstep , and the noise of the door , as she , in her ill-humour , slammed it after her , re-echoed through the dead stillness of the spacious corridors . 
The old grey-headed servant had in the mean time pushed the table and two ponderous arm-chairs near the immense stove ; and having put a black box on the table , with two candlesticks and a tankard of wine , he whispered a few words to his master , and then withdrew . 
Herr Dieterick invited his guest to take part in his usual evening amusement of playing a game of tric-trac , which the black box contained . 
Albert was amused at the proposal of his friend , and particularly when he told him that , since he was twelve years old , he had been in the habit of playing a game with his nurse every evening . 
The dead silence which reigned throughout the house was only broken by the occasional snuffing of the candles , the ticking of a large wooden clock in a black case , and the monotonous throw of the dice . 
Albert would gladly have heard some other symptoms of life , if it were but the grumbling of the old nurse , or her footstep sounding again in the corridors . 
The game had never possessed any charm for him , and more particularly at the present moment , when his thoughts were otherwise occupied . 
He was oppressed with a lowness of spirits which he could scarcely control , separated as he now was by a few streets only from his beloved , and anxious to satisfy his longing desire to see her again . 
The unfeigned pleasure which Herr Dieterick appeared to derive in winning nearly every game , imparted to his good-natured face something so peculiarly agreeable , that it made up in some measure for the loss of time . 
When the clock struck eight Dieterick led his guest to supper , which his housekeeper , spite of her ill humour , had prepared in her best manner , for she spared nothing to keep up the dignity and honour of the house of Kraft . 
The secretary again essayed the powers of his eloquence , with which he sought to season the repast . 
He talked concerning passing events , of the coming war , and gave Albert to understand that his situation put him in possession of state secrets known only to a select few . 
But in vain did Albert hope to hear something about his pretty cousins . 
He attempted to sound him upon a subject so nearly allied to his dearest interests , namely , upon the views of the knight of Lichtenstein in the pending struggle , which he had failed to elicit at the dinner ; but the secretary , whether to impress Albert with the importance of his confidential situation in the council , or that he really did not know the intention of Bertha 's father , put on a more consequential and mysterious air than usual , and the only information he would impart was , that the knight was then in Ulm with some others of Würtemberg . 
This news was at least satisfactory so far as the turn it was likely to give to his fate . 
His joy was now for the first time complete , in the satisfaction of having joined a party which , except for the great names at the head of it , was otherwise indifferent to him . 
`` And so her father is also among those assembled here ! '' 
thought he . 
`` May I not hope to have the good fortune to fight by the side of that good man , and prove myself worthy of my name , and of her I love ? '' 
He felt the conviction that Albert von Sturmfeder would not be the last in a battle . 
His host , after supper , conducted him to his bed-room , and took his leave with a hearty wish for a good night 's rest . 
Albert examined his room closely , and found it to correspond precisely with the rest of the gloomy house . 
The round frames of the windows , warped by age , the dark woodwork of the walls and ceiling , the large stove projecting far into the apartment , the enormous bed with a broad canopy and heavy stuff curtains , gave a dull , nay a melancholy , effect to the whole . 
But still every thing was arranged for his comfort . 
Clean snow-white sheets invited him within as he threw back the curtains of the bed , the stove threw out an agreeable warmth , a night lamp was placed in a niche in the wall , and even a tankard of spiced hot wine , by way of a nightcap , was not forgotten . 
He closed the curtains as he got into bed , and scanned over in his mind the passing events of the day . 
Having taken them in their due order as they had occurred , he had reason to be satisfied with his position ; but , when he afterwards fell into the province of dreaming , they were all heaped up in crowded confusion in his mind , far beyond the power of unravelling . 
One object alone was perfectly clear to him , -- it was the portrait of his beloved Bertha . 
And is it mere illusion ? 
Say -- Or will that one so kind , so true , To whom my heart and life are due , Be to my arms restored this day ? 
F. HAUG . 
Albert was awoke the next morning by a tap at the door . 
He threw open the curtains , and perceived that the sun was already high up . 
The knocking increased , when , shortly after , his kind host entering , inquired how his guest had slept , and explained to him the cause of his early visit . 
The grand council had determined on the preceding evening to celebrate the arrival of the confederates by a ball , which was to take place that very evening in the town-hall . 
It was his province , as secretary to the council , to make all the necessary arrangements for this important affair . 
He had to secure the services of the town musicians , and to invite the first families in the name of the senate . 
But his first concern would be to hasten to impart this extraordinary piece of good news to his charming cousins . 
He related all this to his guest with an air of great importance , and assured him he was so full of business that he scarcely knew where his head was . 
Albert had only one thought , that of seeing and speaking with Bertha , and he was so overjoyed in the anticipation of such-unlooked for happiness , that he gladly would have embraced the bearer of the good tidings , if prudence had not deterred him from thus exhibiting his secret feelings . 
`` I can plainly see , '' said the scribe , `` the pleasure this news gives you ; the love of dancing brightens up your eyes already . 
I can promise you a couple of partners , such as you will not find every day . 
You shall dance with my cousins ; for I am their chaperon on such occasions , and I will so arrange the matter that you and no other shall be the first to engage them ; they will be enchanted when I promise them the best dancer in the room . '' 
With this he left the apartment , wishing his friend good morning , cautioning him when he went out of the house not to forget to notice it , so as to be able to find it again at dinner time . 
Herr Kraft being a near relation of the Herrn von Besserer , was entitled to free access to his house , and upon this occasion he made an earlier call than usual . 
He found the maidens still at breakfast . 
Ladies of the present day may perhaps be shocked at the homely meal which our two belles of Ulm , in the year 1519 , were partaking of when their cousin Dieterick entered the room . 
It was not an elegant déjeuné , served up in painted porcelain in the form of beautiful antique vases , or curious-shaped chocolate cups ; no , the natural grace of Marie and Bertha was not impaired by the occupation of breakfasting on humble beer-soup , at six in the morning , served up in the brown-coloured jug of that day . 
Can this avowal , however , prejudice the attractive qualities of these two beauties ? 
In the eyes of some it perhaps may ; but whoever could have seen Marie and Bertha , in their pretty little morning caps and neat clean dresses , would certainly , as cousin Kraft did , have no objection to partake of the breakfast with them . 
`` I can see at once , cousin , '' began Marie , after the usual salutations of the morning , `` that you would like to partake of our soup , because , I suppose , your old cross nurse has not taken care of you this morning ; but do n't flatter yourself that you will get any here , for you deserve punishment , and must expect -- '' `` Oh , we have been waiting for you so long , '' interrupted Bertha . 
`` Yes , to be sure we have , '' said Marie , with her usual quick way ; `` but do n't flatter yourself that we care as much about your society , as to be informed of the news of what is going on , that 's all . '' 
The scribe had been long accustomed to be received by Marie in this manner . 
He determined , therefore , to make himself as agreeable as possible , satisfying her curiosity by giving her all the gossip of the town , in order to pacify the jealous mood , which he thought he had excited . 
He was about to begin , when Marie interrupted him . 
`` We know , '' said she , `` that you are too fond of a long story , and as we witnessed most of your doings in the town-hall yesterday from the balcony , we 'll say nothing touching your drinking bout there , which speaks not much to your credit ; but answer me this question . '' 
-- She placed herself before him in an attitude of comic seriousness , and went on : `` Dieterick von Kraft , scribe of the most noble council of state , did you notice among the confederates , at the dinner given yesterday in the town-hall , a remarkably distinguished-looking young knight , with long light-brown hair , a face not so milk-white as your own , but not less handsome ; a small beard , not so carefully combed as yours , but much more beautiful ; a light blue scarf with silver -- ! '' 
`` Oh , that is no other than my guest , '' cried cousin Kraft ; `` he rode a large brown horse , and wore a blue jacket , slashed at the shoulders , and turned up with light blue . '' 
`` Yes , yes , go on ; the very one , '' said Marie ; `` we have our particular reasons for inquiring all about him . '' 
`` Well , that is Albert von Sturmfeder , '' answered the scribe , `` a handsome charming young fellow . 
It is curious that you should be the first he noticed in coming into the town . '' 
Kraft then related all the particulars of what had passed at the dinner , how he was at once struck by the manly figure , the commanding and attractive countenance of the young man , who , by good luck , became his neighbour at table , and that the more he knew of him the more he liked him ; so much so , that he had invited him to his house . 
