The creaking drawbridge was lowered over the abyss which separates the rock of Lichtenstein from the country ; the gate opened , when a man , his hat falling deep over his face , and enveloped in a dark cloak , came over the bridge , directly towards the spot where Albert was standing . 
When he had arrived at a few paces from him , the young man called out in a threatening tone , `` Draw , traitor , and defend your life ! '' 
and advanced on him . 
The man in the cloak stepped back , drawing his sword ; in a moment the two blades met . 
`` You shall not have me alive , '' cried the other ; `` at least I 'll sell my life dear ! '' 
and with these words the stranger attacked him vigorously , proving himself by the rapid and heavy blows which he dealt to be an experienced swordsman , and no despicable opponent . 
This was not the first time Albert had crossed blades in anger ; for at the university of Tübingen he had fought many an honourable duel with success ; but now he had found his match . 
His adversary pushed him hard , and his attack was maintained with so masterly a hand , that Albert was compelled to confine himself solely to his own defence , when , in a last attempt to settle the affair by one powerful thrust , his arm was suddenly seized by a strong hand from behind , and in the same moment his sword was wrested from his grasp . 
A loud voice , from the person who now held him fast in both his arms , cried , `` Run him through , sir ; such assassins do n't deserve a moment 's time to say their paternoster . '' 
`` You do it , Hans , '' said the stranger ; `` I am not the one to take the life of a defenceless man ; run him through with his own sword , and be quick about it . '' 
`` Let me rather do it myself , sir , '' said Albert , with a firm voice ; `` you have robbed me of my love , -- what further need have I of life ? '' 
`` What is that I hear ? '' 
said the stranger , and approached nearer . 
`` What voice is that ? '' 
said the other stranger , who still kept a firm hold of Albert ; `` I ought to know its sound . '' 
He turned the young man in his arms , and , as if struck by lightning , he let go his hold . 
`` What on earth do I see ! 
we might have made a pretty business of it ! 
-- but what unlucky star has brought you to this spot , sir ? 
How could my people think of letting you depart without my knowledge ? '' 
It was the fifer of Hardt who addressed Albert , and now offered him his hand . 
He was not , however , much inclined to return the friendly salute of a man who but a moment before was going to perform the part of executioner . 
Burning with fury , he looked at the man in the cloak , and then at the fifer : `` Do you mean to say , '' said he , addressing himself to the latter , `` that I ought to have allowed myself to remain a prisoner in your house , for the purpose of not witnessing your traitorous designs ? 
Miserable impostor ! 
And you , sir , '' turning to the other , `` as you value your honour , defend yourself singly , and not fall two upon one . 
If you wish to know my name , I am Albert von Sturmfeder , come here for the express purpose of measuring swords with you , to uphold my previous claim to the Lady of Lichtenstein , which pretension , perhaps , may not be unknown to you . 
I demand my sword back again , having been wrenched from my hand by an act of treacherous cowardice , and let each make good his pretensions in honourable fight . 
With my life alone will I cease to assert my right . '' 
`` Albert von Sturmfeder ! '' 
replied his opponent in surprise , but in a friendly manner . 
`` It appears you must be labouring under some mistake . 
Believe me , that , instead of being your enemy I am much interested in you , and have long wished to see you . 
Accept my friendship , upon the word of honour of a man ; and do not imagine I visit the castle with the sinister views you attribute to me . '' 
He stretched out his hand from under his cloak , and offered it to the astonished youth , who hesitated , however , to take it . 
The skill with which he wielded his sword , and the heavy blows he dealt out , strengthened Albert in his opinion , that his opponent was accustomed to the use of his weapon ; and that he was a man of honourable and generous character , seemed satisfactorily proved in the frank and unreserved manner he proffered his hand when he became acquainted with his name . 
Under these circumstances therefore he could scarcely forbear trusting to his word . 
Still his mind could not in an instant shake off doubts of being deceived under the specious dealings of the stranger , which made him undecided to accept , without further reserve , the proffered friendship of a man whom but the moment before he had looked upon as his bitterest enemy . 
`` Who is it that offers me his hand ? '' 
demanded Albert ; `` I have given you my name , it is but just you tell me yours . '' 
The stranger threw his cloak back , and raising his hat , discovered to Albert , by the light of the moon , a noble countenance , with a brilliant sparkling eye , bearing the expression of commanding dignity . 
`` Ask not my name , '' said he , whilst a ray of sorrow played about his mouth ; `` that I am a man of honour , is sufficient for you to know . 
I once , indeed , bore a name which was upon a level with the most honourable in the world ; I once wore the golden spurs , and carried the waving plume of feathers in my helmet , and , at the sound of my bugle , could assemble hundreds of my people around me -- but now all is lost . 
One thing alone remains to me , '' he added , with indescribable dignity , taking the hand of the young man with a firm grasp , `` I am a man , and carry a sword , -- ` Si fractus illabatur orbis Impavidam ferient ruinæ . ' '' 
With these words he drew his hat again over his face , and throwing his cloak over his person , withdrew , and was soon lost in the wood . 
Albert von Sturmfeder stood in dumb astonishment , resting on his sword . 
The commanding look of the stranger , his winning benevolent features , his brave and generous conduct , filled his soul with admiration and respect . 
Revenge , which had agitated his breast before he crossed swords with him , no longer ruffled it , but gave way to the contemplation of the virtues which his opponent had displayed in his unexpected rencontre with one , whose life he might have taken in the just defence of his own person . 
But what conduced above all to raise this man higher in Albert 's estimation , was the frank and honest manner in which he had disavowed any clandestine acquaintance with Bertha , having confirmed it by a gallant defence of his honour , which he seemed as capable of asserting as he did of wielding his weapon . 
Such was the result of this adventure upon the mind of Albert , that he felt it relieved of a mountain 's weight of trouble and anxiety , with which , but a few moments back , it had been oppressed . 
The malicious reports of the hostess of the Golden Stag , which he had too readily given credit to , now stung him with shame and remorse . 
He would willingly have risked every thing at that moment to have gained admittance to the castle , and thrown himself at the feet of his beloved , to implore her forgiveness for having given place to a doubt of her faithful attachment . 
When we consider the weight and respect which physical qualities carried with them in those times , -- how bravery , even in an enemy , was prized and admired , -- and that the word of a gallant man was held as sacred as an oath on the altar ; -- and , if we further recollect how imposing is the effect of a pleasing outward appearance upon a young , generous mind , it is not to be wondered that the change in Albert 's feelings was as decided as it was rapid . 
`` Who is that man ? '' 
he asked the fifer , who still stood by him . 
`` You heard from his own lips that he has no name , and neither do I know what to call him . '' 
`` You do n't know who he is , '' replied Albert , `` and still you were present when we fought ? 
Away with you ; you deceive me . '' 
`` Indeed not , sir , '' answered the fifer : `` it is true , God knows ! 
that in these times he has no name . 
But , if you must know what he is , I can tell you . 
He has been driven from his castle by the League , and now wanders in banishment : he was once a powerful knight in Swabia . '' 
`` Poor man ! 
for this reason he conceals his person ? 
Well might he , indeed , have taken me for an assassin . 
I recollect his having said he would sell his life dearly . '' 
`` Do n't be offended , worthy sir , '' said the countryman , `` that I also took you for one of those who are lurking about to take his life ; I came therefore to his assistance , and , had I not heard your voice , who knows how much longer you would have breathed ? 
But what brought you hither at this hour of the night ? 
and what mishap threw you into the path of the banished man ? 
Truly , you may think yourself fortunate that he did not cut you in two , for there are few who can stand before his sword . 
Some one , I suspect , has been playing this cruel game with you . '' 
Albert related to his former guide the news he had heard in the Golden Stag of Pfullingen . 
He pointed out particularly the evidence of the nurse , the fifer 's sister , which gave it an air of so much probability . 
`` I thought it would come to that , '' replied the fifer : `` Love has played many worse tricks , and I do n't know what it might not have done to me in such a case , when I was young . 
No one is in fault but old Rosel , the gossip ! 
What business had she to make the hostess of the Golden Stag her confidant , who can not keep a secret for a moment ? '' 
`` But there must be some truth in the affair , '' said Albert , whose former suspicions were again awakened ; `` for Rosel could never have said it without some foundation . '' 
`` Yes , there is indeed much truth in the report . 
Everything is as true as she has related . 
The servants are sent to bed , and the old spy also . 
At eleven o'clock the man appears at the castle , -- the drawbridge is let down , -- the doors open , -- the young lady receives him and leads him into the saloon -- '' `` Well , do n't you see ? '' 
cried Albert , impatiently , `` if all be as you say , how could that man swear that he had nothing to do with -- '' `` That he had nothing of any kind to do with the lady , you would say ? '' 
answered the fifer , `` without hesitation he can swear to that ; but there is one essential difference in the story , which that old goose Rosel certainly never knew ; namely , that the knight of Lichtenstein always receives his guest in the saloon , and , as soon as his daughter has placed before him the refreshments which she has prepared , she withdraws . 
The old gentleman remains with the banished man till the first crow of the cock , when , after having well satisfied his hunger and thirst , and warmed his weary limbs at the fire , he leaves the castle in the same way that he entered it . '' 
`` Oh , fool that I was not to have thought of all this before ! 
The truth was close at hand , and I pushed it from me ! 
But cursed be the curiosity and slanderous spirit of those women , who always fancy they can divine something extraordinary in the most trifling circumstance , and whose greatest charm consists in conjecturing improbabilities . 
But tell me , '' said Albert , after a moment 's thought , `` it strikes me very odd , that this banished man should visit the castle every night exactly as the clock strikes eleven -- in what inhospitable neighbourhood does he reside , which obliges him to seek subsistence here at that unseasonable hour ? 
Now , mind , I am not to be trifled with ! '' 
The eye of the fifer rested upon Albert with an expression almost amounting to disdain : `` Such gentlemen as you , '' he answered , `` certainly know little of the pain of banishment ; you never experienced the horror of being obliged to conceal yourself from the hand of the assassin , shivering in damp caves , living in inhospitable caverns , among the society of owls , deprived of a warm meal and a cheering glass ! 
But come with me , if you have an inclination , -- the day does not break yet , and you can not go to Lichtenstein by night , -- and I will lead you to the habitation of the banished knight . 
You will not ask me again why he visits the castle at midnight . '' 
The appearance of the stranger had excited Albert 's curiosity to such a degree , that he willingly accepted the offer of the fifer of Hardt , more particularly as he then would have the best opportunity of finding out the truth or falsehood of his assertions . 
His guide took the bridle of his horse , and led him down a narrow pathway in the wood . 
Albert followed , after he had taken a farewell look at the windows of Lichtenstein . 
They moved on in silence , which the young man made no attempt to break , his thoughts being wholly taken up with the person whom he was about to visit , and the strange occurrence which had just taken place . 
He recollected to have heard somewhere or other that many staunch partisans of the Duke had been driven from their possessions by the fury of the League , and he thought that it must have been in the inn at Pfullingen , where mention had been made of a knight of the name of Maxx Stumpf von Schweinsberg , whom the confederates were in search of . 
The bravery and extraordinary strength of this man was the common talk of all Swabia and Franconia ; and when Albert recalled to his mind the powerful figure , the commanding countenance of his late heroic opponent , he thought it could not possibly be any other than this knight , one of Duke Ulerich 's most faithful followers . 
The idea of having had an affair with such a man , and to have measured swords with him in fair fight , was particularly flattering to the amour propre of the young man , although the result had been left undecided . 
So thought Albert von Sturmfeder on that night . 
And after a lapse of many years , when his noble antagonist had been long reinstated in his rights , and by sound of bugle could as formerly assemble his followers in hundreds , he reckoned it among his best feat of arms to have stood his ground before the brave and powerful stranger . 
They were now arrived at a small open meadow in the wood , which terminated in a thick hedge of thorns and briars . 
The fifer having secured the horse to a tree off the path , made a gap through the entangled branches , and gave a sign to Albert to follow . 
It was not without difficulty and some danger that he obeyed his leader 's directions , who in many places was obliged to assist him with his hand , as they proceeded down a narrow footpath into a deep ravine . 
When they had descended about eighty feet they came to even ground again , where the young man expected to find the dwelling of the banished man ; but he was disappointed . 
His companion then went to a tree of great circumference , and which was hollow from age , and brought forth two large torches of pine wood , and striking fire by means of a steel and flint , and a small bit of sulphur , ignited them . 
Albert observed , by the brilliant light of the torches , that they stood before a large opening which nature had formed in the wall of the rock . 
This must be , he thought , the entrance to the habitation of the stranger , who , as the fifer had expressed himself , had his lodgings among owls . 
The man of Hardt took one of the torches , and giving the other to his companion , said , `` The path is dark , and here and there difficult to trace . '' 
With this warning he went on in front , leading through the dark entrance . 
Albert , whose imagination was on the stretch , had expected to be introduced to a low cavern , short and narrow , like the dwelling of wild beasts , such as he had seen about the forests of his own country ; but what was his astonishment , when he entered an immense natural cavern , resembling the lofty halls of a subterranean palace ! 
He had heard in his boyhood , from a man-servant whose great-grandfather had been prisoner in Palestine , a story , which had been handed down from generation to generation in his family , of a boy who had been enticed by the arts of a wicked magician into a palace under ground , which surpassed everything in magnificence he had ever seen above it , and displayed to his view whatever the bold imagination of the east could fancy of splendour . 
Golden pillars surmounted by crystal capitals , arched cupolas studded with emeralds and sapphires , walls of diamonds dazzling the eye by their numerous refracting rays , were united in this subterranean habitation of the genii . 
This story , which had made a deep impression on his youthful imagination , now came to his recollection , and appeared to be realised in what he saw before him . 
He stopped every moment in fresh surprise , and holding the torch high up , viewed in amazement and wonder the lofty and majestic vaulted arches which continued the whole length of the cavern , sparkling and glittering like thousands of crystals and diamonds . 
But his astonishment was still more excited when his leader , turning to the left , conducted him into a spacious grotto , which fancy might figure to itself the magnificent saloon of the subterranean palace . 
The fifer could not help remarking the powerful impression which this wonder of nature made on the mind of the young man . 
He took his torch from him , and mounting a high jutting rock , illumined more effectually the greatest part of the grotto . 
Brilliant white rocks composed its walls . 
The bold arched cupola , formed of innumerable stalactites , from the ends of which hung millions of small drops of water , reflected the light in all the colours of the rainbow . 
The surrounding rocks were thrown together in such happy confusion , as to give the imagination full scope to fancy it could discover in their grotesque shapes , here a chapel , having its high altarpiece ornamented with flowing drapery ; there its corresponding pulpit of rich gothic architecture . 
An organ even was not wanting to complete the idea of a subterranean church , and the changing shadows thrown on the walls by the light of the torches , resembled the solemn figures of martyrs and holy men placed in niches . 
The guide came down again from his position on the rock , after having , as he thought , sufficiently satisfied the curiosity of his companion . 
`` This is called the Nebelhöhle , or the Misty Hollow , '' said he ; `` it is little known in the country , excepting to huntsmen and shepherds , and few venture to enter it , as all kinds of fearful stories are abroad of ghosts inhabiting its chambers . 
I would not advise any one who is not minutely acquainted with its locality to venture down , for there are deep cavities and subterranean waters , whence no one would see the light again , if once entangled amidst their intricacies . 
There are also secret passages and compartments known only to five individuals now alive . '' 
`` But the banished knight , '' asked Albert , `` where is he ? '' 
`` Take the torch , and follow me , '' replied the other , and led the way though a side passage . 
They had proceeded about twenty paces , when Albert thought he heard the deep tones resembling those of an organ . 
He drew the attention of his leader to it . 
`` That is some one singing , '' the fifer answered , `` the voice sounds particularly beautiful and full in these caverns . 
When two or three men join their voices together , it resembles the full chorus of monks chanting the Ora . '' 
The music became still plainer ; and as they approached the spot , the expressive feeling of a beautiful melody was distinctly heard . 
They were obliged to bend themselves under the corner of a rock , as they proceeded , when the voice of the songster sounded from above , and broke in repeated echo on the indentations of the wall of rock , until it was lost in the mingled noises of dripping water from the moist stones , and the murmur of a subterranean waterfall . 
`` That is the place , '' said the guide ; `` above there , in the side of the rock , is the habitation of the unhappy man . 
Hearken to his voice ! 
We 'll wait and listen till he has finished , for he never was accustomed to be interrupted , even when he lived above ground . '' 
It was with great difficulty that they could catch the following words on account of the great echo and the murmur of falling and rushing water . 
The tow ' r from whence my childhood gazed Upon the subject fields so fair , Now bears a stranger 's banner , raised Where erst my father 's fann 'd the air . 
To ruin sink my father 's halls , The portion of my ancestry ; O'erthrown and unavenged , the walls In earth 's deep bosom buried lie . 
O'er fields , where once in happier tide My jocund bugle horn I blew , The savage foemen fiercely ride : A noble quarry they pursue . 
I am their game , the quarry chased ; The slot-hound follows where he flies , Athirst the stag 's warm blood to taste , Whose antlers are the hunter 's prize . 
The murderers have bent their bow , They ransack forest , hill , and plain ; Whilst clad in rags I nightly go A beggar on my own domain . 
Where once I rode in lordly state , Whilst greeting vassals bow 'd the head ; I fear to tap the cotter 's gate , And beg in pity 's name for bread . 
From my own doors ye thrust me out ; Yet will I knock while knock I can : All is not lost , if heart be stout : I bear a sword , I am a man . 
I quail not : tho ' my heart should break , I will endure unto the end ; And thus my foes of me shall speak , `` This was a man , and ne'er would bend . '' 
A deep sigh , which followed the conclusion of the song , gave the hearers reason to suppose , that the burden of it had not afforded the unfortunate exile much consolation . 
A large tear had rolled down the tanned cheek of the man of Hardt as they stood listening ; and Albert perceived the inward struggle which this good peasant seemed to contend with in order to compose his mind , and appear before the inhabitant of the cavern with a cheerful countenance . 
He requested the young man to hold his torch awhile ; and clambered up the smooth , slippery rock which led to the grotto whence the sounds they had just heard had issued . 
Albert supposed he had gone to acquaint the stranger of his arrival , but his guide returned with a strong rope in his hand . 
He descended half way down the rock again , threw one end of the rope to him , and desiring him to tie the torches on to it , he pulled them up , and placed them in a secure corner in the rock . 
He then assisted his young master to mount to the spot where he was standing , which he would not have been well able to accomplish alone . 
Once up there , they were only a few paces from the inhospitable abode of the exile . 
* * * * * We have attempted to describe this remarkable cavern according to its natural formation . 
Some further observations may be interesting to the reader . 
The entrance is about 150 feet in circumference ; two paths , which form two natural excavations , one of 100 feet long , the other 82 , lead from thence , and , taking different directions , meet again in the interior at the distance of about 200 feet . 
The place where they join forms a grotto , whence , on the right towards the north , higher up in the rock , is another smaller one , the spot to which we have led the reader , to the dwelling of the exile . 
The whole length of the cavern , from the entrance to the innermost point , is about 577 feet . 
The rugged rocks fantastic forms assume , Seen in the darkling of the midnight gloom ; And the wild evergreens so dimly bright , Seem to reflect a kind of lurid light ; This sight so strange may well our knight amaze , He stops , upon the witchery to gaze . 
WIELAND . 
The spot to which they had arrived in this large cavern , possessed one great advantage , that of being perfectly dry . 
The ground was covered with rushes and straw ; a lamp hung on the side of the rock , which threw sufficient light on the breadth , and a great part of the length , of the grotto . 
Opposite the entrance sat the stranger upon a large bear skin , and near him stood his sword and a bugle horn ; an old hat , and a grey cloak lay on the ground . 
A jacket of dark brown leather , and trowsers of coarse blue cloth , covered his person ; an unseemly costume , but which did not the less set off the powerful shape of his body , and the noble features of his countenance . 
He was about thirty-four years old , and his face might be called still handsome and pleasing , although the first bloom of youth was worn off by hardship and fatigue , and his beard having grown wild upon his chin , imparted to his look an air of severity . 
Albert made these fleeting remarks as he stopped at the entrance of the grotto . 
`` Welcome to my palace , Albert von Sturmfeder , '' said its inhabitant , whilst he rose from his bear skin , and offering him his hand , begged him to take a seat beside him on a deer skin : `` you are heartily welcome , '' he repeated . 
`` It was no bad thought of our friend the musician , to introduce you into these lower regions , and bring me such agreeable society . 
Hans , thou faithful soul ! 
thou hast been our major domo and chancellor up to this moment , from henceforth we nominate thee our head-master of the cellar and purveyor-general . 
Look behind that pillar , and thou ` lt find the remains of a bottle of good old wine . 
Take my beech-wood hunting-cup , the only utensil left us , and fill it up to the brim , to the honour of our worthy guest . '' 
Albert beheld the exiled man in astonishment ; though he might have expected to find the energies of his mind unsubdued by the storms of life , still he was prepared to see him brooding over his misfortunes in sullen melancholy , driven by hard fate to seek shelter in these inhospitable regions . 
What , therefore , was his surprise to find him , on the contrary , cheerful and unconcerned , joking about his situation , just as if he had been merely overtaken by a storm in hunting , and had sought shelter from its violence in the grotto ! 
It was a storm , indeed , more terrible than the fury of the elements which had driven him from the castle of his ancestors , for he was the prey that had taken shelter here from the shots of his murderous huntsmen . 
`` You look at me and my abode with astonishment , my worthy guest , '' said the knight : `` you , perhaps , expected to hear me bewailing my hard fate -- but of what use would that be ? 
As no one can retrieve my misfortune in this moment , I think it the wisest plan to put a bold face upon what I can not alter . 
But tell me , am not I as well lodged here as many princes in their palaces ? 
Have you noticed the halls and saloons of this my palace ? 
do not the walls shine like silver , and the vaulted ceilings sparkle as if they were set in pearls and diamonds ? 
and the pillars , do they not glitter with emeralds , rubies , and all sorts of precious stones ? 
But here comes Hans , my purveyor , with the wine . 
Say , my trusty subject , does that cup contain the whole of our cellar ? '' 
`` Your habitation can boast of water , as clear as crystal , '' answered the fifer , who well understood the cheerful mood of his companion ; `` the remainder of the wine in the cellar will fill more than three cups , and -- as we have another guest to-day -- we may indulge a little . 
Luckily , I brought a jug full of good old Uhlbacker from the castle to-night . '' 
`` You have done well , '' said the exiled knight , whilst a ray of joy flashed from his brilliant eye ; `` you must not think , Albert von Sturmfeder , that I am a wine-bibber ; but good wine is a noble thing , and I love to see the full glass circulate in friendly society . 
Put the jug down here , worthy master of the cellar , we 'll enjoy ourselves , as in the best days of our prosperity . 
Here 's to you , and the former splendour of the house of Sturmfeder ! '' 
Albert thanked the knight , and drank . 
`` I wish I could return the honour , in drinking to your name , '' he said ; `` but , as you have already hesitated to give it me , I will not ask it now , sir knight . 
But here 's to you , and may you return victorious to the castles of your fathers , and may your family live and nourish there for ever -- huzza ! '' 
He pronounced the last word with a loud voice , and just as he set his cup down , he was astonished to hear it repeated by many sounds , which appeared to be voices , coming from the whole length of the grotto : `` What is that ? '' 
he said , `` are not we alone ? '' 
`` Those are my vassals , -- spirits , '' answered the knight , smiling ; `` or , if you prefer it , the echo , which responds to your kind wish . 
I have often heard , '' he added , in a more serious tone , `` in the days of my prosperity , the success of my house cheered by hundreds of voices ; but I have never been more pleased , or more affected , than to have it drank to , by my only guest , and re-echoed among the rocks of these lower regions . 
Fill the cup , Hans , and drink , and if you can give us a good toast , let 's have it . '' 
The fifer of Hardt filled the cup , and glanced a significant look at Albert : `` Here 's to you , sir , and something which will please you more , -- the Lady of Lichtenstein ! '' 
`` Hollo , right so , right so ! 
drink , sir , drink ! '' 
cried the exile , and laughed so heartily , that the cavern appeared to tremble under it . 
`` Drink out every drop ! 
long may she live , and bloom for you ! 
Well done , Hans ! 
only look how the blood mounts up in the cheeks of our guest ; how his eyes sparkle , as if he actually kissed her beautiful lips . 
You need not be bashful ! 
I also have loved and wooed , and know the state of a light merry heart of four-and-twenty , on such an occasion ! '' 
`` Poor man ! '' 
said Albert , touched by a sigh of deep feeling which accompanied these last words . 
-- `` Have you loved and wooed also ? 
and perhaps been obliged to leave a beloved wife and children to lament and bewail your present misfortunes ! '' 
As he said this he felt his cloak pulled from behind , when turning around , the countryman winked to him , as a sign , that it was a subject of all others the most painful to the knight to hear . 
Albert immediately saw the effect it produced on his features ; and regretted having been the cause of giving him pain . 
With a look of wild despair , and evidently trying to combat his feeling , he merely said , `` Frost in September destroys the beautiful flower which blossoms in May , and we scarcely know how to account for it . 
My children are left in the hands of rough but faithful nurses , who will , with God 's help , take care good of them till their father returns home again . '' 
He was so much affected when he spoke these words , that it required no small effort to enable him to resume his good humour . 
`` Hans is witness , '' he said , after a pause , `` how often I have wished to see you , Albert von Sturmfeder ; he told me of your being wounded , on that occasion when you were surprised by a party of the League , who probably took you for one of us outcasts ; but happily gave you an opportunity to escape . '' 
`` Yes , I had a narrow escape , '' answered Albert . 
`` I almost believe they took me for the Duke , for they were on the look out for him at that time . 
I would willingly have suffered much greater loss , to be the instrument of saving him . '' 
`` Well , that is saying a good deal ; are you aware , that the cut which was made at you might have cost you your life ? '' 
`` He who takes the field , '' replied Albert , `` must settle all his accounts with the world beforehand . 
I would certainly prefer falling before the enemy in the field of battle , surrounded by friends and comrades , that I might receive from their hands the last offices of regard and love . 
But still , to parry the murderer 's hand from the Duke , I would have sacrificed my life , at any time , had it been necessary . '' 
The exile regarded the young man with emotion , and pressed his hand . 
`` You appear to take great interest in the Duke , '' he said ; `` I should hardly have supposed it ; because they say , your heart is with the League . '' 
`` As I know you are a partisan of the Duke , '' answered Albert ; `` I trust you will excuse me if I speak my mind freely . 
Well , then , I must tell you , I think the Duke has acted , in many respects , not becoming his high station ; for example , he ought not to have meddled in the affair of Hutten in the manner he did , whatever might have been his reasons ; and then , the treatment of his wife was excited by violence and an overbearing spirit ; and you must admit , that it was rage and revenge , and not a just ground for attack , which moved him to take forcible possession of Reutlingen . '' 
He paused , expecting to hear a remark from the knight , upon what he had just said ; but as he remained silent , Albert continued : `` Upon these reports I formed the idea of the Duke 's character when I joined the ranks of the confederates , among whom he was vilified in still stronger terms ; but , on the other hand , he had a warm advocate in the Lady of Lichtenstein , who was better acquainted with his virtues than his enemies , and who you may perhaps have already heard was the principal cause of my quitting their service . 
I will not , therefore , say more upon the subject further than she opened my eyes to the true state of existing circumstances . 
In consequence of her information , I gave myself some trouble to penetrate the ulterior views of the League , and found they were directed , not only to the dispossessing him of his dominions and banishing him his country , but , in order to gratify the real object of their views , they grasped at the partition of his sovereignty among themselves . 
With the impression of the injustice of their intentions strong in my mind , I viewed the Duke 's cause in a light totally different to what I had hitherto done . 
His character was raised still higher in my estimation , when I also learnt , that though urged by the patriotism and love of his people to venture a battle in defence of his rights , he would not risk the blood of his faithful Würtembergers in such a hazardous game . 
And though possessing the power of extorting money from his subjects to subsidize the Swiss , he rather preferred exile for the good of his country . 
These are my reasons for befriending the ill-used Prince . '' 
The knight , whose eyes had been fixed on the ground , now raised them upon Albert , and he seemed overpowered with the kind expressions which he had used towards the Duke . 
`` Truly , '' he said , `` your feelings are pure and generous , my young friend ! 
I know the Duke as well as I do myself , and I may venture to say with you , that he rises superior to his misfortunes , and merits a far better name than report gives of him . 
Ah ! 
if he had a hundred hearts such as yours , not a rag of the League 's ensigns would ever float over the castles of Würtemberg ; -- could I but persuade you to join his cause ! 
Far be it from me , however , to invite you to share his misery ; it is enough that your sword , and an arm such as yours , do not belong to his enemies . 
May your days be happier than his ! 
may heaven reward your good opinion of an unfortunate man ! '' 
The spirit which breathed throughout the words of the exile , struck many a corresponding chord in the heart of Albert . 
He was flattered and encouraged to hear his own actions thus acknowledged . 
The similarity which appeared to exist between the fate of his unknown friend and the impoverished fortunes of his own house , together with the prompting of the noble desire to espouse the weakest but honest cause in the pending struggle , in preference to taking the side of victorious injustice , were so many irresistible inducements to the manly mind of Albert to stand by the exile in his present deep distress . 
Inspired by this feeling , he took his hand , and said , `` Let no one henceforth talk to me of the imprudence , -- let it not be called folly , -- of sharing the misfortunes of the persecuted ! 
May others partake of the division of the Duke 's fine country , and carouse in the spoils of the unhappy man 's property , -- I feel courage enough to suffer with him in his sufferings ; and , when he draws his sword to re-conquer his lost possessions , I will be the first by his side . 
Take my hand , sir knight , as my pledge : let what may happen , I am the Duke 's friend from henceforth , for ever . '' 
A tear of gratitude started in the eye of the exile as he returned the shake of his hand . 
`` You risk much , but you lose nothing by becoming Ulerich 's friend . 
The country , beyond these inhospitable regions , is now in the possession of tyrants and robbers ; but here below faithful hearts still beat true to Würtemberg . 
Forget for a moment that I am a poor knight and an exiled man , and figure me to yourself the Prince of the country , as I am lord of this cavern , with his knight and citizen standing before him . 
Ah ! 
as long as these three estates hold firm together , be they concealed ever so deep in the lap of the earth , Würtemberg still exists . 
Fill the cup , Hans , and join your rough hand to ours ; we 'll seal the alliance in a bumper ! '' 
Hans replenished the jug and filled the cup , `` Drink , noble sirs , drink , '' said he ; `` you can not pledge yourselves in a more noble wine than in this Uhlbacher . '' 
The knight having emptied the cup by a long draught , ordered it to be filled again , and presented it to Albert . 
`` Does not this wine , '' asked Albert , `` grow about the castle whence Würtemberg 's royal blood sprang ? 
I think the heights about it are called Uhlbacher ? '' 
`` You are right , '' answered the exile ; `` the hill is generally called the Rothenberg , at the foot of which the vine grows ; the castle stands upon its summit , built by Würtemberg 's ancestors . 
Oh ! 
the beautiful vallies of the Neckar , the luxuriant hills of fruit and wine ! 
Gone , gone for ever ! '' 
He uttered these words with a voice which bespoke a heart almost broken by suffering and grief ; he could scarcely conceal the anguish of his soul , which his inflexible mind had hitherto veiled under the mask of a forced hilarity . 
The countryman knelt beside him , took his hand , and to rouse him from a state of painful wandering , in which he was lost for some moments , said , `` Be of good cheer , sir ; you will return to your country again happier than you left it . '' 
`` You will behold the vallies of your home again , '' said Albert . 
`` When the Duke regains his lost rights , and reoccupies the castles of his ancestors , the vallies of the Neckar , and its richly clothed hills of vineyards , will echo with the rejoicings of his people , and you also will be able to join in the jubilee . 
Banish gloomy thoughts from your mind , nunc vino pellite curas ; drink , and let us hope for better times . 
I pledge you in this Würtemberg wine , -- ` to the Duke 's happy return with his faithful followers ! ' '' 
These words seemed to reanimate the sunken spirits of the knight , and like a ray of sunshine shed a smile over his features . 
`` Yes ! '' 
he cried , `` sweet is the word which sends comfort to the broken-hearted ; it is like a drop of cold water to refresh the weary wanderer in the desert . 
Forget my weakness , my friend ; pardon it in a man who otherwise never gives place to grief . 
`` But if you had ever looked down from the summit of the Rothenberg , shaded by its green woods , into the heart of Würtemberg , and beheld the gentle stream of the Neckar winding its course along its richly cultivated banks ; with its fields of high standing corn waving in the breeze ; the red roofs of its villages peeping out from a forest of fruit trees , with their industrious inhabitants , consisting of strong men and beautiful women , busily employed in their gardens or dressing their vines on the heights ; had you surveyed all this , and with my eyes , and then been compelled to take refuge from the bloodthirsty hands of ruffians in these inhospitable regions , surrounded by the benumbing chill of these walls , outlawed , condemned , banished . 
-- Oh ! 
the thought is terrible ! 
too overwhelming for man 's heart to bear ! '' 
Albert , fearful lest the recollection of his past days , and the keen sense of his present situation , might a second time have too powerful an effect upon the mind of the exile , sought by changing the subject of conversation , to divert his mind and calm his thoughts . 
`` As I suppose you have been often with the Duke , '' he said , `` pray tell me , now that I am his declared friend , what is his disposition ? 
what is his appearance ? 
is it true , as is reported , that he is of a very changeable and capricious temper ? '' 
`` No more upon that subject at present , if you please , '' answered the exile ; `` you will soon have an opportunity to judge for yourself when you see him . 
We have already spoken enough upon these matters , but you have said nothing about your own affairs ; not a word about the object of your travels , nor of the beautiful lady of Lichtenstein ? 
You are silent and look confused when that delicate subject is mentioned . 
Do not suppose I wish to be curious when I ask that question ; no , it is solely because I think I can be of use to you . '' 
`` From what has passed between us this night , '' replied Albert , `` I have nothing to conceal from you ; secrecy is no longer necessary . 
It strikes me , that you must have long known I love Bertha , and that she likewise is faithful to me ? '' 
The exile answered , smiling , `` O yes , there was no mistaking the symptoms of her feelings , for when you were mentioned her confused look bespoke the secret of her heart , and the blush which accompanied it was an evident witness of the truth of it . 
When she named you it was with a peculiar tone of voice , as if the strings of her heart sounded in full accord to that key-note . '' 
`` This observation of yours will encourage me to go to Lichtenstein without further delay . 
It was my original intention , after I had quitted the service of the League , to go direct to my home ; but as the Alb is about half way between Franconia and this place , and the desire I had to see my love once more was uppermost in my thoughts , I determined to endeavour to accomplish it . 
This man Hans conducted me over the Alb ; you know the cause which delayed me eight days on my journey . 
To-morrow , at day-break , I purpose announcing myself at the castle , and I trust I shall now appear before the old knight in a more welcome light than I should otherwise have done , had I not performed my promise to the League of remaining neutral fourteen days , and now joined his colours . '' 
`` You may be assured of his welcome , '' said the knight , `` particularly if you go as the friend of the Duke , for he is his faithful and most devoted adherent . 
But , may be , he would not trust your word , unsupported by some introduction , being , so it is said , rather incredulous , and shy of strangers . 
You know upon what terms I am with him . 
He is the kind-hearted Samaritan to me ; and when I creep out of my hole at night , he nourishes my body with warm food , and my heart with still warmer consolation for the future . 
A couple of lines from me will be better received by him than a passport from the Emperor . 
Take this ring , which he and many others know and respect , and wear it in remembrance of the time we have passed together ; it will announce you as a friend of Würtemberg 's good cause . '' 
With these words , he took a broad gold ring from his finger . 
A large red stone was set in the middle , upon which was engraved , in the armorial helmet , the three stag horns , with the bugle , which Albert recognised as the arms of Würtemberg . 
Around the ring were the letters , U.D.O.W.A.T. in relievo , the meaning of which he could not comprehend . 
`` Udowat ? 
what does that name signify ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Is it a parole for the followers of the Duke ? '' 
`` No , my young friend , '' said the exile . 
`` The Duke has worn this ring long on his finger ; he valued it much ; but as I have many other souvenirs from him , I can best spare it , and could not place it in worthier hands . 
The letters mean , Ulerich , Duke of Würtemberg and Teck . '' 
`` I shall value it as long as I live , '' replied Albert , `` as a relic of the unfortunate Prince whose name it bears , and as a pleasing remembrance of you , sir knight , and the night we passed together in this cavern . '' 
`` When you come to the drawbridge of Lichtenstein , '' continued the knight , `` deliver a note which I will write , and this ring , to the first servant you see , and desire them to be conveyed to the lord of the castle , when he will certainly receive you as the Duke 's own son . 
But for the lady , you must use your own passport , for my charm does not extend to her : a tender squeeze of the hand , or the mysterious language of the eyes , or perhaps still better , a sweet kiss on her rosy lips , will serve the purpose . 
But in order to appear before her as she would wish to see you , you need some rest , for if you pass the whole night without sleep , your eyes will be heavy . 
Therefore follow my example , stretch yourself on the deer skin , and make a pillow of your cloak . 
And you , worthy major domo , grand chamberlain and purveyor , Hans , faithful companion in misfortune , give this Paladin another glass for his nightcap , it will soften his deer-skin , and enchant this rocky grotto into a bed-room . 
And then may the god of dreams visit him with his choicest gifts ! '' 
The men drank a good night to each other , and laid themselves to rest , Hans taking up his position as a faithful dog , at the entrance of the rocky chamber . 
Morpheus soon came with light steps to the aid of the young man , and as he was dropping off to sleep he heard , in a half doze , the exile saying his evening prayer , and , with pious confidence in the Disposer of events , imploring him to shower down his almighty protection on him and his unhappy country . 
See that arrowy crag so tapering rise , From the depths of that valley so sweet ; There Lichtenstein 's fort rears her head to the skies , And smiles on the world at her feet . 
SCHWAB . 
When the fifer of Hardt awakened Albert in the morning , the youth was at first puzzled to recollect where he was , and to recognize the objects about him ; but he soon came to his senses , and the remembrance of the last evening 's occurrences . 
He returned the hearty shake of the hand with which the exile saluted him , who said , `` Although it would give me great pleasure to detain you some few days with me , yet I would rather advise you to proceed at once to Lichtenstein , if you wish to have a hot breakfast . 
I can not , alas ! 
prepare such in my cavern , for we never dare make a fire , lest the smoke betray our position . '' 
Albert consented to his proposal , and thanked him for his night 's lodging . 
`` I may truly say , '' he answered , `` that I never passed a night more to my satisfaction , than I have done in this place . 
A deep-felt , though melancholy , charm would seem to hallow the society of friends in such a situation as this , and I would not have exchanged my abode among these rocky walls , for the most splendid apartment of a ducal palace . '' 
`` Yes , indeed , secure from persecution , and among friends , when the glass circulates freely , banishment has its charms , '' replied the exile ; `` but when I sit here , day after day , in solitude , brooding over my calamities , my heart yearning for liberty , and my eye wearied with the sameness of these subterranean splendours , then it is I drink the full cup of misery . 
And then again , my ear is deafened with the unceasing monotonous murmur of these waters , dripping drop after drop from the rocks ! 
Jealous of their freedom , my imagination follows their course through the depths below , whence they escape to swell the running stream , whose gentle ripple , with the note of the cheerful lark , would seem to join chorus in the universal praise . '' 
`` My poor friend , I pity thee ! 
yes , indeed , this solitary life must be terrible , '' said Albert . 
`` Nevertheless , '' continued the other , raising himself up , `` I reckon myself happy to have found this asylum , with the help of a few trusty friends . 
Rather than fall into the hands of my enemies , to be their sport and laughing-stock , I would descend a hundred fathoms lower , where the vital air scarce sustains life . 
And before I would surrender my liberty , these hands should dig my way into the heart of the earth , until I reached its centre ; there to invoke the curses of heaven upon my oppressors as a just punishment of the wrongs I endure from the persecutions of their revengeful designs . '' 
The exile having worked himself up into a state of fury , Albert involuntarily retreated a pace or two . 
His figure appeared to gain in height -- all the muscles of his body were on the stretch -- his cheeks glowed with rage -- his eyes shot fire , as if they sought an enemy upon whom to revenge his sufferings ; and the loud and violent tone of his voice ; echoed among the rocks the maledictions which issued from his mouth . 
Albert could not but sympathise with the man in giving vent to his feelings in such a burst of passion ; he who was so cruelly persecuted by his enemies , for his faithful attachment to his lord . 
`` I admire your strength of mind , '' said he to the knight ; and , as if a sudden thought had crossed his mind , continued , `` will you pardon me for asking you one question , which perhaps you may deem indiscreet ; but since you have admitted me to your friendship and confidence , I will venture to do so . 
Tell me , are you not the celebrated Maxx Stumpf von Schweinsberg ? '' 
There must have been something particularly strange in this question ; because the gravity which had shaded the knight 's countenance disappeared at once , at the mere mention of this name . 
He first smiled ; but not able to contain himself , broke out into a loud laugh , in which Hans considered himself permitted to join . 
Albert was unable to comprehend the meaning of the sudden burst of merriment which his question had occasioned . 
He felt confused , and looked for an explanation of it , first at one , then at the other ; but his embarrassment only excited their merry mood still more . 
At length the exile said , `` Pardon me , worthy guest , for having violated in an unmannerly way the rights of hospitality ; for I ought rather to have bitten off the end of my tongue than have given you cause to suppose I had thought you said anything ridiculous ; but how comes it that you take me for Maxx Stumpf ? 
Do you know him ? '' 
`` No , I never saw him ; but I know him to be a brave knight , whom the League has expelled from his country , on account of his faithful adherence to the Duke , and that they are now endeavouring to apprehend him . 
Is not yours a similar case ? '' 
`` I thank you for comparing me to such a man ; but I would not advise you to fall in his way in the night , upon the same terms as when we met ; for Stumpf , without further to do , would soon have cut you up into slices fit for cooking . 
Schweinsberg being a little thick-set fellow , and a head shorter than me , it was the comparison which made me laugh so irresistibly . 
He is , however , an honourable man , and one of the few to be depended upon who will not desert his master in misfortune . '' 
`` So you are not Schweinsberg ? '' 
replied Albert ; `` then I must leave you without knowing who my friend is . '' 
`` Young man ! '' 
said the exile , with dignity , `` you have found a friend in me , by your gallant , honourable behaviour ; which your open , frank countenance has confirmed . 
Let it suffice for you , to have gained this friend ; ask no further questions , one word might perhaps interrupt this confidential intimacy between us , which is so gratifying to me . 
Farewell ; think on the banished man without a name , and be assured that , before two days are over , you shall both hear from me , and know my name . '' 
In spite of his unseemly dress , the whole demeanour of this man appeared to Albert to be more that of a Prince dismissing a subject from his presence , than an unfortunate exile , parting from a friend who had participated in his afflictions . 
During the last conversation , the fifer of Hardt had lighted the torches , and stood waiting at the entrance of the grotto ; the knight pressed a salute on the lips of the young man , and waved him to go . 
He departed , unable to account why a man so familiar and friendly in his address , should , at the same time , inspire him with the idea of being so much his superior in rank ; he had never felt , until this moment , how an individual , devoid of all the external marks of distinction , exhibiting outward signs of poverty , rather than the contrary , could possess a personal influence sufficiently great to subdue vanity and self-love . 
Occupied with these thoughts , he retraced his steps through the cavern . 
The beauties of nature , which had surprised him and fixed his attention when he first entered it , had lost their charm to his eye , and his wonder was no longer excited at the grandeur of the surrounding objects . 
His mind was exclusively taken up with the contemplation of a subject more imposing and instructive than these rocks , however magnificent they might be . 
The human mind , rising superior to the frowns of this world , exemplified so well in the character of his unknown friend , filled him with admiration , and proved to him that the dignity of man 's nature will force its way through the garb of poverty and the suffering of persecution , and remain unsullied amidst the frowns of fate . 
A bright day greeted Albert and the fifer of Hardt , as they issued from the darkness of the cavern into the light of heaven . 
Albert breathed more freely in the freshness of the morning air , than he had done amidst the damp exhalations which streamed from the galleries and grottos of the subterranean vaults , from which they derive the name of the misty caverns . 
He found his horse in the same place , fastened to the tree , where he had left him the night before , as fresh and lively as ever ; the military weapons attached to the saddle not having suffered from the night dew , which Albert was fearful might have been the case . 
But Hans had had the precaution to cover the beast with a large coarse cloth , in order to guard against bad weather . 
The young man arranged his dress as well as he was able , after such a night 's lodging , whilst the countryman gave his horse a feed of fresh hay . 
They then set forward on their journey , and having gone but a few paces , the tolling of a church bell from the valley below saluted their ears , and broke the solemn stillness of the morning . 
Shortly afterwards , another bell answered , and then three or four more followed , when the number , increasing to at least twelve , spread their melodious tones over the heights and vallies . 
The young man stopt his horse , surprised at this early chorus of bells : `` What means this salutation ? '' 
he asked , `` is it a signal that there is a fire in the neighbourhood ? 
or may be to-day is a holiday ? 
God knows that , since my illness , I have quite lost all knowledge of time , and can only distinguish Sunday from the other days of the week by the peasant girls being clad in their best dresses and clean aprons . '' 
`` That is not an uncommon case with many a military man , '' replied Hans ; `` I myself have often been obliged to guess what day it was , when I had other things in my head , which I regret to say I deemed more important than hearing mass . 
But now it is different , '' he added , with a serious countenance , and crossed himself , `` to-day is Good Friday . '' 
`` That reminds me , '' said the young man , `` that this is the first time in my life that I have not celebrated this day as becomes a Christian ; it also brings with it many happy hours of my youth to my recollection . 
My father was then alive ; I possessed a tender , good mother , and a dear young sister . 
We two children always rejoiced upon the anniversary of Good Friday , and , though we did not know exactly what it meant , we remembered that it was only two days from Easter , a season when our mother invariably gave us some token of her affection . 
Requiescant in pace ! '' 
he added , turning away to conceal a tear ; `` they are all three gone . '' 
These last words , which he pronounced in remembrance of his departed parents , the spontaneous effusion of his affectionate heart , did not escape the fifer 's observation , who raised his cap in respect to the feelings of his companion . 
Such had been the restless life of this extraordinary man from his infancy , that he might have been thought to be void of all sense of religion ; but since his escape from the hand of the executioner , which he had hinted at in a former conversation with Albert , and professed to have become a better man , serious thoughts at times occupied his mind . 
Albert having alluded to his own case of receiving a present from his mother at Easter , the fifer took occasion to say , with a good-natured smile , `` that the time was coming , when he hoped he would also be able to perform the same office to his own children . '' 
But the young man was offended at this familiarity , and showed symptoms of his displeasure . 
`` No offence , sir , '' he replied , and drew his attention to the castle before them . 
`` Do you see the tower peeping out among the trees ? '' 
he added : `` another short quarter of an hour , and we are there . '' 
`` From what I could remark yesterday in the dark , '' said the young man , `` the castle appeared to be erected upon a solitary , steep rock . 
By heavens ! 
a bold thought , whoever built it ; for no one could attempt to scale its walls unless he were in league with the devil , and had the power of flying . 
It might be bombarded , however , from this spot with heavy artillery . '' 
`` Do you think so ? 
I can tell you , that they have four good match-guns in the hall , which would return an answer too sharp to any one who should attempt it . 
Had you made a careful survey , you must have observed , that the rock is separated from the mountain by a broad deep valley , which surrounds it , so that much damage could not be done to the castle . 
The only weak side is that nearest the mountain , upon which the drawbridge is placed . 
Let but an enemy attempt to plant guns there , and he would soon see old Lichtenstein 's battery hurl them down in the abyss below , before they had even touched a pane of glass in his windows . 
But the great difficulty would be to get guns up this declivity , and transport them over these cavities , without exposing men to more danger than that nest is worth . '' 
`` You are right , '' Albert answered ; `` I should like to know who ever thought of building a castle upon that rock . '' 
`` I 'll tell you , '' replied Hans , who was well acquainted with all the legends of his country : `` once upon a time there lived a fair lady , who suffered much persecution from her suitors , and did not know how to escape them . 
