There it was possible that an introduction to the sister of the Abbess , who was said to bear a great resemblance to the latter , might restore to me my long-lost disposition towards a life of simple piety , and to those pure enjoyments which had attracted me in youth . 
In order to reanimate the most vivid recollections of that period , even a sight of the Princess was , in my present tone of feelings , all that would be requisite ; but as to the means by which an interview with her might be obtained , I resolved to submit myself wholly to chance . 
Scarcely was it day-break when I heard the voice of the forester in the court . 
I had agreed to set out early with his son , and therefore dressed as quickly as possible . 
When I came down stairs , there was a rough leiter-wagen at the door , prepared for departure . 
The three servants now brought out the monk , who , with a deadly-pale and distorted countenance , allowed himself to be led , without uttering a word . 
He would answer no questions -- he would accept of no food ; indeed , scarcely seemed to notice those who were around him . 
Accordingly , they lifted him upon the carriage , and bound him with ropes ; for his present condition appeared very doubtful , and no one could be secure against the sudden breaking out of his malady . 
As they bound his limbs , his visage was convulsively writhen , and he heaved a deep sigh , with an expression so piteous , that his situation wounded me to the heart . 
Between him and me there subsisted some mysterious relationship , as to the nature of which , I could not yet even guess ; but to his misery and probable destruction I owed my present hopes of safety . 
Christian , and one of the huntsmen , took their places beside him in the carriage . 
It was not till they were driving away that his looks happened to fall directly on me , whereupon his features immediately assumed an expression of wonder and perplexity . 
As the carriage receded , his eyes still remained intently gazing on me . 
`` Mark you , '' said the forester , `` how strangely he watches you . 
I do believe that your presence in the dining-room contributed very much to his frenzy ; for even in his lucid intervals he has always been timid , and has cherished the suspicion that a stranger was to come who would put him to death , of which he always entertains an unbounded horror . 
Being aware of this , I have often , when in the wildest of his paroxysms , by threatening to shoot him , produced perfect calmness and submission . '' 
I now felt lightened and relieved by the consciousness that this monk , who seemed to present a horrible and distorted shadow of myself , was effectually removed from my presence . 
I rejoiced , too , in my anticipation of the residenz , believing that the load of that gloomy and obscure fate by which I had been oppressed , would at last be taken from my shoulders , -- that I should be gifted with new energies , and acquire strength to tear myself from the grasp of that malicious demon , to whom I had hitherto been subjected . 
After breakfast , the handsome travelling equipage of the forester drove up to the door ; I could not prevail on his wife to accept of a little money in requital for the hospitality that she had shewn to me ; but to his daughters I was luckily able to give some articles of bijouterie which I found in my portmanteau , having purchased them at the fair in Frankenburg . 
The whole family took leave of me as affectionately as if I had been for a long time resident among them ; but the old man did not let me go without some farther jokes upon my peculiar genius and success as a sportsman . 
Under the bright golden gleams of a fine autumnal day , we at last drove off . 
The residenz of the Prince presented a complete contrast to the trading town which I had left . 
In extent , it was much smaller , but was more regularly and handsomely built . 
Several broad streets , planted with double rows of flourishing trees , seemed more to belong to the laying out of a park , or English garden , than to a town . 
There was here no bustle of trade ; all was , on the contrary , still and solemn -- an impression perhaps deepened by the kind of atmosphere peculiar to that season of the year -LRB- the decline of autumn -RRB- when I arrived at the capital . 
The quiet was only now and then interrupted by the rattling course of some coroneted carriage . 
In the dress and demeanour even of the lower ranks , there was an attempt at the polite and ornamental , yet without vain ostentation ; while , as I walked through the streets , although a perfect stranger , yet my appearance probably being approved of , I was saluted with a respectful bow , and wave of the hat , from every passenger . 
The palace of the Prince was by no means large , nor even built in a grand style ; yet , with regard to elegance and just proportions , it was one of the finest buildings that I had ever seen . 
Around it was a very beautiful park , which , by the possessor 's liberality , was thrown open to all the world , while , as usual in Germany , not a single flower was plucked , nor an ornament displaced or disfigured , not even a blade of grass injured by passengers quitting the gravel walks . 
At the hotel where I had put up , I was told that the Prince frequently enjoyed an evening promenade with his family through the park ; and that many inhabitants of the town watched that opportunity of paying their respects to , or seeing , en passant , their respected sovereign . 
Accordingly , at the proper hour , I hastened to the grounds , and observed the Prince , with his consort and a small train of attendants , step out from the vestibule of the palace . 
Very soon , as they drew nearer , my whole attention was directed to the Princess , whom I should have instantly recognised , only by her resemblance to the Abbess , which was striking and extraordinary . 
The same height and dignity ; the same grace in every gesture ; the same intellectual gleam of the eyes , and the free , unclouded forehead and fascinating smile . 
Only she appeared younger in years , and in shape fuller and rounder than the Abbess . 
She came close past me , so that I heard also the tone of her voice , as she spoke with some ladies who happened to be in the allée , while the Prince walked behind , seemingly absorbed in deep discussion with a grave , formal-looking man . 
The looks and behaviour of this noble family , and the simplicity of dress , the total absence of display evinced both by them and their immediate train , were all in harmony . 
One could easily perceive that the good manners and spirit of respectful order which prevailed through the town , had their origin in the example of the court . 
By chance I had my station near a lively little man , who gave me answers readily to all the questions that I was inclined to put to him , adding spontaneously many remarks of his own , which to me were very opportune and interesting . 
When the Prince and Princess had passed by , he proposed to me , as a stranger , to take a walk through the park , and to point out to me the various objects which , as works of art , were there most to be admired . 
This was an offer precisely such as I had wished for , and I gladly availed myself of his politeness . 
As we proceeded through the grounds , beneath dark shadowy rows of beeches , elms , and poplars , I expressed with great sincerity my admiration of the delightful soil and climate of the residenz , and the luxuriant growth of the noble trees . 
But as to the numberless buildings in imitation of ancient temples , where pillars , that should have been of gigantic height , could be measured at an arm-length from the ground ; -- Gothic chapels , for example , where the attention of the builder had been concentrated on trifling ornaments , instead of the construction of a grand and intellectual whole ; -- of all these I expressed freely my decided disapprobation ; consequently , he endeavoured to defend these erections by the usual argument , that they were in a park indispensable , if it were no more than to guard against the inconvenience of a sudden shower . 
To this I replied , that simple buildings , such as romantic cottages , root-houses , etc. would be equally useful , and free from that blame of bad taste which I attached to the now existing temples , mosques , and chapels . 
`` To say the truth , I am quite of your opinion , '' said the stranger ; `` but , meanwhile , you must know , that the design of all these buildings , and of the whole park , proceeds from our Prince himself ; and this circumstance , of course , softens down , at least to us , who are under his dominion , all tendency to severe criticism or censure . 
`` The Prince is , in truth , one of the best of men . 
He has acted always on that admirable principle , that his subjects are not there to serve and minister to him , but that he is appointed guardian over them , and is responsible for their comfort and welfare . 
The liberty of speaking freely and aloud whatever one thinks ; the low rate of taxes and consequent cheapness of provisions ; the extreme lenity , nay , invisibility , of the police , -LRB- who , though always watchful , never make their appearance except on occasion of some flagrant misdemeanour , -RRB- the removal of all troublesome and superfluous soldiery , the calm regularity with which affairs of business and merchandize are carried on ; all these circumstances must make a residence in our capital very agreeable to a stranger . 
`` I would lay any bet , that you have never yet been asked after your name and rank ; nor has the innkeeper at your hotel , as it happens in other places , marched in with a great book under his arm , in which one is obliged , nolens volens , with an abominable stump of a pen , and ink made of soot and water , to enter his name and condition in the world . 
`` In short , the whole economy and arrangements of our small kingdom , in which there prevail a real prudence and wisdom , proceed directly from our excellent Prince ; whereas , formerly , at this very town , people were tormented by the pedantic formality of a court , whose only aim was to represent the expenses and parade of a neighbouring government of far greater power and wealth , in a pocket-edition . 
`` Our Prince is a sincere and unaffected lover of the arts and sciences . 
Therefore , every good artist , and every man of real learning , is welcome to him ; for , as to rank in life , he lays on that no stress whatever . 
He considers only the degree of intellectual acquirements which a stranger actually does or does not possess ; and accordingly shews or withdraws his favourable countenance . 
`` But even in the accomplishments of our Prince , it is impossible to deny , that something of an alloy of pedantry has crept in , which is partly owing to errors in his early education , and which expresses itself in his improvements , by an overstrained and slavish adherence to this or that particular school or fashion . 
He himself drew out , with the most laborious minuteness , the plans for every building in the park ; and even the slightest departure of the workmen from the given models , which he had searched out and put together from an hundred antiquarian repositories , vexed him in the highest degree . 
Every pillar , portico , tower , and cupola , must have its representative , however ludicrous the imitation in point of height and dimensions must of necessity be . 
`` By the same disposition to carry one or other favourite system to an extreme , our theatre now suffers , where the principles that he has once laid down , must on no account be departed from , although , in order to retain them , sometimes the most heterogeneous incongruities are forced together . 
In short , the Prince has a boundless variety of hobbies , which -LRB- to keep up the metaphor -RRB- he rides alternately ; yet not one of them is of a description calculated to give offence , or do any real injury to his subjects . 
When this park was laid out , then he was architect and gardener à la folie . 
After that , some new fantasies about music wholly absorbed his attention ; to which inspiration , however , we owe the fitting up of a most admirable and unrivalled choir and opera . 
Then painting took the pas , and occupied him so entirely , that , as an artist , he is no mean proficient . 
`` Even in the daily amusements of the Court , he shews the same disposition to extremes , and the same variability . 
Formerly , dancing was kept up almost every evening ; now , there is on company-days a Pharo-Bank , and the Prince , without being in the least what is properly called a gamester , delights in watching and calculating all the intricacies of chance . 
But the pharo-table has continued already long enough ; and there is wanting only some very trifling occurrence or impulse to bring something altogether new again on the carpet . 
`` This versatility has sometimes drawn upon our good Prince the reproach of a weak understanding . 
There are people who insist , that the mind of a wise man should always be like a still and waveless lake , reflecting the same images with calm and unchangeable fidelity . 
But , in my opinion , injustice is done him ; for it is merely from an extraordinary vivacity of spirit , that he thus gives the reins at all times to some favourite and passionate impulse . 
Hence no expense is spared on establishments contributing to the amusement and intellectual improvement of his subjects . 
These grounds , for example , whatever may be their defects , are always kept in the nicest order ; our opera , chapel choir , and theatre , are munificently endowed ; and our collection of pictures is at every opportunity augmented . 
As to the court amusements of gaming , etc. these are recreations , which , considering the Prince 's sedulous application at other times to business , surely can not be refused to him . '' 
During this conversation , we passed by many very beautiful and picturesque masses and groups of trees , of which I renewed my expressions of admiration , praising also the fine varieties , which , from rising grounds , the eye commanded in the landscape . 
`` I ought not to forget , '' said my companion , `` that although the Prince designed every architectural ornament , and had generally the superintendance of the park , yet he was indebted for the position of every thicket , group , or allée of trees , to the taste of our admirable Princess . 
She is indeed a complete landscape painter , after which , natural history , especially botany , is her favourite study . 
Hence you will find the rarest and most curious foreign plants and flowers , not arranged as if merely brought hither for show , but growing in artificial parterres as if on their native soil . 
The Princess , however , expressed an especial disgust to the awkwardly cut gods and goddesses in freestone , naiads and dryads , with which the park , in former days , was filled . 
These statues have therefore vanished ; and you find only a few copies after the antique , which the Prince , on account of certain cherished remembrances , would not part with . '' 
* * * * * It was now late in the evening , and we left the park . 
My companion readily accepted an invitation which I gave him to my hotel , where he at last announced himself as the Inspector of the Prince 's picture-gallery . 
After supper , and a bottle of excellent wine , when we had become better acquainted , I mentioned to him my earnest wish to obtain an introduction at court ; whereupon he assured me , that nothing could be more easy than this , as every well-educated stranger was welcomed in the circle of his sovereign . 
I had only to make a visit to the Court-Marshal , and beg of him to present me to the Prince . 
This diplomatic mode of introduction , however , by no means suited me , as I could scarcely hope to escape certain troublesome questions of whence I had come -- what was my rank and profession , etc. . 
I therefore resolved to trust to chance , which would soon throw a favourable opportunity in my way ; and , accordingly , this soon after occurred . 
One morning , as I was taking an early walk in the yet solitary park , the Prince , dressed in a simple blue surtout , and quite alone , came along an allée , directly meeting me . 
I saluted him en passant , as if he had been some one of whom I had no previous knowledge . 
Hereupon he stood still , and began a conversation with the question , `` Whether I was a stranger here ? '' 
I answered in the affirmative , adding , `` that I had arrived only a few days before , with the intention of passing directly through ; but that the charms of the situation , with the tranquillity , good order , and spirit of calm enjoyment , which everywhere seemed to prevail , had induced me to stay longer . 
Quite independent , and living merely for literature and the arts , I had now resolved to make this place my residence for some time , as everything by which I was surrounded had become to me more and more delightful and attractive . '' 
By these expressions the Prince seemed obviously flattered , and he even offered himself as my cicerone , to explore the beauties of the park . 
I took special care not to betray that I had already seen everything , but availed myself of my previous knowledge , in order to throw in apt remarks and exclamations . 
I allowed myself to be led through all the temples , grottos , chapels , and pavilions , patiently listening to the Prince 's long lectures about every building . 
He regularly named the ancient models after which every structure had been imitated ; made me attend particularly to their minutest details ; then referred , ever and anon , to the grand morale , the intellectual system which prevailed through the whole plan of the park ; that harmony in confusion , `` where all things differ , and yet all agree , '' which he thought should be adopted as the leading principle in laying out grounds of this sort . 
The Prince then desired my opinion . 
I approved very cordially the natural charms of the place , and the luxuriant vegetation also of the well-disposed masses and groups of wood , with the shadowy berceaux ; but as to the buildings , I expressed myself just as freely as I had before done to the gallery inspector . 
He listened to me attentively ; seemed not altogether to reject my remarks , but at last cut all discussion short , by saying , that my notions were very good in theory , but that as to the actual practice , it was a different affair , of which I seemed to have but very little notion . 
The conversation then turned upon the arts . 
I soon proved that I was a tolerable connoisseur of painting ; and , as a practical musician , I ventured many observations , in opposition to his ideas , which , though ingeniously and precisely delivered , only served to shew that he was far more studied than persons of his rank generally are ; but , at the same time , that of the real attributes of musical genius he had no comprehension whatever . 
On the other hand , my objections only proved to the Prince that I was a dilletante , one of a class who are generally not much enlightened by the actual practice of their theories . 
He instructed me , however , in the proper characteristics -LRB- or what , according to him , ought to be the proper characteristics -RRB- of a sublime picture , and a perfect opera . 
I heard much about colouring , drapery , pyramidal groups ; of serious and of comic music ; of scenes for the prima donna ; of choruses ; of effect , chiaro oscuro , light and shade , etc. etc. ; to all which medley I listened quietly , for I perceived that the Prince took a pleasure in his own discourse . 
At last he abruptly cut short his own eloquence with the question , `` Do you play pharo ? '' 
to which I answered in the negative . 
-- `` Well , sir , '' said he , `` that is a most admirable game . 
In its lofty simplicity , it is the true and proper pastime for a man of genius . 
One is thereby carried out of himself ; or , to speak better , if he is possessed of due powers of mind , he is lifted up to a station from which he can contemplate all the strange complications and entanglements which are -LRB- otherwise invisibly -RRB- spun by the mysterious power which we call Chance . 
Loss and gain are the two points on which , like pivots , the grand machine is moved ; and by this machine we are irresistibly carried onward , while it is impelled ceaselessly by its own internal springs . 
This game , sir , you must absolutely learn . 
I will myself be your teacher . '' 
I assured him that I had hitherto felt no particular turn for gaming , and that I had always understood the inclination for it to be highly pernicious and destructive . 
The Prince smiled , and fixing on me his bright , penetrating eyes , resumed ; `` Ay , there are indeed childish superficial minds , who maintain that argument ; and , consequently , you will suppose that I am a gamester , who wishes to draw you into his nets ; know , then , that I am the Prince ! 
If you are pleased with your residence at my capital , then remain here , and visit at my palace , where you will find that we sometimes play pharo . 
Yet I by no means allow that any one under my roof shall subject himself to loss , though the stake must of necessity be high in order to excite interest ; for fortune herself is lazy and stupid as long as nothing but what is insignificant is offered to her arbitration . '' 
Already on the point of leaving me , the Prince turned round , and asked , `` With whom have I been speaking ? '' 
-- I answered that my name was Leonard ; that I lived as a literary man , particulier ; for the rest , I was by no means a nobile , nor a man of rank ; and , therefore , perhaps did not dare to make use of the advantages which his highness had thus offered to me . 
`` What the devil , '' said he , `` has nobility to do with it ? 
You are , as I have clearly convinced myself , a very ingenious and well-informed man . 
Literature , science , and the arts , confer on you nobility , and render you fully qualified to appear in our circles . 
Adieu , Mr Leonard ! 
-- Au revoir ! '' 
Thus my wishes were far more readily , and more early than I could have expected , fulfilled . 
For the first time in my life I should appear as a courtier . 
All the absurd stories , therefore , which I had read in romances , of cabals , quarrels , intrigues , and conspiracies , floated through my brain . 
According to the most received authorities among novel writers , the Prince must be surrounded and blindly led by all sorts of impostors ; especially , too , the Court-Marshal must be an insipid , proud , high-born coxcomb ; the Prime Minister a malicious , miserly villain ; the lords in waiting gay and unprincipled libertines . 
Every countenance must artificially wear the most agreeable expression , while in the heart all is selfishness and deception . 
In society they -LRB- the courtiers -RRB- must profess to each other the most unbounded friendship and attachment . 
They must bend to the very earth in apparent humility , while every one endeavours to trip up his neighbour 's heels in the dark , so that he may fall unpitied , and his pretended friend come into his place , which he may keep only till some one else plays off the same manoeuvre against him . 
Finally , the court ladies must be ugly , proud , revengeful ; glistening with diamonds , nodding with feathers , painted up to the eyes , but withal , amorous , constantly engaged in venal intrigues , and laying snares for the unwary stranger , which he must fly from as he would from the devil . 
Such was the absurd picture which , from the books I had read at college , had remained vividly on my recollection . 
The conversation of the Prior , indeed , might have afforded me more rational ideas ; still it seemed to me that a court must be the sphere , of all others , where the Arch-Enemy of mankind exerted his pre-eminent and unresisted dominion . 
Hence it was not without timidity that I looked forward to my promised introduction ; but an inward conviction , that here my lot in life was finally to be decided , and the veil of mystery withdrawn , drove me still onwards , so that , at the appointed hour , with a palpitating heart , but struggling as manfully as I could with my disquietude , I found myself in the outer hall of the palace . 
My residence at the commercial town of Frankenburg had done much to rub off the rust of my conventual habits . 
Being by nature gifted with a graceful and prepossessing exterior , I soon accustomed myself to that free and unembarrassed demeanour , which is proper to the man of the world . 
That paleness , which generally disfigures even handsome features among the inhabitants of the cloister , had now vanished from my countenance . 
I was at that time of life when our mental and bodily energies are generally in their zenith . 
Conscious power , therefore , gave colour to my cheeks and lustre to my eyes , while my luxuriant dark hair completely concealed all remains of the tonsure . 
Besides all this , I wore a handsome full dress suit of black , a chef-d'oeuvre of Damon , which I had brought with me from Frankenburg . 
Thus it was not to be wondered at that I made a favourable impression on those who were already assembled in the outer hall , and this they did not fail to prove , by their polite advances and courteous expressions . 
As , according to my romantic authorities , the Prince , when he revealed his rank to me in the park , should have thrown back his surtout , and discovered to my sight a brilliant star , -LRB- which he had failed to do , -RRB- so I had expected that every one whom I should meet in the palace should be clad in the richest silks and embroidery . 
How much was I surprised , therefore , to find that , with the exception of ribbons and orders , their dresses were all as plain as that in which I myself appeared . 
By the time , therefore , that we were summoned to the audience-chamber , my prejudices and embarrassment had worn off ; and the manners of the Prince himself , who came up to me , with the words , `` Ha ! 
there is Mr Leonard , '' completely restored my courage . 
His highness continued for some time in conversation with me , and seemed particularly diverted by the freedom and severity with which I had criticised his buildings in the park . 
The folding doors were now opened , and the Princess , accompanied by some of her ladies , came into the room . 
Immediately on her appearance , as the glare of the lustres fell on her features , I recognised , more forcibly than ever , her exact likeness to the Abbess . 
The ladies of the assembly surrounded her for some time , but at last I was summoned , and introduced , after which ceremony her eyes followed me , with a gaze obviously betraying astonishment and inward emotion . 
Then turning to an old lady who stood near her , she said a few words in a whisper , at which the latter also seemed disquieted , and looked on me with a scrutinizing aspect . 
All this was over in a moment , for other presentations took place ; after which the assembly divided into groups , and engaged in lively conversation . 
One recollected , indeed , that he was in the circle of a court , and under the eye of the sovereign , yet without feeling on that account constrained or embarrassed . 
-- I scarcely recognised a single figure that would have been in keeping with the caricatures that I had previously drawn . 
The Court-Marshal was a lively and happy-looking old man , without any particular attributes , either of pride or formality . 
The lords in waiting were sprightly youths , who , by no one symptom , betrayed that their characters were depraved and vicious . 
Two ladies , who immediately waited on the Princess , seemed to be sisters . 
They were uninteresting , insignificant , and , as luck would have it , dressed with extraordinary plainness . 
There was , however , one little man in the room , with a comical visage , long nose , and sparkling eyes , who irresistibly engaged my attention . 
He was dressed in black , with a long steel-mounted sword , and wound himself , with incredible dexterity , like a serpent through the crowd , appearing now here , now there , but resting never , and apparently raising laughter -LRB- whether with him , or at him , I knew not -RRB- wherever he went . 
This person -LRB- having ventured an inquiry -RRB- I understood was the Prince 's physician . 
The old lady with whom the Princess had spoken had kept her eyes on me , and contrived to manoeuvre so skilfully , that , before I was aware of her plans , I found myself alone with her in a window recess . 
She began a conversation with me , in which , guardedly as it was managed , I perceived very clearly that her only object was to gain a knowledge of my situation and circumstances in life . 
I was prepared for some occurrence of this kind , and being convinced that the simplest story was always the safest , I told her that I had formerly studied theology , but that having received from my father a competent fortune , I now travelled about for my own pleasure and improvement . 
My birth-place , I said , was on the Polish frontiers of Prussia ; and I gave it by the way such a horrible unpronounceable name , that the old lady made no attempt to repeat it after me . 
`` Well , sir , '' said she , `` you have a countenance which might here raise many , and not altogether pleasant recollections ; and you are , perhaps , as to rank , more than you wish to appear , for your demeanour by no means resembles that of a student of theology . '' 
* * * * * After refreshments had been handed round , we went into another room , where the pharo-table was in readiness . 
The Court-Marshal was the banker ; but I understood afterwards that his agreement with the Prince allowed him to retain all his winnings , while the latter indemnified him against every loss , so that the bank remained always in the same state . 
The gentlemen now assembled themselves round the table , with the exception of the physician , who never played , but remained with the ladies , who took no interest in the game . 
The Prince desired that I would station myself next to him , while , in a few words , he very clearly explained to me the rules and principles of pharo , at the same time selecting my cards , as I was here completely a novice . 
But there was not a single card chosen by the Prince for himself , that was not attended by the worst possible luck ; and as long as I followed his counsel , the same fate attended mine . 
Besides , I was suffering considerable losses . 
A louis d'or was the very lowest point ; my limited exchequer was fast ebbing away , and this painfully brought back on me the question that had often occurred , `` What was I to do in the world , when my last ducat was expended ? '' 
A new taille was begun , and I begged of the Prince that he would now leave me to myself , as it seemed that I was born to be unlucky , and was drawing him into the same fatality . 
The Prince agreed , with a smile of perfect good humour . 
He said , that the best way to recover my loss would , in his opinion , have been , to follow the lead of an experienced player ; however , that he was very curious to learn how I would behave when alone , having in myself such confidence . 
I had not said that I had any such confidence ; and now blindfold and at random , I drew out a card from my hand ; it was the Queen . 
It may seem absurd , but is nevertheless true , that I thought the caricature features on this card had a resemblance to Aurelia ! 
I stared at it accordingly , and became so lost in my own reflections , that it was only the call of the banker , `` All 's ready , '' that awoke me from my reverie . 
Then , without a moment 's hesitation , I drew out the five louis d'ors , all that I had left , and staked them on the Queen . 
Beyond my expectations this succeeded ! 
Then I always staked more and more on the Queen always higher as my gains increased , and I never lost a single round . 
At every new stake my antagonists and the by-standers cried out -- `` No ; it is impossible ! 
This time she must prove unfaithful ! '' 
But , on the contrary , I won , and the cards of every other player turned against him -- `` Now , this is unheard of -- this is miraculous ! '' 
resounded from all quarters , while , completely reserved , and wrapt up within myself , with my whole thoughts fixed only on Aurelia , I scarcely noticed the rouleaux of gold , which the banker shoved one after another over to me . 
In short , the Queen had , in the four last tailles , invariably gained , and I had my pockets full of gold . 
I had won about two thousand louis d'ors ; and though I thus found myself suddenly freed from all pecuniary embarrassment , yet I could not repress a strange feeling of perplexity , and inward self-condemnation . 
Of course , I perceived an exact coincidence between my success at pharo , and my good fortune in shooting , with eyes closed and at random , the two partridges when in company with the forester . 
It was obvious that the result on both occasions was not owing to any superior skill or management of mine , but to some higher power to which I was wholly subservient . 
This constant recurrence too , and reflection of Aurelia 's form and features , could be nothing but an abominable scheme of the devil to draw me into wickedness , and the misuse which I had now made of that truly sacred and beloved image filled me with horror and aversion ! 
In the most gloomy mood of mind , and utterly at variance with myself , I was gliding about in the morning through the park , when the Prince , who was accustomed to take a walk at the same hour , joined me . 
`` Well , Mr Leonard , '' said he , `` how do you like my game of pharo ? 
What think you of the humours and caprices of Fortune , who kindly excused your absurd conduct , and flung the gold into your hands ? '' 
I was not ready with an answer , and the Prince therefore resumed -- `` You had luckily stumbled on the carte favorite , but you must not trust to your luck again in this manner . 
You might carry the principle too far . '' 
His highness now went into a long discussion , founded on this idea of the carte favorite , imparted to me various rules as to the doctrine of chances , and concluded by expressing his conviction that I would no doubt follow up zealously this commencement of my bonne fortune at play . 
On the contrary , I assured his highness , `` that it was my firm resolution never more to touch a card ! '' 
The Prince looked at me with surprise . 
`` Even my yesterday 's wonderful luck , '' said I , `` has been the natural cause of this resolution ; for all that I had formerly conceived of the pernicious and ruinous tendency of this game , has truly been realized and confirmed . 
In truth , there was in my very success something repugnant , and even horrible to my feelings . 
I drew out a card , blindfold , and unawares . 
That card awoke in my mind painful , though cherished remembrances , of which I could not resist the influences . 
I went on accordingly , venturing stake after stake , as if some demon had placed it in my power to command fortune , though I had no real and moral right to the gain which thus fell to my share . '' 
`` I understand perfectly , '' said the Prince , `` what you mean by painful and cherished remembrances . 
You have been an unfortunate lover , and the card brought to your recollection the image of the lost fair one ; though , begging your pardon , Mr Leonard , when I think of the pale complexion and flat features of your favourite Queen , this seems not a little capricious . 
However , you thought on your lost mistress , and in that game of pharo , she was perhaps more true and faithful than she had been in real life . 
But what you are able to discover in all this that is horrible and frightful , I can not possibly conceive . 
On the contrary , you should rejoice that Fortune , even on any grounds , is so much inclined to favour you . 
Besides , if you are really vexed , this is not to be imputed to the pharo-table , but to the individual moods , the idiosyncrasies of your own mind . '' 
`` All that your highness has stated , '' said I , `` may be perfectly correct ; but I feel deeply that it is not merely the fear of loss on which my present dislike to gaming is founded . 
Gain itself , which only brings us more and more under a state of slavery to a mysterious fate , which would one day lead us to destruction , is equally dangerous . 
Yet , sire , I confess that I was yesterday on the point of seeing my travelling exchequer completely drained , which , considering my present distance from home , would have been to me no slight misfortune . '' 
`` Nay , '' said the Prince , `` I should have infallibly learned this occurrence , and would have taken care that the loss should have been to you threefold repaid , for I certainly do not choose that any one should be ruined , in order to contribute to my amusement . 
Besides , any real evil of this kind can not happen under my roof , for I know my players , and do not trust them out of my own sight . '' 
`` Yet , with submission , '' said I , `` may not these very precautions take away all that freedom from the player , and thereby annihilate those fine involvements of chance , in which your highness takes delight ? 
Or may not some individual , on whom the passion for play has violently seized , break out of such trammels , and rush on , unobserved , to his own destruction ? 
Forgive my candour , sire . 
I believe also , that those very methods which your highness would adopt to prevent evil consequences , would , from the perverse nature of mankind , be looked upon by many as a disgusting and intolerable restraint . '' 
`` Say no more , Mr Leonard , '' said the Prince , `` it is obvious , that from every opinion or idea of mine you are resolved to dissent . '' 
With these words he hastily retired , adding only an unceremonious and careless `` adieu . '' 
I knew not myself how I had been led to speak so freely on the subject , never having till now thought of gaming or its consequences ; but the words , as on former occasions , seemed to be prompted for me by some invisible power , after whom I only repeated them . 
However this might be , I believed that I had now lost the favour of the Prince , and with it , the right of appearing on any future occasion within the walls of his palace . 
In this belief , however , I was mistaken , for , on the same day , I received a card inviting me to a concert ; and the Prince , whom I once more met in the park , said , en passant , with much politeness , `` Good evening , Mr Leonard ! 
You are to be with us to-night , and it is to be hoped that my capelle may gain some credit , and please you better than my park and my pharo-table have done . '' 
The music was indeed very commendable . 
All was performed with great accuracy ; but , at the same time , the pieces appeared to me not well chosen ; for one destroyed , by contrast , the effect of the other ; and , especially , there was one long act , which seemed to have been got up with particular care , and which , nevertheless , produced in me a hearty fit of ennui . 
I took good care not to express my opinion audibly ; and in this respect acted , for once , with prudence , as I was afterwards informed that this same long act , or scene , was one of the Prince 's own composition . 
When the music had concluded , I found myself unawares in the innermost circles of the court , and would have been willing even to take a hand at pharo , in order to reconcile myself wholly with the Prince . 
But , on entering the room where pharo had been played , I was not a little surprised to find no preparations for that game . 
On the contrary , small parties were seated at ordinary tables , over hands of Boston-whist , while the rest of the company kept up lively conversation . 
Even a regular course of story-telling was introduced . 
Old bon-mots were revived , and fresh anecdotes attentively listened to , provided they were agreeably delivered , even though not intrinsically of much importance . 
Here my old gifts of loquacity and eloquence came opportunely to my aid ; and , under the guise of romantic and poetical legends , I contrived to narrate many events out of my own life . 
Thus I attracted attention and won applause from many listeners . 
The Prince , however , liked best whatever was cheerful and humorous ; in which respects , the physician was not to be equalled . 
He was indeed inexhaustible . 
This kind of pastime was at last carried so far , that individuals were chosen to read from their own MS. compositions , whatever they considered best suited for the present society . 
A kind of regular esthetical club was thus formed , where the Prince presided , and every one contributed as he best could . 
Among the rest , there was a certain professor from the gymnasium , who chose to read a very long paper on some new discoveries ; and precisely in proportion as the few who knew anything about his science were interested and delighted , the others were ennuyés and restless . 
Among this majority was the Prince , who was evidently rejoiced when the physician very judiciously seized this time to introduce one of his stories , which , if not very original and witty in themselves , yet , from the drollery of his manner , were irresistible , and had at least a naiveté and facility which were highly acceptable , after the tiresome lecture of the professor . 
`` Your highness knows , '' said the physician , turning to the Prince , `` that I never failed , when on my travels , to enter into my memorandum-book , portraits -LRB- in writing I mean -RRB- of all the strange characters and odd adventurers that fell in my way ; and from this journal I am now about to repeat some notices to which I have hitherto not alluded , on account of their being perhaps too common-place , yet they seem to me not altogether undiverting . 
`` On my way home , about a year ago , I came to a large handsome village , about four German miles from Berlin ; and being much fatigued , resolved to rest there , instead of going on to the capital . 
The landlord directly shewed me to a good room , where , after supper , I threw myself into bed , and directly fell asleep . 
About one in the morning , however , I was suddenly awoke by a noise , which , assimilating with a fearful dream with which I had just then been haunted , I imagined to be either the shrieking of an owl at the window , or the cries of a person in distress , for I had dreamed of both . 
`` It was , however , the sound of a German flute , which proceeded from a room very near me ; but in my whole life , before or since , I have never heard such an attempt at music . 
The man must have had monstrous and gigantic powers of lungs ; for in one loud shrill cutting key , he went on without mercy , so that the character of the instrument was perfectly annihilated . 
What added , if possible , to this enormity , was , that he blew everlastingly the same identical passage over and over , not granting me the slightest relief , by an endeavour at a tune , so that nothing could be conceived more abominable . 
`` I raved at , cursed , and abused this infernal musician , who so cruelly deprived me of needful rest , and by whom my ears were so barbarously outraged ; but , like a wound-up piece of clock-work , the diabolical flute continued to utter the same notes over and over , until I thought the devil himself must be the player , for no one else could have had physical strength to hold out so long . 
At last I heard something thrown with great violence , and a loud crack , against the wainscot ; after which there was dead silence , and I could for the rest of the night sleep in peace . 
`` In the morning I heard a great noise of quarrelling and scolding in the lower floor of the house . 
In the row I could now and then distinguish the voice of mine host , who was scarcely allowed , however , to throw in a word , by a man who roared without ceasing , in broken German -- ` May your house be damned ! 
Would that I had never been so unlucky as to cross the threshold ! 
The devil himself must have brought me hither , where one can neither drink , eat , nor enjoy himself -- where everything is infamously bad , and dog dear . 
There , sir , you have your money ; and as for your rascally gin-shop , you shall never more see me again within its walls ! ' 
`` Having just then finished my toilet , I was in time to behold the author of all this disturbance . 
He was a little , withered man , in a coffee-brown coat , and a round fox-red wig , on which , with a martial air of defiance , he stuck a little grey hat ; then ran out of the house towards the stable , from which I soon afterwards saw him re-appear , with a horse fully as odd-looking as himself , on which he mounted , and , at a heavy , awkward gallop , rode off the field . 
`` Of course I supposed he was like myself , an entire stranger , who had quarrelled with the landlord , and had now taken his final departure . 
I dismissed him , therefore , from my thoughts ; but , at dinner-time , -LRB- having been induced to remain another day at the village , -RRB- how I was surprised , on taking my place at the table d'Hote , to perceive the same absurd coffee-brown figure , with the fox-red wig , who , without ceremony , drew in his chair opposite to mine ! 
`` He had one of the ugliest , and most laughable visages that I had ever beheld . 
In his whole demeanour , there was a kind of grave and solemn absurdity that was irresistible . 
During dinner , I kept up a monosyllabic dialogue with my host , while the stranger continued to eat voraciously , and took no notice whatever of any one . 
`` At last , the innkeeper , with a sly wink at me , led the discourse to national peculiarities , and asked me , whether I had ever been acquainted with an Irishman , or knew what was meant by Irish bulls , for which that country was celebrated ? 
` Unquestionably , ' said I ; ' I have heard many such ; ' and a whole string of these blunders came at once into my head . 
I then told the story of the Irishman , who , when asked why he wore stockings with the wrong side out , answered , ` Because there was a hole in the other side ; ' -- of the still better anecdote of another disciple of St Patrick , who was sleeping in the same bed with a choleric Scotch Highlander . 
An English wag , who was lodged in the same room , by way of a practical joke , took one of the Irishman 's spurs , and , perceiving that he wast fast asleep , buckled it on his heel . 
Soon after , the Irishman happening to turn round , tore the Scotchman 's legs with his spur ; whereupon the latter , in great wrath , gave his companion a violent box on the ear , and the Englishman had the satisfaction of hearing betwixt them the following ingenious discourse : -- '' ` What devil , ' said the Irishman , ` has got possession of you ? 
and why are you beating me ? ' 
-- ` Because , ' said the other , ` you have torn me with your spurs . ' 
-- ` How is that possible ? 
I took off my clothes . ' 
-- ` And yet it is so -- see only here . ' 
-- ` Damnation ! 
-- you are in the right . 
The rascally waiter has pulled off my boots , but left on the spurs ! ' 
`` The story , however old , was new to the innkeeper , who broke out into immoderate laughter ; but the stranger , who had now wound up his dinner with a great draught of beer from a glass as high as a church tower , looked at me gravely , and said -- ` You have spoken well , sir . 
The Irishmen certainly do make these bulls ; but this by no means depends on the character of the people , who are ingenious and witty , but on the cursed air of that damp country , which infects one with them , as with coughs and catarrhs . 
I myself , sir , am an Englishman , though born and bred in Ireland , and therefore am , on that account , subjected to the vile propensity of making bulls . ' 
`` Hereupon the innkeeper laughed more and more , and I was obliged to join him heartily , for it was delightful that the Irishman , gravely lecturing on bulls , should unconsciously give us one of the very best as a specimen . 
`` The stranger seemed not in the least offended by our laughing . 
` In England , ' said he , with his finger on his nose , and dilating his eyes -- ` in England , the Irishmen are like strong spices added to society to render it tasteful . 
I am myself , in one respect , like Falstaff ; I am not only witty in myself , but the cause of wit in others , which , in these times , is no slight accomplishment . 
Could you suppose it possible , that in the empty leathern brain of this innkeeper , wit , generated by me , is now and then roused ? 
But mine host is , in this respect , a prudent man . 
He takes care not to draw on the small capital that he possesses of his own , but lends out a thought now and then at interest , when he finds himself in the society of the rich ! ' 
`` With these words , the little original rose and left us . 
I immediately begged the innkeeper to give me something of his history . '' 
` This Irishman , ' said mine host , ` whose name is Ewson , and who , on that account , will have himself to be an Englishman , has now been here for the short period of twenty-two years ! 
As a young man , I had just set up in the world , purchased a lease of this inn , and it happened to be on my wedding-day when Mr Ewson first arrived among us . 
He was then a youth , but wore his fox-red wig , his grey hat , and coffee-brown coat , exactly as you saw him to-day . 
He then seemed to be travelling in great haste , and said that he was on his return to his own country ; however , hearing the band of music which played at my wedding feast , he was so much delighted with it , that he came into the house and insisted on making one of the party . '' 
` Hereupon , though he approved our music , yet he swore that it was only on board an English war ship that people knew how to dance ; and to prove his assertion , gave us a hornpipe , whistling to it all the while most horribly through his teeth , fell down , dislocated his ancle , and was , of course , obliged to remain with us till it was cured . '' 
` Since that time he has never left my house , though I have had enough to do with his peculiarities . 
Every day through these twenty-two years , he has quarrelled with me . 
He despises my mode of life , complains that my bills are over-charged ; that he can not live any longer without roast-beef and porter ; packs up his portmanteau , with his three red wigs one above the other , mounts an old broken-winded horse , and rides away . '' 
` This , however , turns out nothing more than a ride for exercise ; for at dinner-time he comes in at the other end of the town , and in due time makes his appearance at my table , eating as much of the despised dishes as might serve for any three men ! '' 
` Once every year he receives from his own country a valuable bank-bill . 
Then , with an air of the deepest melancholy , he bids me farewell , calls me his best friend , and sheds tears , which I do also ; but with me they are tears of laughter . 
After having , by his own account , made his will , and provided a fortune for my eldest daughter , he rides away slowly and pensively , so that the first time I believed he certainly was gone for good and all . '' 
` His journey , however , is only four German miles , viz . 
into the residenz , from whence he never fails to return on the third or fourth day , bringing with him two new coffee-brown coats , six new shirts , three wigs , all of the same staring and frightful red , a new grey hat , and other requisites for his wardrobe ; finally , to my eldest daughter , though she is now eighteen , a paper of sugar-plums . '' 
` He then thinks no more either of residing in the capital , nor of his homeward journey . 
His afternoon expenses are paid every night , and his money for breakfast is thrown angrily at my head every morning . '' 
` At other times , however , he is the best-tempered man in the world . 
He gives presents every holiday to all my children , and in the village has done much real good among the poor ; only , he can not bear the priest , because he learned from the schoolmaster that the former had changed a gold piece that Mr Ewson had put into the box , and given it out in copper pennies ! 
Since that time , he avoids him on all occasions , and never goes to church , and the priest calls him an atheist . '' 
` As before said , however , I have often trouble enough with his temper . 
On coming home just yesterday , I heard a great noise in the house , and a voice in furious wrath , which I knew to be Ewson 's . 
Accordingly I found him in vehement altercation with the house-maid . 
He had , as usual with him , thrown away his wig , and was standing bald-pated in his shirt-sleeves before her , and holding a great book under her nose , wherein he obstinately pointed at something with his finger . 
The maid stuck her hands in her sides , told him he might get somebody else to play his tricks upon , that he was a bad wicked man , who believed in nothing , etc. etc. etc. . '' 
` With considerable difficulty I succeeded in parting the disputants , and bringing the matter under arbitration . 
Mr Ewson had desired the maid to bring him a wafer to seal a letter . 
The girl never having written or sealed a letter in her life , at first did not in the least understand him . 
At last it occurred to her that the wafers he spoke of were those used at mass , and thought Mr E. wanted to mock at religion , because the priest had said he was an atheist . 
She therefore refused to obey him . 
Hereupon he had recourse to the dictionary , and at last got into such a rage , that he spoke nothing but English , which she imagined was gibberish of the devil 's own inspiration . 
Only my coming in prevented a personal encounter , in which probably Mr Ewson would have come off with the worst . ' 
`` I here interrupted mine host with the question , ` Whether it was Mr Ewson also who tormented me so much in the night with his flute-playing ? ' 
` Alas ! 
sir , ' said he , ` that is another of his eccentricities , by which he frightens away all my night-lodgers . 
Three years ago one of my sons came on a visit here from the residenz . 
He plays well on the flute , and practises a good deal . 
Then , by evil chance , it occurred to Mr Ewson that he had also in former days learned to blow the flute , and never gave over till he prevailed on my son to sell him his instrument for a good round sum , and also a difficult concerto which he had brought with him from town . '' 
` Thereafter Mr Ewson , who has not the slightest pretensions to a musical ear , began with furious zeal to blow at this concerto . 
He came , however , only to the second solo of the first allegro . 
There he met with a passage which he could by no possible means bring out ; and this one passage he has now blown at , through these three years , about a hundred times per day , till at last , in the utmost rage , he throws his flute and wig together against the wall . '' 
` As few instruments can long hold out against such treatment , he therefore frequently gets a new one , and has indeed three or four in use at the same time . 
If any of them exhibits the smallest flaw in one of the keys or joinings , then , with a ` God d -- n me , it is only in England that musical instruments can be made ! ' 
he throws it out of the window . '' 
` What is worst of all , however , is , that this passion for blowing the flute of his , seizes him in the night , and he then never fails to diddle all my guests out of their first sleep . '' 
` Could you believe it , however , that there is in our town another foreigner , an Englishman , by name Doctor Green , who has been in the house of the Amtmann about as long as Mr Ewson has lived with me , and that the one is just as absurd an original as the other ? 
These two are constantly quarrelling , and yet without each other could not live . 
It has just now occurred to me that Mr Ewson has , for this evening , ordered a bowl of punch at my house , to which he has invited Doctor Green . 
If , sir , you choose to stay here till to-morrow , you will see the most absurd trio that this whole world could afford . ' 
`` Your highness will readily conclude , '' continued the physician , `` that I was very willing on this account to delay my journey , as I had thereby an opportunity of seeing Mr Ewson in his glory . 
As soon as the morning drew on , he came into my room , and was so good as to invite me to his bowl of punch , although he regretted that he could only give me that contemptible drink which , in this country , bore the honoured name of a far different liquor . 
It was only in England where good punch could be drunk , and if ever I came to see him in his own country , he would convince me that he knew how to prepare , in its best fashion , that divine panacea . 
`` Not long afterwards , the two other guests whom he had invited , made their appearance . 
The Amtmann was , like Ewson , a little figure , but round as a ball , happy and contented , with a red snub nose , and large sparkling eyes . 
Dr Green , on the contrary , was a tall , powerful , and middle-aged man , with a countenance strikingly national , carelessly , yet fashionably dressed , spectacles on his nose , and a round white hat on his head . '' 
` Give me sack , that mine eyes may be red , ' cried this hero , -LRB- marching up to the innkeeper , whom he seized by the breast , shaking him heartily , -RRB- ` Speak , thou rascally Cambyses , where are the princesses ? 
There is here a base odour of coffee and Bremen cigars , but no fumigation yet floats on the air from the ambrosial drink of the gods . ' '' 
` Have mercy , oh champion ! 
Away with thy hands -- relax thy potent grasp , ' answered the host , coughing ; ` otherwise , in thine ire , thou might ` st crush my ribs like an eggshell . '' '' 
` Not till thy duties are fulfilled , ' replied Dr Green ; ` not before the sweet vapour of punch , ambrosial punch , delights our nostrils . 
Why are thy functions thus delayed ? 
Not till then shall I let thee go , thou most unrighteous host ! ' 
`` Now , however , Ewson darted out ferociously against the Doctor , crying , ` Green , thou brute , thou rascal ! 
-- Green shalt thou be , beneath the eyes , -- nay , thou shalt be green and yellow with grief , if thou dost not immediately desist from thy shameful deeds . ' 
`` Accordingly , I expected a violent quarrel , and prepared myself for departure ; but I was for once mistaken . 
` In contempt , then , of his cowardly impotence , I shall desist , ' said the Doctor , ` and wait patiently for the divine drink which thou , Ewson , shalt prepare for us . ' 
`` With these words he let go the innkeeper , -LRB- who instantly ran out of the room , -RRB- seated himself , with the demeanour of a Cato , at the table , lighted his pipe , which was ready filled , and blew out great volumes of smoke . '' 
` Is not all this as if one were at the play ? ' 
said the good-humoured Amtmann , addressing himself to me . 
` The Doctor , who generally never reads a German book , borrowed from us a volume of Schlegel 's Shakespeare , and since that time he has , according to his own expression , never ceased playing old well-known tunes upon a strange instrument . 
You must have observed , that even the innkeeper speaks in measured verse , the Doctor having drilled him for that purpose . ' 
`` He was interrupted by the appearance of the landlord with his punch-bowl , ready filled with liquor , smoking hot ; and although Green and Ewson both swore that it was scarcely drinkable , yet they did not fail to swallow glass after glass with the greatest expedition . 
`` We kept up a tolerable conversation . 
Green , however , remained very silent , only now and then falling in with most comical contradictions of what other people had said . 
Thus , for example , the Amtmann spoke of the theatre at Berlin , and I assured him that the tragedy hero played admirably . 
` That I can not admit , ' said Dr Green . 
` Do you not think if the actor had performed six times better , that he might have been tolerable ? ' 
Of necessity I could not but answer in the affirmative , but was of opinion , that to play six times better would cost him a deal of unnecessary trouble , as he had already played the part of Lear -LRB- in which I had already seen him -RRB- most movingly . 
` This , ' said Green , ` quite passes the bounds of my perceptions . 
The man , indeed , gives us all that he has to give . 
Can he help it , if he is by nature and destiny inclined to be stupid ? 
However , in his own way , he has brought the art to tolerable perfection ; therefore one must bear with him . ' 
`` The Amtmann sat between the two originals , exerting his own particular talent , which was , like that of a demon , to excite them to all sorts of folly ; and thus the night wore on , till the powerful ambrosia began to operate . 
`` At last Ewson became extravagantly merry . 
With a hoarse , croaking voice , he sung divers national songs , of which I did not understand a word ; but if the words were like the music , they must have been every way detestable . 
Moreover , he threw his periwig and coat through the window into the court , and began to dance a hornpipe , with such unutterable grimaces , and in a style so supernaturally grotesque , that I had almost split my sides with laughing . 
`` The Doctor , meanwhile , remained obstinately solemn , but it was obvious that the strangest visions were passing through his brain . 
He looked upon the punch-bowl as a bass fiddle , and would not give over playing upon it with the spoon , to accompany Ewson 's songs , though the innkeeper earnestly entreated of him to desist . 
`` As for the Amtmann , he had always become more and more quiet ; at last he tottered away into a corner of the room , where he took a chair , and began to weep bitterly . 
I understood a signal of the innkeeper , and inquired of this dignitary the cause of his deep sorrow . 
` Alas ! 
alas ! ' 
said he , ` the Prince Eugene was a great , very great general , and yet even he , that heroic prince , was under the necessity to die ! ' 
Thereupon he wept more vehemently , so that the tears ran down his cheeks . 
`` I endeavoured as well as I could to console him for the loss of this brave hero of the last century , but in vain . 
`` Dr Green , meanwhile , had seized a great pair of snuffers , and with all his might drove and laboured with them towards the open window . 
He had nothing less in view than to clip the moon , which he had mistaken for a candle . 
`` Ewson , meanwhile , danced and yelled as if he were possessed by a thousand devils , till at last the under-waiter came , with a great lantern , notwithstanding the clear moonlight shone into the apartment , and cried out , ` Here I am , gentlemen . 
Now you can march . ' 
`` The Doctor arose , lighted his pipe , -LRB- which he had laid aside while the enjoyments of the punch-bowl lasted , -RRB- and now placed himself right opposite to the waiter , blowing great clouds into his face . '' 
` Welcome , friend , ' cried he ; ` Art thou Peter Quince , who bearest about moonshine , and dog , and thorn-bush ? 
'T is I that have trimmed your light for you , you lubber , and therefore you shine so brightly ! '' 
` Good night then ! 
Much have I quaffed of the contemptible juice here denominated ambrosial punch . 
Good night , mine honest host -- Good night , mine Pylades ! ' 
`` Ewson swore that he would instantly break the head of any one who should offer to go home , but no one heeded him . 
On the contrary , the waiter took the Doctor under one arm , and the Amtmann , still weeping for Prince Eugene , under the other ; and thus they reeled along through the streets , towards the Amthaus . 
`` With considerable difficulty , we carried the delirious Ewson to his own room , where he raged and blew for half the night on his flute , so that I could not possibly obtain any rest ; nor did I recover from the influences of the mad evening , until I found myself once more in my travelling carriage . '' 
The physician 's story was -LRB- more , perhaps , from the naive quaintness of his delivery , than the materiel of his narrative , -RRB- interrupted frequently by peals of laughter , louder and longer than are usually to be heard in a court circle . 
The Prince himself appeared particularly delighted . 
`` There is only one figure , '' said his highness , `` which , in the punch-bowl scene , you have kept too much in the back-ground , and that is your own -- for I am fully persuaded , that you must have been the means of leading the Doctor and Ewson to a thousand extravagancies , and that you were , in truth , the exciting principle of mischief , for which you would have us take the poor devil of an Amtmann . '' 
`` I assure your highness , '' said the Doctor , `` that the club was , on the contrary , so rounded and complete in itself , that every addition would have been both discordant and superfluous . 
The three originals were tuned up , and adapted , one to the other , each on his proper key , so as to produce a most perfect trio . 
The host added thereto what we musicians call a septime . '' 
In this manner the conversations and the readings were kept up till the hour when the Prince 's family retired to their private apartments , after which the numerous assembly all separated in the greatest good humour . 
* * * * * I now found myself , day after day , moving happily and cheerfully in a world entirely new . 
But the more that I learned to accommodate myself to the quiet pleasant mode of life in the town , and at the court , the less I thought of the past , or troubled myself with reflections that my situation here was held by a very frail tenure . 
A place was gradually opened for me , which I could hold with honour and credit . 
The Prince seemed to take particular pleasure in my society , and from various hints , I could very easily perceive that he thought of retaining me permanently at his court . 
It was not to be denied , that to many individuals the restraint imposed by the constant presence of the sovereign , and the necessity of accommodating one 's pursuits and opinions to those which prevailed at court , might have been very disagreeable . 
But here I possessed the peculiar advantage of having been already accustomed to the formal restrained life of the convent ; so that I suffered less than any other stranger would have done . 
