`` The Leaguists , to be sure , '' replied the musician ; `` their cavalry overrun the Alb , and some of them were not a thousand paces from us at times . 
For my part , I would not like to fall into their hands , for , as you well know , they bear me no good will ; and perhaps it would not be quite so pleasant for you to be brought prisoner before old Truchses . '' 
`` God defend me from Truchses ! '' 
cried Albert . 
`` I would rather allow myself to be shot on the spot than undergo such disgrace . 
But what are they doing here ? 
There is no fortress of Würtemberg in this neighbourhood , and yet you say they scour the country hereabouts ; what is their object ? '' 
`` Look ye , sir ! 
Wicked men are to be found everywhere ; a true Würtemberger would rather let himself be flayed alive than betray the Duke , after whom the League is now on the search . 
But Truchses has secretly offered a bribe of a heap of gold to any one who takes him ; and for this purpose has sent his cavalry out all over the country ; the report is , that many peasants , instigated by money , willingly assist these bloodhounds in searching all the caverns and holes of the rocks after their prey . '' 
`` Searching after the Duke ? 
I thought he had already fled the country , or , as others say , has shut himself up in Tübingen with forty knights ! '' 
`` Yes , the forty nobles are there , true enough , '' answered the countryman , with a knowing look ; `` the Duke 's young son , Christoph , is also with them ; that 's as it should be ; but where the Duke himself is , no one can tell . 
Between you and I , sir , knowing him as well as I do , nothing but dire necessity will compel him to seek shelter in a fortress ; he is a bold restless man , and prefers the freedom of woods and mountains to other resources , even if there is danger attending it . '' 
`` So they are searching after him ? 
is it possible he can be in this neighbourhood ? '' 
`` Where he is at present , I know not , '' answered the fifer of Hardt ; `` and I would bet that no one but God alone knows ; but where he will be , '' he added , and appeared to Albert as if he were inspired with the idea , `` I know where he will be should fate push him to extremities ; I know the spot where his faithful friends will find him in case of need , where many a true breast will be assembled and form a wall of defence to protect their lord against his enemies . 
For though he may be a severe master , he is still a Würtemberger , and his heavy hand is dearer to us than the slippery words of Bavaria or Austria . '' 
`` And should they happen to fall in with the unfortunate prince , would they be able to recognise him ? 
Has he not disguised his person ? 
You described his appearance to me once , particularly his brilliant commanding eye , so that I almost fancy I see him now before me ? 
Can you describe his figure to me ? '' 
`` As I told you then , he may be eight years older than you , '' replied the other ; `` not quite so tall , but your figures resemble each other so much , particularly when you are on horseback , that when I look at you from behind , I say to myself , ` there goes the Duke himself . ' '' 
Albert got up to look after his horse ; the conversation of the countryman had made him anxious for his own safety ; and he now thought , for the first time , that he had acted foolishly in stealing about the country occupied by an enemy . 
It would have been particularly unpleasant to be taken prisoner at this moment ; for though there was certainly nothing against his oath in travelling as he did , provided he took no active part against the League : still he felt the disadvantageous light into which he would be thrown were he found in this neighbourhood , and in company with a man of whom the officers of the League were suspicious , and indeed were afraid of . 
To retrace his steps would , he thought , be imprudent , as it was almost certain the road would be occupied by the enemy 's patroles ; the safest way , therefore , appeared to be to hurry on as fast as possible , and get beyond reach of their advanced posts . 
Albert , to his great dismay , when he came to examine his horse , found him somewhat lame . 
His companion remarked the distress of the young man . 
After having looked at his feet , he thought the beast only wanted rest , and therefore proposed remaining in their present situation for some time longer , and travel part of the night ; for , to Albert 's consolation , he assured him he was sufficiently acquainted with their route to find it in the dark . 
Sent by the Suabian League , The hunters do not tarry ; But range the plain , and seek To strike a princely quarry . 
G. SCHWAB . 
The youth resigned himself to his fate , and sought to dissipate time in the enjoyment of the beautiful prospect which , in proportion as the countryman led him higher up from the place where they had made their mid-day meal , presented itself to his view on a much more extended scale . 
They stood upon the crest of a rock commanding a large circuit of the Swabian Alb . 
An extended panorama spread itself before the spectators , to Albert 's delight , who was so enraptured with the diversified colouring which the evening gradually threw over the whole , that he was for a time lost in ecstasy . 
And , in truth , whoever possesses a mind sufficiently pure for the enjoyment of the beauties of nature as existing in the peaceful landscape , the quiet valley , and lonely dell , such as are to be found in the Rhinegau , let him but mount the Swabian Alb , and he will be gratified by the sight of scenery which he will long cherish as among the most charming images in his remembrance . 
A range of mountains , so distant as scarcely to be reached by the eye , skirted the horizon , graduated with soft grey tints and different shades of blue , whilst a foreground of dark green hills completed the picture . 
On the summit of the extended ridge innumerable castles and towers were conspicuous , placed like watchmen as it were on these heights to overlook the country . 
Their remains are now in ruins , their stately gates and approaches no longer exist , the moats are filled with rubbish and overgrown with moss , and their halls , once the scenes of jovial mirth , now tell their tale in mournful silence . 
At the moment , however , when Albert and his companion stood on the rock of Beuren , many of them were to be seen in all the pride of solid and substantial defence , ranging themselves in array like an unbroken band of powerful men . 
`` This Würtemberg is a beautiful country , '' cried Albert , his eye wandering from hill to hill ; `` how bold , how sublime the summit and declivities of those mountains , how picturesque those rocks and castles ! 
And when the eye turns to the valley of the Neckar , how truly charming are those soft hills interspersed with orchards and vineyards , and watered by gentle streams and rivulets ; the whole being blessed by a mild climate and a good race of people ! '' 
`` Yes , indeed , '' said the countryman , `` this is a fine country ; but it is not to be compared to the neighbourhood of Stuttgardt , the true lowland ! 
There it is a real pleasure to wander about in summer or spring , on the banks of the Neckar ; nature is prolific in all her bounties of cultivation ; the vine grows to a large size and plentiful on the hills ; the boats and rafts on the river float up and down in cheerful activity ; the people are gay and happy at their work ; and the girls sing like larks ! '' 
`` Those vallies , on the Rems and Neckar , may indeed possess their beauties , '' replied Albert ; `` but this one at our feet , and those heights about us , possess also a peculiarly peaceful charm : what is the name of that tower on the hill yonder ? 
and tell me how are those distant mountains called ? '' 
The countryman scanned the neighbourhood , and pointed to the most distant ridge of mountains , which , on account of the mist , was scarcely visible . 
`` That , between the east and south , is the Rossberg mountain ; in the same direction , ' but nearer towards us , those many-pointed rocks which you see are the heights of Urack : more to the westward , is the Achalm ; not far from which , but you can not see it from hence , lies the rock of Lichtenstein . '' 
`` There it is , '' thought Albert to himself , `` there , where that small cloud hovers amidst the evening tints ; in that direction , a true heart beats for me ; at this very moment she , perhaps , stands on the pinnacle of the rock , and looks this way , among that world of mountains . 
Oh , that the evening breeze might waft her my remembrance , and that rosy cloud acquaint her with my vicinity ! '' 
`` You see that sharp corner , further in the distance , that is the castle of Teck ; our dukes call themselves Dukes of Teck : it is a strong fortress . 
Look to the right , that high steep mountain was once the residence of a renowned Emperor ; and is called Hohenstaufen . '' 
`` But what is the name of that castle , near us , which appears to rear its head out of the deep mist ? '' 
asked the young man . 
`` Only observe how the sun plays on its white walls ; how the golden mist seems to rest about its battlements ; and how beautifully the red light illumines its towers ! '' 
`` That is Neuffen , sir ; also a strong castle , which the League would be glad to get possession of . '' 
The sun was fast going down during this conversation . 
The shades of evening threw a dark veil from the mountains over the vallies , and obscured the distant objects . 
The moon rose pale , and surveyed her nightly province . 
The high walls and towers of Neuffen only were lighted up by the last rays of the sun ; and with its departure , Neuffen was enveloped in darkness ; the night air began to whisper through the trees of the surrounding wood mysterious salutations to the rays of the rising moon . 
`` This is the proper time for robbers and travellers fearful of the light of day , such as we are , '' said the countryman , as he bridled the horse ; `` in an hour hence , the night will , I hope , be dark as coal ; and then , before the sun rises again , no Leaguist dog of a horseman shall come upon our scent . '' 
`` If there is any likelihood of our being attacked , '' said Albert , `` we had better prepare for the worst ; for I am resolved not to allow myself to be taken for a mere trifle . '' 
And taking his cap off , he was preparing to substitute in its place his helmet , which hung by his saddle . 
`` You had better keep on your cap , sir , '' said the countryman , smiling ; `` it will be warmer in the night breeze than your helmet ; they will scarcely look for the Duke in this neighbourhood , and should we meet them , we two are a match for any four of them . '' 
The young man thought he had betrayed a want of courage ; and a feeling of shame rose in his breast , when he noticed the unconcern of his conductor , on foot , who had nothing but a thin leathern cap on his head , and armed only with an axe and knife . 
He mounted his horse , and his guide , taking the bridle , led him down the hill . 
`` You believe , therefore , '' asked Albert , after a pause , `` that the Leaguist cavalry do not venture thus far ? '' 
`` It is not very likely , '' answered the fifer of Hardt ; `` because Neuffen is a strong fort , and contains a good garrison ; the Leaguists will , however , soon besiege it ; but vagabonds , such as Truchses ' cavalry , will not venture in small bodies so near an enemy 's position . '' 
`` Look how clear and beautiful the moon shines ! '' 
cried the young man , whose mind , still dwelling on the sight of the mountains they had left , admired the fantastic shades of the wood , and the brilliant shining rocks ; `` look how the windows in Neuffen glimmer in the moonlight . '' 
`` I would much rather she did not shine this night , '' replied the countryman , who at times looked anxiously about him ; `` a dark night would have suited us better ; the moon has betrayed many a brave man . 
She now stands directly over the Reissenstein , where a giant once lived ; it will not be long , however , before she goes down . '' 
`` What is that you say of a giant , who lived on the Reissenstein ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Hans , `` tradition says that many years back a giant lived on that spot ; there , just where the moon shines on the mountain , stands his castle , called Reissenstein , or Achalm ; it belongs now to the Helfensteiners ; it is built on the declivity of the rock , high up in the air ; and has no nearer neighbours than the clouds , and the moon . 
Just opposite the castle , on another eminence , upon which now stands Heimenstein , is a cavern , in which a giant formerly lived . 
He possessed an enormous treasure of gold , and could have lived nobly and in luxury , had there been other giants and giantesses besides him to keep him company . 
He was determined to build a castle , such as other knights possessed on the Alb . 
The rock opposite appeared to him the most convenient spot . 
He however was a bad architect ; he dug out rocks of the height of a house from the Alb , with his nails , and placed them one upon another ; but , as they always fell , he found his labour was in vain . 
He then mounted on the top of the Beuren rock , and cried out in the valley below for workmen ; carpenters , masons , stone-cutters , blacksmiths , any one who would come and help him should be well paid . 
His voice was heard all over Swabia ; from Kocher to the lake of Constance ; from the Necker to the Danube ; the call brought masters and workmen from all parts , who came to assist the giant build his castle . 
-- Keep in the shade here , out of the moonshine , sir , '' he added , `` your armour shines like silver , and could easily be seen by some of those bloodhounds . 
`` Well , to go on with the giant 's history ; it was curious to see him sitting in his cavern , in the sunshine , overlooking the progress of the workmen in building his castle on the top of the rock ; masters and workmen worked merrily , and had their jokes with the giant , who understood nothing of their art . 
At last the castle was finished , and the giant took possession of it ; when viewing the valley below from the uppermost window , where the master and his men were assembled , he angrily remarked , ` that one nail was wanting in the outside of the building , and that they had deceived him in reporting it complete . ' 
The master blacksmith excused himself , and said : ` no one would venture to perch himself outside the window , to drive the nail in . ' 
The giant would hear of no excuse ; and refused to pay the reckoning until the nail was in its place . 
They all returned again to the castle ; the most daring among them swore it was not a feat worth talking of to drive the nail in ; but when they came to look out of the window , and beheld the great depth of the valley below , with its perpendicular rocks , they shook their heads , and retired in shame . 
The master offered a ten-fold reward to him who would venture on the perilous undertaking ; but a long time elapsed before one bold enough could be found . 
There was a smart young fellow among the rest , who loved the master 's daughter , and she loved him ; but as he was poor and the master a hard man , he could not gain his consent to marry her . 
Taking courage , and thinking this a good opportunity to be able either to merit his love or to die in the attempt ; for life without her was a burden to him : he went to his master , her father , and said , ` Will you give me your daughter if I drive the nail in ? ' 
The other thought this a good chance to get rid of him should he fall into the valley , and answered ` Yes . ' 
`` The youth took the nail and hammer , said a prayer , and prepared to get outside the window and drive in the nail for the sake of his beloved . 
A burst of joy broke from the bystanders , which awoke the giant out of his sleep , when he asked what was the matter ; and , when he heard that a volunteer was found to drive the nail in , he looked at the young locksmith for some time , and said : ` You are a fine fellow , and have more courage than all your milk-hearted companions ; come , and I 'll assist you . ' 
He then took him by the nape of the neck , almost crushing him to atoms , lifted him out of the window in the air , and said , ` drive in , now -- you shall not fall . ' 
`` When the young lover was suspended in the air over the immense depth below , though held by the iron grasp of the giant 's hand , fear came over him , his sight became dim , giddiness seized his brain , and , thinking he was on the point of being hurled into the abyss beneath , he would have cried out ` Ach Allmächtig ! ' 
-LRB- Oh , Almighty ! -RRB- 
but had only time enough to pronounce , ` Ach Allm , ' when the giant secured him from his perilous situation , and landed him again in safety . 
From that moment the mountain has retained the name of the Achalm . 
`` The lad drove the nail in firmly , -- the giant kissed him for his fortitude , -- and a tender hug which he gave him almost cost him his life , -- he then led him to the master , and said : ` Give your daughter to the brave lad . ' 
He afterwards went to his cavern , took out his money bag , and paid each his due . 
But when he came to the bold young blacksmith , he said , ` Go home , my daring young fellow , fetch your master 's daughter , and take possession of the castle , for it belongs to you now . ' 
`` His companions all rejoiced at his good fortune ; the young blacksmith went home , and -- '' `` Hark ! 
did not you hear the neighing of horses ? '' 
said Albert , not feeling quite at his ease , as they were passing through a deep ravine . 
The moon still shone bright , the shadows of the trees waved with the breeze , there was a rustling among the bushes , and he often fancied he saw dark figures passing in the wood . 
The fifer of Hardt stopt , vexed that his companion had interrupted him in his story , and answered , `` I thought so , likewise , just now , but it is nothing but the noise of the wind among the trees . 
If we were but on the other side of the meadow , which is open and as clear as day , we should regain the wood , and be free from all anxiety , for there it is dark enough . 
Give your horse the spur , and trot on ; I 'll run by your side . '' 
`` But why do you want to get on faster now ? 
do you think there is anything to be apprehended ? 
Own it , did you not see some figures in the wood sneaking along not far from us ? 
Do you think they belong to the League ? '' 
`` Well , yes , '' whispered the countryman , looking round , `` it struck me as if some one was watching us ; hurry on , therefore , and let 's get out of this cursed hollow path : a good round trot across the valley will carry us clear of danger , and then we may bid defiance to it . '' 
Albert looked to his sword , and held the reins firmer in his hand . 
They descended in silence the gorge through which the path led , and , by the light of the moon , he could perceive each motion of his guide , and saw him raise his axe to his shoulder , and , taking out a knife , which he had concealed under his jacket , stick it into his girdle . 
Just as they were entering the open valley from the hollow way , a voice was heard in the bush : `` That 's the fifer of Hardt -- seize him ! 
he on the horse must be the right one . '' 
`` Fly , sir , fly , '' cried the faithful guide , and placed himself in a position of defence with his axe . 
Albert drew his sword , and , in a moment , was attacked by five men , whilst his companion was engaged with three others hand to hand . 
The confined spot where this rencontre took place prevented Albert profiting by the advantage he otherwise would have had over his opponents . 
One of them seized his bridle , but , in the same moment , Albert 's blade fell with such force on his head that he sank to the ground without a groan ; the others , furious at the loss of their companion , pressed him with increased vigour , calling out to him to surrender ; but , though Albert began to bleed copiously from many wounds he had already received in his arms and legs , he answered only by fresh blows . 
`` Dead or alive , '' cried one of the combatants , `` if the Duke will have it so , let him take the consequences ! '' 
and with these words a heavy blow on the head , brought Albert von Sturmfeder from his horse to the ground . 
His eyes closed in a state of fainting stupor , but he still was sufficiently conscious , to feel himself raised and carried away , amidst the sarcastic jeers of his opponents , who appeared to triumph and rejoice over their royal captive , as they supposed him to be . 
He was placed on the ground shortly after , when a horseman galloped up , dismounted , and spoke to the men who carried him . 
Albert , having somewhat recovered from the violence of the stunning blow he had received , opened his eyes and surveyed the surrounding group . 
An unknown figure bent over him , as if to examine his features . 
`` Who have we here ? '' 
said this man : `` this is not him we are looking for -- leave him to his fate ; we must hurry away without loss of time -- alarm is already spread in Neuffen , and the garrison is on the alert . '' 
Falling again into a state of stupor from excessive weakness , Albert closed his eyes a second time , his ear only was alive to the confused sound of indistinct voices , which soon were hushed into dead silence , and he was left alone . 
The damp ground of the meadow chilled his limbs , but a sweet slumber coming to his aid , he sank under it , his beloved Bertha occupying his last thought . 
The Swabian League displays her mighty power , Her warriors people many a castle wall , Her banners wave from many an ancient tower , And every city answers to her call . 
Alone , will Tübingen no homage proffer , But stand apart , and grim resistance offer . 
G. SCHWAB . 
The forces of the Swabian League had advanced in large numbers into Würtemberg . 
Uninterrupted success crowned all their undertakings , -- its army became daily more formidable . 
Hollenstein and the strong castle of Heidenheim were the first that fell into their hands after a long and brave defence . 
The latter was defended by Stephan von Lichow ; but with only a couple of culverins and a handful of men at his command , he could not hold out against the thousands of the League and the military experience of a Fronsberg . 
Göppingen soon after experienced the same fate . 
Not less brave than Lichow , Philip von Rechberg distinguished himself there , and obtained an honourable retreat for himself and garrison ; but his gallant conduct was not able to turn the fate of the country . 
Teck , at that time a strong fortified position , was lost through the imprudence of the garrison . 
Möckmukh held out the longest ; it possessed a man within its walls , who would have been a match for twenty of the besiegers , and whose determined resistance was equalled only by the power of his iron hand . 
Its walls were , however , demolished , and Götz von Berlichingen was also reckoned among the prisoners . 
Schorndorf could not withstand Fronsberg 's cannon ; it was reckoned , of all places , one of the strongest holds , and with it the rest of the low country belonging to Duke Ulerich fell into the hands of the League . 
The whole of Würtemberg , as far as the neighbourhood of Kirchheim , being now in the power of the League , the Duke of Bavaria broke up his camp , for the purpose of besieging Stuttgardt in person . 
An embassy from the town met him , however , at Denkendorf , to beg for mercy . 
The ambassadors did not attempt to make any excuse before the bitter enemies of their Duke , nor to shelter themselves under the allegiance they owed to their hereditary Prince ; they merely asserted , that as he , the cause of the war , was no longer within their walls , they craved exemption for their town being occupied by the troops of the League . 
But this petition found no grace in the stern mind of Wilhelm of Bavaria and the covetous desires of the other members of the League . 
The only answer they received was , that Ulerich 's conduct had merited punishment , and that , as the country had supported him , Stuttgardt therefore must also open its gates unconditionally . 
The townsfolk of the capital being unable to defend themselves against the powerful forces of the League , were obliged to submit to these hard terms , and admit a garrison within their walls . 
The conquest of the country was , however , far from being complete with the capture of the capital . 
The greatest part of the hill country still held for the Duke , and , judging from the spirit of its inhabitants , they were not likely to submit to the first summons . 
This elevated district was commanded by two fortified places , Urach and Tübingen ; -- and so long as they remained firm to the Duke , the surrounding neighbourhood also determined not to desert his cause . 
In Urach , however , the citizens , fearful of the power of the League , wished to come to terms , whilst the garrison held faithful to their master . 
The two parties at last came to blows , in which the brave commander was killed , and the garrison was then obliged to surrender . 
By the middle of April Tübingen , which had been strongly fortified , was the only place left to the Duke . 
Ulerich confided the defence of the castle , with the care of his family and the treasure of his house , to forty gallant and experienced knights , having under them two hundred of the bravest of his countrymen . 
The position of this fortress was strong , and being well supplied with ammunition and provisions , all eyes in Germany looked to its fate with anxiety ; for , Tübingen being a town of great repute in those days , it was thought that if it could but hold out until the Duke relieved it , he might then be able to re-conquer the country . 
The League , to frustrate their enemy 's last hope , now marched against it with their whole force . 
The heavy steps of armed bodies of men sounded through the forests in their march towards the place ; the vallies of the Neckar trembled under the tread of cavalry ; the artillery , with the baggage and ammunition waggons , and all the apparatus for a long siege , which was brought with the army , left deep ruts in the fields as a witness of the coming event . 
Albert von Sturmfeder knew nothing of the progress of the war . 
A deep but sweet slumber , like a powerful enchantment , suspended the operations of his faculties for a long time . 
He suffered no inconvenience in this state of stupor , but resembled a child who , sleeping on the breast of its mother , occasionally opens its eyes to gaze at a world it knows not , and closes them again for a time . 
Pleasing dreams of better days soothed his situation , a placid smile often played upon his pale countenance , and comforted those who nursed him with tender solicitude . 
We will now introduce the reader to the humble cottage , which had received him with hospitality , and treated him with tender care the day after he had been wounded . 
The morning sun of this day threw its enlivening rays on the round frame of a small window , and illumined the largest room of a needy peasant 's house . 
Though the furniture bespoke poverty , cleanliness and order reigned throughout . 
A large oaken table stood in one corner of the room , on two sides of which were placed wooden benches . 
A carved chest , painted with bright colours , contained , as was generally the case in such habitations , the Sunday wardrobe of the inhabitants , and fine linen spun by themselves ; around the dark wainscot of the walls was a shelf , upon which were ranged well polished cans , goblets , and smoothing irons , earthen utensils with mottos in verse painted on them , and all kinds of musical instruments , such as cymbals , hautboys , and a guitar , hung on the walls . 
At the further end of the room stood a bedstead , with cotton curtains , of a coarse texture , ornamented with figures of large flowers . 
It was partly concealed from view by a range of clean linen hanging to air around an earthenware stove , which projected far into the apartment . 
A young girl , of about sixteen or seventeen years of age , sat beside the bed . 
She was dressed in that picturesque costume which , with little difference , has been handed down to our days among our Swabian peasantry . 
Her golden hair was uncovered , and fell in two long tresses plaited with different coloured ribands , over her back . 
Her cheerful face was somewhat tanned by the sun , but not so much as to obscure the lovely youthful colour of her cheeks ; a lively blue eye sparkled from beneath a long eyelash . 
Plaited full sleeves of white linen covered her arm down to the hand ; a scarlet bodice , laced with a silver chain , and trimmed with fancy-worked linen , of a finer texture than the sleeves , sat close to her shape ; a short black petticoat fell scarcely below the knee . 
This ornamental dress , together with a clean white apron and high clocked stockings of the same colour , fastened up with pretty garters , did not appear quite in keeping with the humble furniture of the room , nor with the week-day costume of a peasant 's daughter . 
The young girl was busily employed spinning fine thread ; at times she opened the curtains of the bed , and peeped in . 
But , as if she had been caught in the act , she quickly closed them again , and smoothed the folds , so that no one might remark what she had been about . 
The door opened , when a little plump elderly woman entered , dressed much in the same way as the girl , but not so smart . 
She brought a basin of hot soup for breakfast , and then arranged the plates on the table . 
When she saw her daughter -LRB- for such she was -RRB- sitting beside the bed , she was so startled at her appearance , that a little more and she would have dropped the jug of cider which she also held in her hand . 
`` For God 's sake , what are you thinking about , Barbelle , '' said she , as she placed the jug on the table and approached the maiden ; `` what are you thinking about , to sit and spin there with your new bodice on ? 
And she has got her new petticoat on , too , and the silver chain , I declare , and has taken a clean apron and stockings out of the chest ! 
What a piece of vanity , you foolish thing ! 
Do n't you know that we are poor folks , and that you are the child of an unfortunate man ? '' 
The daughter patiently allowed her bustling mother to expend her astonishment ; she cast her eyes down , it is true , but there was a roguish smile on her face , which proved that the lecture did not sink very deep . 
`` Ah ! 
what 's the use of being angry ? '' 
she answered ; `` what harm can it do to my dress , if I wear it once on a week day ? 
The silver chain will not suffer , and I can easily wash the apron . '' 
`` So ! 
as if we had not washing and cleaning enough ? 
But tell me , what has put it into your head to make yourself so smart to-day ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
do n't you know , mother , '' said the blushing Swabian child , `` that to-day is the eighth day ? 
Did not my father say the gentleman would awake on the eighth day , if his medicines had their desired effect ? 
And so I thought -- '' `` Yes , this is about the time , '' replied the mother , kindly ; `` you are quite right , child : if he awakes and sees everything about him slovenly and dirty , we shall get into trouble with the father . 
And I am not fit to be seen ! 
Go , Barbelle , and fetch me my black jacket and red bodice , and a clean apron . '' 
`` But , mother , '' said the young one , `` you had better go and dress yourself , while I remain here , for perhaps the gentleman may awake when you are putting your things on . '' 
`` You are right again , girl , '' replied the mother , and , leaving the breakfast on the table , retired to adorn her person . 
Her daughter opened the window to the fresh morning air , for the purpose , according to her usual practice , of feeding her pigeons , which were assembled before the house waiting for their accustomed meal ; larks and other little birds saluting her in full chirping chorus , partook also of her bounty , which the young girl enjoyed with innocent pleasure . 
At this moment the curtains of the bed were opened , when the head of a handsome young man looked out ; we need not say it was Albert von Sturmfeder . 
A slight colour , the first messenger of returning health , played on his cheeks ; his look was as brilliant as ever , and his arm felt as powerful . 
He surveyed his situation in astonishment ; the room , with its furniture , were strangers to him ; everything about him was a riddle . 
Who had bandaged his head ? 
who had put him in this bed ? 
His position appeared to him like that of one who had passed a jovial night with his companions , and , having lost his senses , awoke in some out-of-the-way place . 
He observed the girl at the window for some time . 
He could not keep his eyes off her , as she was the first object he had seen ; for the purpose of drawing her attention , he made a rustling noise with the curtains as he threw them further back . 
She ' started when she heard the noise , and looking round , exhibited , to Albert 's astonishment and delight , the beauty of her countenance , now slightly tinged with a blush . 
His sudden apparition appeared for a moment to deprive her pretty smiling mouth of the power of finding words to welcome the invalid to returning life . 
She soon collected herself , however , and hastened to the bedside , but immediately after checked her steps , as if she were not quite certain of her patient being really awake , or whether it were proper to be in the room when he returned to his senses . 
The young man , observing the embarrassment of this beautiful maiden , was the first to break silence . 
`` Tell me , where am I ? 
how came I here ? '' 
asked Albert . 
`` To whom belongs this house , in which , it appears , I awake out of a long sleep ? '' 
`` Are you really in your senses again ? '' 
cried she , clasping her hands for joy . 
`` Ah ! 
thank God , who would ever have thought it ? 
But you look at one as if it were true , though you have been so long ill as to make us very fearful and anxious about you . '' 
`` Have I been ill ? '' 
inquired Albert , who scarcely understood the dialect of the Swabian girl . 
`` I have only been a few hours without consciousness ? '' 
`` Eh ! 
what are you thinking about , '' giggled the girl , and bit the end of the tress , to suppress a rising laugh ; `` a few hours , did you say ? 
This night will just be the ninth that I have been watching you . '' 
The young man could not comprehend what he heard . 
Nine days , and not arrived at Lichtenstein , to see Bertha ? 
And with this thought his recollection of the past returned in full force to his mind ; he remembered having renounced the service of the League , -- that he had determined to visit Lichtenstein , -- that he had crossed the Alb by unfrequented paths , and that he and his leader had been attacked . 
But now , when he looked about him , fearful doubts oppressed his mind . 
Am I a prisoner , he thought to himself ; and immediately put the same question to his pretty attendant . 
She had noticed , with increasing anxiety , the placid countenance of the young knight , as it became ruffled , and the wild look his features had suddenly assumed . 
Fearful he might relapse again into his former situation , which the languid tone of his voice seemed to indicate , she hesitated what to do , whether to remain in the room , or call in the assistance of her mother . 
She did not return an answer , and retired towards the door . 
Her heart was touched at the distress which appeared to oppress her patient ; and Albert , judging by her silence and the anxious expression of her countenance , which he construed into an affirmation to his question , that he was now in the hands of his enemies , exclaimed , `` I am a prisoner then , separated from her without hope , without consolation , without the possibility of hearing from her perhaps for a long time ! '' 
The shock was too great for his weak state of body to withstand ; a tear stole from his eye . 
The girl observed the tear : her anxiety was changed into pity , she approached nearer , and seating herself again by the bed-side , ventured to take the hand of the young man . 
`` You must not give way to grief , '' she said , `` your honour is well again , and -- you can very soon proceed on your journey , '' she added , with a cheerful smile . 
`` Proceed on my journey ? '' 
asked Albert , `` then I am not a prisoner ? '' 
`` Prisoner ? 
no , certainly not ; you might have been so , indeed , once or twice , for the patroles of the League often came to our house , but we always concealed you , because my father told us not to let any one see you . '' 
`` Your father ! '' 
cried the young man , `` who is your father ? 
Where am I ? '' 
`` Where are you ? '' 
answered Barbelle , `` why , in Hardt , to be sure . '' 
`` In Hardt ? '' 
a glance at the walls adorned with musical instruments convinced him that he was indebted to the man for his life and liberty , who had been sent to him from Bertha as a guardian angel . 
`` So I am in Hardt ? 
and your father is the fifer of Hardt , is he not ? '' 
`` He does not like to be called by that name , '' said the girl ; `` he is certainly a musician , but he prefers being known by the name of Hans . '' 
`` But how did I come here ? '' 
inquired Albert . 
`` Do n't you recollect anything about it ? '' 
smiled the young girl , and played with her hair again . 
She then related , in Swabian dialect , that after her father had been absent many weeks , he suddenly arrived nine days ago , in the night , and knocked at the door some time before it awoke her . 
Having recognised his voice , she hurried down to let him in . 
He was accompanied by four men , carrying a wounded man , covered with his cloak , whom they brought into the house . 
When her father withdrew the cloak from the sick man , and desired her to bring a light , she was terribly frightened at seeing a person bleeding , and apparently half dead . 
He then ordered her to heat the stove immediately , and they brought the wounded man into the room , and laid him on the bed . 
His dress was that of a person of distinction . 
`` My father , '' added she , `` applied some herbs to his wounds , he also prepared a cordial for him , for he understands the art of medicine both for man and beast . 
The young man was for two days very restless and violent , which caused us all great anxiety . 
But after my father had given him a third dose of medicine he became easy and quiet , and then he said that , on the eighth morning , the invalid would be himself again , and his prediction has actually come to pass . '' 
Albert listened to the story of the young girl with much interest ; he was obliged occasionally to interrupt her in her narration , when he did not exactly understand the expressions she made use of in her Swabian dialect , or when she described more minutely the herbs with which the fifer of Hardt had prepared his medicines . 
`` And where is your father ? '' 
he asked . 
`` How can we know where he is ? '' 
she answered , as if she wished to avoid the question ; but , recollecting herself , she added , `` I think I may tell you , because you must be a good friend of his ; he is gone to Lichtenstein . '' 
`` To Lichtenstein ? '' 
cried Albert , and blushed deeply ; `` and when will he come back again ? '' 
`` He ought to have been here two days ago , as he told us , if nothing happened to detain him . 
Folks say the cavalry of the League are on the look-out for him . '' 
The mere mention of Lichtenstein seemed to invigorate his weak frame with renewed strength . 
He fancied himself strong enough to mount his horse immediately , and , by the rapidity of his movements , make up for the time he had lost on the bed of sickness . 
His next and most important question , therefore , was to inquire after his horse ; and when he heard it was quite well in the cow-house , he thought he would be able to set out without further loss of time . 
He thanked his kind little nurse for the care she had taken of him , and asked for his jacket and cloak . 
She had long since cleaned his clothes , and carefully washed out all spots of blood ; and taking them out of the carved painted chest , where they had been placed among her Sunday 's attire , spread them out one by one before him , and appeared pleased with the grateful acknowledgements which he expressed for her attention . 
She then hurried out of the room to acquaint her mother with the joyful news of the young knight 's restoration to health and vigour . 
We know not whether she told her mother that she had had half an hour 's gossip with the handsome gentleman ; we have reason however to doubt it , for that good lady had learnt from the experience of her youthful days , and thought it necessary to repeat the warning constantly to her daughter , that `` she should take good care not to speak to a smart young fellow longer than it would take to repeat an ` Ave Maria . ' '' 
END OF VOL . 
I. J. B. Nichols and Son , 25 , Parliament-street . 
THE BANISHED . 
VOL . 
II . 
LONDON : PRINTED BY J. B. NICHOLS AND SON , 25 , PARLIAMENT STREET . 
THE BANISHED : A SWABIAN HISTORICAL TALE . 
EDITED BY JAMES MORIER , ESQ. . 
AUTHOR OF HAJJI BABA , & c . 
IN THREE VOLUMES . 
VOL . 
II . 
LONDON : HENRY COLBURN , PUBLISHER , GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET . 
1839 . 
THE BANISHED . 
* * * * * Art thou troubled , maiden ? 
Tell me what , -- Thou speak ` st of matters which beseem thee not . 
SCHILLER . 
Barbelle went up stairs to her mother , who was still occupied in adorning her little plump person , to appear before her guest in proper attire . 
They then descended together to the kitchen on the ground floor , which adjoined the apartment of Albert . 
The attention of the good matron was more excited by getting a peep at him through a small window looking into his room , than in preparing a mess of oatmeal porridge for his mid-day meal . 
Barbelle was also determined to satisfy her curiosity in like manner , and standing upon tiptoes , looked over her mother 's shoulders . 
She beheld the young man with wondering eyes , and her heart beat violently for the first time in seventeen years at the sight of his fine figure . 
She had been often moved to tears as he lay on the bed of sickness , insensible , almost lifeless ; deeply affected at the pallid appearance of his fine manly features struggling with death , as she imagined , she had watched him with the tender anxiety of a pious mind ; but now she felt he was quite a different object to behold . 
His eye was reanimated by a beautiful expression , and it struck Barbelle , young though she was , that she had never seen the like before . 
His hair fell no longer in wild disorder over his forehead ; it now hung down his neck arranged with care and combed into neat curls . 
The colour had returned to his cheeks , and his lips were as fresh as cherries on the festivals of Peter and Paul ; and how well did his embroidered silk jacket become him , and the broad white collar which he had put on over his dress ! 
But the little girl could not comprehend why he was so much occupied with a certain white and blue silk scarf ; she even thought that he pressed it to his heart and raised it to his lips , full of the devotion which is paid to some esteemed relic . 
The elderly matron had , in the meantime , satisfied her curiosity in the examination of her guest , and returned to her culinary occupations . 
`` The gentleman looks like a prince , '' she said , as she gave the mess of oatmeal porridge a stir , `` what a jacket he has ! 
no Stuttgardt beau can boast of a finer one . 
But what is he always doing with that band he holds in his hand ? 
He never ceases to look at it . 
Perhaps there is a spot of blood on it which he can not get out ? '' 
`` No , that 's not it ! '' 
said Barbelle , who could now look into the room with greater ease . 
`` But do you know , mother , what I think ? 
he looks at it with such ardent eyes , that it must certainly be something from his love . '' 
The matron could scarcely help smiling at the supposition of her child , but she soon recover her dignity , and replied , `` Ah , what do you know about love ! 
Such a child as you must not think of the like . 
Get away from the window , and fetch me a napkin . 
The gentleman has been accustomed to good living , so I must put more melted butter in the porridge . '' 
Barbelle left the window rather in a pet . 
She knew that she dare not disobey her mother , but nevertheless thought that she was in the present instance decidedly in the wrong . 
For , had she not been in the habit of joining the other girls of the village for a whole year past , when they talked and sang of their loves and favourites ? 
Had not some of her companions , who were only a few weeks older than herself their appropriate sweethearts ? 
and should she alone be debarred from even speaking on the subject , -- not even to know anything about it ? 
No , it was too bad of her mother ; who now forbad her knowing anything about such affairs , when but a moment before she had not objected to her standing upon tiptoes to look over her shoulder . 
But , as it often happens that prohibition excites transgression , so Barbelle was determined not to rest satisfied until she had discovered why the young knight regarded his scarf with such enraptured eyes . 
The breakfast of the young man was , in the meantime , ready , wanting only a can of wine to complete it ; this was also soon provided ; for , though the fifer of Hardt was a man of low condition , he was not so poor that his cellar could not produce a bottle or two upon extraordinary occasions . 
The girl carried the wine and bread , whilst her mother , dressed in her complete Sunday 's attire , preceded her daughter into the room , bearing the dish of oatmeal porridge in both hands . 
Albert had some difficulty to dispense with the ceremonious respect , which the fifer 's wife thought was due to such a distinguished guest . 
She had once served in the castle of Neuffen , and knew what good manners were , and therefore remained on the threshold of the door , with the smoking hot dish in her hands , until the young man positively ordered her to approach . 
Her daughter stood blushing behind the round plump matron , and her confused countenance was only occasionally visible to Albert when her mother curtsied very low . 
She also followed her mother through the number of requisite ceremonies , but felt , perhaps , less embarrassment now than she might have done , had she not had half an hour 's previous conversation with their guest . 
Barbelle covered the table with a clean cloth , and put the porridge and wine before Albert , who was to sit on the end of the bench under the crucifix , which hung on the wall . 
She then stuck a curiously carved wooden spoon into it , which , standing unassisted upright , was a proof that the meal was of the best cooking . 
When the young man had seated himself , the mother and daughter also took their places at the table to partake of the breakfast , but placed themselves at a respectful distance , not forgetting to put the salt between them and their distinguished guest , for such was the custom in the good old times . 
During the time that each was occupied with their repast , Albert had sufficient opportunity to make a few passing observations upon his companions . 
In the appearance of the stately personage who filled the situation of honour in the fifer of Hardt 's house , self importance and dignity seemed pre-eminent whilst much kindliness of expression was marked on her features . 
Had not her better half been a man of determined character , and positive in maintaining the upper hand in the essentials of domestic government , there was something in the bearing of his wife which indicated , that one less bold might easily have been brought under her dominion . 
In her daughter 's countenance , the combined charms of simple unaffected goodness and innocence beamed forth in all their glory . 
The purity of her heart , and kindliness of her feelings , were delineated in the delicate lines of her features , and the soft modest expression of her eye bespoke unconsciousness of nature 's best gifts . 
Such was this child of nature , bred and born in the lonely cottage of a restless intriguing peasant ; Albert could not behold her without admiration , and owned to himself that , had his heart not been already fully occupied with another , and the distance between the heir to the name of Sturmfeder and the lower born daughter of the fifer of Hardt been immeasurably great , she might have won no insignificant place in it . 
His eye rested with peculiar pleasure and interest upon her innocent face , and , had not her mother been so much occupied with her porridge , she could not have avoided noticing the blushes of her child , when a stolen look at the young knight by chance met his glance . 
`` Now that the platter is empty , is the time to gossip , '' is a true saying ; which was put in practice as soon as the table cloth was taken away . 
Albert had two things particularly at heart . 
He wished to know for certain , when the fifer of Hardt would return from Lichtenstein , because he only awaited intelligence from Bertha to hasten immediately to her ; and , secondly , it was highly necessary for him to learn where the army of the League was at the present moment . 
To the first question he could not expect any further information , than that which the maiden had already given him , namely , that her father had been absent about six days , but , having promised to be back on the fifth , she now looked for his arrival every hour . 
The good matron shed tears as she bewailed to her guest how her husband , since the commencement of the war , had been but a few hours at home ; how he had always had the reputation of being a restless character ; and how people rumoured all sorts of stories about him , which would certainly bring his wife and child into misfortune and trouble by his dangerous mode of life . 
Albert tried all means to console her and stop her tears ; and so far succeeded , as to enable her to answer his questions respecting the army of the League . 
`` Ah ! 
sir , '' she said , `` terror and misery are our portion now-a-days ! 
it is just as if a wild huntsman were riding on the clouds , driving over the country with his ghost hounds . 
They have overrun all the low country , and now the whole force is gone to attack Tübingen . '' 
`` So all the fortresses are in their hands ? '' 
said Albert , astonished : `` Höllenstein , Schorndorf , Göppingen , Teck , Urach -- are they all taken ? '' 
`` All of them , I believe ; a man from Schorndorf told me that the confederates were in Höllenstein , Schorndorf , and Göppingen . 
But I can tell you for certain about Teck and Urach , as we are only three or four hours ' distance from them . '' 
She then related that , on the 3rd of April , the League 's army advanced to Teck ; one part of the infantry was posted before one of the gates of the town , and had a parley with the garrison about surrendering . 
Every one flocked to the spot to hear the summons , and in the meantime the enemy scaled the other gate . 
But , in the castle of Urach , there were four hundred ducal infantry , which the citizens would not admit into the town when the enemy advanced . 
A battle took place between them , in which the soldiers were forced into the market place , where the commander was wounded by a ball , and afterwards run through the body by a halbert ; the town then surrendered to the League . 
`` It is no wonder , '' said the fifer of Hardt 's wife , as she concluded her narration , `` that they take all the towns and castles ; for they have long falconets and bombarding pieces which shoot balls as large as my head , breaking down walls and upsetting towers . '' 
Albert could easily foresee from this information , that the journey from Hardt to Lichtenstein would not be less dangerous , than that which he had already performed over the Alb , for he knew that he would be obliged to pass directly between Urach and Tübingen . 
But , as the army of the League had been withdrawn from Urach several days back , and the siege of Tübingen necessarily required a large force , he might hope there was no post of any importance occupied by the enemy , in the country through which he would have to travel . 
He therefore awaited the arrival of his guide with impatience . 
The wound on his head was quite healed ; though the blow had been severe enough to deprive him of his senses for many days , it was not deep , owing to the feathers of his cap and the thickness of his hair having blunted the sharpness of the cut . 
He had recovered also of the wounds on his legs and arms , and the only inconvenience he suffered from the result of that unfortunate night , was a debility arising from the loss of blood , and lying so long upon the bed of sickness . 
But his constitution hourly gained strength , his natural buoyancy of spirit resumed its sway , and his only thought was to proceed onwards to his destination . 
He was , however , compelled to summon up all his spirits , to make the tedious hours he was still doomed to pass in his present quarters at all bearable . 
The daughter of the fifer , perceiving how the prolonged absence of her father distressed him , did her best to beguile the time by amusing him with her cheerful conversation . 
The delay was nevertheless not without its advantages , for he became acquainted with the character and life of the Swabian peasant . 
Their manners and dialect were quite new to him . 
His countrymen , the Franconians , although bordering so near on this part of Würtemberg , were to his mind a race more subtle and crafty , -- in many respects less polished , -- than these . 
But the kind-hearted honesty of the Swabians , which their looks , address , and actions bespoke , -- their cheerful industry , their cleanliness and order , giving to poverty a respectable , indeed a substantial , appearance ; in short , everything he saw induced him to think they possessed more intrinsic good qualities than their shrewder neighbours . 
He was very much taken with the unaffected simplicity of the young girl 's talk . 
Her mother might scold as much as she liked , and remind her continually of the high rank of the knight , she was not to be deterred from entertaining him , and she was particularly bent upon not giving up her secret plan to ascertain whether she or her mother were right in their views respecting the white and blue scarf . 
Upon this subject she had her own thoughts , arising out of the following circumstance : One night when Albert was very ill , she had remained up late to keep her father company , who was watching by his bed-side . 
But having fallen asleep over her work , she was aroused , it might have been about ten o'clock , by a noise in the room . 
She saw a man in earnest conversation with her father , whose features did not escape her notice , although he tried to conceal them under a large cap . 
She thought she recognised in the stranger a servant of the knight of Lichtenstein , who had often been in the habit of coming in a mysterious way to the fifer of Hardt , upon which occasion she was always obliged to leave the apartment . 
Bent upon knowing what this man had to communicate to her father , she feigned to be asleep thinking he would not disturb her . 
She was right in her conjecture ; and heard the stranger speak of a young lady , who was inconsolable , on account of a certain young man . 
She had commissioned him to go to Hardt to ascertain the truth of the report which had given her great concern , and had determined to acknowledge every thing to her father respecting her acquaintance with the invalid , and in case he returned to her with unsatisfactory intelligence , she would immediately proceed to nurse him herself . 
The messenger from Lichtenstein spoke in an under tone , as if afraid of being overheard ; and her father , lamenting the case of the lady , represented the state of the patient as being likely soon to be ameliorated , and promised that , when he was decidedly better , he would immediately convey the consoling news to her himself . 
The stranger then cut off a lock of the sick man 's hair , folded it up carefully in a cloth , which he carried under his jacket , and being led out of the room by her father , took his departure . 
The many occupations of the following days , had driven the conversation of the stranger from the recollection of the fifer 's daughter ; but when she witnessed the scene from the kitchen window , it came back in full force to her mind . 
She knew that the knight of Lichtenstein had a daughter , because her aunt had been her nurse , and now was her attendant . 
It could be no other than this very lady , who had sent the servant to inquire about the sick man , and intended to come herself to nurse him . 
All the stories she had ever heard as she sat at the spinning-wheel on a long winter 's evening , -- and there were many terrible ones , of king 's daughters in love , of gallant knights sick in prison , saved by the hands of noble ladies , -- came to her remembrance . 
She did not exactly know what people of quality thought of love , but she supposed that sensation must be much the same kind of thing , which girls of her village felt , when they surrendered their hearts to handsome young fellows of their own rank in life . 
With this idea strong in her mind , she thought how painful must be the situation of the noble lady , living in the high and distant castle , not to know whether her treasure were dead or alive , nor to be able to come to him , to see him , and to watch over him . 
These reflections brought tears into her eye , generally so animated and cheerful . 
Her heart was touched at the idea of the narrow escape the lady had run of losing her lover ; and supposing her to be the daughter of a noble , rich knight , she necessarily must be very beautiful , her imagination led her to fancy her situation to be doubly inconsolable . 
But was not the young man to be equally pitied , if not more so ? 
