`` Not I , certainly , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` but I believe it was M. Colbert . '' 
Colbert , having heard his name pronounced , said , `` What was M. d'Artagnan good enough to say ? '' 
`` I was good enough to remark that it was you who stopped the king 's progress , so that he might taste the vin de Brie . 
Was I right ? '' 
`` Quite so , monsieur . '' 
`` In that case , then , it was you whom the king called some name or other . '' 
`` What name ? '' 
`` I hardly know ; but wait a moment - idiot , I think it was - no , no , it was fool or dolt . 
Yes ; his majesty said that the man who had thought of the vin de Melun was something of the sort . '' 
D'Artagnan , after this broadside , quietly caressed his mustache ; M. Colbert 's large head seemed to become larger and larger than ever . 
D'Artagnan , seeing how ugly anger made him , did not stop half-way . 
The orator still went on with his speech , while the king 's color was visibly increasing . 
`` Mordioux ! '' 
said the musketeer , coolly , `` the king is going to have an attack of determination of blood to the head . 
Where the deuce did you get hold of that idea , Monsieur Colbert ? 
You have no luck . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said the financier , drawing himself up , `` my zeal for the king 's service inspired me with the idea . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
`` Monsieur , Melun is a city , an excellent city , which pays well , and which it would be imprudent to displease . '' 
`` There , now ! 
I , who do not pretend to be a financier , saw only one idea in your idea . '' 
`` What was that , monsieur ? '' 
`` That of causing a little annoyance to M. Fouquet , who is making himself quite giddy on his donjons yonder , in waiting for us . '' 
This was a home-stroke , hard enough in all conscience . 
Colbert was completely thrown out of the saddle by it , and retired , thoroughly discomfited . 
Fortunately , the speech was now at an end ; the king drank the wine which was presented to him , and then every one resumed the progress through the city . 
The king bit his lips in anger , for the evening was closing in , and all hope of a walk with La Valliere was at an end . 
In order that the whole of the king 's household should enter Vaux , four hours at least were necessary , owing to the different arrangements . 
The king , therefore , who was boiling with impatience , hurried forward as much as possible , in order to reach it before nightfall . 
But , at the moment he was setting off again , other and fresh difficulties arose . 
`` Is not the king going to sleep at Melun ? '' 
said Colbert , in a low tone of voice , to D'Artagnan . 
M. Colbert must have been badly inspired that day , to address himself in that manner to the chief of the musketeers ; for the latter guessed that the king 's intention was very far from that of remaining where he was . 
D'Artagnan would not allow him to enter Vaux except he were well and strongly accompanied ; and desired that his majesty would not enter except with all the escort . 
On the other hand , he felt that these delays would irritate that impatient monarch beyond measure . 
In what way could he possibly reconcile these difficulties ? 
D'Artagnan took up Colbert 's remark , and determined to repeated it to the king . 
`` Sire , '' he said , `` M. Colbert has been asking me if your majesty does not intend to sleep at Melun . '' 
`` Sleep at Melun ! 
What for ? '' 
exclaimed Louis XIV . 
`` Sleep at Melun ! 
Who , in Heaven 's name , can have thought of such a thing , when M. Fouquet is expecting us this evening ? '' 
`` It was simply , '' replied Colbert , quickly , `` the fear of causing your majesty the least delay ; for , according to established etiquette , you can not enter any place , with the exception of your own royal residences , until the soldiers ' quarters have been marked out by the quartermaster , and the garrison properly distributed . '' 
D'Artagnan listened with the greatest attention , biting his mustache to conceal his vexation ; and the queens were not less interested . 
They were fatigued , and would have preferred to go to rest without proceeding any farther ; more especially , in order to prevent the king walking about in the evening with M. de Saint-Aignan and the ladies of the court , for , if etiquette required the princesses to remain within their own rooms , the ladies of honor , as soon as they had performed the services required of them , had no restrictions placed upon them , but were at liberty to walk about as they pleased . 
It will easily be conjectured that all these rival interests , gathering together in vapors , necessarily produced clouds , and that the clouds were likely to be followed by a tempest . 
The king had no mustache to gnaw , and therefore kept biting the handle of his whip instead , with ill-concealed impatience . 
How could he get out of it ? 
D'Artagnan looked as agreeable as possible , and Colbert as sulky as he could . 
Who was there he could get in a passion with ? 
`` We will consult the queen , '' said Louis XIV. , bowing to the royal ladies . 
And this kindness of consideration softened Maria Theresa 's heart , who , being of a kind and generous disposition , when left to her own free-will , replied : `` I shall be delighted to do whatever your majesty wishes . '' 
`` How long will it take us to get to Vaux ? '' 
inquired Anne of Austria , in slow and measured accents , placing her hand upon her bosom , where the seat of her pain lay . 
`` An hour for your majesty 's carriages , '' said D'Artagnan ; `` the roads are tolerably good . '' 
The king looked at him . 
`` And a quarter of an hour for the king , '' he hastened to add . 
`` We should arrive by daylight ? '' 
said Louis XIV . 
`` But the billeting of the king 's military escort , '' objected Colbert , softly , `` will make his majesty lose all the advantage of his speed , however quick he may be . '' 
`` Double ass that you are ! '' 
thought D'Artagnan ; `` if I had any interest or motive in demolishing your credit with the king , I could do it in ten minutes . 
If I were in the king 's place , '' he added aloud , `` I should , in going to M. Fouquet , leave my escort behind me ; I should go to him as a friend ; I should enter accompanied only by my captain of the guards ; I should consider that I was acting more nobly , and should be invested with a still more sacred character by doing so . '' 
Delight sparkled in the king 's eyes . 
`` That is indeed a very sensible suggestion . 
We will go to see a friend as friends ; the gentlemen who are with the carriages can go slowly : but we who are mounted will ride on . '' 
And he rode off , accompanied by all those who were mounted . 
Colbert hid his ugly head behind his horse 's neck . 
`` I shall be quits , '' said D'Artagnan , as he galloped along , `` by getting a little talk with Aramis this evening . 
And then , M. Fouquet is a man of honor . 
Mordioux ! 
I have said so , and it must be so . '' 
And this was the way how , towards seven o'clock in the evening , without announcing his arrival by the din of trumpets , and without even his advanced guard , without out-riders or musketeers , the king presented himself before the gate of Vaux , where Fouquet , who had been informed of his royal guest 's approach , had been waiting for the last half-hour , with his head uncovered , surrounded by his household and his friends . 
: Nectar and Ambrosia . 
M. Fouquet held the stirrup of the king , who , having dismounted , bowed most graciously , and more graciously still held out his hand to him , which Fouquet , in spite of a slight resistance on the king 's part , carried respectfully to his lips . 
The king wished to wait in the first courtyard for the arrival of the carriages , nor had he long to wait , for the roads had been put into excellent order by the superintendent , and a stone would hardly have been found of the size of an egg the whole way from Melun to Vaux ; so that the carriages , rolling along as though on a carpet , brought the ladies to Vaux , without jolting or fatigue , by eight o'clock . 
They were received by Madame Fouquet , and at the moment they made their appearance , a light as bright as day burst forth from every quarter , trees , vases , and marble statues . 
This species of enchantment lasted until their majesties had retired into the palace . 
All these wonders and magical effects which the chronicler has heaped up , or rather embalmed , in his recital , at the risk of rivaling the brain-born scenes of romancers ; these splendors whereby night seemed vanquished and nature corrected , together with every delight and luxury combined for the satisfaction of all the senses , as well as the imagination , Fouquet did in real truth offer to his sovereign in that enchanting retreat of which no monarch could at that time boast of possessing an equal . 
We do not intend to describe the grand banquet , at which the royal guests were present , nor the concerts , nor the fairy-like and more than magic transformations and metamorphoses ; it will be enough for our purpose to depict the countenance the king assumed , which , from being gay , soon wore a very gloomy , constrained , and irritated expression . 
He remembered his own residence , royal though it was , and the mean and indifferent style of luxury that prevailed there , which comprised but little more than what was merely useful for the royal wants , without being his own personal property . 
The large vases of the Louvre , the older furniture and plate of Henry II. , of Francis I. , and of Louis XI. , were but historic monuments of earlier days ; nothing but specimens of art , the relics of his predecessors ; while with Fouquet , the value of the article was as much in the workmanship as in the article itself . 
Fouquet ate from a gold service , which artists in his own employ had modeled and cast for him alone . 
Fouquet drank wines of which the king of France did not even know the name , and drank them out of goblets each more valuable than the entire royal cellar . 
What , too , was to be said of the apartments , the hangings , the pictures , the servants and officers , of every description , of his household ? 
What of the mode of service in which etiquette was replaced by order ; stiff formality by personal , unrestrained comfort ; the happiness and contentment of the guest became the supreme law of all who obeyed the host ? 
The perfect swarm of busily engaged persons moving about noiselessly ; the multitude of guests , - who were , however , even less numerous than the servants who waited on them , - the myriad of exquisitely prepared dishes , of gold and silver vases ; the floods of dazzling light , the masses of unknown flowers of which the hot-houses had been despoiled , redundant with luxuriance of unequaled scent and beauty ; the perfect harmony of the surroundings , which , indeed , was no more than the prelude of the promised fete , charmed all who were there ; and they testified their admiration over and over again , not by voice or gesture , but by deep silence and rapt attention , those two languages of the courtier which acknowledge the hand of no master powerful enough to restrain them . 
As for the king , his eyes filled with tears ; he dared not look at the queen . 
Anne of Austria , whose pride was superior to that of any creature breathing , overwhelmed her host by the contempt with which she treated everything handed to her . 
The young queen , kind-hearted by nature and curious by disposition , praised Fouquet , ate with an exceedingly good appetite , and asked the names of the strange fruits as they were placed upon the table . 
Fouquet replied that he was not aware of their names . 
The fruits came from his own stores ; he had often cultivated them himself , having an intimate acquaintance with the cultivation of exotic fruits and plants . 
The king felt and appreciated the delicacy of the replies , but was only the more humiliated ; he thought the queen a little too familiar in her manners , and that Anne of Austria resembled Juno a little too much , in being too proud and haughty ; his chief anxiety , however , was himself , that he might remain cold and distant in his behavior , bordering lightly the limits of supreme disdain or simple admiration . 
But Fouquet had foreseen all this ; he was , in fact , one of those men who foresee everything . 
The king had expressly declared that , so long as he remained under Fouquet 's roof , he did not wish his own different repasts to be served in accordance with the usual etiquette , and that he would , consequently , dine with the rest of society ; but by the thoughtful attention of the surintendant , the king 's dinner was served up separately , if one may so express it , in the middle of the general table ; the dinner , wonderful in every respect , from the dishes of which was composed , comprised everything the king liked and generally preferred to anything else . 
Louis had no excuse - he , indeed , who had the keenest appetite in his kingdom - for saying that he was not hungry . 
Nay , M. Fouquet did even better still ; he certainly , in obedience to the king 's expressed desire , seated himself at the table , but as soon as the soups were served , he arose and personally waited on the king , while Madame Fouquet stood behind the queen-mother 's armchair . 
The disdain of Juno and the sulky fits of temper of Jupiter could not resist this excess of kindly feeling and polite attention . 
The queen ate a biscuit dipped in a glass of San-Lucar wine ; and the king ate of everything , saying to M. Fouquet : `` It is impossible , monsieur le surintendant , to dine better anywhere . '' 
