`` 6 . 
My pictures and statues , which are said to be of great value , and which are sufficiently numerous to fatigue the sight . 
`` 7 . 
My library , consisting of six thousand volumes , quite new , and have never been opened . 
`` 8 . 
My silver plate , which is perhaps a little worn , but which ought to weigh from a thousand to twelve hundred pounds , for I had great trouble in lifting the coffer that contained it and could not carry it more than six times round my chamber . 
`` 9 . 
All these objects , in addition to the table and house linen , are divided in the residences I liked the best . '' 
Here the reader stopped to take breath . 
Every one sighed , coughed , and redoubled his attention . 
The procureur resumed : `` I have lived without having any children , and it is probable I never shall have any , which to me is a cutting grief . 
And yet I am mistaken , for I have a son , in common with my other friends ; that is , M. Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne , the true son of M. le Comte de la Fere . 
`` This young nobleman appears to me extremely worthy to succeed the valiant gentleman of whom I am the friend and very humble servant . '' 
Here a sharp sound interrupted the reader . 
It was D'Artagnan 's sword , which , slipping from his baldric , had fallen on the sonorous flooring . 
Every one turned his eyes that way , and saw that a large tear had rolled from the thick lid of D'Artagnan , half-way down to his aquiline nose , the luminous edge of which shone like a little crescent moon . 
`` This is why , '' continued the procureur , `` I have left all my property , movable , or immovable , comprised in the above enumerations , to M. le Vicomte Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne , son of M. le Comte de la Fere , to console him for the grief he seems to suffer , and enable him to add more luster to his already glorious name . '' 
A vague murmur ran through the auditory . 
The procureur continued , seconded by the flashing eye of D'Artagnan , which , glancing over the assembly , quickly restored the interrupted silence : `` On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do give to M. le Chevalier d'Artagnan , captain of the king 's musketeers , whatever the said Chevalier d'Artagnan may demand of my property . 
On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do pay a good pension to M. le Chevalier d'Herblay , my friend , if he should need it in exile . 
I leave to my intendant Mousqueton all of my clothes , of city , war , or chase , to the number of forty-seven suits , in the assurance that he will wear them till they are worn out , for the love of and in remembrance of his master . 
Moreover , I bequeath to M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne my old servant and faithful friend Mousqueton , already named , providing that the said vicomte shall so act that Mousqueton shall declare , when dying , he has never ceased to be happy . '' 
On hearing these words , Mousqueton bowed , pale and trembling ; his shoulders shook convulsively ; his countenance , compressed by a frightful grief , appeared from between his icy hands , and the spectators saw him stagger and hesitate , as if , though wishing to leave the hall , he did not know the way . 
`` Mousqueton , my good friend , '' said D'Artagnan , `` go and make your preparations . 
I will take you with me to Athos 's house , whither I shall go on leaving Pierrefonds . '' 
Mousqueton made no reply . 
He scarcely breathed , as if everything in that hall would from that time be foreign . 
He opened the door , and slowly disappeared . 
The procureur finished his reading , after which the greater part of those who had come to hear the last will of Porthos dispersed by degrees , many disappointed , but all penetrated with respect . 
As for D'Artagnan , thus left alone , after having received the formal compliments of the procureur , he was lost in admiration of the wisdom of the testator , who had so judiciously bestowed his wealth upon the most necessitous and the most worthy , with a delicacy that neither nobleman nor courtier could have displayed more kindly . 
When Porthos enjoined Raoul de Bragelonne to give D'Artagnan all that he would ask , he knew well , our worthy Porthos , that D'Artagnan would ask or take nothing ; and in case he did demand anything , none but himself could say what . 
Porthos left a pension to Aramis , who , if he should be inclined to ask too much , was checked by the example of D'Artagnan ; and that word exile , thrown out by the testator , without apparent intention , was it not the mildest , most exquisite criticism upon that conduct of Aramis which had brought about the death of Porthos ? 
But there was no mention of Athos in the testament of the dead . 
Could the latter for a moment suppose that the son would not offer the best part to the father ? 
The rough mind of Porthos had fathomed all these causes , seized all these shades more clearly than law , better than custom , with more propriety than taste . 
`` Porthos had indeed a heart , '' said D'Artagnan to himself with a sigh . 
As he made this reflection , he fancied he hard a groan in the room above him ; and he thought immediately of poor Mousqueton , whom he felt it was a pleasing duty to divert from his grief . 
For this purpose he left the hall hastily to seek the worthy intendant , as he had not returned . 
He ascended the staircase leading to the first story , and perceived , in Porthos 's own chamber , a heap of clothes of all colors and materials , upon which Mousqueton had laid himself down after heaping them all on the floor together . 
It was the legacy of the faithful friend . 
Those clothes were truly his own ; they had been given to him ; the hand of Mousqueton was stretched over these relics , which he was kissing with his lips , with all his face , and covered with his body . 
D'Artagnan approached to console the poor fellow . 
`` My God ! '' 
said he , `` he does not stir - he has fainted ! '' 
But D'Artagnan was mistaken . 
Mousqueton was dead ! 
Dead , like the dog who , having lost his master , crawls back to die upon his cloak . 
: The Old Age of Athos . 
While these affairs were separating forever the four musketeers , formerly bound together in a manner that seemed indissoluble , Athos , left alone after the departure of Raoul , began to pay his tribute to that foretaste of death which is called the absence of those we love . 
Back in his house at Blois , no longer having even Grimaud to receive a poor smile as he passed through the parterre , Athos daily felt the decline of vigor of a nature which for so long a time had seemed impregnable . 
Age , which had been kept back by the presence of the beloved object , arrived with that cortege of pains and inconveniences , which grows by geometrical accretion . 
Athos had no longer his son to induce him to walk firmly , with head erect , as a good example ; he had no longer , in those brilliant eyes of the young man , an ever-ardent focus at which to kindle anew the fire of his looks . 
And then , must it be said , that nature , exquisite in tenderness and reserve , no longer finding anything to understand its feelings , gave itself up to grief with all the warmth of common natures when they yield to joy . 
The Comte de la Fere , who had remained a young man to his sixty-second year ; the warrior who had preserved his strength in spite of fatigue ; his freshness of mind in spite of misfortune , his mild serenity of soul and body in spite of Milady , in spite of Mazarin , in spite of La Valliere ; Athos had become an old man in a week , from the moment at which he lost the comfort of his later youth . 
Still handsome , though bent , noble , but sad , he sought , since his solitude , the deeper glades where sunshine scarcely penetrated . 
He discontinued all the mighty exercises he had enjoyed through life , when Raoul was no longer with him . 
The servants , accustomed to see him stirring with the dawn at all seasons , were astonished to hear seven o'clock strike before their master quitted his bed . 
Athos remained in bed with a book under his pillow - but he did not sleep , neither did he read . 
Remaining in bed that he might no longer have to carry his body , he allowed his soul and spirit to wander from their envelope and return to his son , or to God . 
-LRB- 6 -RRB- His people were sometimes terrified to see him , for hours together , absorbed in silent reverie , mute and insensible ; he no longer heard the timid step of the servant who came to the door of his chamber to watch the sleeping or waking of his master . 
It often occurred that he forgot the day had half passed away , that the hours for the two first meals were gone by . 
Then he was awakened . 
He rose , descended to his shady walk , then came out a little into the sun , as though to partake of its warmth for a minute in memory of his absent child . 
And then the dismal monotonous walk recommenced , until , exhausted , he regained the chamber and his bed , his domicile by choice . 
For several days the comte did not speak a single word . 
He refused to receive the visits that were paid him , and during the night he was seen to relight his lamp and pass long hours in writing , or examining parchments . 
Athos wrote one of these letters to Vannes , another to Fontainebleau ; they remained without answers . 
We know why : Aramis had quitted France , and D'Artagnan was traveling from Nantes to Paris , from Paris to Pierrefonds . 
His valet de chambre observed that he shortened his walk every day by several turns . 
The great alley of limes soon became too long for feet that used to traverse it formerly a hundred times a day . 
The comte walked feebly as far as the middle trees , seated himself upon a mossy bank that sloped towards a sidewalk , and there waited the return of his strength , or rather the return of night . 
Very shortly a hundred steps exhausted him . 
At length Athos refused to rise at all ; he declined all nourishment , and his terrified people , although he did not complain , although he wore a smile upon his lips , although he continued to speak with his sweet voice - his people went to Blois in search of the ancient physician of the late Monsieur , and brought him to the Comte de la Fere in such a fashion that he could see the comte without being himself seen . 
For this purpose , they placed him in a closet adjoining the chamber of the patient , and implored him not to show himself , for fear of displeasing their master , who had not asked for a physician . 
The doctor obeyed . 
Athos was a sort of model for the gentlemen of the country ; the Blaisois boasted of possessing this sacred relic of French glory . 
Athos was a great seigneur compared with such nobles as the king improvised by touching with his artificial scepter the parched-up trunks of the heraldic trees of the province . 
People respected Athos , we say , and they loved him . 
The physician could not bear to see his people weep , to see flock round him the poor of the canton , to whom Athos had so often given life and consolation by his kind words and his charities . 
He examined , therefore , from the depths of his hiding-place , the nature of that mysterious malady which bent and aged more mortally every day a man but lately so full of life and a desire to live . 
He remarked upon the cheeks of Athos the hectic hue of fever , which feeds upon itself ; slow fever , pitiless , born in a fold of the heart , sheltering itself behind that rampart , growing from the suffering it engenders , at once cause and effect of a perilous situation . 
The comte spoke to nobody ; he did not even talk to himself . 
His thought feared noise ; it approached to that degree of over-excitement which borders upon ecstasy . 
Man thus absorbed , though he does not yet belong to God , already appertains no longer to the earth . 
The doctor remained for several hours studying this painful struggle of the will against superior power ; he was terrified at seeing those eyes always fixed , ever directed on some invisible object ; was terrified at the monotonous beating of that heart from which never a sigh arose to vary the melancholy state ; for often pain becomes the hope of the physician . 
Half a day passed away thus . 
The doctor formed his resolution like a brave man ; he issued suddenly from his place of retreat , and went straight up to Athos , who beheld him without evincing more surprise than if he had understood nothing of the apparition . 
`` Monsieur le comte , I crave your pardon , '' said the doctor , coming up to the patient with open arms ; `` but I have a reproach to make you - you shall hear me . '' 
And he seated himself by the pillow of Athos , who had great trouble in rousing himself from his preoccupation . 
`` What is the matter , doctor ? '' 
asked the comte , after a silence . 
`` The matter is , you are ill , monsieur , and have had no advice . '' 
`` I ! 
ill ! '' 
said Athos , smiling . 
`` Fever , consumption , weakness , decay , monsieur le comte ! '' 
`` Weakness ! '' 
replied Athos ; `` is it possible ? 
I do not get up . '' 
`` Come , come ! 
