Baisemeaux obeyed . 
He summoned his lieutenant , and gave him an order , which the latter passed on , without disturbing himself about it , to the next whom it concerned . 
Half an hour afterwards they heard a gate shut in the court ; it was the door to the dungeon , which had just rendered up its prey to the free air . 
Aramis blew out all the candles which lighted the room but one , which he left burning behind the door . 
This flickering glare prevented the sight from resting steadily on any object . 
It multiplied tenfold the changing forms and shadows of the place , by its wavering uncertainty . 
Steps drew near . 
`` Go and meet your men , '' said Aramis to Baisemeaux . 
The governor obeyed . 
The sergeant and turnkeys disappeared . 
Baisemeaux re-entered , followed by a prisoner . 
Aramis had placed himself in the shade ; he saw without being seen . 
Baisemeaux , in an agitated tone of voice , made the young man acquainted with the order which set him at liberty . 
The prisoner listened , without making a single gesture or saying a word . '' 
`` You will swear -LRB- 't is the regulation that requires it -RRB- , '' added the governor , `` never to reveal anything that you have seen or heard in the Bastile . '' 
The prisoner perceived a crucifix ; he stretched out his hands and swore with his lips . 
`` And now , monsieur , you are free . 
Whither do you intend going ? '' 
The prisoner turned his head , as if looking behind him for some protection , on which he ought to rely . 
Then was it that Aramis came out of the shade : `` I am here , '' he said , `` to render the gentleman whatever service he may please to ask . '' 
The prisoner slightly reddened , and , without hesitation , passed his arm through that of Aramis . 
`` God have you in his holy keeping , '' he said , in a voice the firmness of which made the governor tremble as much as the form of the blessing astonished him . 
Aramis , on shaking hands with Baisemeaux , said to him ; `` Does my order trouble you ? 
Do you fear their finding it here , should they come to search ? '' 
`` I desire to keep it , monseigneur , '' said Baisemeaux . 
`` If they found it here , it would be a certain indication I should be lost , and in that case you would be a powerful and a last auxiliary for me . '' 
`` Being your accomplice , you mean ? '' 
answered Aramis , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` Adieu , Baisemeaux , '' said he . 
The horses were in waiting , making each rusty spring reverberate the carriage again with their impatience . 
Baisemeaux accompanied the bishop to the bottom of the steps . 
Aramis caused his companion to mount before him , then followed , and without giving the driver any further order , `` Go on , '' said he . 
The carriage rattled over the pavement of the courtyard . 
An officer with a torch went before the horses , and gave orders at every post to let them pass . 
During the time taken in opening all the barriers , Aramis barely breathed , and you might have heard his `` sealed heart knock against his ribs . '' 
The prisoner , buried in a corner of the carriage , made no more sign of life than his companion . 
At length , a jolt more sever than the others announced to them that they had cleared the last watercourse . 
Behind the carriage closed the last gate , that in the Rue St. Antoine . 
No more walls either on the right or the left ; heaven everywhere , liberty everywhere , and life everywhere . 
The horses , kept in check by a vigorous hand , went quietly as far as the middle of the faubourg . 
There they began to trot . 
Little by little , whether they were warming to their work , or whether they were urged , they gained in swiftness , and once past Bercy , the carriage seemed to fly , so great was the ardor of the coursers . 
The horses galloped thus as far as Villeneuve St. George 's , where relays were waiting . 
Then four instead of two whirled the carriage away in the direction of Melun , and pulled up for a moment in the middle of the forest of Senart . 
No doubt the order had been given the postilion beforehand , for Aramis had no occasion even to make a sign . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked the prisoner , as if waking from a long dream . 
`` The matter is , monseigneur , '' said Aramis , `` that before going further , it is necessary your royal highness and I should converse . '' 
`` I will await an opportunity , monsieur , '' answered the young prince . 
`` We could not have a better , monseigneur . 
We are in the middle of a forest , and no one can hear us . '' 
`` The postilion ? '' 
`` The postilion of this relay is deaf and dumb , monseigneur . '' 
`` I am at your service , M. d'Herblay . '' 
`` Is it your pleasure to remain in the carriage ? '' 
`` Yes ; we are comfortably seated , and I like this carriage , for it has restored me to liberty . '' 
`` Wait , monseigneur ; there is yet a precaution to be taken . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` We are here on the highway ; cavaliers or carriages traveling like ourselves might pass , and seeing us stopping , deem us in some difficulty . 
Let us avoid offers of assistance , which would embarrass us . '' 
`` Give the postilion orders to conceal the carriage in one of the side avenues . '' '' 
'T is exactly what I wished to do , monseigneur . '' 
Aramis made a sign to the deaf and dumb driver of the carriage , whom he touched on the arm . 
The latter dismounted , took the leaders by the bridle , and led them over the velvet sward and the mossy grass of a winding alley , at the bottom of which , on this moonless night , the deep shades formed a curtain blacker than ink . 
This done , the man lay down on a slope near his horses , who , on either side , kept nibbling the young oak shoots . 
`` I am listening , '' said the young prince to Aramis ; `` but what are you doing there ? '' 
`` I am disarming myself of my pistols , of which we have no further need , monseigneur . '' 
: The Tempter . 
`` My prince , '' said Aramis , turning in the carriage towards his companion , `` weak creature as I am , so unpretending in genius , so low in the scale of intelligent beings , it has never yet happened to me to converse with a man without penetrating his thoughts through that living mask which has been thrown over our mind , in order to retain its expression . 
But to - night , in this darkness , in the reserve which you maintain , I can read nothing on your features , and something tells me that I shall have great difficulty in wresting from you a sincere declaration . 
I beseech you , then , not for love of me , for subjects should never weigh as anything in the balance which princes hold , but for love of yourself , to retain every syllable , every inflexion which , under the present most grave circumstances , will all have a sense and value as important as any every uttered in the world . '' 
`` I listen , '' replied the young prince , `` decidedly , without either eagerly seeking or fearing anything you are about to say to me . '' 
And he buried himself still deeper in the thick cushions of the carriage , trying to deprive his companion not only of the sight of him , but even of the very idea of his presence . 
Black was the darkness which fell wide and dense from the summits of the intertwining trees . 
The carriage , covered in by this prodigious roof , would not have received a particle of light , not even if a ray could have struggled through the wreaths of mist that were already rising in the avenue . 
`` Monseigneur , '' resumed Aramis , `` you know the history of the government which to-day controls France . 
The king issued from an infancy imprisoned like yours , obscure as yours , and confined as yours ; only , instead of ending , like yourself , this slavery in a prison , this obscurity in solitude , these straightened circumstances in concealment , he was fain to bear all these miseries , humiliations , and distresses , in full daylight , under the pitiless sun of royalty ; on an elevation flooded with light , where every stain appears a blemish , every glory a stain . 
The king has suffered ; it rankles in his mind ; and he will avenge himself . 
He will be a bad king . 
I say not that he will pour out his people 's blood , like Louis XI. , or Charles IX. ; for he has no mortal injuries to avenge ; but he will devour the means and substance of his people ; for he has himself undergone wrongs in his own interest and money . 
In the first place , then , I acquit my conscience , when I consider openly the merits and the faults of this great prince ; and if I condemn him , my conscience absolves me . '' 
Aramis paused . 
It was not to listen if the silence of the forest remained undisturbed , but it was to gather up his thoughts from the very bottom of his soul - to leave the thoughts he had uttered sufficient time to eat deeply into the mind of his companion . 
`` All that Heaven does , Heaven does well , '' continued the bishop of Vannes ; `` and I am so persuaded of it that I have long been thankful to have been chosen depositary of the secret which I have aided you to discover . 
To a just Providence was necessary an instrument , at once penetrating , persevering , and convinced , to accomplish a great work . 
I am this instrument . 
I possess penetration , perseverance , conviction ; I govern a mysterious people , who has taken for its motto , the motto of God , ` Patiens quia oeternus . ' '' 
The prince moved . 
`` I divine , monseigneur , why you are raising your head , and are surprised at the people I have under my command . 
You did not know you were dealing with a king - oh ! 
monseigneur , king of a people very humble , much disinherited ; humble because they have no force save when creeping ; disinherited , because never , almost never in this world , do my people reap the harvest they sow , nor eat the fruit they cultivate . 
They labor for an abstract idea ; they heap together all the atoms of their power , to from a single man ; and round this man , with the sweat of their labor , they create a misty halo , which his genius shall , in turn , render a glory gilded with the rays of all the crowns in Christendom . 
Such is the man you have beside you , monseigneur . 
It is to tell you that he has drawn you from the abyss for a great purpose , to raise you above the powers of the earth - above himself . '' 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- The prince lightly touched Aramis 's arm . 
`` You speak to me , '' he said , `` of that religious order whose chief you are . 
For me , the result of your words is , that the day you desire to hurl down the man you shall have raised , the event will be accomplished ; and that you will keep under your hand your creation of yesterday . '' 
`` Undeceive yourself , monseigneur , '' replied the bishop . 
`` I should not take the trouble to play this terrible game with your royal highness , if I had not a double interest in gaining it . 
The day you are elevated , you are elevated forever ; you will overturn the footstool , as you rise , and will send it rolling so far , that not even the sight of it will ever again recall to you its right to simple gratitude . '' 
