`` Yes ; I can well say ` my friend . ' '' 
`` He who escorted La Valliere to Le Chaillot ; he who delivered up Monk , cooped in an iron box , to Charles II. ; he who so faithfully served my mother ; he to whom the crown of France owes so much that it owes everything . 
Do you intend to ask me to exile him also ? '' 
`` Never , sire . 
D'Artagnan is a man to whom , at a certain given time , I will undertake to reveal everything ; but be on your guard with him , for if he discovers our plot before it is revealed to him , you or I will certainly be killed or taken . 
He is a bold and enterprising man . '' 
`` I will think it over . 
Now tell me about M. Fouquet ; what do you wish to be done with regard to him ? '' 
`` One moment more , I entreat you , monseigneur ; and forgive me , if I seem to fail in respect to questioning you further . '' 
`` It is your duty to do so , nay , more than that , your right . '' 
`` Before we pass to M. Fouquet , I should very much regret forgetting another friend of mine . '' 
`` M. du Vallon , the Hercules of France , you mean ; oh ! 
as far as he is concerned , his interests are more than safe . '' 
`` No ; it is not he whom I intended to refer to . '' 
`` The Comte de la Fere , then ? '' 
`` And his son , the son of all four of us . '' 
`` That poor boy who is dying of love for La Valliere , whom my brother so disloyally bereft him of ? 
Be easy on that score . 
I shall know how to rehabilitate his happiness . 
Tell me only one thing , Monsieur d'Herblay ; do men , when they love , forget the treachery that has been shown them ? 
Can a man ever forgive the woman who has betrayed him ? 
Is that a French custom , or is it one of the laws of the human heart ? '' 
`` A man who loves deeply , as deeply as Raoul loves Mademoiselle de la Valliere , finishes by forgetting the fault or crime of the woman he loves ; but I do not yet know whether Raoul will be able to forget . '' 
`` I will see after that . 
Have you anything further to say about your friend ? '' 
`` No ; that is all . '' 
`` Well , then , now for M. Fouquet . 
What do you wish me to do for him ? '' 
`` To keep him on as surintendant , in the capacity in which he has hitherto acted , I entreat you . '' 
`` Be it so ; but he is the first minister at present . '' 
`` Not quite so . '' 
`` A king , ignorant and embarrassed as I shall be , will , as a matter of course , require a first minister of state . '' 
`` Your majesty will require a friend . '' 
`` I have only one , and that is yourself . '' 
`` You will have many others by and by , but none so devoted , none so zealous for your glory . '' 
`` You shall be my first minister of state . '' 
`` Not immediately , monseigneur , for that would give rise to too much suspicion and astonishment . '' 
`` M. de Richelieu , the first minister of my grandmother , Marie de Medici , was simply bishop of Lucon , as you are bishop of Vannes . '' 
`` I perceive that your royal highness has studied my notes to great advantage ; your amazing perspicacity overpowers me with delight . '' 
`` I am perfectly aware that M. de Richelieu , by means of the queen 's protection , soon became cardinal . '' 
`` It would be better , '' said Aramis , bowing , `` that I should not be appointed first minister until your royal highness has procured my nomination as cardinal . '' 
`` You shall be nominated before two months are past , Monsieur d'Herblay . 
But that is a matter of very trifling moment ; you would not offend me if you were to ask more than that , and you would cause me serious regret if you were to limit yourself to that . '' 
`` In that case , I have something still further to hope for , monseigneur . '' 
`` Speak ! 
speak ! '' 
`` M. Fouquet will not keep long at the head of affairs , he will soon get old . 
He is fond of pleasure , consistently , I mean , with all his labors , thanks to the youthfulness he still retains ; but this protracted youth will disappear at the approach of the first serious annoyance , or at the first illness he may experience . 
We will spare him the annoyance , because he is an agreeable and noble-hearted man ; but we can not save him from ill-health . 
So it is determined . 
When you shall have paid all M. Fouquet 's debts , and restored the finances to a sound condition , M. Fouquet will be able to remain the sovereign ruler in his little court of poets and painters , - we shall have made him rich . 
When that has been done , and I have become your royal highness 's prime minister , I shall be able to think of my own interests and yours . '' 
The young man looked at his interrogator . 
`` M. de Richelieu , of whom we were speaking just now , was very much to blame in the fixed idea he had of governing France alone , unaided . 
He allowed two kings , King Louis XIII . 
and himself , to be seated on the self - same throne , whilst he might have installed them more conveniently upon two separate and distinct thrones . '' 
`` Upon two thrones ? '' 
said the young man , thoughtfully . 
`` In fact , '' pursued Aramis , quietly , `` a cardinal , prime minister of France , assisted by the favor and by the countenance of his Most Christian Majesty the King of France , a cardinal to whom the king his master lends the treasures of the state , his army , his counsel , such a man would be acting with twofold injustice in applying these mighty resources to France alone . 
Besides , '' added Aramis , `` you will not be a king such as your father was , delicate in health , slow in judgment , whom all things wearied ; you will be a king governing by your brain and by your sword ; you will have in the government of the state no more than you will be able to manage unaided ; I should only interfere with you . 
Besides , our friendship ought never to be , I do not say impaired , but in any degree affected , by a secret thought . 
I shall have given you the throne of France , you will confer on me the throne of St. Peter . 
Whenever your loyal , firm , and mailed hand should joined in ties of intimate association the hand of a pope such as I shall be , neither Charles V. , who owned two-thirds of the habitable globe , nor Charlemagne , who possessed it entirely , will be able to reach to half your stature . 
I have no alliances , I have no predilections ; I will not throw you into persecutions of heretics , nor will I cast you into the troubled waters of family dissension ; I will simply say to you : The whole universe is our own ; for me the minds of men , for you their bodies . 
And as I shall be the first to die , you will have my inheritance . 
What do you say of my plan , monseigneur ? '' 
`` I say that you render me happy and proud , for no other reason than that of having comprehended you thoroughly . 
Monsieur d'Herblay , you shall be cardinal , and when cardinal , my prime minister ; and then you will point out to me the necessary steps to be taken to secure your election as pope , and I will take them . 
You can ask what guarantees from me you please . '' 
`` It is useless . 
Never shall I act except in such a manner that you will be the gainer ; I shall never ascend the ladder of fortune , fame , or position , until I have first seen you placed upon the round of the ladder immediately above me ; I shall always hold myself sufficiently aloof from you to escape incurring your jealousy , sufficiently near to sustain your personal advantage and to watch over your friendship . 
All the contracts in the world are easily violated because the interests included in them incline more to one side than to another . 
With us , however , this will never be the case ; I have no need of any guarantees . '' 
`` And so - my dear brother - will disappear ? '' 
`` Simply . 
We will remove him from his bed by means of a plank which yields to the pressure of the finger . 
Having retired to rest a crowned sovereign , he will awake a captive . 
Alone you will rule from that moment , and you will have no interest dearer and better than that of keeping me near you . '' 
`` I believe it . 
There is my hand on it , Monsieur d'Herblay . '' 
`` Allow me to kneel before you , sire , most respectfully . 
We will embrace each other on the day we shall have upon our temples , you the crown , I the tiara . '' 
`` Still embrace me this very day also , and be , for and towards me , more than great , more than skillful , more than sublime in genius ; be kind and indulgent - be my father ! '' 
Aramis was almost overcome as he listened to his voice ; he fancied he detected in his own heart an emotion hitherto unknown ; but this impression was speedily removed . 
`` His father ! '' 
he thought ; `` yes , his Holy Father . '' 
And they resumed their places in the carriage , which sped rapidly along the road leading to Vaux-le-Vicomte . 
: The Chateau de Vaux-le-Vicomte . 
The chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte , situated about a league from Melun , had been built by Fouquet in 1655 , at a time when there was a scarcity of money in France ; Mazarin had taken all that there was , and Fouquet expended the remainder . 
However , as certain men have fertile , false , and useful vices , Fouquet , in scattering broadcast millions of money in the construction of this palace , had found a means of gathering , as the result of his generous profusion , three illustrious men together : Levau , the architect of the building ; Lenotre , the designer of the gardens ; and Lebrun , the decorator of the apartments . 
If the Chateau de Vaux possessed a single fault with which it could be reproached , it was its grand , pretentious character . 
It is even at the present day proverbial to calculate the number of acres of roofing , the restoration of which would , in our age , be the ruin of fortunes cramped and narrowed as the epoch itself . 
Vaux-le-Vicomte , when its magnificent gates , supported by caryatides , have been passed through , has the principal front of the main building opening upon a vast , so-called , court of honor , inclosed by deep ditches , bordered by a magnificent stone balustrade . 
Nothing could be more noble in appearance than the central forecourt raised upon the flight of steps , like a king upon his throne , having around it four pavilions at the angles , the immense Ionic columns of which rose majestically to the whole height of the building . 
The friezes ornamented with arabesques , and the pediments which crowned the pilasters , conferred richness and grace on every part of the building , while the domes which surmounted the whole added proportion and majesty . 
This mansion , built by a subject , bore a far greater resemblance to those royal residences which Wolsey fancied he was called upon to construct , in order to present them to his master form the fear of rendering him jealous . 
But if magnificence and splendor were displayed in any one particular part of this palace more than another , - if anything could be preferred to the wonderful arrangement of the interior , to the sumptuousness of the gilding , and to the profusion of the paintings and statues , it would be the park and gardens of Vaux . 
The jets d'eau , which were regarded as wonderful in 1653 , are still so , even at the present time ; the cascades awakened the admiration of kings and princes ; and as for the famous grotto , the theme of so many poetical effusions , the residence of that illustrious nymph of Vaux , whom Pelisson made converse with La Fontaine , we must be spared the description of all its beauties . 
We will do as Despreaux did , - we will enter the park , the trees of which are of eight years ' growth only - that is to say , in their present position - and whose summits even yet , as they proudly tower aloft , blushingly unfold their leaves to the earliest rays of the rising sun . 
Lenotre had hastened the pleasure of the Maecenas of his period ; all the nursery - grounds had furnished trees whose growth had been accelerated by careful culture and the richest plant-food . 
