Do you suppose I should contend against the most valiant sword in the kingdom ? '' 
`` It is not that , at all , monseigneur ; but that I am going to look for M. d'Herblay , and , consequently , to leave you alone . '' 
Fouquet uttered a cry of delight and surprise . 
`` To look for M. d'Herblay ! 
to leave me alone ! '' 
he exclaimed , clasping his hands together . 
`` Which is M. d'Herblay 's room ? 
The blue room is it not ? '' 
`` Yes , my friend , yes . '' 
`` Your friend ! 
thank you for that word , monseigneur ; you confer it upon me to-day , at least , if you have never done so before . '' 
`` Ah ! 
you have saved me . '' 
`` It will take a good ten minutes to go from hence to the blue room , and to return ? '' 
said D'Artagnan . 
`` Nearly so . '' 
`` And then to wake Aramis , who sleeps very soundly , when he is asleep , I put that down at another five minutes ; making a total of fifteen minutes ' absence . 
And now , monseigneur , give me your word that you will not in any way attempt to make your escape , and that when I return I shall find you here again . '' 
`` I give it , monsieur , '' replied Fouquet , with an expression of the warmest and deepest gratitude . 
D'Artagnan disappeared . 
Fouquet looked at him as he quitted the room , waited with a feverish impatience until the door was closed behind him , and as soon as it was shut , flew to his keys , opened two or three secret doors concealed in various articles of furniture in the room , looked vainly for certain papers , which doubtless he had left at Saint-Mande , and which he seemed to regret not having found in them ; then hurriedly seizing hold of letters , contracts , papers , writings , he heaped them up into a pile , which he burnt in the extremest haste upon the marble hearth of the fireplace , not even taking time to draw from the interior of it the vases and pots of flowers with which it was filled . 
As soon as he had finished , like a man who has just escaped an imminent danger , and whose strength abandons him as soon as the danger is past , he sank down , completely overcome , on a couch . 
When D'Artagnan returned , he found Fouquet in the same position ; the worthy musketeer had not the slightest doubt that Fouquet , having given his word , would not even think of failing to keep it , but he had thought it most likely that Fouquet would turn his -LRB- D'Artagnan 's -RRB- absence to the best advantage in getting rid of all the papers , memorandums , and contracts , which might possibly render his position , which was even now serious enough , more dangerous than ever . 
And so , lifting up his head like a dog who has regained the scent , he perceived an odor resembling smoke he had relied on finding in the atmosphere , and having found it , made a movement of his head in token of satisfaction . 
As D'Artagnan entered , Fouquet , on his side , raised his head , and not one of D'Artagnan 's movements escaped him . 
And then the looks of the two men met , and they both saw that they had understood each other without exchanging a syllable . 
`` Well ! '' 
asked Fouquet , the first to speak , `` and M. d'Herblay ? '' 
`` Upon my word , monseigneur , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` M. d'Herblay must be desperately fond of walking out at night , and composing verses by moonlight in the park of Vaux , with some of your poets , in all probability , for he is not in his own room . '' 
`` What ! 
not in his own room ? '' 
cried Fouquet , whose last hope thus escaped him ; for unless he could ascertain in what way the bishop of Vannes could assist him , he perfectly well knew that he could expect assistance from no other quarter . 
`` Or , indeed , '' continued D'Artagnan , `` if he is in his own room , he has very good reasons for not answering . '' 
`` But surely you did not call him in such a manner that he could have heard you ? '' 
`` You can hardly suppose , monseigneur , that having already exceeded my orders , which forbade me leaving you a single moment - you can hardly suppose , I say , that I should have been mad enough to rouse the whole house and allow myself to be seen in the corridor of the bishop of Vannes , in order that M. Colbert might state with positive certainty that I gave you time to burn your papers . '' 
`` My papers ? '' 
`` Of course ; at least that is what I should have done in your place . 
When any one opens a door for me I always avail myself of it . '' 
`` Yes , yes , and I thank you , for I have availed myself of it . '' 
`` And you have done perfectly right . 
Every man has his own peculiar secrets with which others have nothing to do . 
But let us return to Aramis , monseigneur . '' 
`` Well , then , I tell you , you could not have called loud enough , or Aramis would have heard you . '' 
`` However softly any one may call Aramis , monseigneur , Aramis always hears when he has an interest in hearing . 
I repeat what I said before - Aramis was not in his own room , or Aramis had certain reasons for not recognizing my voice , of which I am ignorant , and of which you may be even ignorant yourself , notwithstanding your liege-man is His Greatness the Lord Bishop of Vannes . '' 
Fouquet drew a deep sigh , rose from his seat , took three or four turns in his room , and finished by seating himself , with an expression of extreme dejection , upon his magnificent bed with velvet hangings , and costliest lace . 
D'Artagnan looked at Fouquet with feelings of the deepest and sincerest pity . 
`` I have seen a good many men arrested in my life , '' said the musketeer , sadly ; `` I have seen both M. de Cinq-Mars and M. de Chalais arrested , though I was very young then . 
I have seen M. de Conde arrested with the princes ; I have seen M. de Retz arrested ; I have seen M. Broussel arrested . 
Stay a moment , monseigneur , it is disagreeable to have to say , but the very one of all those whom you most resemble at this moment was that poor fellow Broussel . 
You were very near doing as he did , putting your dinner napkin in your portfolio , and wiping your mouth with your papers . 
Mordioux ! 
Monseigneur Fouquet , a man like you ought not to be dejected in this manner . 
Suppose your friends saw you ? '' 
`` Monsieur d'Artagnan , '' returned the surintendant , with a smile full of gentleness , `` you do not understand me ; it is precisely because my friends are not looking on , that I am as you see me now . 
I do not live , exist even , isolated from others ; I am nothing when left to myself . 
Understand that throughout my whole life I have passed every moment of my time in making friends , whom I hoped to render my stay and support . 
In times of prosperity , all these cheerful , happy voices - rendered so through and by my means - formed in my honor a concert of praise and kindly actions . 
In the least disfavor , these humbler voices accompanied in harmonious accents the murmur of my own heart . 
Isolation I have never yet known . 
Poverty -LRB- a phantom I have sometimes beheld , clad in rags , awaiting me at the end of my journey through life -RRB- - poverty has been the specter with which many of my own friends have trifled for years past , which they poetize and caress , and which has attracted me towards them . 
Poverty ! 
I accept it , acknowledge it , receive it , as a disinherited sister ; for poverty is neither solitude , nor exile , nor imprisonment . 
Is it likely I shall ever be poor , with such friends as Pelisson , as La Fontaine , as Moliere ? 
with such a mistress as - Oh ! 
if you knew how utterly lonely and desolate I feel at this moment , and how you , who separate me from all I love , seem to resemble the image of solitude , of annihilation - death itself . '' 
`` But I have already told you , Monsieur Fouquet , '' replied D'Artagnan , moved to the depths of his soul , `` that you are woefully exaggerating . 
The king likes you . '' 
`` No , no , '' said Fouquet , shaking his head . 
`` M. Colbert hates you . '' 
`` M. Colbert ! 
What does that matter to me ? '' 
`` He will ruin you . '' 
`` Ah ! 
I defy him to do that , for I am ruined already . '' 
At this singular confession of the superintendent , D'Artagnan cast his glance all round the room ; and although he did not open his lips , Fouquet understood him so thoroughly , that he added : `` What can be done with such wealth of substance as surrounds us , when a man can no longer cultivate his taste for the magnificent ? 
Do you know what good the greater part of the wealth and the possessions which we rich enjoy , confer upon us ? 
merely to disgust us , by their very splendor even , with everything which does not equal it ! 
Vaux ! 
you will say , and the wonders of Vaux ! 
What of it ? 
What boot these wonders ? 
If I am ruined , how shall I fill with water the urns which my Naiads bear in their arms , or force the air into the lungs of my Tritons ? 
To be rich enough , Monsieur d'Artagnan , a man must be too rich . '' 
D'Artagnan shook his head . 
`` Oh ! 
I know very well what you think , '' replied Fouquet , quickly . 
`` If Vaux were yours , you would sell it , and would purchase an estate in the country ; an estate which should have woods , orchards , and land attached , so that the estate should be made to support its master . 
With forty millions you might - '' `` Ten millions , '' interrupted D'Artagnan . 
`` Not a million , my dear captain . 
No one in France is rich enough to give two millions for Vaux , and to continue to maintain it as I have done ; no one could do it , no one would know how . '' 
`` Well , '' said D'Artagnan , `` in any case , a million is not abject misery . '' 
`` It is not far from it , my dear monsieur . 
But you do not understand me . 
No ; I will not sell my residence at Vaux ; I will give it to you , if you like ; '' and Fouquet accompanied these words with a movement of the shoulders to which it would be impossible to do justice . 
`` Give it to the king ; you will make a better bargain . '' 
`` The king does not require me to give it to him , '' said Fouquet ; `` he will take it away from me with the most absolute ease and grace , if it pleases him to do so ; and that is the very reason I should prefer to see it perish . 
Do you know , Monsieur d'Artagnan , that if the king did not happen to be under my roof , I would take this candle , go straight to the dome , and set fire to a couple of huge chests of fusees and fireworks which are in reserve there , and would reduce my palace to ashes . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
said the musketeer , negligently . 
