in order to arrest this haughty , arrogant Titan who , true to his menace , threatens to scale my heaven . '' 
`` Arrest M. Fouquet , do you say ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
does that surprise you ? '' 
`` In his own house ! '' 
`` Why not ? 
If he be guilty , he is as guilty in his own house as anywhere else . '' 
`` M. Fouquet , who at this moment is ruining himself for his sovereign . '' 
`` In plain truth , mademoiselle , it seems as if you were defending this traitor . '' 
Colbert began to chuckle silently . 
The king turned round at the sound of this suppressed mirth . 
`` Sire , '' said La Valliere , `` it is not M. Fouquet I am defending ; it is yourself . '' 
`` Me ! 
you are defending me ? '' 
`` Sire , you would dishonor yourself if you were to give such an order . '' 
`` Dishonor myself ! '' 
murmured the king , turning pale with anger . 
`` In plain truth , mademoiselle , you show a strange persistence in what you say . '' 
`` If I do , sire , my only motive is that of serving your majesty , '' replied the noble-hearted girl : `` for that I would risk , I would sacrifice my very life , without the least reserve . '' 
Colbert seemed inclined to grumble and complain . 
La Valliere , that timid , gentle lamb , turned round upon him , and with a glance like lightning imposed silence upon him . 
`` Monsieur , '' she said , `` when the king acts well , whether , in doing so , he does either myself or those who belong to me an injury , I have nothing to say ; but were the king to confer a benefit either upon me or mine , and if he acted badly , I should tell him so . '' 
`` But it appears to me , mademoiselle , '' Colbert ventured to say , `` that I too love the king . '' 
`` Yes , monseigneur , we both love him , but each in a different manner , '' replied La Valliere , with such an accent that the heart of the young king was powerfully affected by it . 
`` I love him so deeply , that the whole world is aware of it ; so purely , that the king himself does not doubt my affection . 
He is my king and my master ; I am the least of all his servants . 
But whoso touches his honor assails my life . 
Therefore , I repeat , that they dishonor the king who advise him to arrest M. Fouquet under his own roof . '' 
Colbert hung down his head , for he felt that the king had abandoned him . 
However , as he bent his head , he murmured , `` Mademoiselle , I have only one word to say . '' 
`` Do not say it , then , monsieur ; for I would not listen to it . 
Besides , what could you have to tell me ? 
That M. Fouquet has been guilty of certain crimes ? 
I believe he has , because the king has said so ; and , from the moment the king said , ' I think so , ' I have no occasion for other lips to say , ' I affirm it . ' 
But , were M. Fouquet the vilest of men , I should say aloud , 'M . 
Fouquet 's person is sacred to the king because he is the guest of M. Fouquet . 
Were his house a den of thieves , were Vaux a cave of coiners or robbers , his home is sacred , his palace is inviolable , since his wife is living in it ; and that is an asylum which even executioners would not dare to violate . ' '' 
La Valliere paused , and was silent . 
In spite of himself the king could not but admire her ; he was overpowered by the passionate energy of her voice ; by the nobleness of the cause she advocated . 
Colbert yielded , overcome by the inequality of the struggle . 
At last the king breathed again more freely , shook his head , and held out his hand to La Valliere . 
`` Mademoiselle , '' he said , gently , `` why do you decide against me ? 
Do you know what this wretched fellow will do , if I give him time to breathe again ? '' 
`` Is he not a prey which will always be within your grasp ? '' 
`` Should he escape , and take to flight ? '' 
exclaimed Colbert . 
`` Well , monsieur , it will always remain on record , to the king 's eternal honor , that he allowed M. Fouquet to flee ; and the more guilty he may have been , the greater will the king 's honor and glory appear , compared with such unnecessary misery and shame . '' 
Louis kissed La Valliere 's hand , as he knelt before her . 
`` I am lost , '' thought Colbert ; then suddenly his face brightened up again . 
`` Oh ! 
no , no , aha , old fox ! 
- not yet , '' he said to himself . 
And while the king , protected from observation by the thick covert of an enormous lime , pressed La Valliere to his breast , with all the ardor of ineffable affection , Colbert tranquilly fumbled among the papers in his pocket-book and drew out of it a paper folded in the form of a letter , somewhat yellow , perhaps , but one that must have been most precious , since the intendant smiled as he looked at it ; he then bent a look , full of hatred , upon the charming group which the young girl and the king formed together - a group revealed but for a moment , as the light of the approaching torches shone upon it . 
Louis noticed the light reflected upon La Valliere 's white dress . 
`` Leave me , Louise , '' he said , `` for some one is coming . '' 
`` Mademoiselle , mademoiselle , some one is coming , '' cried Colbert , to expedite the young girl 's departure . 
Louise disappeared rapidly among the trees ; and then , as the king , who had been on his knees before the young girl , was rising from his humble posture , Colbert exclaimed , `` Ah ! 
Mademoiselle de la Valliere has let something fall . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
inquired the king . 
`` A paper - a letter - something white ; look there , sire . '' 
The king stooped down immediately and picked up the letter , crumpling it in his hand , as he did so ; and at the same moment the torches arrived , inundating the blackness of the scene with a flood of light as bight as day . 
: Jealousy . 
The torches we have just referred to , the eager attention every one displayed , and the new ovation paid to the king by Fouquet , arrived in time to suspend the effect of a resolution which La Valliere had already considerably shaken in Louis XIV . 
's heart . 
He looked at Fouquet with a feeling almost of gratitude for having given La Valliere an opportunity of showing herself so generously disposed , so powerful in the influence she exercised over his heart . 
The moment of the last and greatest display had arrived . 
Hardly had Fouquet conducted the king towards the chateau , when a mass of fire burst from the dome of Vaux , with a prodigious uproar , pouring a flood of dazzling cataracts of rays on every side , and illumining the remotest corners of the gardens . 
The fireworks began . 
Colbert , at twenty paces from the king , who was surrounded and feted by the owner of Vaux , seemed , by the obstinate persistence of his gloomy thoughts , to do his utmost to recall Louis 's attention , which the magnificence of the spectacle was already , in his opinion , too easily diverting . 
Suddenly , just as Louis was on the point of holding it out to Fouquet , he perceived in his hand the paper which , as he believed , La Valliere had dropped at his feet as she hurried away . 
The still stronger magnet of love drew the young prince 's attention towards the souvenir of his idol ; and , by the brilliant light , which increased momentarily in beauty , and drew from the neighboring villages loud cheers of admiration , the king read the letter , which he supposed was a loving and tender epistle La Valliere had destined for him . 
But as he read it , a death - like pallor stole over his face , and an expression of deep-seated wrath , illumined by the many-colored fire which gleamed so brightly , soaringly around the scene , produced a terrible spectacle , which every one would have shuddered at , could they only have read into his heart , now torn by the most stormy and most bitter passions . 
There was no truce for him now , influenced as he was by jealousy and mad passion . 
From the very moment when the dark truth was revealed to him , every gentler feeling seemed to disappear ; pity , kindness of consideration , the religion of hospitality , all were forgotten . 
In the bitter pang which wrung his heart , he , still too weak to hide his sufferings , was almost on the point of uttering a cry of alarm , and calling his guards to gather round him . 
This letter which Colbert had thrown down at the king 's feet , the reader has doubtlessly guessed , was the same that had disappeared with the porter Toby at Fontainebleau , after the attempt which Fouquet had made upon La Valliere 's heart . 
Fouquet saw the king 's pallor , and was far from guessing the evil ; Colbert saw the king 's anger , and rejoiced inwardly at the approach of the storm . 
Fouquet 's voice drew the young prince from his wrathful reverie . 
`` What is the matter , sire ? '' 
inquired the superintendent , with an expression of graceful interest . 
Louis made a violent effort over himself , as he replied , `` Nothing . '' 
`` I am afraid your majesty is suffering ? '' 
`` I am suffering , and have already told you so , monsieur ; but it is nothing . '' 
And the king , without waiting for the termination of the fireworks , turned towards the chateau . 
Fouquet accompanied him , and the whole court followed , leaving the remains of the fireworks consuming for their own amusement . 
The superintendent endeavored again to question Louis XIV. , but did not succeed in obtaining a reply . 
He imagined there had been some misunderstanding between Louis and La Valliere in the park , which had resulted in a slight quarrel ; and that the king , who was not ordinarily sulky by disposition , but completely absorbed by his passion for La Valliere , had taken a dislike to every one because his mistress had shown herself offended with him . 
This idea was sufficient to console him ; he had even a friendly and kindly smile for the young king , when the latter wished him good night . 
This , however , was not all the king had to submit to ; he was obliged to undergo the usual ceremony , which on that evening was marked by close adherence to the strictest etiquette . 
The next day was the one fixed for the departure ; it was but proper that the guests should thank their host , and show him a little attention in return for the expenditure of his twelve millions . 
The only remark , approaching to amiability , which the king could find to say to M. Fouquet , as he took leave of him , were in these words , `` M. Fouquet , you shall hear from me . 
Be good enough to desire M. d'Artagnan to come here . '' 
But the blood of Louis XIV. , who had so profoundly dissimulated his feelings , boiled in his veins ; and he was perfectly willing to order M. Fouquet to be put an end to with the same readiness , indeed , as his predecessor had caused the assassination of le Marechal d'Ancre ; and so he disguised the terrible resolution he had formed beneath one of those royal smiles which , like lightning-flashes , indicated coups d'etat . 
Fouquet took the king 's hand and kissed it ; Louis shuddered throughout his whole frame , but allowed M. Fouquet to touch his hand with his lips . 
Five minutes afterwards , D'Artagnan , to whom the royal order had been communicated , entered Louis XIV . 
's apartment . 
Aramis and Philippe were in theirs , still eagerly attentive , and still listening with all their ears . 
The king did not even give the captain of the musketeers time to approach his armchair , but ran forward to meet him . 
`` Take care , '' he exclaimed , `` that no one enters here . '' 
