`` Heaven is right , '' he said ; `` Heaven acts wisely . 
It would be cowardly to pray to Heaven for that which I have so often refused my own fellow - creatures . '' 
He had reached this stage of his reflections , that is , of his agony of mind , when a similar noise was again heard behind his door , followed this time by the sound of the key in the lock , and of the bolts being withdrawn from their staples . 
The king bounded forward to be nearer to the person who was about to enter , but , suddenly reflecting that it was a movement unworthy of a sovereign , he paused , assumed a noble and calm expression , which for him was easy enough , and waited with his back turned towards the window , in order , to some extent , to conceal his agitation from the eyes of the person who was about to enter . 
It was only a jailer with a basket of provisions . 
The king looked at the man with restless anxiety , and waited until he spoke . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the latter , `` you have broken your chair . 
I said you had done so ! 
Why , you have gone quite mad . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said the king , `` be careful what you say ; it will be a very serious affair for you . '' 
The jailer placed the basket on the table , and looked at his prisoner steadily . 
`` What do you say ? '' 
he said . 
`` Desire the governor to come to me , '' added the king , in accents full of calm and dignity . 
`` Come , my boy , '' said the turnkey , `` you have always been very quiet and reasonable , but you are getting vicious , it seems , and I wish you to know it in time . 
You have broken your chair , and made a great disturbance ; that is an offense punishable by imprisonment in one of the lower dungeons . 
Promise me not to begin over again , and I will not say a word about it to the governor . '' 
`` I wish to see the governor , '' replied the king , still governing his passions . 
`` He will send you off to one of the dungeons , I tell you ; so take care . '' 
`` I insist upon it , do you hear ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
ah ! 
your eyes are becoming wild again . 
Very good ! 
I shall take away your knife . '' 
And the jailer did what he said , quitted the prisoner , and closed the door , leaving the king more astounded , more wretched , more isolated than ever . 
It was useless , though he tried it , to make the same noise again on his door , and equally useless that he threw the plates and dishes out of the window ; not a single sound was heard in recognition . 
Two hours afterwards he could not be recognized as a king , a gentleman , a man , a human being ; he might rather be called a madman , tearing the door with his nails , trying to tear up the flooring of his cell , and uttering such wild and fearful cries that the old Bastile seemed to tremble to its very foundations for having revolted against its master . 
As for the governor , the jailer did not even think of disturbing him ; the turnkeys and the sentinels had reported the occurrence to him , but what was the good of it ? 
Were not these madmen common enough in such a prison ? 
and were not the walls still stronger ? 
M. de Baisemeaux , thoroughly impressed with what Aramis had told him , and in perfect conformity with the king 's order , hoped only that one thing might happen ; namely , that the madman Marchiali might be mad enough to hang himself to the canopy of his bed , or to one of the bars of the window . 
In fact , the prisoner was anything but a profitable investment for M. Baisemeaux , and became more annoying than agreeable to him . 
These complications of Seldon and Marchiali - the complications first of setting at liberty and then imprisoning again , the complications arising from the strong likeness in question - had at last found a very proper denouement . 
Baisemeaux even thought he had remarked that D'Herblay himself was not altogether dissatisfied with the result . 
`` And then , really , '' said Baisemeaux to his next in command , `` an ordinary prisoner is already unhappy enough in being a prisoner ; he suffers quite enough , indeed , to induce one to hope , charitably enough , that his death may not be far distant . 
With still greater reason , accordingly , when the prisoner has gone mad , and might bite and make a terrible disturbance in the Bastile ; why , in such a case , it is not simply an act of mere charity to wish him dead ; it would be almost a good and even commendable action , quietly to have him put out of his misery . '' 
And the good-natured governor thereupon sat down to his late breakfast . 
: The Shadow of M. Fouquet . 
D'Artagnan , still confused and oppressed by the conversation he had just had with the king , could not resist asking himself if he were really in possession of his senses , if he were really and truly at Vaux ; if he , D'Artagnan , were really the captain of the musketeers , and M. Fouquet the owner of the chateau in which Louis XIV . 
was at that moment partaking of his hospitality . 
These reflections were not those of a drunken man , although everything was in prodigal profusion at Vaux , and the surintendant 's wines had met with a distinguished reception at the fete . 
The Gascon , however , was a man of calm self-possession ; and no sooner did he touch his bright steel blade , than he knew how to adopt morally the cold , keen weapon as his guide of action . 
`` Well , '' he said , as he quitted the royal apartment , `` I seem now to be mixed up historically with the destinies of the king and of the minister ; it will be written , that M. d'Artagnan , a younger son of a Gascon family , placed his hand on the shoulder of M. Nicolas Fouquet , the surintendant of the finances of France . 
My descendants , if I have any , will flatter themselves with the distinction which this arrest will confer , just as the members of the De Luynes family have done with regard to the estates of the poor Marechal d'Ancre . 
But the thing is , how best to execute the king 's directions in a proper manner . 
Any man would know how to say to M. Fouquet , ` Your sword , monsieur . ' 
But it is not every one who would be able to take care of M. Fouquet without others knowing anything about it . 
How am I to manage , then , so that M. le surintendant pass from the height of favor to the direst disgrace ; that Vaux be turned into a dungeon for him ; that after having been steeped to his lips , as it were , in all the perfumes and incense of Ahasuerus , he is transferred to the gallows of Haman ; in other words , of Enguerrand de Marigny ? '' 
And at this reflection , D'Artagnan 's brow became clouded with perplexity . 
The musketeer had certain scruples on the matter , it must be admitted . 
To deliver up to death -LRB- for not a doubt existed that Louis hated Fouquet mortally -RRB- the man who had just shown himself so delightful and charming a host in every way , was a real insult to one 's conscience . 
`` It almost seems , '' said D'Artagnan to himself , `` that if I am not a poor , mean , miserable fellow , I should let M. Fouquet know the opinion the king has about him . 
Yet , if I betray my master 's secret , I shall be a false - hearted , treacherous knave , a traitor , too , a crime provided for and punishable by military laws - so much so , indeed , that twenty times , in former days when wars were rife , I have seen many a miserable fellow strung up to a tree for doing , in but a small degree , what my scruples counsel me to undertake upon a great scale now . 
No , I think that a man of true readiness of wit ought to get out of this difficulty with more skill than that . 
And now , let us admit that I do possess a little readiness of invention ; it is not at all certain , though , for , after having for forty years absorbed so large a quantity , I shall be lucky if there were to be a pistole 's - worth left . '' 
D'Artagnan buried his head in his hands , tore at his mustache in sheer vexation , and added , `` What can be the reason of M. Fouquet 's disgrace ? 
There seem to be three good ones : the first , because M. Colbert does n't like him ; the second , because he wished to fall in love with Mademoiselle de la Valliere ; and lastly , because the king likes M. Colbert and loves Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
Oh ! 
he is lost ! 
But shall I put my foot on his neck , I , of all men , when he is falling a prey to the intrigues of a pack of women and clerks ? 
For shame ! 
If he be dangerous , I will lay him low enough ; if , however , he be only persecuted , I will look on . 
I have come to such a decisive determination , that neither king nor living man shall change my mind . 
If Athos were here , he would do as I have done . 
Therefore , instead of going , in cold blood , up to M. Fouquet , and arresting him off-hand and shutting him up altogether , I will try and conduct myself like a man who understands what good manners are . 
People will talk about it , of course ; but they shall talk well of it , I am determined . '' 
And D'Artagnan , drawing by a gesture peculiar to himself his shoulder-belt over his shoulder , went straight off to M. Fouquet , who , after he had taken leave of his guests , was preparing to retire for the night and to sleep tranquilly after the triumphs of the day . 
The air was still perfumed , or infected , whichever way it may be considered , with the odors of the torches and the fireworks . 
The wax-lights were dying away in their sockets , the flowers fell unfastened from the garlands , the groups of dancers and courtiers were separating in the salons . 
Surrounded by his friends , who complimented him and received his flattering remarks in return , the surintendant half-closed his wearied eyes . 
He longed for rest and quiet ; he sank upon the bed of laurels which had been heaped up for him for so many days past ; it might almost have been said that he seemed bowed beneath the weight of the new debts which he had incurred for the purpose of giving the greatest possible honor to this fete . 
Fouquet had just retired to his room , still smiling , but more than half - asleep . 
He could listen to nothing more , he could hardly keep his eyes open ; his bed seemed to possess a fascinating and irresistible attraction for him . 
The god Morpheus , the presiding deity of the dome painted by Lebrun , had extended his influence over the adjoining rooms , and showered down his most sleep-inducing poppies upon the master of the house . 
Fouquet , almost entirely alone , was being assisted by his valet de chambre to undress , when M. d'Artagnan appeared at the entrance of the room . 
D'Artagnan had never been able to succeed in making himself common at the court ; and notwithstanding he was seen everywhere and on all occasions , he never failed to produce an effect wherever and whenever he made his appearance . 
Such is the happy privilege of certain natures , which in that respect resemble either thunder or lightning ; every one recognizes them ; but their appearance never fails to arouse surprise and astonishment , and whenever they occur , the impression is always left that the last was the most conspicuous or most important . 
`` What ! 
M. d'Artagnan ? '' 
said Fouquet , who had already taken his right arm out of the sleeve of his doublet . 
`` At your service , '' replied the musketeer . 
`` Come in , my dear M. d'Artagnan . '' 
`` Thank you . '' 
`` Have you come to criticise the fete ? 
You are ingenious enough in your criticisms , I know . '' 
`` By no means . '' 
`` Are not your men looked after properly ? '' 
`` In every way . '' 
`` You are not comfortably lodged , perhaps ? '' 
`` Nothing could be better . '' 
`` In that case , I have to thank you for being so amiably disposed , and I must not fail to express my obligations to you for all your flattering kindness . '' 
These words were as much as to say , `` My dear D'Artagnan , pray go to bed , since you have a bed to lie down on , and let me do the same . '' 
D'Artagnan did not seem to understand it . 
`` Are you going to bed already ? '' 
he said to the superintendent . 
`` Yes ; have you anything to say to me ? '' 
`` Nothing , monsieur , nothing at all . 
You sleep in this room , then ? '' 
