- off ! 
throw yourself off ! ' 
M. de Bragelonne was an officer much beloved in the army . 
Already had the vicomte arrived within pistol-shot of the ramparts , when a discharge was poured upon him that enshrouded him in fire and smoke . 
We lost sight of him ; the smoke dispersed ; he was on foot , upright ; his horse was killed . 
`` The vicomte was summoned to surrender by the Arabs , but he made them a negative sign with his head , and continued to march towards the palisades . 
This was a mortal imprudence . 
Nevertheless the entire army was pleased that he would not retreat , since ill-chance had led him so near . 
He marched a few paces further , and the two regiments clapped their hands . 
It was at this moment the second discharge shook the walls , and the Vicomte de Bragelonne again disappeared in the smoke ; but this time the smoke dispersed in vain ; we no longer saw him standing . 
He was down , with his head lower than his legs , among the bushes , and the Arabs began to think of leaving their intrenchments to come and cut off his head or take his body - as is the custom with the infidels . 
But Monseigneur le Duc de Beaufort had followed all this with his eyes , and the sad spectacle drew from him many painful sighs . 
He then cried aloud , seeing the Arabs running like white phantoms among the mastic-trees , ` Grenadiers ! 
lancers ! 
will you let them take that noble body ? ' 
`` Saying these words and waving his sword , he himself rode towards the enemy . 
The regiments , rushing in his steps , ran in their turn , uttering cries as terrible as those of the Arabs were wild . 
`` The combat commenced over the body of M. de Bragelonne , and with such inveteracy was it fought that a hundred and sixty Arabs were left upon the field , by the side of at least fifty of our troops . 
It was a lieutenant from Normandy who took the body of the vicomte on his shoulders and carried it back to the lines . 
The advantage was , however , pursued , the regiments took the reserve with them , and the enemy 's palisades were utterly destroyed . 
At three o'clock the fire of the Arabs ceased ; the hand-to-hand fight lasted two hours ; it was a massacre . 
At five o'clock we were victorious at all points ; the enemy had abandoned his positions , and M. le duc ordered the white flag to be planted on the summit of the little mountain . 
It was then we had time to think of M. de Bragelonne , who had eight large wounds in his body , through which almost all his blood had welled away . 
Still , however , he had breathed , which afforded inexpressible joy to monseigneur , who insisted on being present at the first dressing of the wounds and the consultation of the surgeons . 
There were two among them who declared M. de Bragelonne would live . 
Monseigneur threw his arms around their necks , and promised them a thousand louis each if they could save him . 
`` The vicomte heard these transports of joy , and whether he was in despair , or whether he suffered much from his wounds , he expressed by his countenance a contradiction , which gave rise to reflection , particularly in one of the secretaries when he had heard what follows . 
The third surgeon was the brother of Sylvain de Saint-Cosme , the most learned of them all . 
He probed the wounds in his turn , and said nothing . 
M. de Bragelonne fixed his eyes steadily upon the skillful surgeon , and seemed to interrogate his every movement . 
The latter , upon being questioned by monseigneur , replied that he saw plainly three mortal wounds out of eight , but so strong was the constitution of the wounded , so rich was he in youth , and so merciful was the goodness of God , that perhaps M. de Bragelonne might recover , particularly if he did not move in the slightest manner . 
Frere Sylvain added , turning towards his assistants , ` Above everything , do not allow him to move , even a finger , or you will kill him ; ' and we all left the tent in very low spirits . 
That secretary I have mentioned , on leaving the tent , thought he perceived a faint and sad smile glide over the lips of M. de Bragelonne when the duke said to him , in a cheerful , kind voice , ` We will save you , vicomte , we will save you yet . ' 
`` In the evening , when it was believed the wounded youth had taken some repose , one of the assistants entered his tent , but rushed out again immediately , uttering loud cries . 
We all ran up in disorder , M. le duc with us , and the assistant pointed to the body of M. de Bragelonne upon the ground , at the foot of his bed , bathed in the remainder of his blood . 
It appeared that he had suffered some convulsion , some delirium , and that he had fallen ; that the fall had accelerated his end , according to the prognosis of Frere Sylvain . 
We raised the vicomte ; he was cold and dead . 
He held a lock of fair hair in his right hand , and that hand was tightly pressed upon his heart . '' 
Then followed the details of the expedition , and of the victory obtained over the Arabs . 
D'Artagnan stopped at the account of the death of poor Raoul . 
`` Oh ! '' 
murmured he , `` unhappy boy ! 
a suicide ! '' 
And turning his eyes towards the chamber of the chateau , in which Athos slept in eternal sleep , `` They kept their words with each other , '' said he , in a low voice ; `` now I believe them to be happy ; they must be reunited . '' 
And he returned through the parterre with slow and melancholy steps . 
All the village - all the neighborhood - were filled with grieving neighbors relating to each other the double catastrophe , and making preparations for the funeral . 
: The Last Canto of the Poem . 
On the morrow , all the noblesse of the provinces , of the environs , and wherever messengers had carried the news , might have been seen arriving in detachments . 
D'Artagnan had shut himself up , without being willing to speak to anybody . 
Two such heavy deaths falling upon the captain , so closely after the death of Porthos , for a long time oppressed that spirit which had hitherto been so indefatigable and invulnerable . 
Except Grimaud , who entered his chamber once , the musketeer saw neither servants nor guests . 
He supposed , from the noises in the house , and the continual coming and going , that preparations were being made for the funeral of the comte . 
He wrote to the king to ask for an extension of his leave of absence . 
Grimaud , as we have said , had entered D'Artagnan 's apartment , had seated himself upon a joint-stool near the door , like a man who meditates profoundly ; then , rising , he made a sign to D'Artagnan to follow him . 
The latter obeyed in silence . 
Grimaud descended to the comte 's bed-chamber , showed the captain with his finger the place of the empty bed , and raised his eyes eloquently towards Heaven . 
`` Yes , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` yes , good Grimaud - now with the son he loved so much ! '' 
Grimaud left the chamber , and led the way to the hall , where , according to the custom of the province , the body was laid out , previously to being put away forever . 
D'Artagnan was struck at seeing two open coffins in the hall . 
In reply to the mute invitation of Grimaud , he approached , and saw in one of them Athos , still handsome in death , and , in the other , Raoul with his eyes closed , his cheeks pearly as those of the Palls of Virgil , with a smile on his violet lips . 
He shuddered at seeing the father and son , those two departed souls , represented on earth by two silent , melancholy bodies , incapable of touching each other , however close they might be . 
`` Raoul here ! '' 
murmured he . 
`` Oh ! 
Grimaud , why did you not tell me this ? '' 
Grimaud shook his head , and made no reply ; but taking D'Artagnan by the hand , he led him to the coffin , and showed him , under the thin winding - sheet , the black wounds by which life had escaped . 
The captain turned away his eyes , and , judging it was useless to question Grimaud , who would not answer , he recollected that M. de Beaufort 's secretary had written more than he , D'Artagnan , had had the courage to read . 
Taking up the recital of the affair which had cost Raoul his life , he found these words , which ended the concluding paragraph of the letter : `` Monseigneur le duc has ordered that the body of monsieur le vicomte should be embalmed , after the manner practiced by the Arabs when they wish their dead to be carried to their native land ; and monsieur le duc has appointed relays , so that the same confidential servant who brought up the young man might take back his remains to M. le Comte de la Fere . '' 
`` And so , '' thought D'Artagnan , `` I shall follow thy funeral , my dear boy - I , already old - I , who am of no value on earth - and I shall scatter dust upon that brow I kissed but two months since . 
God has willed it to be so . 
Thou hast willed it to be so , thyself . 
I have no longer the right even to weep . 
Thou hast chosen death ; it seemed to thee a preferable gift to life . '' 
At length arrived the moment when the chill remains of these two gentlemen were to be given back to mother earth . 
There was such an affluence of military and other people that up to the place of the sepulture , which was a little chapel on the plain , the road from the city was filled with horsemen and pedestrians in mourning . 
Athos had chosen for his resting-place the little inclosure of a chapel erected by himself near the boundary of his estates . 
He had had the stones , cut in 1550 , brought from an old Gothic manor-house in Berry , which had sheltered his early youth . 
The chapel , thus rebuilt , transported , was pleasing to the eye beneath its leafy curtains of poplars and sycamores . 
It was ministered in every Sunday , by the cure of the neighboring bourg , to whom Athos paid an allowance of two hundred francs for this service ; and all the vassals of his domain , with their families , came thither to hear mass , without having any occasion to go to the city . 
Behind the chapel extended , surrounded by two high hedges of hazel , elder and white thorn , and a deep ditch , the little inclosure - uncultivated , though gay in its sterility ; because the mosses there grew thick , wild heliotrope and ravenelles there mingled perfumes , while from beneath an ancient chestnut issued a crystal spring , a prisoner in its marble cistern , and on the thyme all around alighted thousands of bees from the neighboring plants , whilst chaffinches and redthroats sang cheerfully among the flower-spangled hedges . 
It was to this place the somber coffins were carried , attended by a silent and respectful crowd . 
The office of the dead being celebrated , the last adieux paid to the noble departed , the assembly dispersed , talking , along the roads , of the virtues and mild death of the father , of the hopes the son had given , and of his melancholy end upon the arid coast of Africa . 
Little by little , all noises were extinguished , like the lamps illuminating the humble nave . 
The minister bowed for the last time to the altar and the still fresh graves ; then , followed by his assistant , he slowly took the road back to the presbytery . 
D'Artagnan , left alone , perceived that night was coming on . 
He had forgotten the hour , thinking only of the dead . 
He arose from the oaken bench on which he was seated in the chapel , and wished , as the priest had done , to go and bid a last adieu to the double grave which contained his two lost friends . 
A woman was praying , kneeling on the moist earth . 
D'Artagnan stopped at the door of the chapel , to avoid disturbing her , and also to endeavor to find out who was the pious friend who performed this sacred duty with so much zeal and perseverance . 
The unknown had hidden her face in her hands , which were white as alabaster . 
From the noble simplicity of her costume , she must be a woman of distinction . 
Outside the inclosure were several horses mounted by servants ; a travelling carriage was in waiting for this lady . 
D'Artagnan in vain sought to make out what caused her delay . 
She continued praying , and frequently pressed her handkerchief to her face , by which D'Artagnan perceived she was weeping . 
He beheld her strike her breast with the compunction of a Christian woman . 
He heard her several times exclaim as from a wounded heart : `` Pardon ! 
pardon ! '' 
And as she appeared to abandon herself entirely to her grief , as she threw herself down , almost fainting , exhausted by complaints and prayers , D'Artagnan , touched by this love for his so much regretted friends , made a few steps towards the grave , in order to interrupt the melancholy colloquy of the penitent with the dead . 
But as soon as his step sounded on the gravel , the unknown raised her head , revealing to D'Artagnan a face aflood with tears , a well-known face . 
It was Mademoiselle de la Valliere ! 
