These barks , these floating-houses , are wafted to and fro by the changing winds . 
Whenever they touch a bank , it is but by chance ; and so gently , too , that the sleeping fisherman is not awakened by the shock . 
Should he wish to land , it is merely because he has seen a large flight of landrails or plovers , of wild ducks , teal , widgeon , or woodchucks , which fall an easy pray to net or gun . 
Silver shad , eels , greedy pike , red and gray mullet , swim in shoals into his nets ; he has but to choose the finest and largest , and return the others to the waters . 
Never yet has the food of the stranger , be he soldier or simple citizen , never has any one , indeed , penetrated into that district . 
The sun 's rays there are soft and tempered : in plots of solid earth , whose soil is swart and fertile , grows the vine , nourishing with generous juice its purple , white , and golden grapes . 
Once a week , a boat is sent to deliver the bread which has been baked at an oven - the common property of all . 
There - like the seigneurs of early days - powerful in virtue of your dogs , your fishing-lines , your guns , and your beautiful reed-built house , would you live , rich in the produce of the chase , in plentitude of absolute secrecy . 
There would years of your life roll away , at the end of which , no longer recognizable , for you would have been perfectly transformed , you would have succeeded in acquiring a destiny accorded to you by Heaven . 
There are a thousand pistoles in this bag , monseigneur - more , far more , than sufficient to purchase the whole marsh of which I have spoken ; more than enough to live there as many years as you have days to live ; more than enough to constitute you the richest , the freest , and the happiest man in the country . 
Accept it , as I offer it you - sincerely , cheerfully . 
Forthwith , without a moment 's pause , I will unharness two of my horses , which are attached to the carriage yonder , and they , accompanied by my servant - my deaf and dumb attendant - shall conduct you - traveling throughout the night , sleeping during the day - to the locality I have described ; and I shall , at least , have the satisfaction of knowing that I have rendered to my prince the major service he himself preferred . 
I shall have made one human being happy ; and Heaven for that will hold me in better account than if I had made one man powerful ; the former task is far more difficult . 
And now , monseigneur , your answer to this proposition ? 
Here is the money . 
Nay , do not hesitate . 
At Poitou , you can risk nothing , except the chance of catching the fevers prevalent there ; and even of them , the so-called wizards of the country will cure you , for the sake of your pistoles . 
If you play the other game , you run the chance of being assassinated on a throne , strangled in a prison-cell . 
Upon my soul , I assure you , now I begin to compare them together , I myself should hesitate which lot I should accept . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the young prince , `` before I determine , let me alight from this carriage , walk on the ground , and consult that still voice within me , which Heaven bids us all to hearken to . 
Ten minutes is all I ask , and then you shall have your answer . '' 
`` As you please , monseigneur , '' said Aramis , bending before him with respect , so solemn and august in tone and address had sounded these strange words . 
: Crown and Tiara . 
Aramis was the first to descend from the carriage ; he held the door open for the young man . 
He saw him place his foot on the mossy ground with a trembling of the whole body , and walk round the carriage with an unsteady and almost tottering step . 
It seemed as if the poor prisoner was unaccustomed to walk on God 's earth . 
It was the 15th of August , about eleven o'clock at night ; thick clouds , portending a tempest , overspread the heavens , and shrouded every light and prospect underneath their heavy folds . 
The extremities of the avenues were imperceptibly detached from the copse , by a lighter shadow of opaque gray , which , upon closer examination , became visible in the midst of the obscurity . 
But the fragrance which ascended from the grass , fresher and more penetrating than that which exhaled from the trees around him ; the warm and balmy air which enveloped him for the first time for many years past ; the ineffable enjoyment of liberty in an open country , spoke to the prince in so seductive a language , that notwithstanding the preternatural caution , we would almost say dissimulation of his character , of which we have tried to give an idea , he could not restrain his emotion , and breathed a sigh of ecstasy . 
Then , by degrees , he raised his aching head and inhaled the softly scented air , as it was wafted in gentle gusts to his uplifted face . 
Crossing his arms on his chest , as if to control this new sensation of delight , he drank in delicious draughts of that mysterious air which interpenetrates at night the loftiest forests . 
The sky he was contemplating , the murmuring waters , the universal freshness - was not all this reality ? 
Was not Aramis a madman to suppose that he had aught else to dream of in this world ? 
Those exciting pictures of country life , so free from fears and troubles , the ocean of happy days that glitters incessantly before all young imaginations , are real allurements wherewith to fascinate a poor , unhappy prisoner , worn out by prison cares , emaciated by the stifling air of the Bastile . 
It was the picture , it will be remembered , drawn by Aramis , when he offered the thousand pistoles he had with him in the carriage to the prince , and the enchanted Eden which the deserts of Bas-Poitou hid from the eyes of the world . 
Such were the reflections of Aramis as he watched , with an anxiety impossible to describe , the silent progress of the emotions of Philippe , whom he perceived gradually becoming more and more absorbed in his meditations . 
The young prince was offering up an inward prayer to Heaven , to be divinely guided in this trying moment , upon which his life or death depended . 
It was an anxious time for the bishop of Vannes , who had never before been so perplexed . 
His iron will , accustomed to overcome all obstacles , never finding itself inferior or vanquished on any occasion , to be foiled in so vast a project from not having foreseen the influence which a view of nature in all its luxuriance would have on the human mind ! 
Aramis , overwhelmed by anxiety , contemplated with emotion the painful struggle that was taking place in Philippe 's mind . 
This suspense lasted the whole ten minutes which the young man had requested . 
During this space of time , which appeared an eternity , Philippe continued gazing with an imploring and sorrowful look towards the heavens ; Aramis did not remove the piercing glance he had fixed on Philippe . 
Suddenly the young man bowed his head . 
His thought returned to the earth , his looks perceptibly hardened , his brow contracted , his mouth assuming an expression of undaunted courage ; again his looks became fixed , but this time they wore a worldly expression , hardened by covetousness , pride , and strong desire . 
Aramis 's look immediately became as soft as it had before been gloomy . 
Philippe , seizing his hand in a quick , agitated manner , exclaimed : `` Lead me to where the crown of France is to be found . '' 
`` Is this your decision , monseigneur ? '' 
asked Aramis . 
`` It is . '' 
`` Irrevocably so ? '' 
Philippe did not even deign to reply . 
He gazed earnestly at the bishop , as if to ask him if it were possible for a man to waver after having once made up his mind . 
`` Such looks are flashes of the hidden fire that betrays men 's character , '' said Aramis , bowing over Philippe 's hand ; `` you will be great , monseigneur , I will answer for that . '' 
`` Let us resume our conversation . 
I wished to discuss two points with you ; in the first place the dangers , or the obstacles we may meet with . 
That point is decided . 
The other is the conditions you intend imposing on me . 
It is your turn to speak , M. d'Herblay . '' 
`` The conditions , monseigneur ? '' 
`` Doubtless . 
You will not allow so mere a trifle to stop me , and you will not do me the injustice to suppose that I think you have no interest in this affair . 
Therefore , without subterfuge or hesitation , tell me the truth - '' `` I will do so , monseigneur . 
Once a king - '' `` When will that be ? '' 
`` To-morrow evening - I mean in the night . '' 
`` Explain yourself . '' 
`` When I shall have asked your highness a question . '' 
`` Do so . '' 
`` I sent to your highness a man in my confidence with instructions to deliver some closely written notes , carefully drawn up , which will thoroughly acquaint your highness with the different persons who compose and will compose your court . '' 
`` I perused those notes . '' 
`` Attentively ? '' 
`` I know them by heart . '' 
`` And understand them ? 
Pardon me , but I may venture to ask that question of a poor , abandoned captive of the Bastile ? 
In a week 's time it will not be requisite to further question a mind like yours . 
You will then be in full possession of liberty and power . '' 
`` Interrogate me , then , and I will be a scholar representing his lesson to his master . '' 
`` We will begin with your family , monseigneur . '' 
`` My mother , Anne of Austria ! 
all her sorrows , her painful malady . 
Oh ! 
I know her - I know her . '' 
`` Your second brother ? '' 
asked Aramis , bowing . 
`` To these notes , '' replied the prince , `` you have added portraits so faithfully painted , that I am able to recognize the persons whose characters , manners , and history you have so carefully portrayed . 
Monsieur , my brother , is a fine , dark young man , with a pale face ; he does not love his wife , Henrietta , whom I , Louis XIV. , loved a little , and still flirt with , even although she made me weep on the day she wished to dismiss Mademoiselle de la Valliere from her service in disgrace . '' 
`` You will have to be careful with regard to the watchfulness of the latter , '' said Aramis ; `` she is sincerely attached to the actual king . 
The eyes of a woman who loves are not easily deceived . '' 
`` She is fair , has blue eyes , whose affectionate gaze reveals her identity . 
She halts slightly in her gait ; she writes a letter every day , to which I have to send an answer by M. de Saint-Aignan . '' 
`` Do you know the latter ? '' 
`` As if I saw him , and I know the last verses he composed for me , as well as those I composed in answer to his . '' 
`` Very good . 
Do you know your ministers ? '' 
`` Colbert , an ugly , dark-browed man , but intelligent enough , his hair covering his forehead , a large , heavy , full head ; the mortal enemy of M. Fouquet . '' 
`` As for the latter , we need not disturb ourselves about him . '' 
`` No ; because necessarily you will not require me to exile him , I suppose ? '' 
Aramis , struck with admiration at the remark , said , `` You will become very great , monseigneur . '' 
`` You see , '' added the prince , `` that I know my lesson by heart , and with Heaven 's assistance , and yours afterwards , I shall seldom go wrong . '' 
`` You have still an awkward pair of eyes to deal with , monseigneur . '' 
`` Yes , the captain of the musketeers , M. d'Artagnan , your friend . '' 
