In the meantime a serious incident occurred . 
Carve as we will the mysterious block of which our life is made , the black vein of destiny constantly reappears in it . 
HOW JEAN MAY BECOME CHAMP One morning M. Madeleine was in his study , occupied in arranging in advance some pressing matters connected with the mayor 's office , in case he should decide to take the trip to Montfermeil , when he was informed that Police Inspector Javert was desirous of speaking with him . 
Madeleine could not refrain from a disagreeable impression on hearing this name . 
Javert had avoided him more than ever since the affair of the police-station , and M. Madeleine had not seen him . 
`` Admit him , '' he said . 
Javert entered . 
M. Madeleine had retained his seat near the fire , pen in hand , his eyes fixed on the docket which he was turning over and annotating , and which contained the trials of the commission on highways for the infraction of police regulations . 
He did not disturb himself on Javert 's account . 
He could not help thinking of poor Fantine , and it suited him to be glacial in his manner . 
Javert bestowed a respectful salute on the mayor , whose back was turned to him . 
The mayor did not look at him , but went on annotating this docket . 
Javert advanced two or three paces into the study , and halted , without breaking the silence . 
If any physiognomist who had been familiar with Javert , and who had made a lengthy study of this savage in the service of civilization , this singular composite of the Roman , the Spartan , the monk , and the corporal , this spy who was incapable of a lie , this unspotted police agent -- if any physiognomist had known his secret and long-cherished aversion for M. Madeleine , his conflict with the mayor on the subject of Fantine , and had examined Javert at that moment , he would have said to himself , `` What has taken place ? '' 
It was evident to any one acquainted with that clear , upright , sincere , honest , austere , and ferocious conscience , that Javert had but just gone through some great interior struggle . 
Javert had nothing in his soul which he had not also in his countenance . 
Like violent people in general , he was subject to abrupt changes of opinion . 
His physiognomy had never been more peculiar and startling . 
On entering he bowed to M. Madeleine with a look in which there was neither rancor , anger , nor distrust ; he halted a few paces in the rear of the mayor 's arm-chair , and there he stood , perfectly erect , in an attitude almost of discipline , with the cold , ingenuous roughness of a man who has never been gentle and who has always been patient ; he waited without uttering a word , without making a movement , in genuine humility and tranquil resignation , calm , serious , hat in hand , with eyes cast down , and an expression which was half-way between that of a soldier in the presence of his officer and a criminal in the presence of his judge , until it should please the mayor to turn round . 
All the sentiments as well as all the memories which one might have attributed to him had disappeared . 
That face , as impenetrable and simple as granite , no longer bore any trace of anything but a melancholy depression . 
His whole person breathed lowliness and firmness and an indescribable courageous despondency . 
At last the mayor laid down his pen and turned half round . 
`` Well ! 
What is it ? 
What is the matter , Javert ? '' 
Javert remained silent for an instant as though collecting his ideas , then raised his voice with a sort of sad solemnity , which did not , however , preclude simplicity . 
`` This is the matter , Mr. Mayor ; a culpable act has been committed . '' 
`` What act ? '' 
`` An inferior agent of the authorities has failed in respect , and in the gravest manner , towards a magistrate . 
I have come to bring the fact to your knowledge , as it is my duty to do . '' 
`` Who is the agent ? '' 
asked M. Madeleine . 
`` I , '' said Javert . 
`` You ? '' 
`` I. '' `` And who is the magistrate who has reason to complain of the agent ? '' 
`` You , Mr. Mayor . '' 
M. Madeleine sat erect in his arm-chair . 
Javert went on , with a severe air and his eyes still cast down . 
`` Mr. Mayor , I have come to request you to instigate the authorities to dismiss me . '' 
M. Madeleine opened his mouth in amazement . 
Javert interrupted him : -- `` You will say that I might have handed in my resignation , but that does not suffice . 
Handing in one 's resignation is honorable . 
I have failed in my duty ; I ought to be punished ; I must be turned out . '' 
And after a pause he added : -- `` Mr. Mayor , you were severe with me the other day , and unjustly . 
Be so to-day , with justice . '' 
`` Come , now ! 
Why ? '' 
exclaimed M. Madeleine . 
`` What nonsense is this ? 
What is the meaning of this ? 
What culpable act have you been guilty of towards me ? 
What have you done to me ? 
What are your wrongs with regard to me ? 
You accuse yourself ; you wish to be superseded -- '' `` Turned out , '' said Javert . 
`` Turned out ; so it be , then . 
That is well . 
I do not understand . '' 
`` You shall understand , Mr. Mayor . '' 
Javert sighed from the very bottom of his chest , and resumed , still coldly and sadly : -- `` Mr. Mayor , six weeks ago , in consequence of the scene over that woman , I was furious , and I informed against you . '' 
`` Informed against me ! '' 
`` At the Prefecture of Police in Paris . '' 
M. Madeleine , who was not in the habit of laughing much oftener than Javert himself , burst out laughing now : -- `` As a mayor who had encroached on the province of the police ? '' 
`` As an ex-convict . '' 
The mayor turned livid . 
Javert , who had not raised his eyes , went on : -- `` I thought it was so . 
I had had an idea for a long time ; a resemblance ; inquiries which you had caused to be made at Faverolles ; the strength of your loins ; the adventure with old Fauchelevant ; your skill in marksmanship ; your leg , which you drag a little ; -- I hardly know what all , -- absurdities ! 
But , at all events , I took you for a certain Jean Valjean . '' 
`` A certain -- What did you say the name was ? '' 
`` Jean Valjean . 
He was a convict whom I was in the habit of seeing twenty years ago , when I was adjutant-guard of convicts at Toulon . 
On leaving the galleys , this Jean Valjean , as it appears , robbed a bishop ; then he committed another theft , accompanied with violence , on a public highway on the person of a little Savoyard . 
He disappeared eight years ago , no one knows how , and he has been sought , I fancied . 
In short , I did this thing ! 
Wrath impelled me ; I denounced you at the Prefecture ! '' 
M. Madeleine , who had taken up the docket again several moments before this , resumed with an air of perfect indifference : -- `` And what reply did you receive ? '' 
`` That I was mad . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Well , they were right . '' 
`` It is lucky that you recognize the fact . '' 
`` I am forced to do so , since the real Jean Valjean has been found . '' 
The sheet of paper which M. Madeleine was holding dropped from his hand ; he raised his head , gazed fixedly at Javert , and said with his indescribable accent : -- `` Ah ! '' 
Javert continued : -- `` This is the way it is , Mr. Mayor . 
It seems that there was in the neighborhood near Ailly-le-Haut-Clocher an old fellow who was called Father Champmathieu . 
He was a very wretched creature . 
No one paid any attention to him . 
No one knows what such people subsist on . 
Lately , last autumn , Father Champmathieu was arrested for the theft of some cider apples from -- Well , no matter , a theft had been committed , a wall scaled , branches of trees broken . 
My Champmathieu was arrested . 
He still had the branch of apple-tree in his hand . 
The scamp is locked up . 
Up to this point it was merely an affair of a misdemeanor . 
But here is where Providence intervened . 
`` The jail being in a bad condition , the examining magistrate finds it convenient to transfer Champmathieu to Arras , where the departmental prison is situated . 
In this prison at Arras there is an ex-convict named Brevet , who is detained for I know not what , and who has been appointed turnkey of the house , because of good behavior . 
Mr. Mayor , no sooner had Champmathieu arrived than Brevet exclaims : ` Eh ! 
Why , I know that man ! 
He is a fagot ! 
-LSB- 4 -RSB- Take a good look at me , my good man ! 
You are Jean Valjean ! ' 
` Jean Valjean ! 
who 's Jean Valjean ? ' 
Champmathieu feigns astonishment . 
` Do n't play the innocent dodge , ' says Brevet . 
` You are Jean Valjean ! 
You have been in the galleys of Toulon ; it was twenty years ago ; we were there together . ' 
Champmathieu denies it . 
Parbleu ! 
You understand . 
The case is investigated . 
The thing was well ventilated for me . 
This is what they discovered : This Champmathieu had been , thirty years ago , a pruner of trees in various localities , notably at Faverolles . 
There all trace of him was lost . 
A long time afterwards he was seen again in Auvergne ; then in Paris , where he is said to have been a wheelwright , and to have had a daughter , who was a laundress ; but that has not been proved . 
Now , before going to the galleys for theft , what was Jean Valjean ? 
A pruner of trees . 
Where ? 
At Faverolles . 
Another fact . 
This Valjean 's Christian name was Jean , and his mother 's surname was Mathieu . 
What more natural to suppose than that , on emerging from the galleys , he should have taken his mother 's name for the purpose of concealing himself , and have called himself Jean Mathieu ? 
He goes to Auvergne . 
The local pronunciation turns Jean into Chan -- he is called Chan Mathieu . 
Our man offers no opposition , and behold him transformed into Champmathieu . 
You follow me , do you not ? 
Inquiries were made at Faverolles . 
The family of Jean Valjean is no longer there . 
It is not known where they have gone . 
You know that among those classes a family often disappears . 
Search was made , and nothing was found . 
When such people are not mud , they are dust . 
And then , as the beginning of the story dates thirty years back , there is no longer any one at Faverolles who knew Jean Valjean . 
Inquiries were made at Toulon . 
Besides Brevet , there are only two convicts in existence who have seen Jean Valjean ; they are Cochepaille and Chenildieu , and are sentenced for life . 
They are taken from the galleys and confronted with the pretended Champmathieu . 
They do not hesitate ; he is Jean Valjean for them as well as for Brevet . 
The same age , -- he is fifty-four , -- the same height , the same air , the same man ; in short , it is he . 
It was precisely at this moment that I forwarded my denunciation to the Prefecture in Paris . 
I was told that I had lost my reason , and that Jean Valjean is at Arras , in the power of the authorities . 
You can imagine whether this surprised me , when I thought that I had that same Jean Valjean here . 
I write to the examining judge ; he sends for me ; Champmathieu is conducted to me -- '' -LSB- 4 -RSB- An ex-convict . 
`` Well ? '' 
interposed M. Madeleine . 
Javert replied , his face incorruptible , and as melancholy as ever : -- `` Mr. Mayor , the truth is the truth . 
I am sorry ; but that man is Jean Valjean . 
I recognized him also . '' 
M. Madeleine resumed in , a very low voice : -- `` You are sure ? '' 
Javert began to laugh , with that mournful laugh which comes from profound conviction . 
`` O ! 
Sure ! '' 
He stood there thoughtfully for a moment , mechanically taking pinches of powdered wood for blotting ink from the wooden bowl which stood on the table , and he added : -- `` And even now that I have seen the real Jean Valjean , I do not see how I could have thought otherwise . 
I beg your pardon , Mr. Mayor . '' 
Javert , as he addressed these grave and supplicating words to the man , who six weeks before had humiliated him in the presence of the whole station-house , and bade him `` leave the room , '' -- Javert , that haughty man , was unconsciously full of simplicity and dignity , -- M. Madeleine made no other reply to his prayer than the abrupt question : -- `` And what does this man say ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
Indeed , Mr. Mayor , it 's a bad business . 
If he is Jean Valjean , he has his previous conviction against him . 
To climb a wall , to break a branch , to purloin apples , is a mischievous trick in a child ; for a man it is a misdemeanor ; for a convict it is a crime . 
Robbing and housebreaking -- it is all there . 
It is no longer a question of correctional police ; it is a matter for the Court of Assizes . 
It is no longer a matter of a few days in prison ; it is the galleys for life . 
And then , there is the affair with the little Savoyard , who will return , I hope . 
The deuce ! 
there is plenty to dispute in the matter , is there not ? 
Yes , for any one but Jean Valjean . 
But Jean Valjean is a sly dog . 
That is the way I recognized him . 
Any other man would have felt that things were getting hot for him ; he would struggle , he would cry out -- the kettle sings before the fire ; he would not be Jean Valjean , et cetera . 
But he has not the appearance of understanding ; he says , ` I am Champmathieu , and I wo n't depart from that ! ' 
He has an astonished air , he pretends to be stupid ; it is far better . 
Oh ! 
the rogue is clever ! 
But it makes no difference . 
The proofs are there . 
He has been recognized by four persons ; the old scamp will be condemned . 
The case has been taken to the Assizes at Arras . 
I shall go there to give my testimony . 
I have been summoned . '' 
M. Madeleine had turned to his desk again , and taken up his docket , and was turning over the leaves tranquilly , reading and writing by turns , like a busy man . 
He turned to Javert : -- `` That will do , Javert . 
In truth , all these details interest me but little . 
We are wasting our time , and we have pressing business on hand . 
Javert , you will betake yourself at once to the house of the woman Buseaupied , who sells herbs at the corner of the Rue Saint-Saulve . 
You will tell her that she must enter her complaint against carter Pierre Chesnelong . 
The man is a brute , who came near crushing this woman and her child . 
He must be punished . 
You will then go to M. Charcellay , Rue Montre-de-Champigny . 
He complained that there is a gutter on the adjoining house which discharges rain-water on his premises , and is undermining the foundations of his house . 
After that , you will verify the infractions of police regulations which have been reported to me in the Rue Guibourg , at Widow Doris 's , and Rue du Garraud-Blanc , at Madame Renee le Bosse 's , and you will prepare documents . 
But I am giving you a great deal of work . 
Are you not to be absent ? 
Did you not tell me that you were going to Arras on that matter in a week or ten days ? '' 
`` Sooner than that , Mr. Mayor . '' 
`` On what day , then ? '' 
`` Why , I thought that I had said to Monsieur le Maire that the case was to be tried to-morrow , and that I am to set out by diligence to-night . '' 
M. Madeleine made an imperceptible movement . 
`` And how long will the case last ? '' 
`` One day , at the most . 
The judgment will be pronounced to-morrow evening at latest . 
But I shall not wait for the sentence , which is certain ; I shall return here as soon as my deposition has been taken . '' 
`` That is well , '' said M. Madeleine . 
And he dismissed Javert with a wave of the hand . 
Javert did not withdraw . 
`` Excuse me , Mr. Mayor , '' said he . 
`` What is it now ? '' 
demanded M. Madeleine . 
`` Mr. Mayor , there is still something of which I must remind you . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I must be dismissed . '' 
M. Madeleine rose . 
`` Javert , you are a man of honor , and I esteem you . 
You exaggerate your fault . 
Moreover , this is an offence which concerns me . 
Javert , you deserve promotion instead of degradation . 
I wish you to retain your post . '' 
Javert gazed at M. Madeleine with his candid eyes , in whose depths his not very enlightened but pure and rigid conscience seemed visible , and said in a tranquil voice : -- `` Mr. Mayor , I can not grant you that . '' 
`` I repeat , '' replied M. Madeleine , `` that the matter concerns me . '' 
But Javert , heeding his own thought only , continued : -- `` So far as exaggeration is concerned , I am not exaggerating . 
This is the way I reason : I have suspected you unjustly . 
That is nothing . 
It is our right to cherish suspicion , although suspicion directed above ourselves is an abuse . 
But without proofs , in a fit of rage , with the object of wreaking my vengeance , I have denounced you as a convict , you , a respectable man , a mayor , a magistrate ! 
That is serious , very serious . 
I have insulted authority in your person , I , an agent of the authorities ! 
If one of my subordinates had done what I have done , I should have declared him unworthy of the service , and have expelled him . 
Well ? 
Stop , Mr. Mayor ; one word more . 
I have often been severe in the course of my life towards others . 
That is just . 
I have done well . 
Now , if I were not severe towards myself , all the justice that I have done would become injustice . 
Ought I to spare myself more than others ? 
No ! 
What ! 
I should be good for nothing but to chastise others , and not myself ! 
Why , I should be a blackguard ! 
Those who say , ` That blackguard of a Javert ! ' 
would be in the right . 
Mr. Mayor , I do not desire that you should treat me kindly ; your kindness roused sufficient bad blood in me when it was directed to others . 
I want none of it for myself . 
The kindness which consists in upholding a woman of the town against a citizen , the police agent against the mayor , the man who is down against the man who is up in the world , is what I call false kindness . 
That is the sort of kindness which disorganizes society . 
Good God ! 
it is very easy to be kind ; the difficulty lies in being just . 
Come ! 
if you had been what I thought you , I should not have been kind to you , not I ! 
You would have seen ! 
Mr. Mayor , I must treat myself as I would treat any other man . 
When I have subdued malefactors , when I have proceeded with vigor against rascals , I have often said to myself , ` If you flinch , if I ever catch you in fault , you may rest at your ease ! ' 
I have flinched , I have caught myself in a fault . 
So much the worse ! 
Come , discharged , cashiered , expelled ! 
That is well . 
I have arms . 
I will till the soil ; it makes no difference to me . 
Mr. Mayor , the good of the service demands an example . 
I simply require the discharge of Inspector Javert . '' 
All this was uttered in a proud , humble , despairing , yet convinced tone , which lent indescribable grandeur to this singular , honest man . 
`` We shall see , '' said M. Madeleine . 
And he offered him his hand . 
Javert recoiled , and said in a wild voice : -- `` Excuse me , Mr. Mayor , but this must not be . 
A mayor does not offer his hand to a police spy . '' 
He added between his teeth : -- `` A police spy , yes ; from the moment when I have misused the police . 
I am no more than a police spy . '' 
Then he bowed profoundly , and directed his steps towards the door . 
There he wheeled round , and with eyes still downcast : -- `` Mr. Mayor , '' he said , `` I shall continue to serve until I am superseded . '' 
He withdrew . 
M. Madeleine remained thoughtfully listening to the firm , sure step , which died away on the pavement of the corridor . 
SISTER SIMPLICE The incidents the reader is about to peruse were not all known at M. sur M . 
But the small portion of them which became known left such a memory in that town that a serious gap would exist in this book if we did not narrate them in their most minute details . 
Among these details the reader will encounter two or three improbable circumstances , which we preserve out of respect for the truth . 
On the afternoon following the visit of Javert , M. Madeleine went to see Fantine according to his wont . 
Before entering Fantine 's room , he had Sister Simplice summoned . 
The two nuns who performed the services of nurse in the infirmary , Lazariste ladies , like all sisters of charity , bore the names of Sister Perpetue and Sister Simplice . 
Sister Perpetue was an ordinary villager , a sister of charity in a coarse style , who had entered the service of God as one enters any other service . 
She was a nun as other women are cooks . 
This type is not so very rare . 
The monastic orders gladly accept this heavy peasant earthenware , which is easily fashioned into a Capuchin or an Ursuline . 
These rustics are utilized for the rough work of devotion . 
The transition from a drover to a Carmelite is not in the least violent ; the one turns into the other without much effort ; the fund of ignorance common to the village and the cloister is a preparation ready at hand , and places the boor at once on the same footing as the monk : a little more amplitude in the smock , and it becomes a frock . 
Sister Perpetue was a robust nun from Marines near Pontoise , who chattered her patois , droned , grumbled , sugared the potion according to the bigotry or the hypocrisy of the invalid , treated her patients abruptly , roughly , was crabbed with the dying , almost flung God in their faces , stoned their death agony with prayers mumbled in a rage ; was bold , honest , and ruddy . 
Sister Simplice was white , with a waxen pallor . 
Beside Sister Perpetue , she was the taper beside the candle . 
Vincent de Paul has divinely traced the features of the Sister of Charity in these admirable words , in which he mingles as much freedom as servitude : `` They shall have for their convent only the house of the sick ; for cell only a hired room ; for chapel only their parish church ; for cloister only the streets of the town and the wards of the hospitals ; for enclosure only obedience ; for gratings only the fear of God ; for veil only modesty . '' 
This ideal was realized in the living person of Sister Simplice : she had never been young , and it seemed as though she would never grow old . 
No one could have told Sister Simplice 's age . 
She was a person -- we dare not say a woman -- who was gentle , austere , well-bred , cold , and who had never lied . 
She was so gentle that she appeared fragile ; but she was more solid than granite . 
She touched the unhappy with fingers that were charmingly pure and fine . 
There was , so to speak , silence in her speech ; she said just what was necessary , and she possessed a tone of voice which would have equally edified a confessional or enchanted a drawing-room . 
This delicacy accommodated itself to the serge gown , finding in this harsh contact a continual reminder of heaven and of God . 
Let us emphasize one detail . 
Never to have lied , never to have said , for any interest whatever , even in indifference , any single thing which was not the truth , the sacred truth , was Sister Simplice 's distinctive trait ; it was the accent of her virtue . 
She was almost renowned in the congregation for this imperturbable veracity . 
The Abbe Sicard speaks of Sister Simplice in a letter to the deaf-mute Massieu . 
However pure and sincere we may be , we all bear upon our candor the crack of the little , innocent lie . 
She did not . 
Little lie , innocent lie -- does such a thing exist ? 
To lie is the absolute form of evil . 
To lie a little is not possible : he who lies , lies the whole lie . 
To lie is the very face of the demon . 
Satan has two names ; he is called Satan and Lying . 
That is what she thought ; and as she thought , so she did . 
The result was the whiteness which we have mentioned -- a whiteness which covered even her lips and her eyes with radiance . 
Her smile was white , her glance was white . 
There was not a single spider 's web , not a grain of dust , on the glass window of that conscience . 
On entering the order of Saint Vincent de Paul , she had taken the name of Simplice by special choice . 
Simplice of Sicily , as we know , is the saint who preferred to allow both her breasts to be torn off rather than to say that she had been born at Segesta when she had been born at Syracuse -- a lie which would have saved her . 
This patron saint suited this soul . 
Sister Simplice , on her entrance into the order , had had two faults which she had gradually corrected : she had a taste for dainties , and she liked to receive letters . 
She never read anything but a book of prayers printed in Latin , in coarse type . 
She did not understand Latin , but she understood the book . 
This pious woman had conceived an affection for Fantine , probably feeling a latent virtue there , and she had devoted herself almost exclusively to her care . 
M. Madeleine took Sister Simplice apart and recommended Fantine to her in a singular tone , which the sister recalled later on . 
On leaving the sister , he approached Fantine . 
Fantine awaited M. Madeleine 's appearance every day as one awaits a ray of warmth and joy . 
She said to the sisters , `` I only live when Monsieur le Maire is here . '' 
She had a great deal of fever that day . 
As soon as she saw M. Madeleine she asked him : -- `` And Cosette ? '' 
He replied with a smile : -- `` Soon . '' 
M. Madeleine was the same as usual with Fantine . 
Only he remained an hour instead of half an hour , to Fantine 's great delight . 
He urged every one repeatedly not to allow the invalid to want for anything . 
It was noticed that there was a moment when his countenance became very sombre . 
But this was explained when it became known that the doctor had bent down to his ear and said to him , `` She is losing ground fast . '' 
Then he returned to the town-hall , and the clerk observed him attentively examining a road map of France which hung in his study . 
He wrote a few figures on a bit of paper with a pencil . 
THE PERSPICACITY OF MASTER SCAUFFLAIRE From the town-hall he betook himself to the extremity of the town , to a Fleming named Master Scaufflaer , French Scaufflaire , who let out `` horses and cabriolets as desired . '' 
In order to reach this Scaufflaire , the shortest way was to take the little-frequented street in which was situated the parsonage of the parish in which M. Madeleine resided . 
The cure was , it was said , a worthy , respectable , and sensible man . 
At the moment when M. Madeleine arrived in front of the parsonage there was but one passer-by in the street , and this person noticed this : After the mayor had passed the priest 's house he halted , stood motionless , then turned about , and retraced his steps to the door of the parsonage , which had an iron knocker . 
He laid his hand quickly on the knocker and lifted it ; then he paused again and stopped short , as though in thought , and after the lapse of a few seconds , instead of allowing the knocker to fall abruptly , he placed it gently , and resumed his way with a sort of haste which had not been apparent previously . 
M. Madeleine found Master Scaufflaire at home , engaged in stitching a harness over . 
`` Master Scaufflaire , '' he inquired , `` have you a good horse ? '' 
`` Mr. Mayor , '' said the Fleming , `` all my horses are good . 
What do you mean by a good horse ? '' 
`` I mean a horse which can travel twenty leagues in a day . '' 
`` The deuce ! '' 
said the Fleming . 
`` Twenty leagues ! '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Hitched to a cabriolet ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And how long can he rest at the end of his journey ? '' 
`` He must be able to set out again on the next day if necessary . '' 
`` To traverse the same road ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` The deuce ! 
the deuce ! 
And it is twenty leagues ? '' 
M. Madeleine drew from his pocket the paper on which he had pencilled some figures . 
He showed it to the Fleming . 
The figures were 5 , 6 , 8 1/2 . 
`` You see , '' he said , `` total , nineteen and a half ; as well say twenty leagues . '' 
`` Mr. Mayor , '' returned the Fleming , `` I have just what you want . 
My little white horse -- you may have seen him pass occasionally ; he is a small beast from Lower Boulonnais . 
He is full of fire . 
They wanted to make a saddle-horse of him at first . 
Bah ! 
He reared , he kicked , he laid everybody flat on the ground . 
He was thought to be vicious , and no one knew what to do with him . 
I bought him . 
I harnessed him to a carriage . 
That is what he wanted , sir ; he is as gentle as a girl ; he goes like the wind . 
Ah ! 
indeed he must not be mounted . 
It does not suit his ideas to be a saddle-horse . 
Every one has his ambition . 
` Draw ? 
Yes . 
Carry ? 
No . ' 
We must suppose that is what he said to himself . '' 
`` And he will accomplish the trip ? '' 
`` Your twenty leagues all at a full trot , and in less than eight hours . 
But here are the conditions . '' 
`` State them . '' 
`` In the first place . 
you will give him half an hour 's breathing spell midway of the road ; he will eat ; and some one must be by while he is eating to prevent the stable boy of the inn from stealing his oats ; for I have noticed that in inns the oats are more often drunk by the stable men than eaten by the horses . '' 
`` Some one will be by . '' 
`` In the second place -- is the cabriolet for Monsieur le Maire ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Does Monsieur le Maire know how to drive ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well , Monsieur le Maire will travel alone and without baggage , in order not to overload the horse ? '' 
`` Agreed . '' 
`` But as Monsieur le Maire will have no one with him , he will be obliged to take the trouble himself of seeing that the oats are not stolen . '' 
`` That is understood . '' 
`` I am to have thirty francs a day . 
The days of rest to be paid for also -- not a farthing less ; and the beast 's food to be at Monsieur le Maire 's expense . '' 
M. Madeleine drew three napoleons from his purse and laid them on the table . 
`` Here is the pay for two days in advance . '' 
`` Fourthly , for such a journey a cabriolet would be too heavy , and would fatigue the horse . 
Monsieur le Maire must consent to travel in a little tilbury that I own . '' 
`` I consent to that . '' 
`` It is light , but it has no cover . '' 
`` That makes no difference to me . '' 
`` Has Monsieur le Maire reflected that we are in the middle of winter ? '' 
M. Madeleine did not reply . 
The Fleming resumed : -- `` That it is very cold ? '' 
M. Madeleine preserved silence . 
Master Scaufflaire continued : -- `` That it may rain ? '' 
M. Madeleine raised his head and said : -- `` The tilbury and the horse will be in front of my door to-morrow morning at half-past four o'clock . '' 
`` Of course , Monsieur le Maire , '' replied Scaufflaire ; then , scratching a speck in the wood of the table with his thumb-nail , he resumed with that careless air which the Flemings understand so well how to mingle with their shrewdness : -- `` But this is what I am thinking of now : Monsieur le Maire has not told me where he is going . 
Where is Monsieur le Maire going ? '' 
He had been thinking of nothing else since the beginning of the conversation , but he did not know why he had not dared to put the question . 
`` Are your horse 's forelegs good ? '' 
said M. Madeleine . 
`` Yes , Monsieur le Maire . 
You must hold him in a little when going down hill . 
Are there many descends between here and the place whither you are going ? '' 
`` Do not forget to be at my door at precisely half-past four o'clock to-morrow morning , '' replied M. Madeleine ; and he took his departure . 
The Fleming remained `` utterly stupid , '' as he himself said some time afterwards . 
The mayor had been gone two or three minutes when the door opened again ; it was the mayor once more . 
He still wore the same impassive and preoccupied air . 
`` Monsieur Scaufflaire , '' said he , `` at what sum do you estimate the value of the horse and tilbury which you are to let to me , -- the one bearing the other ? '' 
`` The one dragging the other , Monsieur le Maire , '' said the Fleming , with a broad smile . 
`` So be it . 
Well ? '' 
`` Does Monsieur le Maire wish to purchase them or me ? '' 
`` No ; but I wish to guarantee you in any case . 
You shall give me back the sum at my return . 
At what value do you estimate your horse and cabriolet ? '' 
`` Five hundred francs , Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` Here it is . '' 
M. Madeleine laid a bank-bill on the table , then left the room ; and this time he did not return . 
Master Scaufflaire experienced a frightful regret that he had not said a thousand francs . 
Besides the horse and tilbury together were worth but a hundred crowns . 
The Fleming called his wife , and related the affair to her . 
`` Where the devil could Monsieur le Maire be going ? '' 
They held counsel together . 
`` He is going to Paris , '' said the wife . 
`` I do n't believe it , '' said the husband . 
M. Madeleine had forgotten the paper with the figures on it , and it lay on the chimney-piece . 
The Fleming picked it up and studied it . 
`` Five , six , eight and a half ? 
That must designate the posting relays . '' 
He turned to his wife : -- `` I have found out . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` It is five leagues from here to Hesdin , six from Hesdin to Saint-Pol , eight and a half from Saint-Pol to Arras . 
He is going to Arras . '' 
Meanwhile , M. Madeleine had returned home . 
He had taken the longest way to return from Master Scaufflaire 's , as though the parsonage door had been a temptation for him , and he had wished to avoid it . 
He ascended to his room , and there he shut himself up , which was a very simple act , since he liked to go to bed early . 
Nevertheless , the portress of the factory , who was , at the same time , M. Madeleine 's only servant , noticed that the latter 's light was extinguished at half-past eight , and she mentioned it to the cashier when he came home , adding : -- `` Is Monsieur le Maire ill ? 
I thought he had a rather singular air . '' 
This cashier occupied a room situated directly under M. Madeleine 's chamber . 
He paid no heed to the portress 's words , but went to bed and to sleep . 
Towards midnight he woke up with a start ; in his sleep he had heard a noise above his head . 
He listened ; it was a footstep pacing back and forth , as though some one were walking in the room above him . 
He listened more attentively , and recognized M. Madeleine 's step . 
This struck him as strange ; usually , there was no noise in M. Madeleine 's chamber until he rose in the morning . 
A moment later the cashier heard a noise which resembled that of a cupboard being opened , and then shut again ; then a piece of furniture was disarranged ; then a pause ensued ; then the step began again . 
The cashier sat up in bed , quite awake now , and staring ; and through his window-panes he saw the reddish gleam of a lighted window reflected on the opposite wall ; from the direction of the rays , it could only come from the window of M. Madeleine 's chamber . 
The reflection wavered , as though it came rather from a fire which had been lighted than from a candle . 
The shadow of the window-frame was not shown , which indicated that the window was wide open . 
The fact that this window was open in such cold weather was surprising . 
The cashier fell asleep again . 
An hour or two later he waked again . 
The same step was still passing slowly and regularly back and forth overhead . 
The reflection was still visible on the wall , but now it was pale and peaceful , like the reflection of a lamp or of a candle . 
The window was still open . 
This is what had taken place in M. Madeleine 's room . 
A TEMPEST IN A SKULL The reader has , no doubt , already divined that M. Madeleine is no other than Jean Valjean . 
We have already gazed into the depths of this conscience ; the moment has now come when we must take another look into it . 
We do so not without emotion and trepidation . 
There is nothing more terrible in existence than this sort of contemplation . 
The eye of the spirit can nowhere find more dazzling brilliance and more shadow than in man ; it can fix itself on no other thing which is more formidable , more complicated , more mysterious , and more infinite . 
There is a spectacle more grand than the sea ; it is heaven : there is a spectacle more grand than heaven ; it is the inmost recesses of the soul . 
To make the poem of the human conscience , were it only with reference to a single man , were it only in connection with the basest of men , would be to blend all epics into one superior and definitive epic . 
Conscience is the chaos of chimeras , of lusts , and of temptations ; the furnace of dreams ; the lair of ideas of which we are ashamed ; it is the pandemonium of sophisms ; it is the battlefield of the passions . 
Penetrate , at certain hours , past the livid face of a human being who is engaged in reflection , and look behind , gaze into that soul , gaze into that obscurity . 
There , beneath that external silence , battles of giants , like those recorded in Homer , are in progress ; skirmishes of dragons and hydras and swarms of phantoms , as in Milton ; visionary circles , as in Dante . 
What a solemn thing is this infinity which every man bears within him , and which he measures with despair against the caprices of his brain and the actions of his life ! 
Alighieri one day met with a sinister-looking door , before which he hesitated . 
Here is one before us , upon whose threshold we hesitate . 
Let us enter , nevertheless . 
We have but little to add to what the reader already knows of what had happened to Jean Valjean after the adventure with Little Gervais . 
From that moment forth he was , as we have seen , a totally different man . 
What the Bishop had wished to make of him , that he carried out . 
It was more than a transformation ; it was a transfiguration . 
He succeeded in disappearing , sold the Bishop 's silver , reserving only the candlesticks as a souvenir , crept from town to town , traversed France , came to M. sur M. , conceived the idea which we have mentioned , accomplished what we have related , succeeded in rendering himself safe from seizure and inaccessible , and , thenceforth , established at M. sur M. , happy in feeling his conscience saddened by the past and the first half of his existence belied by the last , he lived in peace , reassured and hopeful , having henceforth only two thoughts , -- to conceal his name and to sanctify his life ; to escape men and to return to God . 
These two thoughts were so closely intertwined in his mind that they formed but a single one there ; both were equally absorbing and imperative and ruled his slightest actions . 
In general , they conspired to regulate the conduct of his life ; they turned him towards the gloom ; they rendered him kindly and simple ; they counselled him to the same things . 
Sometimes , however , they conflicted . 
In that case , as the reader will remember , the man whom all the country of M. sur M. called M. Madeleine did not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second -- his security to his virtue . 
Thus , in spite of all his reserve and all his prudence , he had preserved the Bishop 's candlesticks , worn mourning for him , summoned and interrogated all the little Savoyards who passed that way , collected information regarding the families at Faverolles , and saved old Fauchelevent 's life , despite the disquieting insinuations of Javert . 
It seemed , as we have already remarked , as though he thought , following the example of all those who have been wise , holy , and just , that his first duty was not towards himself . 
At the same time , it must be confessed , nothing just like this had yet presented itself . 
Never had the two ideas which governed the unhappy man whose sufferings we are narrating , engaged in so serious a struggle . 
He understood this confusedly but profoundly at the very first words pronounced by Javert , when the latter entered his study . 
At the moment when that name , which he had buried beneath so many layers , was so strangely articulated , he was struck with stupor , and as though intoxicated with the sinister eccentricity of his destiny ; and through this stupor he felt that shudder which precedes great shocks . 
He bent like an oak at the approach of a storm , like a soldier at the approach of an assault . 
He felt shadows filled with thunders and lightnings descending upon his head . 
As he listened to Javert , the first thought which occurred to him was to go , to run and denounce himself , to take that Champmathieu out of prison and place himself there ; this was as painful and as poignant as an incision in the living flesh . 
Then it passed away , and he said to himself , `` We will see ! 
We will see ! '' 
He repressed this first , generous instinct , and recoiled before heroism . 
It would be beautiful , no doubt , after the Bishop 's holy words , after so many years of repentance and abnegation , in the midst of a penitence admirably begun , if this man had not flinched for an instant , even in the presence of so terrible a conjecture , but had continued to walk with the same step towards this yawning precipice , at the bottom of which lay heaven ; that would have been beautiful ; but it was not thus . 
We must render an account of the things which went on in this soul , and we can only tell what there was there . 
He was carried away , at first , by the instinct of self-preservation ; he rallied all his ideas in haste , stifled his emotions , took into consideration Javert 's presence , that great danger , postponed all decision with the firmness of terror , shook off thought as to what he had to do , and resumed his calmness as a warrior picks up his buckler . 
He remained in this state during the rest of the day , a whirlwind within , a profound tranquillity without . 
He took no `` preservative measures , '' as they may be called . 
Everything was still confused , and jostling together in his brain . 
His trouble was so great that he could not perceive the form of a single idea distinctly , and he could have told nothing about himself , except that he had received a great blow . 
He repaired to Fantine 's bed of suffering , as usual , and prolonged his visit , through a kindly instinct , telling himself that he must behave thus , and recommend her well to the sisters , in case he should be obliged to be absent himself . 
He had a vague feeling that he might be obliged to go to Arras ; and without having the least in the world made up his mind to this trip , he said to himself that being , as he was , beyond the shadow of any suspicion , there could be nothing out of the way in being a witness to what was to take place , and he engaged the tilbury from Scaufflaire in order to be prepared in any event . 
He dined with a good deal of appetite . 
On returning to his room , he communed with himself . 
He examined the situation , and found it unprecedented ; so unprecedented that in the midst of his revery he rose from his chair , moved by some inexplicable impulse of anxiety , and bolted his door . 
He feared lest something more should enter . 
He was barricading himself against possibilities . 
A moment later he extinguished his light ; it embarrassed him . 
lt seemed to him as though he might be seen . 
By whom ? 
Alas ! 
That on which he desired to close the door had already entered ; that which he desired to blind was staring him in the face , -- his conscience . 
His conscience ; that is to say , God . 
Nevertheless , he deluded himself at first ; he had a feeling of security and of solitude ; the bolt once drawn , he thought himself impregnable ; the candle extinguished , he felt himself invisible . 
Then he took possession of himself : he set his elbows on the table , leaned his head on his hand , and began to meditate in the dark . 
`` Where do I stand ? 
Am not I dreaming ? 
What have I heard ? 
Is it really true that I have seen that Javert , and that he spoke to me in that manner ? 
Who can that Champmathieu be ? 
So he resembles me ! 
Is it possible ? 
When I reflect that yesterday I was so tranquil , and so far from suspecting anything ! 
What was I doing yesterday at this hour ? 
What is there in this incident ? 
What will the end be ? 
What is to be done ? '' 
This was the torment in which he found himself . 
His brain had lost its power of retaining ideas ; they passed like waves , and he clutched his brow in both hands to arrest them . 
Nothing but anguish extricated itself from this tumult which overwhelmed his will and his reason , and from which he sought to draw proof and resolution . 
His head was burning . 
He went to the window and threw it wide open . 
There were no stars in the sky . 
He returned and seated himself at the table . 
The first hour passed in this manner . 
Gradually , however , vague outlines began to take form and to fix themselves in his meditation , and he was able to catch a glimpse with precision of the reality , -- not the whole situation , but some of the details . 
He began by recognizing the fact that , critical and extraordinary as was this situation , he was completely master of it . 
This only caused an increase of his stupor . 
Independently of the severe and religious aim which he had assigned to his actions , all that he had made up to that day had been nothing but a hole in which to bury his name . 
That which he had always feared most of all in his hours of self-communion , during his sleepless nights , was to ever hear that name pronounced ; he had said to himself , that that would be the end of all things for him ; that on the day when that name made its reappearance it would cause his new life to vanish from about him , and -- who knows ? 
-- perhaps even his new soul within him , also . 
He shuddered at the very thought that this was possible . 
Assuredly , if any one had said to him at such moments that the hour would come when that name would ring in his ears , when the hideous words , Jean Valjean , would suddenly emerge from the darkness and rise in front of him , when that formidable light , capable of dissipating the mystery in which he had enveloped himself , would suddenly blaze forth above his head , and that that name would not menace him , that that light would but produce an obscurity more dense , that this rent veil would but increase the mystery , that this earthquake would solidify his edifice , that this prodigious incident would have no other result , so far as he was concerned , if so it seemed good to him , than that of rendering his existence at once clearer and more impenetrable , and that , out of his confrontation with the phantom of Jean Valjean , the good and worthy citizen Monsieur Madeleine would emerge more honored , more peaceful , and more respected than ever -- if any one had told him that , he would have tossed his head and regarded the words as those of a madman . 
Well , all this was precisely what had just come to pass ; all that accumulation of impossibilities was a fact , and God had permitted these wild fancies to become real things ! 
His revery continued to grow clearer . 
He came more and more to an understanding of his position . 
It seemed to him that he had but just waked up from some inexplicable dream , and that he found himself slipping down a declivity in the middle of the night , erect , shivering , holding back all in vain , on the very brink of the abyss . 
He distinctly perceived in the darkness a stranger , a man unknown to him , whom destiny had mistaken for him , and whom she was thrusting into the gulf in his stead ; in order that the gulf might close once more , it was necessary that some one , himself or that other man , should fall into it : he had only let things take their course . 
The light became complete , and he acknowledged this to himself : That his place was empty in the galleys ; that do what he would , it was still awaiting him ; that the theft from little Gervais had led him back to it ; that this vacant place would await him , and draw him on until he filled it ; that this was inevitable and fatal ; and then he said to himself , `` that , at this moment , be had a substitute ; that it appeared that a certain Champmathieu had that ill luck , and that , as regards himself , being present in the galleys in the person of that Champmathieu , present in society under the name of M. Madeleine , he had nothing more to fear , provided that he did not prevent men from sealing over the head of that Champmathieu this stone of infamy which , like the stone of the sepulchre , falls once , never to rise again . '' 
All this was so strange and so violent , that there suddenly took place in him that indescribable movement , which no man feels more than two or three times in the course of his life , a sort of convulsion of the conscience which stirs up all that there is doubtful in the heart , which is composed of irony , of joy , and of despair , and which may be called an outburst of inward laughter . 
He hastily relighted his candle . 
`` Well , what then ? '' 
he said to himself ; `` what am I afraid of ? 
What is there in all that for me to think about ? 
I am safe ; all is over . 
I had but one partly open door through which my past might invade my life , and behold that door is walled up forever ! 
That Javert , who has been annoying me so long ; that terrible instinct which seemed to have divined me , which had divined me -- good God ! 
and which followed me everywhere ; that frightful hunting-dog , always making a point at me , is thrown off the scent , engaged elsewhere , absolutely turned from the trail : henceforth he is satisfied ; he will leave me in peace ; he has his Jean Valjean . 
Who knows ? 
it is even probable that he will wish to leave town ! 
And all this has been brought about without any aid from me , and I count for nothing in it ! 
Ah ! 
but where is the misfortune in this ? 
Upon my honor , people would think , to see me , that some catastrophe had happened to me ! 
After all , if it does bring harm to some one , that is not my fault in the least : it is Providence which has done it all ; it is because it wishes it so to be , evidently . 
Have I the right to disarrange what it has arranged ? 
What do I ask now ? 
Why should I meddle ? 
It does not concern me ; what ! 
I am not satisfied : but what more do I want ? 
The goal to which I have aspired for so many years , the dream of my nights , the object of my prayers to Heaven , -- security , -- I have now attained ; it is God who wills it ; I can do nothing against the will of God , and why does God will it ? 
In order that I may continue what I have begun , that I may do good , that I may one day be a grand and encouraging example , that it may be said at last , that a little happiness has been attached to the penance which I have undergone , and to that virtue to which I have returned . 
Really , I do not understand why I was afraid , a little while ago , to enter the house of that good cure , and to ask his advice ; this is evidently what he would have said to me : It is settled ; let things take their course ; let the good God do as he likes ! '' 
Thus did he address himself in the depths of his own conscience , bending over what may be called his own abyss ; he rose from his chair , and began to pace the room : `` Come , '' said he , `` let us think no more about it ; my resolve is taken ! '' 
but he felt no joy . 
Quite the reverse . 
One can no more prevent thought from recurring to an idea than one can the sea from returning to the shore : the sailor calls it the tide ; the guilty man calls it remorse ; God upheaves the soul as he does the ocean . 
After the expiration of a few moments , do what he would , he resumed the gloomy dialogue in which it was he who spoke and he who listened , saying that which he would have preferred to ignore , and listened to that which he would have preferred not to hear , yielding to that mysterious power which said to him : `` Think ! '' 
as it said to another condemned man , two thousand years ago , `` March on ! '' 
Before proceeding further , and in order to make ourselves fully understood , let us insist upon one necessary observation . 
It is certain that people do talk to themselves ; there is no living being who has not done it . 
It may even be said that the word is never a more magnificent mystery than when it goes from thought to conscience within a man , and when it returns from conscience to thought ; it is in this sense only that the words so often employed in this chapter , he said , he exclaimed , must be understood ; one speaks to one 's self , talks to one 's self , exclaims to one 's self without breaking the external silence ; there is a great tumult ; everything about us talks except the mouth . 
The realities of the soul are none the less realities because they are not visible and palpable . 
So he asked himself where he stood . 
He interrogated himself upon that `` settled resolve . '' 
He confessed to himself that all that he had just arranged in his mind was monstrous , that `` to let things take their course , to let the good God do as he liked , '' was simply horrible ; to allow this error of fate and of men to be carried out , not to hinder it , to lend himself to it through his silence , to do nothing , in short , was to do everything ! 
that this was hypocritical baseness in the last degree ! 
that it was a base , cowardly , sneaking , abject , hideous crime ! 
For the first time in eight years , the wretched man had just tasted the bitter savor of an evil thought and of an evil action . 
He spit it out with disgust . 
He continued to question himself . 
He asked himself severely what he had meant by this , `` My object is attained ! '' 
He declared to himself that his life really had an object ; but what object ? 
To conceal his name ? 
To deceive the police ? 
Was it for so petty a thing that he had done all that he had done ? 
Had he not another and a grand object , which was the true one -- to save , not his person , but his soul ; to become honest and good once more ; to be a just man ? 
Was it not that above all , that alone , which he had always desired , which the Bishop had enjoined upon him -- to shut the door on his past ? 
But he was not shutting it ! 
great God ! 
he was re-opening it by committing an infamous action ! 
He was becoming a thief once more , and the most odious of thieves ! 
He was robbing another of his existence , his life , his peace , his place in the sunshine . 
He was becoming an assassin . 
He was murdering , morally murdering , a wretched man . 
He was inflicting on him that frightful living death , that death beneath the open sky , which is called the galleys . 
On the other hand , to surrender himself to save that man , struck down with so melancholy an error , to resume his own name , to become once more , out of duty , the convict Jean Valjean , that was , in truth , to achieve his resurrection , and to close forever that hell whence he had just emerged ; to fall back there in appearance was to escape from it in reality . 
This must be done ! 
He had done nothing if he did not do all this ; his whole life was useless ; all his penitence was wasted . 
There was no longer any need of saying , `` What is the use ? '' 
He felt that the Bishop was there , that the Bishop was present all the more because he was dead , that the Bishop was gazing fixedly at him , that henceforth Mayor Madeleine , with all his virtues , would be abominable to him , and that the convict Jean Valjean would be pure and admirable in his sight ; that men beheld his mask , but that the Bishop saw his face ; that men saw his life , but that the Bishop beheld his conscience . 
So he must go to Arras , deliver the false Jean Valjean , and denounce the real one . 
Alas ! 
that was the greatest of sacrifices , the most poignant of victories , the last step to take ; but it must be done . 
Sad fate ! 
he would enter into sanctity only in the eyes of God when he returned to infamy in the eyes of men . 
`` Well , said he , `` let us decide upon this ; let us do our duty ; let us save this man . '' 
He uttered these words aloud , without perceiving that he was speaking aloud . 
He took his books , verified them , and put them in order . 
He flung in the fire a bundle of bills which he had against petty and embarrassed tradesmen . 
He wrote and sealed a letter , and on the envelope it might have been read , had there been any one in his chamber at the moment , To Monsieur Laffitte , Banker , Rue d'Artois , Paris . 
He drew from his secretary a pocket-book which contained several bank-notes and the passport of which he had made use that same year when he went to the elections . 
Any one who had seen him during the execution of these various acts , into which there entered such grave thought , would have had no suspicion of what was going on within him . 
Only occasionally did his lips move ; at other times he raised his head and fixed his gaze upon some point of the wall , as though there existed at that point something which he wished to elucidate or interrogate . 
When he had finished the letter to M. Laffitte , he put it into his pocket , together with the pocket-book , and began his walk once more . 
His revery had not swerved from its course . 
He continued to see his duty clearly , written in luminous letters , which flamed before his eyes and changed its place as he altered the direction of his glance : -- `` Go ! 
Tell your name ! 
Denounce yourself ! '' 
In the same way he beheld , as though they had passed before him in visible forms , the two ideas which had , up to that time , formed the double rule of his soul , -- the concealment of his name , the sanctification of his life . 
For the first time they appeared to him as absolutely distinct , and he perceived the distance which separated them . 
He recognized the fact that one of these ideas was , necessarily , good , while the other might become bad ; that the first was self-devotion , and that the other was personality ; that the one said , my neighbor , and that the other said , myself ; that one emanated from the light , and the other from darkness . 
They were antagonistic . 
He saw them in conflict . 
In proportion as he meditated , they grew before the eyes of his spirit . 
They had now attained colossal statures , and it seemed to him that he beheld within himself , in that infinity of which we were recently speaking , in the midst of the darkness and the lights , a goddess and a giant contending . 
He was filled with terror ; but it seemed to him that the good thought was getting the upper hand . 
He felt that he was on the brink of the second decisive crisis of his conscience and of his destiny ; that the Bishop had marked the first phase of his new life , and that Champmathieu marked the second . 
After the grand crisis , the grand test . 
But the fever , allayed for an instant , gradually resumed possession of him . 
A thousand thoughts traversed his mind , but they continued to fortify him in his resolution . 
One moment he said to himself that he was , perhaps , taking the matter too keenly ; that , after all , this Champmathieu was not interesting , and that he had actually been guilty of theft . 
He answered himself : `` If this man has , indeed , stolen a few apples , that means a month in prison . 
It is a long way from that to the galleys . 
And who knows ? 
Did he steal ? 
Has it been proved ? 
The name of Jean Valjean overwhelms him , and seems to dispense with proofs . 
Do not the attorneys for the Crown always proceed in this manner ? 
He is supposed to be a thief because he is known to be a convict . '' 
In another instant the thought had occurred to him that , when he denounced himself , the heroism of his deed might , perhaps , be taken into consideration , and his honest life for the last seven years , and what he had done for the district , and that they would have mercy on him . 
But this supposition vanished very quickly , and he smiled bitterly as he remembered that the theft of the forty sous from little Gervais put him in the position of a man guilty of a second offence after conviction , that this affair would certainly come up , and , according to the precise terms of the law , would render him liable to penal servitude for life . 
He turned aside from all illusions , detached himself more and more from earth , and sought strength and consolation elsewhere . 
He told himself that he must do his duty ; that perhaps he should not be more unhappy after doing his duty than after having avoided it ; that if he allowed things to take their own course , if he remained at M. sur M. , his consideration , his good name , his good works , the deference and veneration paid to him , his charity , his wealth , his popularity , his virtue , would be seasoned with a crime . 
And what would be the taste of all these holy things when bound up with this hideous thing ? 
while , if he accomplished his sacrifice , a celestial idea would be mingled with the galleys , the post , the iron necklet , the green cap , unceasing toil , and pitiless shame . 
At length he told himself that it must be so , that his destiny was thus allotted , that he had not authority to alter the arrangements made on high , that , in any case , he must make his choice : virtue without and abomination within , or holiness within and infamy without . 
The stirring up of these lugubrious ideas did not cause his courage to fail , but his brain grow weary . 
He began to think of other things , of indifferent matters , in spite of himself . 
The veins in his temples throbbed violently ; he still paced to and fro ; midnight sounded first from the parish church , then from the town-hall ; he counted the twelve strokes of the two clocks , and compared the sounds of the two bells ; he recalled in this connection the fact that , a few days previously , he had seen in an ironmonger 's shop an ancient clock for sale , upon which was written the name , Antoine-Albin de Romainville . 
He was cold ; he lighted a small fire ; it did not occur to him to close the window . 
In the meantime he had relapsed into his stupor ; he was obliged to make a tolerably vigorous effort to recall what had been the subject of his thoughts before midnight had struck ; he finally succeeded in doing this . 
`` Ah ! 
yes , '' he said to himself , `` I had resolved to inform against myself . '' 
And then , all of a sudden , he thought of Fantine . 
`` Hold ! '' 
said he , `` and what about that poor woman ? '' 
Here a fresh crisis declared itself . 
Fantine , by appearing thus abruptly in his revery , produced the effect of an unexpected ray of light ; it seemed to him as though everything about him were undergoing a change of aspect : he exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
but I have hitherto considered no one but myself ; it is proper for me to hold my tongue or to denounce myself , to conceal my person or to save my soul , to be a despicable and respected magistrate , or an infamous and venerable convict ; it is I , it is always I and nothing but I : but , good God ! 
all this is egotism ; these are diverse forms of egotism , but it is egotism all the same . 
What if I were to think a little about others ? 
The highest holiness is to think of others ; come , let us examine the matter . 
The I excepted , the I effaced , the I forgotten , what would be the result of all this ? 
What if I denounce myself ? 
I am arrested ; this Champmathieu is released ; I am put back in the galleys ; that is well -- and what then ? 
What is going on here ? 
Ah ! 
here is a country , a town , here are factories , an industry , workers , both men and women , aged grandsires , children , poor people ! 
All this I have created ; all these I provide with their living ; everywhere where there is a smoking chimney , it is I who have placed the brand on the hearth and meat in the pot ; I have created ease , circulation , credit ; before me there was nothing ; I have elevated , vivified , informed with life , fecundated , stimulated , enriched the whole country-side ; lacking me , the soul is lacking ; I take myself off , everything dies : and this woman , who has suffered so much , who possesses so many merits in spite of her fall ; the cause of all whose misery I have unwittingly been ! 
And that child whom I meant to go in search of , whom I have promised to her mother ; do I not also owe something to this woman , in reparation for the evil which I have done her ? 
If I disappear , what happens ? 
The mother dies ; the child becomes what it can ; that is what will take place , if I denounce myself . 
If I do not denounce myself ? 
come , let us see how it will be if I do not denounce myself . '' 
After putting this question to himself , he paused ; he seemed to undergo a momentary hesitation and trepidation ; but it did not last long , and he answered himself calmly : -- `` Well , this man is going to the galleys ; it is true , but what the deuce ! 
he has stolen ! 
There is no use in my saying that he has not been guilty of theft , for he has ! 
I remain here ; I go on : in ten years I shall have made ten millions ; I scatter them over the country ; I have nothing of my own ; what is that to me ? 
It is not for myself that I am doing it ; the prosperity of all goes on augmenting ; industries are aroused and animated ; factories and shops are multiplied ; families , a hundred families , a thousand families , are happy ; the district becomes populated ; villages spring up where there were only farms before ; farms rise where there was nothing ; wretchedness disappears , and with wretchedness debauchery , prostitution , theft , murder ; all vices disappear , all crimes : and this poor mother rears her child ; and behold a whole country rich and honest ! 
Ah ! 
I was a fool ! 
I was absurd ! 
what was that I was saying about denouncing myself ? 
I really must pay attention and not be precipitate about anything . 
What ! 
because it would have pleased me to play the grand and generous ; this is melodrama , after all ; because I should have thought of no one but myself , the idea ! 
for the sake of saving from a punishment , a trifle exaggerated , perhaps , but just at bottom , no one knows whom , a thief , a good-for-nothing , evidently , a whole country-side must perish ! 
a poor woman must die in the hospital ! 
a poor little girl must die in the street ! 
like dogs ; ah , this is abominable ! 
And without the mother even having seen her child once more , almost without the child 's having known her mother ; and all that for the sake of an old wretch of an apple-thief who , most assuredly , has deserved the galleys for something else , if not for that ; fine scruples , indeed , which save a guilty man and sacrifice the innocent , which save an old vagabond who has only a few years to live at most , and who will not be more unhappy in the galleys than in his hovel , and which sacrifice a whole population , mothers , wives , children . 
This poor little Cosette who has no one in the world but me , and who is , no doubt , blue with cold at this moment in the den of those Thenardiers ; those peoples are rascals ; and I was going to neglect my duty towards all these poor creatures ; and I was going off to denounce myself ; and I was about to commit that unspeakable folly ! 
Let us put it at the worst : suppose that there is a wrong action on my part in this , and that my conscience will reproach me for it some day , to accept , for the good of others , these reproaches which weigh only on myself ; this evil action which compromises my soul alone ; in that lies self-sacrifice ; in that alone there is virtue . '' 
He rose and resumed his march ; this time , he seemed to be content . 
Diamonds are found only in the dark places of the earth ; truths are found only in the depths of thought . 
It seemed to him , that , after having descended into these depths , after having long groped among the darkest of these shadows , he had at last found one of these diamonds , one of these truths , and that he now held it in his hand , and he was dazzled as he gazed upon it . 
`` Yes , '' he thought , `` this is right ; I am on the right road ; I have the solution ; I must end by holding fast to something ; my resolve is taken ; let things take their course ; let us no longer vacillate ; let us no longer hang back ; this is for the interest of all , not for my own ; I am Madeleine , and Madeleine I remain . 
Woe to the man who is Jean Valjean ! 
I am no longer he ; I do not know that man ; I no longer know anything ; it turns out that some one is Jean Valjean at the present moment ; let him look out for himself ; that does not concern me ; it is a fatal name which was floating abroad in the night ; if it halts and descends on a head , so much the worse for that head . '' 
He looked into the little mirror which hung above his chimney-piece , and said : -- `` Hold ! 
it has relieved me to come to a decision ; I am quite another man now . '' 
He proceeded a few paces further , then he stopped short . 
`` Come ! '' 
he said , `` I must not flinch before any of the consequences of the resolution which I have once adopted ; there are still threads which attach me to that Jean Valjean ; they must be broken ; in this very room there are objects which would betray me , dumb things which would bear witness against me ; it is settled ; all these things must disappear . '' 
He fumbled in his pocket , drew out his purse , opened it , and took out a small key ; he inserted the key in a lock whose aperture could hardly be seen , so hidden was it in the most sombre tones of the design which covered the wall-paper ; a secret receptacle opened , a sort of false cupboard constructed in the angle between the wall and the chimney-piece ; in this hiding-place there were some rags -- a blue linen blouse , an old pair of trousers , an old knapsack , and a huge thorn cudgel shod with iron at both ends . 
Those who had seen Jean Valjean at the epoch when he passed through D -- in October , 1815 , could easily have recognized all the pieces of this miserable outfit . 
He had preserved them as he had preserved the silver candlesticks , in order to remind himself continually of his starting-point , but he had concealed all that came from the galleys , and he had allowed the candlesticks which came from the Bishop to be seen . 
He cast a furtive glance towards the door , as though he feared that it would open in spite of the bolt which fastened it ; then , with a quick and abrupt movement , he took the whole in his arms at once , without bestowing so much as a glance on the things which he had so religiously and so perilously preserved for so many years , and flung them all , rags , cudgel , knapsack , into the fire . 
He closed the false cupboard again , and with redoubled precautions , henceforth unnecessary , since it was now empty , he concealed the door behind a heavy piece of furniture , which he pushed in front of it . 
After the lapse of a few seconds , the room and the opposite wall were lighted up with a fierce , red , tremulous glow . 
Everything was on fire ; the thorn cudgel snapped and threw out sparks to the middle of the chamber . 
As the knapsack was consumed , together with the hideous rags which it contained , it revealed something which sparkled in the ashes . 
By bending over , one could have readily recognized a coin , -- no doubt the forty-sou piece stolen from the little Savoyard . 
He did not look at the fire , but paced back and forth with the same step . 
All at once his eye fell on the two silver candlesticks , which shone vaguely on the chimney-piece , through the glow . 
`` Hold ! '' 
he thought ; `` the whole of Jean Valjean is still in them . 
They must be destroyed also . '' 
He seized the two candlesticks . 
There was still fire enough to allow of their being put out of shape , and converted into a sort of unrecognizable bar of metal . 
He bent over the hearth and warmed himself for a moment . 
He felt a sense of real comfort . 
`` How good warmth is ! '' 
said he . 
He stirred the live coals with one of the candlesticks . 
A minute more , and they were both in the fire . 
At that moment it seemed to him that he heard a voice within him shouting : `` Jean Valjean ! 
Jean Valjean ! '' 
His hair rose upright : he became like a man who is listening to some terrible thing . 
`` Yes , that 's it ! 
finish ! '' 
said the voice . 
`` Complete what you are about ! 
Destroy these candlesticks ! 
Annihilate this souvenir ! 
Forget the Bishop ! 
Forget everything ! 
Destroy this Champmathieu , do ! 
That is right ! 
Applaud yourself ! 
So it is settled , resolved , fixed , agreed : here is an old man who does not know what is wanted of him , who has , perhaps , done nothing , an innocent man , whose whole misfortune lies in your name , upon whom your name weighs like a crime , who is about to be taken for you , who will be condemned , who will finish his days in abjectness and horror . 
That is good ! 
Be an honest man yourself ; remain Monsieur le Maire ; remain honorable and honored ; enrich the town ; nourish the indigent ; rear the orphan ; live happy , virtuous , and admired ; and , during this time , while you are here in the midst of joy and light , there will be a man who will wear your red blouse , who will bear your name in ignominy , and who will drag your chain in the galleys . 
Yes , it is well arranged thus . 
Ah , wretch ! '' 
The perspiration streamed from his brow . 
He fixed a haggard eye on the candlesticks . 
But that within him which had spoken had not finished . 
The voice continued : -- `` Jean Valjean , there will be around you many voices , which will make a great noise , which will talk very loud , and which will bless you , and only one which no one will hear , and which will curse you in the dark . 
Well ! 
listen , infamous man ! 
All those benedictions will fall back before they reach heaven , and only the malediction will ascend to God . '' 
This voice , feeble at first , and which had proceeded from the most obscure depths of his conscience , had gradually become startling and formidable , and he now heard it in his very ear . 
It seemed to him that it had detached itself from him , and that it was now speaking outside of him . 
He thought that he heard the last words so distinctly , that he glanced around the room in a sort of terror . 
`` Is there any one here ? '' 
he demanded aloud , in utter bewilderment . 
Then he resumed , with a laugh which resembled that of an idiot : -- `` How stupid I am ! 
There can be no one ! '' 
There was some one ; but the person who was there was of those whom the human eye can not see . 
He placed the candlesticks on the chimney-piece . 
Then he resumed his monotonous and lugubrious tramp , which troubled the dreams of the sleeping man beneath him , and awoke him with a start . 
This tramping to and fro soothed and at the same time intoxicated him . 
It sometimes seems , on supreme occasions , as though people moved about for the purpose of asking advice of everything that they may encounter by change of place . 
After the lapse of a few minutes he no longer knew his position . 
He now recoiled in equal terror before both the resolutions at which he had arrived in turn . 
The two ideas which counselled him appeared to him equally fatal . 
What a fatality ! 
What conjunction that that Champmathieu should have been taken for him ; to be overwhelmed by precisely the means which Providence seemed to have employed , at first , to strengthen his position ! 
There was a moment when he reflected on the future . 
Denounce himself , great God ! 
Deliver himself up ! 
With immense despair he faced all that he should be obliged to leave , all that he should be obliged to take up once more . 
He should have to bid farewell to that existence which was so good , so pure , so radiant , to the respect of all , to honor , to liberty . 
He should never more stroll in the fields ; he should never more hear the birds sing in the month of May ; he should never more bestow alms on the little children ; he should never more experience the sweetness of having glances of gratitude and love fixed upon him ; he should quit that house which he had built , that little chamber ! 
Everything seemed charming to him at that moment . 
Never again should he read those books ; never more should he write on that little table of white wood ; his old portress , the only servant whom he kept , would never more bring him his coffee in the morning . 
Great God ! 
instead of that , the convict gang , the iron necklet , the red waistcoat , the chain on his ankle , fatigue , the cell , the camp bed all those horrors which he knew so well ! 
At his age , after having been what he was ! 
If he were only young again ! 
but to be addressed in his old age as `` thou '' by any one who pleased ; to be searched by the convict-guard ; to receive the galley-sergeant 's cudgellings ; to wear iron-bound shoes on his bare feet ; to have to stretch out his leg night and morning to the hammer of the roundsman who visits the gang ; to submit to the curiosity of strangers , who would be told : `` That man yonder is the famous Jean Valjean , who was mayor of M. sur M. '' ; and at night , dripping with perspiration , overwhelmed with lassitude , their green caps drawn over their eyes , to remount , two by two , the ladder staircase of the galleys beneath the sergeant 's whip . 
Oh , what misery ! 
Can destiny , then , be as malicious as an intelligent being , and become as monstrous as the human heart ? 
And do what he would , he always fell back upon the heartrending dilemma which lay at the foundation of his revery : `` Should he remain in paradise and become a demon ? 
Should he return to hell and become an angel ? '' 
What was to be done ? 
Great God ! 
what was to be done ? 
The torment from which he had escaped with so much difficulty was unchained afresh within him . 
His ideas began to grow confused once more ; they assumed a kind of stupefied and mechanical quality which is peculiar to despair . 
The name of Romainville recurred incessantly to his mind , with the two verses of a song which he had heard in the past . 
He thought that Romainville was a little grove near Paris , where young lovers go to pluck lilacs in the month of April . 
He wavered outwardly as well as inwardly . 
He walked like a little child who is permitted to toddle alone . 
At intervals , as he combated his lassitude , he made an effort to recover the mastery of his mind . 
He tried to put to himself , for the last time , and definitely , the problem over which he had , in a manner , fallen prostrate with fatigue : Ought he to denounce himself ? 
Ought he to hold his peace ? 
He could not manage to see anything distinctly . 
The vague aspects of all the courses of reasoning which had been sketched out by his meditations quivered and vanished , one after the other , into smoke . 
He only felt that , to whatever course of action he made up his mind , something in him must die , and that of necessity , and without his being able to escape the fact ; that he was entering a sepulchre on the right hand as much as on the left ; that he was passing through a death agony , -- the agony of his happiness , or the agony of his virtue . 
Alas ! 
all his resolution had again taken possession of him . 
He was no further advanced than at the beginning . 
Thus did this unhappy soul struggle in its anguish . 
Eighteen hundred years before this unfortunate man , the mysterious Being in whom are summed up all the sanctities and all the sufferings of humanity had also long thrust aside with his hand , while the olive-trees quivered in the wild wind of the infinite , the terrible cup which appeared to Him dripping with darkness and overflowing with shadows in the depths all studded with stars . 
FORMS ASSUMED BY SUFFERING DURING SLEEP Three o'clock in the morning had just struck , and he had been walking thus for five hours , almost uninterruptedly , when he at length allowed himself to drop into his chair . 
There he fell asleep and had a dream . 
This dream , like the majority of dreams , bore no relation to the situation , except by its painful and heart-rending character , but it made an impression on him . 
This nightmare struck him so forcibly that he wrote it down later on . 
It is one of the papers in his own handwriting which he has bequeathed to us . 
We think that we have here reproduced the thing in strict accordance with the text . 
Of whatever nature this dream may be , the history of this night would be incomplete if we were to omit it : it is the gloomy adventure of an ailing soul . 
Here it is . 
On the envelope we find this line inscribed , `` The Dream I had that Night . '' 
`` I was in a plain ; a vast , gloomy plain , where there was no grass . 
It did not seem to me to be daylight nor yet night . 
`` I was walking with my brother , the brother of my childish years , the brother of whom , I must say , I never think , and whom I now hardly remember . 
`` We were conversing and we met some passers-by . 
We were talking of a neighbor of ours in former days , who had always worked with her window open from the time when she came to live on the street . 
As we talked we felt cold because of that open window . 
`` There were no trees in the plain . 
We saw a man passing close to us . 
He was entirely nude , of the hue of ashes , and mounted on a horse which was earth color . 
The man had no hair ; we could see his skull and the veins on it . 
In his hand he held a switch which was as supple as a vine-shoot and as heavy as iron . 
This horseman passed and said nothing to us . 
`` My brother said to me , ` Let us take to the hollow road . ' 
`` There existed a hollow way wherein one saw neither a single shrub nor a spear of moss . 
Everything was dirt-colored , even the sky . 
After proceeding a few paces , I received no reply when I spoke : I perceived that my brother was no longer with me . 
`` I entered a village which I espied . 
I reflected that it must be Romainville . 
-LRB- Why Romainville ? -RRB- 
-LSB- 5 -RSB- -LSB- 5 -RSB- This parenthesis is due to Jean Valjean . 
`` The first street that I entered was deserted . 
I entered a second street . 
Behind the angle formed by the two streets , a man was standing erect against the wall . 
I said to this Man : -- '' ` What country is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man made no reply . 
I saw the door of a house open , and I entered . 
`` The first chamber was deserted . 
I entered the second . 
Behind the door of this chamber a man was standing erect against the wall . 
I inquired of this man , ` Whose house is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man replied not . 
`` The house had a garden . 
I quitted the house and entered the garden . 
The garden was deserted . 
Behind the first tree I found a man standing upright . 
I said to this man , ` What garden is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man did not answer . 
`` I strolled into the village , and perceived that it was a town . 
All the streets were deserted , all the doors were open . 
Not a single living being was passing in the streets , walking through the chambers or strolling in the gardens . 
But behind each angle of the walls , behind each door , behind each tree , stood a silent man . 
Only one was to be seen at a time . 
These men watched me pass . 
`` I left the town and began to ramble about the fields . 
`` After the lapse of some time I turned back and saw a great crowd coming up behind me . 
I recognized all the men whom I had seen in that town . 
They had strange heads . 
They did not seem to be in a hurry , yet they walked faster than I did . 
They made no noise as they walked . 
In an instant this crowd had overtaken and surrounded me . 
The faces of these men were earthen in hue . 
`` Then the first one whom I had seen and questioned on entering the town said to me : -- '' ` Whither are you going ! 
Do you not know that you have been dead this long time ? ' 
`` I opened my mouth to reply , and I perceived that there was no one near me . '' 
He woke . 
He was icy cold . 
A wind which was chill like the breeze of dawn was rattling the leaves of the window , which had been left open on their hinges . 
The fire was out . 
The candle was nearing its end . 
It was still black night . 
He rose , he went to the window . 
There were no stars in the sky even yet . 
From his window the yard of the house and the street were visible . 
A sharp , harsh noise , which made him drop his eyes , resounded from the earth . 
Below him he perceived two red stars , whose rays lengthened and shortened in a singular manner through the darkness . 
As his thoughts were still half immersed in the mists of sleep , `` Hold ! '' 
said he , `` there are no stars in the sky . 
They are on earth now . '' 
But this confusion vanished ; a second sound similar to the first roused him thoroughly ; he looked and recognized the fact that these two stars were the lanterns of a carriage . 
By the light which they cast he was able to distinguish the form of this vehicle . 
It was a tilbury harnessed to a small white horse . 
The noise which he had heard was the trampling of the horse 's hoofs on the pavement . 
`` What vehicle is this ? '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Who is coming here so early in the morning ? '' 
At that moment there came a light tap on the door of his chamber . 
He shuddered from head to foot , and cried in a terrible voice : -- `` Who is there ? '' 
Some one said : -- `` I , Monsieur le Maire . '' 
He recognized the voice of the old woman who was his portress . 
`` Well ! '' 
he replied , `` what is it ? '' 
`` Monsieur le Maire , it is just five o'clock in the morning . '' 
`` What is that to me ? '' 
`` The cabriolet is here , Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` What cabriolet ? '' 
`` The tilbury . '' 
`` What tilbury ? '' 
`` Did not Monsieur le Maire order a tilbury ? '' 
`` No , '' said he . 
`` The coachman says that he has come for Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` What coachman ? '' 
`` M. Scaufflaire 's coachman . '' 
`` M. Scaufflaire ? '' 
That name sent a shudder over him , as though a flash of lightning had passed in front of his face . 
`` Ah ! 
yes , '' he resumed ; `` M. Scaufflaire ! '' 
If the old woman could have seen him at that moment , she would have been frightened . 
A tolerably long silence ensued . 
He examined the flame of the candle with a stupid air , and from around the wick he took some of the burning wax , which he rolled between his fingers . 
The old woman waited for him . 
She even ventured to uplift her voice once more : -- `` What am I to say , Monsieur le Maire ? '' 
`` Say that it is well , and that I am coming down . '' 
HINDRANCES The posting service from Arras to M. sur M. was still operated at this period by small mail-wagons of the time of the Empire . 
These mail-wagons were two-wheeled cabriolets , upholstered inside with fawn-colored leather , hung on springs , and having but two seats , one for the postboy , the other for the traveller . 
The wheels were armed with those long , offensive axles which keep other vehicles at a distance , and which may still be seen on the road in Germany . 
The despatch box , an immense oblong coffer , was placed behind the vehicle and formed a part of it . 
This coffer was painted black , and the cabriolet yellow . 
These vehicles , which have no counterparts nowadays , had something distorted and hunchbacked about them ; and when one saw them passing in the distance , and climbing up some road to the horizon , they resembled the insects which are called , I think , termites , and which , though with but little corselet , drag a great train behind them . 
But they travelled at a very rapid rate . 
The post-wagon which set out from Arras at one o'clock every night , after the mail from Paris had passed , arrived at M. sur M. a little before five o'clock in the morning . 
That night the wagon which was descending to M. sur M. by the Hesdin road , collided at the corner of a street , just as it was entering the town , with a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse , which was going in the opposite direction , and in which there was but one person , a man enveloped in a mantle . 
The wheel of the tilbury received quite a violent shock . 
The postman shouted to the man to stop , but the traveller paid no heed and pursued his road at full gallop . 
`` That man is in a devilish hurry ! '' 
said the postman . 
The man thus hastening on was the one whom we have just seen struggling in convulsions which are certainly deserving of pity . 
Whither was he going ? 
He could not have told . 
Why was he hastening ? 
He did not know . 
He was driving at random , straight ahead . 
Whither ? 
To Arras , no doubt ; but he might have been going elsewhere as well . 
At times he was conscious of it , and he shuddered . 
He plunged into the night as into a gulf . 
Something urged him forward ; something drew him on . 
No one could have told what was taking place within him ; every one will understand it . 
What man is there who has not entered , at least once in his life , into that obscure cavern of the unknown ? 
However , he had resolved on nothing , decided nothing , formed no plan , done nothing . 
None of the actions of his conscience had been decisive . 
He was , more than ever , as he had been at the first moment . 
Why was he going to Arras ? 
He repeated what he had already said to himself when he had hired Scaufflaire 's cabriolet : that , whatever the result was to be , there was no reason why he should not see with his own eyes , and judge of matters for himself ; that this was even prudent ; that he must know what took place ; that no decision could be arrived at without having observed and scrutinized ; that one made mountains out of everything from a distance ; that , at any rate , when he should have seen that Champmathieu , some wretch , his conscience would probably be greatly relieved to allow him to go to the galleys in his stead ; that Javert would indeed be there ; and that Brevet , that Chenildieu , that Cochepaille , old convicts who had known him ; but they certainly would not recognize him ; -- bah ! 
what an idea ! 
that Javert was a hundred leagues from suspecting the truth ; that all conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu , and that there is nothing so headstrong as suppositions and conjectures ; that accordingly there was no danger . 
That it was , no doubt , a dark moment , but that he should emerge from it ; that , after all , he held his destiny , however bad it might be , in his own hand ; that he was master of it . 
He clung to this thought . 
At bottom , to tell the whole truth , he would have preferred not to go to Arras . 
Nevertheless , he was going thither . 
As he meditated , he whipped up his horse , which was proceeding at that fine , regular , and even trot which accomplishes two leagues and a half an hour . 
In proportion as the cabriolet advanced , he felt something within him draw back . 
At daybreak he was in the open country ; the town of M. sur M. lay far behind him . 
He watched the horizon grow white ; he stared at all the chilly figures of a winter 's dawn as they passed before his eyes , but without seeing them . 
The morning has its spectres as well as the evening . 
He did not see them ; but without his being aware of it , and by means of a sort of penetration which was almost physical , these black silhouettes of trees and of hills added some gloomy and sinister quality to the violent state of his soul . 
Each time that he passed one of those isolated dwellings which sometimes border on the highway , he said to himself , `` And yet there are people there within who are sleeping ! '' 
The trot of the horse , the bells on the harness , the wheels on the road , produced a gentle , monotonous noise . 
These things are charming when one is joyous , and lugubrious when one is sad . 
It was broad daylight when he arrived at Hesdin . 
He halted in front of the inn , to allow the horse a breathing spell , and to have him given some oats . 
The horse belonged , as Scaufflaire had said , to that small race of the Boulonnais , which has too much head , too much belly , and not enough neck and shoulders , but which has a broad chest , a large crupper , thin , fine legs , and solid hoofs -- a homely , but a robust and healthy race . 
The excellent beast had travelled five leagues in two hours , and had not a drop of sweat on his loins . 
He did not get out of the tilbury . 
The stableman who brought the oats suddenly bent down and examined the left wheel . 
`` Are you going far in this condition ? '' 
said the man . 
He replied , with an air of not having roused himself from his revery : -- `` Why ? '' 
`` Have you come from a great distance ? '' 
went on the man . 
`` Five leagues . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
`` Why do you say , ` Ah ? ' '' 
The man bent down once more , was silent for a moment , with his eyes fixed on the wheel ; then he rose erect and said : -- `` Because , though this wheel has travelled five leagues , it certainly will not travel another quarter of a league . '' 
He sprang out of the tilbury . 
`` What is that you say , my friend ? '' 
`` I say that it is a miracle that you should have travelled five leagues without you and your horse rolling into some ditch on the highway . 
Just see here ! '' 
The wheel really had suffered serious damage . 
The shock administered by the mail-wagon had split two spokes and strained the hub , so that the nut no longer held firm . 
`` My friend , '' he said to the stableman , `` is there a wheelwright here ? '' 
`` Certainly , sir . '' 
`` Do me the service to go and fetch him . '' 
`` He is only a step from here . 
Hey ! 
Master Bourgaillard ! '' 
Master Bourgaillard , the wheelwright , was standing on his own threshold . 
He came , examined the wheel and made a grimace like a surgeon when the latter thinks a limb is broken . 
`` Can you repair this wheel immediately ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
`` When can I set out again ? '' 
`` To-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow ! '' 
`` There is a long day 's work on it . 
Are you in a hurry , sir ? '' 
`` In a very great hurry . 
I must set out again in an hour at the latest . '' 
`` Impossible , sir . '' 
`` I will pay whatever you ask . '' 
`` Impossible . '' 
`` Well , in two hours , then . '' 
`` Impossible to-day . 
Two new spokes and a hub must be made . 
Monsieur will not be able to start before to-morrow morning . '' 
`` The matter can not wait until to-morrow . 
What if you were to replace this wheel instead of repairing it ? '' 
`` How so ? '' 
`` You are a wheelwright ? '' 
`` Certainly , sir . '' 
`` Have you not a wheel that you can sell me ? 
Then I could start again at once . '' 
`` A spare wheel ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` I have no wheel on hand that would fit your cabriolet . 
Two wheels make a pair . 
Two wheels can not be put together hap-hazard . '' 
`` In that case , sell me a pair of wheels . '' 
`` Not all wheels fit all axles , sir . '' 
`` Try , nevertheless . '' 
`` It is useless , sir . 
I have nothing to sell but cart-wheels . 
We are but a poor country here . '' 
`` Have you a cabriolet that you can let me have ? '' 
The wheelwright had seen at the first glance that the tilbury was a hired vehicle . 
He shrugged his shoulders . 
`` You treat the cabriolets that people let you so well ! 
If I had one , I would not let it to you ! '' 
`` Well , sell it to me , then . '' 
`` I have none . '' 
`` What ! 
not even a spring-cart ? 
I am not hard to please , as you see . '' 
`` We live in a poor country . 
There is , in truth , '' added the wheelwright , `` an old calash under the shed yonder , which belongs to a bourgeois of the town , who gave it to me to take care of , and who only uses it on the thirty-sixth of the month -- never , that is to say . 
I might let that to you , for what matters it to me ? 
But the bourgeois must not see it pass -- and then , it is a calash ; it would require two horses . '' 
`` I will take two post-horses . '' 
`` Where is Monsieur going ? '' 
`` To Arras . '' 
`` And Monsieur wishes to reach there to-day ? '' 
`` Yes , of course . '' 
`` By taking two post-horses ? '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
`` Does it make any difference whether Monsieur arrives at four o'clock to-morrow morning ? '' 
`` Certainly not . '' 
`` There is one thing to be said about that , you see , by taking post-horses -- Monsieur has his passport ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well , by taking post-horses , Monsieur can not reach Arras before to-morrow . 
We are on a cross-road . 
The relays are badly served , the horses are in the fields . 
The season for ploughing is just beginning ; heavy teams are required , and horses are seized upon everywhere , from the post as well as elsewhere . 
Monsieur will have to wait three or four hours at the least at every relay . 
And , then , they drive at a walk . 
There are many hills to ascend . '' 
`` Come then , I will go on horseback . 
Unharness the cabriolet . 
Some one can surely sell me a saddle in the neighborhood . '' 
`` Without doubt . 
But will this horse bear the saddle ? '' 
`` That is true ; you remind me of that ; he will not bear it . '' 
`` Then -- '' `` But I can surely hire a horse in the village ? '' 
`` A horse to travel to Arras at one stretch ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` That would require such a horse as does not exist in these parts . 
You would have to buy it to begin with , because no one knows you . 
But you will not find one for sale nor to let , for five hundred francs , or for a thousand . '' 
`` What am I to do ? '' 
`` The best thing is to let me repair the wheel like an honest man , and set out on your journey to-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow will be too late . '' 
`` The deuce ! '' 
`` Is there not a mail-wagon which runs to Arras ? 
When will it pass ? '' 
`` To-night . 
Both the posts pass at night ; the one going as well as the one coming . '' 
`` What ! 
It will take you a day to mend this wheel ? '' 
`` A day , and a good long one . '' 
`` If you set two men to work ? '' 
`` If I set ten men to work . '' 
`` What if the spokes were to be tied together with ropes ? '' 
`` That could be done with the spokes , not with the hub ; and the felly is in a bad state , too . '' 
`` Is there any one in this village who lets out teams ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Is there another wheelwright ? '' 
The stableman and the wheelwright replied in concert , with a toss of the head `` No . '' 
He felt an immense joy . 
It was evident that Providence was intervening . 
That it was it who had broken the wheel of the tilbury and who was stopping him on the road . 
He had not yielded to this sort of first summons ; he had just made every possible effort to continue the journey ; he had loyally and scrupulously exhausted all means ; he had been deterred neither by the season , nor fatigue , nor by the expense ; he had nothing with which to reproach himself . 
If he went no further , that was no fault of his . 
It did not concern him further . 
It was no longer his fault . 
It was not the act of his own conscience , but the act of Providence . 
He breathed again . 
He breathed freely and to the full extent of his lungs for the first time since Javert 's visit . 
It seemed to him that the hand of iron which had held his heart in its grasp for the last twenty hours had just released him . 
It seemed to him that God was for him now , and was manifesting Himself . 
He said himself that he had done all he could , and that now he had nothing to do but retrace his steps quietly . 
If his conversation with the wheelwright had taken place in a chamber of the inn , it would have had no witnesses , no one would have heard him , things would have rested there , and it is probable that we should not have had to relate any of the occurrences which the reader is about to peruse ; but this conversation had taken place in the street . 
Any colloquy in the street inevitably attracts a crowd . 
There are always people who ask nothing better than to become spectators . 
While he was questioning the wheelwright , some people who were passing back and forth halted around them . 
After listening for a few minutes , a young lad , to whom no one had paid any heed , detached himself from the group and ran off . 
At the moment when the traveller , after the inward deliberation which we have just described , resolved to retrace his steps , this child returned . 
He was accompanied by an old woman . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the woman , `` my boy tells me that you wish to hire a cabriolet . '' 
These simple words uttered by an old woman led by a child made the perspiration trickle down his limbs . 
He thought that he beheld the hand which had relaxed its grasp reappear in the darkness behind him , ready to seize him once more . 
He answered : -- `` Yes , my good woman ; I am in search of a cabriolet which I can hire . '' 
And he hastened to add : -- `` But there is none in the place . '' 
`` Certainly there is , '' said the old woman . 
`` Where ? '' 
interpolated the wheelwright . 
`` At my house , '' replied the old woman . 
He shuddered . 
The fatal hand had grasped him again . 
The old woman really had in her shed a sort of basket spring-cart . 
The wheelwright and the stable-man , in despair at the prospect of the traveller escaping their clutches , interfered . 
`` It was a frightful old trap ; it rests flat on the axle ; it is an actual fact that the seats were suspended inside it by leather thongs ; the rain came into it ; the wheels were rusted and eaten with moisture ; it would not go much further than the tilbury ; a regular ramshackle old stage-wagon ; the gentleman would make a great mistake if he trusted himself to it , '' etc. , etc. . 
All this was true ; but this trap , this ramshackle old vehicle , this thing , whatever it was , ran on its two wheels and could go to Arras . 
He paid what was asked , left the tilbury with the wheelwright to be repaired , intending to reclaim it on his return , had the white horse put to the cart , climbed into it , and resumed the road which he had been travelling since morning . 
At the moment when the cart moved off , he admitted that he had felt , a moment previously , a certain joy in the thought that he should not go whither he was now proceeding . 
He examined this joy with a sort of wrath , and found it absurd . 
Why should he feel joy at turning back ? 
After all , he was taking this trip of his own free will . 
No one was forcing him to it . 
And assuredly nothing would happen except what he should choose . 
As he left Hesdin , he heard a voice shouting to him : `` Stop ! 
Stop ! '' 
He halted the cart with a vigorous movement which contained a feverish and convulsive element resembling hope . 
It was the old woman 's little boy . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the latter , `` it was I who got the cart for you . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` You have not given me anything . '' 
He who gave to all so readily thought this demand exorbitant and almost odious . 
`` Ah ! 
it 's you , you scamp ? '' 
said he ; `` you shall have nothing . '' 
He whipped up his horse and set off at full speed . 
He had lost a great deal of time at Hesdin . 
He wanted to make it good . 
The little horse was courageous , and pulled for two ; but it was the month of February , there had been rain ; the roads were bad . 
And then , it was no longer the tilbury . 
The cart was very heavy , and in addition , there were many ascents . 
He took nearly four hours to go from Hesdin to Saint-Pol ; four hours for five leagues . 
At Saint-Pol he had the horse unharnessed at the first inn he came to and led to the stable ; as he had promised Scaufflaire , he stood beside the manger while the horse was eating ; he thought of sad and confusing things . 
The inn-keeper 's wife came to the stable . 
`` Does not Monsieur wish to breakfast ? '' 
`` Come , that is true ; I even have a good appetite . '' 
He followed the woman , who had a rosy , cheerful face ; she led him to the public room where there were tables covered with waxed cloth . 
`` Make haste ! '' 
said he ; `` I must start again ; I am in a hurry . '' 
A big Flemish servant-maid placed his knife and fork in all haste ; he looked at the girl with a sensation of comfort . 
`` That is what ailed me , '' he thought ; `` I had not breakfasted . '' 
His breakfast was served ; he seized the bread , took a mouthful , and then slowly replaced it on the table , and did not touch it again . 
A carter was eating at another table ; he said to this man : -- `` Why is their bread so bitter here ? '' 
The carter was a German and did not understand him . 
He returned to the stable and remained near the horse . 
An hour later he had quitted Saint-Pol and was directing his course towards Tinques , which is only five leagues from Arras . 
What did he do during this journey ? 
Of what was he thinking ? 
As in the morning , he watched the trees , the thatched roofs , the tilled fields pass by , and the way in which the landscape , broken at every turn of the road , vanished ; this is a sort of contemplation which sometimes suffices to the soul , and almost relieves it from thought . 
What is more melancholy and more profound than to see a thousand objects for the first and the last time ? 
To travel is to be born and to die at every instant ; perhaps , in the vaguest region of his mind , be did make comparisons between the shifting horizon and our human existence : all the things of life are perpetually fleeing before us ; the dark and bright intervals are intermingled ; after a dazzling moment , an eclipse ; we look , we hasten , we stretch out our hands to grasp what is passing ; each event is a turn in the road , and , all at once , we are old ; we feel a shock ; all is black ; we distinguish an obscure door ; the gloomy horse of life , which has been drawing us halts , and we see a veiled and unknown person unharnessing amid the shadows . 
Twilight was falling when the children who were coming out of school beheld this traveller enter Tinques ; it is true that the days were still short ; he did not halt at Tinques ; as he emerged from the village , a laborer , who was mending the road with stones , raised his head and said to him : -- `` That horse is very much fatigued . '' 
The poor beast was , in fact , going at a walk . 
`` Are you going to Arras ? '' 
added the road-mender . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` If you go on at that rate you will not arrive very early . '' 
He stopped his horse , and asked the laborer : -- `` How far is it from here to Arras ? '' 
`` Nearly seven good leagues . '' 
`` How is that ? 
the posting guide only says five leagues and a quarter . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
returned the road-mender , `` so you do n't know that the road is under repair ? 
You will find it barred a quarter of an hour further on ; there is no way to proceed further . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` You will take the road on the left , leading to Carency ; you will cross the river ; when you reach Camblin , you will turn to the right ; that is the road to Mont-Saint-Eloy which leads to Arras . '' 
`` But it is night , and I shall lose my way . '' 
`` You do not belong in these parts ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` And , besides , it is all cross-roads ; stop ! 
sir , '' resumed the road-mender ; `` shall I give you a piece of advice ? 
your horse is tired ; return to Tinques ; there is a good inn there ; sleep there ; you can reach Arras to-morrow . '' 
`` I must be there this evening . '' 
`` That is different ; but go to the inn all the same , and get an extra horse ; the stable-boy will guide you through the cross-roads . '' 
He followed the road-mender 's advice , retraced his steps , and , half an hour later , he passed the same spot again , but this time at full speed , with a good horse to aid ; a stable-boy , who called himself a postilion , was seated on the shaft of the cariole . 
Still , he felt that he had lost time . 
Night had fully come . 
They turned into the cross-road ; the way became frightfully bad ; the cart lurched from one rut to the other ; he said to the postilion : -- `` Keep at a trot , and you shall have a double fee . '' 
In one of the jolts , the whiffle-tree broke . 
`` There 's the whiffle-tree broken , sir , '' said the postilion ; `` I do n't know how to harness my horse now ; this road is very bad at night ; if you wish to return and sleep at Tinques , we could be in Arras early to-morrow morning . '' 
He replied , `` Have you a bit of rope and a knife ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
He cut a branch from a tree and made a whiffle-tree of it . 
This caused another loss of twenty minutes ; but they set out again at a gallop . 
The plain was gloomy ; low-hanging , black , crisp fogs crept over the hills and wrenched themselves away like smoke : there were whitish gleams in the clouds ; a strong breeze which blew in from the sea produced a sound in all quarters of the horizon , as of some one moving furniture ; everything that could be seen assumed attitudes of terror . 
How many things shiver beneath these vast breaths of the night ! 
He was stiff with cold ; he had eaten nothing since the night before ; he vaguely recalled his other nocturnal trip in the vast plain in the neighborhood of D -- , eight years previously , and it seemed but yesterday . 
The hour struck from a distant tower ; he asked the boy : -- `` What time is it ? '' 
`` Seven o'clock , sir ; we shall reach Arras at eight ; we have but three leagues still to go . '' 
At that moment , he for the first time indulged in this reflection , thinking it odd the while that it had not occurred to him sooner : that all this trouble which he was taking was , perhaps , useless ; that he did not know so much as the hour of the trial ; that he should , at least , have informed himself of that ; that he was foolish to go thus straight ahead without knowing whether he would be of any service or not ; then he sketched out some calculations in his mind : that , ordinarily , the sittings of the Court of Assizes began at nine o'clock in the morning ; that it could not be a long affair ; that the theft of the apples would be very brief ; that there would then remain only a question of identity , four or five depositions , and very little for the lawyers to say ; that he should arrive after all was over . 
The postilion whipped up the horses ; they had crossed the river and left Mont-Saint-Eloy behind them . 
The night grew more profound . 
SISTER SIMPLICE PUT TO THE PROOF But at that moment Fantine was joyous . 
She had passed a very bad night ; her cough was frightful ; her fever had doubled in intensity ; she had had dreams : in the morning , when the doctor paid his visit , she was delirious ; he assumed an alarmed look , and ordered that he should be informed as soon as M. Madeleine arrived . 
All the morning she was melancholy , said but little , and laid plaits in her sheets , murmuring the while , in a low voice , calculations which seemed to be calculations of distances . 
Her eyes were hollow and staring . 
They seemed almost extinguished at intervals , then lighted up again and shone like stars . 
It seems as though , at the approach of a certain dark hour , the light of heaven fills those who are quitting the light of earth . 
Each time that Sister Simplice asked her how she felt , she replied invariably , `` Well . 
I should like to see M. Madeleine . '' 
Some months before this , at the moment when Fantine had just lost her last modesty , her last shame , and her last joy , she was the shadow of herself ; now she was the spectre of herself . 
Physical suffering had completed the work of moral suffering . 
This creature of five and twenty had a wrinkled brow , flabby cheeks , pinched nostrils , teeth from which the gums had receded , a leaden complexion , a bony neck , prominent shoulder-blades , frail limbs , a clayey skin , and her golden hair was growing out sprinkled with gray . 
Alas ! 
how illness improvises old-age ! 
At mid-day the physician returned , gave some directions , inquired whether the mayor had made his appearance at the infirmary , and shook his head . 
M. Madeleine usually came to see the invalid at three o'clock . 
As exactness is kindness , he was exact . 
About half-past two , Fantine began to be restless . 
In the course of twenty minutes , she asked the nun more than ten times , `` What time is it , sister ? '' 
Three o'clock struck . 
At the third stroke , Fantine sat up in bed ; she who could , in general , hardly turn over , joined her yellow , fleshless hands in a sort of convulsive clasp , and the nun heard her utter one of those profound sighs which seem to throw off dejection . 
Then Fantine turned and looked at the door . 
No one entered ; the door did not open . 
She remained thus for a quarter of an hour , her eyes riveted on the door , motionless and apparently holding her breath . 
The sister dared not speak to her . 
The clock struck a quarter past three . 
Fantine fell back on her pillow . 
She said nothing , but began to plait the sheets once more . 
Half an hour passed , then an hour , no one came ; every time the clock struck , Fantine started up and looked towards the door , then fell back again . 
Her thought was clearly perceptible , but she uttered no name , she made no complaint , she blamed no one . 
But she coughed in a melancholy way . 
One would have said that something dark was descending upon her . 
She was livid and her lips were blue . 
She smiled now and then . 
Five o'clock struck . 
Then the sister heard her say , very low and gently , `` He is wrong not to come to-day , since I am going away to-morrow . '' 
Sister Simplice herself was surprised at M. Madeleine 's delay . 
In the meantime , Fantine was staring at the tester of her bed . 
She seemed to be endeavoring to recall something . 
All at once she began to sing in a voice as feeble as a breath . 
The nun listened . 
This is what Fantine was singing : -- `` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through . 
Roses are pink , corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , corn-flowers are blue . 
`` Yestere'en the Virgin Mary came near my stove , in a broidered mantle clad , and said to me , ` Here , hide ` neath my veil the child whom you one day begged from me . 
Haste to the city , buy linen , buy a needle , buy thread . ' 
`` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through . 
`` Dear Holy Virgin , beside my stove I have set a cradle with ribbons decked . 
God may give me his loveliest star ; I prefer the child thou hast granted me . 
` Madame , what shall I do with this linen fine ? ' 
-- ` Make of it clothes for thy new-born babe . ' 
`` Roses are pink and corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , and corn-flowers are blue . '' 
` Wash this linen . ' 
-- ` Where ? ' 
-- ` In the stream . 
Make of it , soiling not , spoiling not , a petticoat fair with its bodice fine , which I will embroider and fill with flowers . ' 
-- ` Madame , the child is no longer here ; what is to be done ? ' 
-- ` Then make of it a winding-sheet in which to bury me . ' 
`` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through , Roses are pink , corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , corn-flowers are blue . '' 
This song was an old cradle romance with which she had , in former days , lulled her little Cosette to sleep , and which had never recurred to her mind in all the five years during which she had been parted from her child . 
She sang it in so sad a voice , and to so sweet an air , that it was enough to make any one , even a nun , weep . 
The sister , accustomed as she was to austerities , felt a tear spring to her eyes . 
The clock struck six . 
Fantine did not seem to hear it . 
She no longer seemed to pay attention to anything about her . 
Sister Simplice sent a serving-maid to inquire of the portress of the factory , whether the mayor had returned , and if he would not come to the infirmary soon . 
The girl returned in a few minutes . 
Fantine was still motionless and seemed absorbed in her own thoughts . 
The servant informed Sister Simplice in a very low tone , that the mayor had set out that morning before six o'clock , in a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse , cold as the weather was ; that he had gone alone , without even a driver ; that no one knew what road he had taken ; that people said he had been seen to turn into the road to Arras ; that others asserted that they had met him on the road to Paris . 
That when he went away he had been very gentle , as usual , and that he had merely told the portress not to expect him that night . 
While the two women were whispering together , with their backs turned to Fantine 's bed , the sister interrogating , the servant conjecturing , Fantine , with the feverish vivacity of certain organic maladies , which unite the free movements of health with the frightful emaciation of death , had raised herself to her knees in bed , with her shrivelled hands resting on the bolster , and her head thrust through the opening of the curtains , and was listening . 
All at once she cried : -- `` You are speaking of M. Madeleine ! 
Why are you talking so low ? 
What is he doing ? 
Why does he not come ? '' 
Her voice was so abrupt and hoarse that the two women thought they heard the voice of a man ; they wheeled round in affright . 
`` Answer me ! '' 
cried Fantine . 
The servant stammered : -- `` The portress told me that he could not come to-day . '' 
`` Be calm , my child , '' said the sister ; `` lie down again . '' 
Fantine , without changing her attitude , continued in a loud voice , and with an accent that was both imperious and heart-rending : -- `` He can not come ? 
Why not ? 
You know the reason . 
You are whispering it to each other there . 
I want to know it . '' 
The servant-maid hastened to say in the nun 's ear , `` Say that he is busy with the city council . '' 
Sister Simplice blushed faintly , for it was a lie that the maid had proposed to her . 
On the other hand , it seemed to her that the mere communication of the truth to the invalid would , without doubt , deal her a terrible blow , and that this was a serious matter in Fantine 's present state . 
Her flush did not last long ; the sister raised her calm , sad eyes to Fantine , and said , `` Monsieur le Maire has gone away . '' 
Fantine raised herself and crouched on her heels in the bed : her eyes sparkled ; indescribable joy beamed from that melancholy face . 
`` Gone ! '' 
she cried ; `` he has gone to get Cosette . '' 
Then she raised her arms to heaven , and her white face became ineffable ; her lips moved ; she was praying in a low voice . 
When her prayer was finished , `` Sister , '' she said , `` I am willing to lie down again ; I will do anything you wish ; I was naughty just now ; I beg your pardon for having spoken so loud ; it is very wrong to talk loudly ; I know that well , my good sister , but , you see , I am very happy : the good God is good ; M. Madeleine is good ; just think ! 
he has gone to Montfermeil to get my little Cosette . '' 
She lay down again , with the nun 's assistance , helped the nun to arrange her pillow , and kissed the little silver cross which she wore on her neck , and which Sister Simplice had given her . 
`` My child , '' said the sister , `` try to rest now , and do not talk any more . '' 
Fantine took the sister 's hand in her moist hands , and the latter was pained to feel that perspiration . 
`` He set out this morning for Paris ; in fact , he need not even go through Paris ; Montfermeil is a little to the left as you come thence . 
Do you remember how he said to me yesterday , when I spoke to him of Cosette , Soon , soon ? 
He wants to give me a surprise , you know ! 
he made me sign a letter so that she could be taken from the Thenardiers ; they can not say anything , can they ? 
they will give back Cosette , for they have been paid ; the authorities will not allow them to keep the child since they have received their pay . 
Do not make signs to me that I must not talk , sister ! 
I am extremely happy ; I am doing well ; I am not ill at all any more ; I am going to see Cosette again ; I am even quite hungry ; it is nearly five years since I saw her last ; you can not imagine how much attached one gets to children , and then , she will be so pretty ; you will see ! 
If you only knew what pretty little rosy fingers she had ! 
In the first place , she will have very beautiful hands ; she had ridiculous hands when she was only a year old ; like this ! 
she must be a big girl now ; she is seven years old ; she is quite a young lady ; I call her Cosette , but her name is really Euphrasie . 
Stop ! 
this morning I was looking at the dust on the chimney-piece , and I had a sort of idea come across me , like that , that I should see Cosette again soon . 
Mon Dieu ! 
how wrong it is not to see one 's children for years ! 
One ought to reflect that life is not eternal . 
Oh , how good M. le Maire is to go ! 
it is very cold ! 
it is true ; he had on his cloak , at least ? 
he will be here to-morrow , will he not ? 
to-morrow will be a festival day ; to-morrow morning , sister , you must remind me to put on my little cap that has lace on it . 
What a place that Montfermeil is ! 
I took that journey on foot once ; it was very long for me , but the diligences go very quickly ! 
he will be here to-morrow with Cosette : how far is it from here to Montfermeil ? '' 
The sister , who had no idea of distances , replied , `` Oh , I think that be will be here to-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow ! 
to-morrow ! '' 
said Fantine , `` I shall see Cosette to-morrow ! 
you see , good sister of the good God , that I am no longer ill ; I am mad ; I could dance if any one wished it . '' 
A person who had seen her a quarter of an hour previously would not have understood the change ; she was all rosy now ; she spoke in a lively and natural voice ; her whole face was one smile ; now and then she talked , she laughed softly ; the joy of a mother is almost infantile . 
`` Well , '' resumed the nun , `` now that you are happy , mind me , and do not talk any more . '' 
Fantine laid her head on her pillow and said in a low voice : `` Yes , lie down again ; be good , for you are going to have your child ; Sister Simplice is right ; every one here is right . '' 
And then , without stirring , without even moving her head , she began to stare all about her with wide-open eyes and a joyous air , and she said nothing more . 
The sister drew the curtains together again , hoping that she would fall into a doze . 
Between seven and eight o'clock the doctor came ; not hearing any sound , he thought Fantine was asleep , entered softly , and approached the bed on tiptoe ; he opened the curtains a little , and , by the light of the taper , he saw Fantine 's big eyes gazing at him . 
She said to him , `` She will be allowed to sleep beside me in a little bed , will she not , sir ? '' 
The doctor thought that she was delirious . 
She added : -- `` See ! 
there is just room . '' 
The doctor took Sister Simplice aside , and she explained matters to him ; that M. Madeleine was absent for a day or two , and that in their doubt they had not thought it well to undeceive the invalid , who believed that the mayor had gone to Montfermeil ; that it was possible , after all , that her guess was correct : the doctor approved . 
He returned to Fantine 's bed , and she went on : -- `` You see , when she wakes up in the morning , I shall be able to say good morning to her , poor kitten , and when I can not sleep at night , I can hear her asleep ; her little gentle breathing will do me good . '' 
`` Give me your hand , '' said the doctor . 
She stretched out her arm , and exclaimed with a laugh : -- `` Ah , hold ! 
in truth , you did not know it ; I am cured ; Cosette will arrive to-morrow . '' 
The doctor was surprised ; she was better ; the pressure on her chest had decreased ; her pulse had regained its strength ; a sort of life had suddenly supervened and reanimated this poor , worn-out creature . 
`` Doctor , '' she went on , `` did the sister tell you that M. le Maire has gone to get that mite of a child ? '' 
The doctor recommended silence , and that all painful emotions should be avoided ; he prescribed an infusion of pure chinchona , and , in case the fever should increase again during the night , a calming potion . 
As he took his departure , he said to the sister : -- `` She is doing better ; if good luck willed that the mayor should actually arrive to-morrow with the child , who knows ? 
there are crises so astounding ; great joy has been known to arrest maladies ; I know well that this is an organic disease , and in an advanced state , but all those things are such mysteries : we may be able to save her . '' 
THE TRAVELLER ON HIS ARRIVAL TAKES PRECAUTIONS FOR DEPARTURE It was nearly eight o'clock in the evening when the cart , which we left on the road , entered the porte-cochere of the Hotel de la Poste in Arras ; the man whom we have been following up to this moment alighted from it , responded with an abstracted air to the attentions of the people of the inn , sent back the extra horse , and with his own hands led the little white horse to the stable ; then he opened the door of a billiard-room which was situated on the ground floor , sat down there , and leaned his elbows on a table ; he had taken fourteen hours for the journey which he had counted on making in six ; he did himself the justice to acknowledge that it was not his fault , but at bottom , he was not sorry . 
The landlady of the hotel entered . 
`` Does Monsieur wish a bed ? 
Does Monsieur require supper ? '' 
He made a sign of the head in the negative . 
`` The stableman says that Monsieur 's horse is extremely fatigued . '' 
Here he broke his silence . 
`` Will not the horse be in a condition to set out again to-morrow morning ? '' 
`` Oh , Monsieur ! 
he must rest for two days at least . '' 
He inquired : -- `` Is not the posting-station located here ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
The hostess conducted him to the office ; he showed his passport , and inquired whether there was any way of returning that same night to M. sur M. by the mail-wagon ; the seat beside the post-boy chanced to be vacant ; he engaged it and paid for it . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the clerk , `` do not fail to be here ready to start at precisely one o'clock in the morning . '' 
This done , he left the hotel and began to wander about the town . 
He was not acquainted with Arras ; the streets were dark , and he walked on at random ; but he seemed bent upon not asking the way of the passers-by . 
He crossed the little river Crinchon , and found himself in a labyrinth of narrow alleys where he lost his way . 
A citizen was passing along with a lantern . 
After some hesitation , he decided to apply to this man , not without having first glanced behind and in front of him , as though he feared lest some one should hear the question which he was about to put . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , `` where is the court-house , if you please . '' 
`` You do not belong in town , sir ? '' 
replied the bourgeois , who was an oldish man ; `` well , follow me . 
I happen to be going in the direction of the court-house , that is to say , in the direction of the hotel of the prefecture ; for the court-house is undergoing repairs just at this moment , and the courts are holding their sittings provisionally in the prefecture . '' 
`` Is it there that the Assizes are held ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Certainly , sir ; you see , the prefecture of to-day was the bishop 's palace before the Revolution . 
M. de Conzie , who was bishop in ' 82 , built a grand hall there . 
It is in this grand hall that the court is held . '' 
On the way , the bourgeois said to him : -- `` If Monsieur desires to witness a case , it is rather late . 
The sittings generally close at six o'clock . '' 
When they arrived on the grand square , however , the man pointed out to him four long windows all lighted up , in the front of a vast and gloomy building . 
`` Upon my word , sir , you are in luck ; you have arrived in season . 
Do you see those four windows ? 
That is the Court of Assizes . 
There is light there , so they are not through . 
The matter must have been greatly protracted , and they are holding an evening session . 
Do you take an interest in this affair ? 
Is it a criminal case ? 
Are you a witness ? '' 
He replied : -- `` I have not come on any business ; I only wish to speak to one of the lawyers . '' 
`` That is different , '' said the bourgeois . 
`` Stop , sir ; here is the door where the sentry stands . 
You have only to ascend the grand staircase . '' 
He conformed to the bourgeois 's directions , and a few minutes later he was in a hall containing many people , and where groups , intermingled with lawyers in their gowns , were whispering together here and there . 
It is always a heart-breaking thing to see these congregations of men robed in black , murmuring together in low voices , on the threshold of the halls of justice . 
It is rare that charity and pity are the outcome of these words . 
Condemnations pronounced in advance are more likely to be the result . 
All these groups seem to the passing and thoughtful observer so many sombre hives where buzzing spirits construct in concert all sorts of dark edifices . 
This spacious hall , illuminated by a single lamp , was the old hall of the episcopal palace , and served as the large hall of the palace of justice . 
A double-leaved door , which was closed at that moment , separated it from the large apartment where the court was sitting . 
The obscurity was such that he did not fear to accost the first lawyer whom he met . 
`` What stage have they reached , sir ? '' 
he asked . 
`` It is finished , '' said the lawyer . 
`` Finished ! '' 
This word was repeated in such accents that the lawyer turned round . 
`` Excuse me sir ; perhaps you are a relative ? '' 
`` No ; I know no one here . 
Has judgment been pronounced ? '' 
`` Of course . 
Nothing else was possible . '' 
`` To penal servitude ? '' 
`` For life . '' 
He continued , in a voice so weak that it was barely audible : -- `` Then his identity was established ? '' 
`` What identity ? '' 
replied the lawyer . 
`` There was no identity to be established . 
The matter was very simple . 
The woman had murdered her child ; the infanticide was proved ; the jury threw out the question of premeditation , and she was condemned for life . '' 
`` So it was a woman ? '' 
said he . 
`` Why , certainly . 
The Limosin woman . 
Of what are you speaking ? '' 
`` Nothing . 
But since it is all over , how comes it that the hall is still lighted ? '' 
`` For another case , which was begun about two hours ago . 
`` What other case ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
this one is a clear case also . 
It is about a sort of blackguard ; a man arrested for a second offence ; a convict who has been guilty of theft . 
I do n't know his name exactly . 
There 's a bandit 's phiz for you ! 
I 'd send him to the galleys on the strength of his face alone . '' 
`` Is there any way of getting into the court-room , sir ? '' 
said he . 
`` I really think that there is not . 
There is a great crowd . 
However , the hearing has been suspended . 
Some people have gone out , and when the hearing is resumed , you might make an effort . '' 
`` Where is the entrance ? '' 
`` Through yonder large door . '' 
The lawyer left him . 
In the course of a few moments he had experienced , almost simultaneously , almost intermingled with each other , all possible emotions . 
The words of this indifferent spectator had , in turn , pierced his heart like needles of ice and like blades of fire . 
When he saw that nothing was settled , he breathed freely once more ; but he could not have told whether what he felt was pain or pleasure . 
He drew near to many groups and listened to what they were saying . 
The docket of the session was very heavy ; the president had appointed for the same day two short and simple cases . 
They had begun with the infanticide , and now they had reached the convict , the old offender , the `` return horse . '' 
This man had stolen apples , but that did not appear to be entirely proved ; what had been proved was , that he had already been in the galleys at Toulon . 
It was that which lent a bad aspect to his case . 
However , the man 's examination and the depositions of the witnesses had been completed , but the lawyer 's plea , and the speech of the public prosecutor were still to come ; it could not be finished before midnight . 
The man would probably be condemned ; the attorney-general was very clever , and never missed his culprits ; he was a brilliant fellow who wrote verses . 
An usher stood at the door communicating with the hall of the Assizes . 
He inquired of this usher : -- `` Will the door be opened soon , sir ? '' 
`` It will not be opened at all , '' replied the usher . 
`` What ! 
It will not be opened when the hearing is resumed ? 
Is not the hearing suspended ? '' 
`` The hearing has just been begun again , '' replied the usher , `` but the door will not be opened again . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Because the hall is full . '' 
`` What ! 
There is not room for one more ? '' 
`` Not another one . 
The door is closed . 
No one can enter now . '' 
The usher added after a pause : `` There are , to tell the truth , two or three extra places behind Monsieur le President , but Monsieur le President only admits public functionaries to them . '' 
So saying , the usher turned his back . 
He retired with bowed head , traversed the antechamber , and slowly descended the stairs , as though hesitating at every step . 
It is probable that he was holding counsel with himself . 
The violent conflict which had been going on within him since the preceding evening was not yet ended ; and every moment he encountered some new phase of it . 
On reaching the landing-place , he leaned his back against the balusters and folded his arms . 
All at once he opened his coat , drew out his pocket-book , took from it a pencil , tore out a leaf , and upon that leaf he wrote rapidly , by the light of the street lantern , this line : M. Madeleine , Mayor of M. sur M. ; then he ascended the stairs once more with great strides , made his way through the crowd , walked straight up to the usher , handed him the paper , and said in an authoritative manner : -- `` Take this to Monsieur le President . '' 
The usher took the paper , cast a glance upon it , and obeyed . 
AN ENTRANCE BY FAVOR Although he did not suspect the fact , the mayor of M. sur M. enjoyed a sort of celebrity . 
For the space of seven years his reputation for virtue had filled the whole of Bas Boulonnais ; it had eventually passed the confines of a small district and had been spread abroad through two or three neighboring departments . 
Besides the service which he had rendered to the chief town by resuscitating the black jet industry , there was not one out of the hundred and forty communes of the arrondissement of M. sur M. which was not indebted to him for some benefit . 
He had even at need contrived to aid and multiply the industries of other arrondissements . 
It was thus that he had , when occasion offered , supported with his credit and his funds the linen factory at Boulogne , the flax-spinning industry at Frevent , and the hydraulic manufacture of cloth at Boubers-sur-Canche . 
Everywhere the name of M. Madeleine was pronounced with veneration . 
Arras and Douai envied the happy little town of M. sur M. its mayor . 
The Councillor of the Royal Court of Douai , who was presiding over this session of the Assizes at Arras , was acquainted , in common with the rest of the world , with this name which was so profoundly and universally honored . 
When the usher , discreetly opening the door which connected the council-chamber with the court-room , bent over the back of the President 's arm-chair and handed him the paper on which was inscribed the line which we have just perused , adding : `` The gentleman desires to be present at the trial , '' the President , with a quick and deferential movement , seized a pen and wrote a few words at the bottom of the paper and returned it to the usher , saying , `` Admit him . '' 
The unhappy man whose history we are relating had remained near the door of the hall , in the same place and the same attitude in which the usher had left him . 
In the midst of his revery he heard some one saying to him , `` Will Monsieur do me the honor to follow me ? '' 
It was the same usher who had turned his back upon him but a moment previously , and who was now bowing to the earth before him . 
At the same time , the usher handed him the paper . 
He unfolded it , and as he chanced to be near the light , he could read it . 
`` The President of the Court of Assizes presents his respects to M. Madeleine . '' 
He crushed the paper in his hand as though those words contained for him a strange and bitter aftertaste . 
He followed the usher . 
A few minutes later he found himself alone in a sort of wainscoted cabinet of severe aspect , lighted by two wax candles , placed upon a table with a green cloth . 
The last words of the usher who had just quitted him still rang in his ears : `` Monsieur , you are now in the council-chamber ; you have only to turn the copper handle of yonder door , and you will find yourself in the court-room , behind the President 's chair . '' 
These words were mingled in his thoughts with a vague memory of narrow corridors and dark staircases which he had recently traversed . 
The usher had left him alone . 
The supreme moment had arrived . 
He sought to collect his faculties , but could not . 
It is chiefly at the moment when there is the greatest need for attaching them to the painful realities of life , that the threads of thought snap within the brain . 
He was in the very place where the judges deliberated and condemned . 
With stupid tranquillity he surveyed this peaceful and terrible apartment , where so many lives had been broken , which was soon to ring with his name , and which his fate was at that moment traversing . 
He stared at the wall , then he looked at himself , wondering that it should be that chamber and that it should be he . 
He had eaten nothing for four and twenty hours ; he was worn out by the jolts of the cart , but he was not conscious of it . 
It seemed to him that he felt nothing . 
He approached a black frame which was suspended on the wall , and which contained , under glass , an ancient autograph letter of Jean Nicolas Pache , mayor of Paris and minister , and dated , through an error , no doubt , the 9th of June , of the year II. , and in which Pache forwarded to the commune the list of ministers and deputies held in arrest by them . 
Any spectator who had chanced to see him at that moment , and who had watched him , would have imagined , doubtless , that this letter struck him as very curious , for he did not take his eyes from it , and he read it two or three times . 
He read it without paying any attention to it , and unconsciously . 
He was thinking of Fantine and Cosette . 
As he dreamed , he turned round , and his eyes fell upon the brass knob of the door which separated him from the Court of Assizes . 
He had almost forgotten that door . 
His glance , calm at first , paused there , remained fixed on that brass handle , then grew terrified , and little by little became impregnated with fear . 
Beads of perspiration burst forth among his hair and trickled down upon his temples . 
At a certain moment he made that indescribable gesture of a sort of authority mingled with rebellion , which is intended to convey , and which does so well convey , `` Pardieu ! 
who compels me to this ? '' 
Then he wheeled briskly round , caught sight of the door through which he had entered in front of him , went to it , opened it , and passed out . 
He was no longer in that chamber ; he was outside in a corridor , a long , narrow corridor , broken by steps and gratings , making all sorts of angles , lighted here and there by lanterns similar to the night taper of invalids , the corridor through which he had approached . 
He breathed , he listened ; not a sound in front , not a sound behind him , and he fled as though pursued . 
When he had turned many angles in this corridor , he still listened . 
The same silence reigned , and there was the same darkness around him . 
He was out of breath ; he staggered ; he leaned against the wall . 
The stone was cold ; the perspiration lay ice-cold on his brow ; he straightened himself up with a shiver . 
Then , there alone in the darkness , trembling with cold and with something else , too , perchance , he meditated . 
He had meditated all night long ; he had meditated all the day : he heard within him but one voice , which said , `` Alas ! '' 
A quarter of an hour passed thus . 
At length he bowed his head , sighed with agony , dropped his arms , and retraced his steps . 
He walked slowly , and as though crushed . 
It seemed as though some one had overtaken him in his flight and was leading him back . 
He re-entered the council-chamber . 
The first thing he caught sight of was the knob of the door . 
This knob , which was round and of polished brass , shone like a terrible star for him . 
He gazed at it as a lamb might gaze into the eye of a tiger . 
He could not take his eyes from it . 
From time to time he advanced a step and approached the door . 
Had he listened , he would have heard the sound of the adjoining hall like a sort of confused murmur ; but he did not listen , and he did not hear . 
Suddenly , without himself knowing how it happened , he found himself near the door ; he grasped the knob convulsively ; the door opened . 
He was in the court-room . 
A PLACE WHERE CONVICTIONS ARE IN PROCESS OF FORMATION He advanced a pace , closed the door mechanically behind him , and remained standing , contemplating what he saw . 
It was a vast and badly lighted apartment , now full of uproar , now full of silence , where all the apparatus of a criminal case , with its petty and mournful gravity in the midst of the throng , was in process of development . 
At the one end of the hall , the one where he was , were judges , with abstracted air , in threadbare robes , who were gnawing their nails or closing their eyelids ; at the other end , a ragged crowd ; lawyers in all sorts of attitudes ; soldiers with hard but honest faces ; ancient , spotted woodwork , a dirty ceiling , tables covered with serge that was yellow rather than green ; doors blackened by handmarks ; tap-room lamps which emitted more smoke than light , suspended from nails in the wainscot ; on the tables candles in brass candlesticks ; darkness , ugliness , sadness ; and from all this there was disengaged an austere and august impression , for one there felt that grand human thing which is called the law , and that grand divine thing which is called justice . 
No one in all that throng paid any attention to him ; all glances were directed towards a single point , a wooden bench placed against a small door , in the stretch of wall on the President 's left ; on this bench , illuminated by several candles , sat a man between two gendarmes . 
This man was the man . 
He did not seek him ; he saw him ; his eyes went thither naturally , as though they had known beforehand where that figure was . 
He thought he was looking at himself , grown old ; not absolutely the same in face , of course , but exactly similar in attitude and aspect , with his bristling hair , with that wild and uneasy eye , with that blouse , just as it was on the day when he entered D -- , full of hatred , concealing his soul in that hideous mass of frightful thoughts which he had spent nineteen years in collecting on the floor of the prison . 
He said to himself with a shudder , `` Good God ! 
shall I become like that again ? '' 
This creature seemed to be at least sixty ; there was something indescribably coarse , stupid , and frightened about him . 
At the sound made by the opening door , people had drawn aside to make way for him ; the President had turned his head , and , understanding that the personage who had just entered was the mayor of M. sur M. , he had bowed to him ; the attorney-general , who had seen M. Madeleine at M. sur M. , whither the duties of his office had called him more than once , recognized him and saluted him also : he had hardly perceived it ; he was the victim of a sort of hallucination ; he was watching . 
Judges , clerks , gendarmes , a throng of cruelly curious heads , all these he had already beheld once , in days gone by , twenty-seven years before ; he had encountered those fatal things once more ; there they were ; they moved ; they existed ; it was no longer an effort of his memory , a mirage of his thought ; they were real gendarmes and real judges , a real crowd , and real men of flesh and blood : it was all over ; he beheld the monstrous aspects of his past reappear and live once more around him , with all that there is formidable in reality . 
All this was yawning before him . 
He was horrified by it ; he shut his eyes , and exclaimed in the deepest recesses of his soul , `` Never ! '' 
And by a tragic play of destiny which made all his ideas tremble , and rendered him nearly mad , it was another self of his that was there ! 
all called that man who was being tried Jean Valjean . 
Under his very eyes , unheard-of vision , he had a sort of representation of the most horrible moment of his life , enacted by his spectre . 
Everything was there ; the apparatus was the same , the hour of the night , the faces of the judges , of soldiers , and of spectators ; all were the same , only above the President 's head there hung a crucifix , something which the courts had lacked at the time of his condemnation : God had been absent when he had been judged . 
There was a chair behind him ; he dropped into it , terrified at the thought that he might be seen ; when he was seated , he took advantage of a pile of cardboard boxes , which stood on the judge 's desk , to conceal his face from the whole room ; he could now see without being seen ; he had fully regained consciousness of the reality of things ; gradually he recovered ; he attained that phase of composure where it is possible to listen . 
M. Bamatabois was one of the jurors . 
He looked for Javert , but did not see him ; the seat of the witnesses was hidden from him by the clerk 's table , and then , as we have just said , the hall was sparely lighted . 
At the moment of this entrance , the defendant 's lawyer had just finished his plea . 
The attention of all was excited to the highest pitch ; the affair had lasted for three hours : for three hours that crowd had been watching a strange man , a miserable specimen of humanity , either profoundly stupid or profoundly subtle , gradually bending beneath the weight of a terrible likeness . 
This man , as the reader already knows , was a vagabond who had been found in a field carrying a branch laden with ripe apples , broken in the orchard of a neighbor , called the Pierron orchard . 
Who was this man ? 
an examination had been made ; witnesses had been heard , and they were unanimous ; light had abounded throughout the entire debate ; the accusation said : `` We have in our grasp not only a marauder , a stealer of fruit ; we have here , in our hands , a bandit , an old offender who has broken his ban , an ex-convict , a miscreant of the most dangerous description , a malefactor named Jean Valjean , whom justice has long been in search of , and who , eight years ago , on emerging from the galleys at Toulon , committed a highway robbery , accompanied by violence , on the person of a child , a Savoyard named Little Gervais ; a crime provided for by article 383 of the Penal Code , the right to try him for which we reserve hereafter , when his identity shall have been judicially established . 
He has just committed a fresh theft ; it is a case of a second offence ; condemn him for the fresh deed ; later on he will be judged for the old crime . '' 
In the face of this accusation , in the face of the unanimity of the witnesses , the accused appeared to be astonished more than anything else ; he made signs and gestures which were meant to convey No , or else he stared at the ceiling : he spoke with difficulty , replied with embarrassment , but his whole person , from head to foot , was a denial ; he was an idiot in the presence of all these minds ranged in order of battle around him , and like a stranger in the midst of this society which was seizing fast upon him ; nevertheless , it was a question of the most menacing future for him ; the likeness increased every moment , and the entire crowd surveyed , with more anxiety than he did himself , that sentence freighted with calamity , which descended ever closer over his head ; there was even a glimpse of a possibility afforded ; besides the galleys , a possible death penalty , in case his identity were established , and the affair of Little Gervais were to end thereafter in condemnation . 
Who was this man ? 
what was the nature of his apathy ? 
was it imbecility or craft ? 
Did he understand too well , or did he not understand at all ? 
these were questions which divided the crowd , and seemed to divide the jury ; there was something both terrible and puzzling in this case : the drama was not only melancholy ; it was also obscure . 
The counsel for the defence had spoken tolerably well , in that provincial tongue which has long constituted the eloquence of the bar , and which was formerly employed by all advocates , at Paris as well as at Romorantin or at Montbrison , and which to-day , having become classic , is no longer spoken except by the official orators of magistracy , to whom it is suited on account of its grave sonorousness and its majestic stride ; a tongue in which a husband is called a consort , and a woman a spouse ; Paris , the centre of art and civilization ; the king , the monarch ; Monseigneur the Bishop , a sainted pontiff ; the district-attorney , the eloquent interpreter of public prosecution ; the arguments , the accents which we have just listened to ; the age of Louis XIV. , the grand age ; a theatre , the temple of Melpomene ; the reigning family , the august blood of our kings ; a concert , a musical solemnity ; the General Commandant of the province , the illustrious warrior , who , etc. ; the pupils in the seminary , these tender levities ; errors imputed to newspapers , the imposture which distills its venom through the columns of those organs ; etc. . 
The lawyer had , accordingly , begun with an explanation as to the theft of the apples , -- an awkward matter couched in fine style ; but Benigne Bossuet himself was obliged to allude to a chicken in the midst of a funeral oration , and he extricated himself from the situation in stately fashion . 
The lawyer established the fact that the theft of the apples had not been circumstantially proved . 
His client , whom he , in his character of counsel , persisted in calling Champmathieu , had not been seen scaling that wall nor breaking that branch by any one . 
He had been taken with that branch -LRB- which the lawyer preferred to call a bough -RRB- in his possession ; but he said that he had found it broken off and lying on the ground , and had picked it up . 
Where was there any proof to the contrary ? 
No doubt that branch had been broken off and concealed after the scaling of the wall , then thrown away by the alarmed marauder ; there was no doubt that there had been a thief in the case . 
But what proof was there that that thief had been Champmathieu ? 
One thing only . 
His character as an ex-convict . 
The lawyer did not deny that that character appeared to be , unhappily , well attested ; the accused had resided at Faverolles ; the accused had exercised the calling of a tree-pruner there ; the name of Champmathieu might well have had its origin in Jean Mathieu ; all that was true , -- in short , four witnesses recognize Champmathieu , positively and without hesitation , as that convict , Jean Valjean ; to these signs , to this testimony , the counsel could oppose nothing but the denial of his client , the denial of an interested party ; but supposing that he was the convict Jean Valjean , did that prove that he was the thief of the apples ? 
that was a presumption at the most , not a proof . 
The prisoner , it was true , and his counsel , `` in good faith , '' was obliged to admit it , had adopted `` a bad system of defence . '' 
He obstinately denied everything , the theft and his character of convict . 
An admission upon this last point would certainly have been better , and would have won for him the indulgence of his judges ; the counsel had advised him to do this ; but the accused had obstinately refused , thinking , no doubt , that he would save everything by admitting nothing . 
It was an error ; but ought not the paucity of this intelligence to be taken into consideration ? 
This man was visibly stupid . 
Long-continued wretchedness in the galleys , long misery outside the galleys , had brutalized him , etc. . 
He defended himself badly ; was that a reason for condemning him ? 
As for the affair with Little Gervais , the counsel need not discuss it ; it did not enter into the case . 
The lawyer wound up by beseeching the jury and the court , if the identity of Jean Valjean appeared to them to be evident , to apply to him the police penalties which are provided for a criminal who has broken his ban , and not the frightful chastisement which descends upon the convict guilty of a second offence . 
The district-attorney answered the counsel for the defence . 
He was violent and florid , as district-attorneys usually are . 
He congratulated the counsel for the defence on his `` loyalty , '' and skilfully took advantage of this loyalty . 
He reached the accused through all the concessions made by his lawyer . 
The advocate had seemed to admit that the prisoner was Jean Valjean . 
He took note of this . 
So this man was Jean Valjean . 
This point had been conceded to the accusation and could no longer be disputed . 
Here , by means of a clever autonomasia which went back to the sources and causes of crime , the district-attorney thundered against the immorality of the romantic school , then dawning under the name of the Satanic school , which had been bestowed upon it by the critics of the Quotidienne and the Oriflamme ; he attributed , not without some probability , to the influence of this perverse literature the crime of Champmathieu , or rather , to speak more correctly , of Jean Valjean . 
Having exhausted these considerations , he passed on to Jean Valjean himself . 
Who was this Jean Valjean ? 
Description of Jean Valjean : a monster spewed forth , etc. . 
The model for this sort of description is contained in the tale of Theramene , which is not useful to tragedy , but which every day renders great services to judicial eloquence . 
The audience and the jury `` shuddered . '' 
The description finished , the district-attorney resumed with an oratorical turn calculated to raise the enthusiasm of the journal of the prefecture to the highest pitch on the following day : And it is such a man , etc. , etc. , etc. , vagabond , beggar , without means of existence , etc. , etc. , inured by his past life to culpable deeds , and but little reformed by his sojourn in the galleys , as was proved by the crime committed against Little Gervais , etc. , etc. ; it is such a man , caught upon the highway in the very act of theft , a few paces from a wall that had been scaled , still holding in his hand the object stolen , who denies the crime , the theft , the climbing the wall ; denies everything ; denies even his own identity ! 
In addition to a hundred other proofs , to which we will not recur , four witnesses recognize him -- Javert , the upright inspector of police ; Javert , and three of his former companions in infamy , the convicts Brevet , Chenildieu , and Cochepaille . 
What does he offer in opposition to this overwhelming unanimity ? 
His denial . 
What obduracy ! 
You will do justice , gentlemen of the jury , etc. , etc. . 
While the district-attorney was speaking , the accused listened to him open-mouthed , with a sort of amazement in which some admiration was assuredly blended . 
He was evidently surprised that a man could talk like that . 
From time to time , at those `` energetic '' moments of the prosecutor 's speech , when eloquence which can not contain itself overflows in a flood of withering epithets and envelops the accused like a storm , he moved his head slowly from right to left and from left to right in the sort of mute and melancholy protest with which he had contented himself since the beginning of the argument . 
Two or three times the spectators who were nearest to him heard him say in a low voice , `` That is what comes of not having asked M. Baloup . '' 
The district-attorney directed the attention of the jury to this stupid attitude , evidently deliberate , which denoted not imbecility , but craft , skill , a habit of deceiving justice , and which set forth in all its nakedness the `` profound perversity '' of this man . 
He ended by making his reserves on the affair of Little Gervais and demanding a severe sentence . 
At that time , as the reader will remember , it was penal servitude for life . 
The counsel for the defence rose , began by complimenting Monsieur l'Avocat-General on his `` admirable speech , '' then replied as best he could ; but he weakened ; the ground was evidently slipping away from under his feet . 
THE SYSTEM OF DENIALS The moment for closing the debate had arrived . 
The President had the accused stand up , and addressed to him the customary question , `` Have you anything to add to your defence ? '' 
The man did not appear to understand , as he stood there , twisting in his hands a terrible cap which he had . 
The President repeated the question . 
This time the man heard it . 
He seemed to understand . 
He made a motion like a man who is just waking up , cast his eyes about him , stared at the audience , the gendarmes , his counsel , the jury , the court , laid his monstrous fist on the rim of woodwork in front of his bench , took another look , and all at once , fixing his glance upon the district-attorney , he began to speak . 
It was like an eruption . 
It seemed , from the manner in which the words escaped from his mouth , -- incoherent , impetuous , pell-mell , tumbling over each other , -- as though they were all pressing forward to issue forth at once . 
He said : -- `` This is what I have to say . 
That I have been a wheelwright in Paris , and that it was with Monsieur Baloup . 
It is a hard trade . 
In the wheelwright 's trade one works always in the open air , in courtyards , under sheds when the masters are good , never in closed workshops , because space is required , you see . 
In winter one gets so cold that one beats one 's arms together to warm one 's self ; but the masters do n't like it ; they say it wastes time . 
Handling iron when there is ice between the paving-stones is hard work . 
That wears a man out quickly One is old while he is still quite young in that trade . 
At forty a man is done for . 
I was fifty-three . 
I was in a bad state . 
And then , workmen are so mean ! 
When a man is no longer young , they call him nothing but an old bird , old beast ! 
I was not earning more than thirty sous a day . 
They paid me as little as possible . 
The masters took advantage of my age -- and then I had my daughter , who was a laundress at the river . 
She earned a little also . 
It sufficed for us two . 
She had trouble , also ; all day long up to her waist in a tub , in rain , in snow . 
When the wind cuts your face , when it freezes , it is all the same ; you must still wash . 
There are people who have not much linen , and wait until late ; if you do not wash , you lose your custom . 
The planks are badly joined , and water drops on you from everywhere ; you have your petticoats all damp above and below . 
That penetrates . 
She has also worked at the laundry of the Enfants-Rouges , where the water comes through faucets . 
You are not in the tub there ; you wash at the faucet in front of you , and rinse in a basin behind you . 
As it is enclosed , you are not so cold ; but there is that hot steam , which is terrible , and which ruins your eyes . 
She came home at seven o'clock in the evening , and went to bed at once , she was so tired . 
Her husband beat her . 
She is dead . 
We have not been very happy . 
She was a good girl , who did not go to the ball , and who was very peaceable . 
I remember one Shrove-Tuesday when she went to bed at eight o'clock . 
There , I am telling the truth ; you have only to ask . 
Ah , yes ! 
how stupid I am ! 
Paris is a gulf . 
Who knows Father Champmathieu there ? 
But M. Baloup does , I tell you . 
Go see at M. Baloup 's ; and after all , I do n't know what is wanted of me . '' 
The man ceased speaking , and remained standing . 
He had said these things in a loud , rapid , hoarse voice , with a sort of irritated and savage ingenuousness . 
Once he paused to salute some one in the crowd . 
The sort of affirmations which he seemed to fling out before him at random came like hiccoughs , and to each he added the gesture of a wood-cutter who is splitting wood . 
When he had finished , the audience burst into a laugh . 
He stared at the public , and , perceiving that they were laughing , and not understanding why , he began to laugh himself . 
It was inauspicious . 
The President , an attentive and benevolent man , raised his voice . 
He reminded `` the gentlemen of the jury '' that `` the sieur Baloup , formerly a master-wheelwright , with whom the accused stated that he had served , had been summoned in vain . 
He had become bankrupt , and was not to be found . '' 
Then turning to the accused , he enjoined him to listen to what he was about to say , and added : `` You are in a position where reflection is necessary . 
The gravest presumptions rest upon you , and may induce vital results . 
Prisoner , in your own interests , I summon you for the last time to explain yourself clearly on two points . 
In the first place , did you or did you not climb the wall of the Pierron orchard , break the branch , and steal the apples ; that is to say , commit the crime of breaking in and theft ? 
In the second place , are you the discharged convict , Jean Valjean -- yes or no ? '' 
The prisoner shook his head with a capable air , like a man who has thoroughly understood , and who knows what answer he is going to make . 
He opened his mouth , turned towards the President , and said : -- `` In the first place -- '' Then he stared at his cap , stared at the ceiling , and held his peace . 
`` Prisoner , '' said the district-attorney , in a severe voice ; `` pay attention . 
You are not answering anything that has been asked of you . 
Your embarrassment condemns you . 
It is evident that your name is not Champmathieu ; that you are the convict , Jean Valjean , concealed first under the name of Jean Mathieu , which was the name of his mother ; that you went to Auvergne ; that you were born at Faverolles , where you were a pruner of trees . 
It is evident that you have been guilty of entering , and of the theft of ripe apples from the Pierron orchard . 
The gentlemen of the jury will form their own opinion . '' 
The prisoner had finally resumed his seat ; he arose abruptly when the district-attorney had finished , and exclaimed : -- `` You are very wicked ; that you are ! 
This what I wanted to say ; I could not find words for it at first . 
I have stolen nothing . 
I am a man who does not have something to eat every day . 
I was coming from Ailly ; I was walking through the country after a shower , which had made the whole country yellow : even the ponds were overflowed , and nothing sprang from the sand any more but the little blades of grass at the wayside . 
I found a broken branch with apples on the ground ; I picked up the branch without knowing that it would get me into trouble . 
I have been in prison , and they have been dragging me about for the last three months ; more than that I can not say ; people talk against me , they tell me , ` Answer ! ' 
The gendarme , who is a good fellow , nudges my elbow , and says to me in a low voice , ` Come , answer ! ' 
I do n't know how to explain ; I have no education ; I am a poor man ; that is where they wrong me , because they do not see this . 
I have not stolen ; I picked up from the ground things that were lying there . 
You say , Jean Valjean , Jean Mathieu ! 
I do n't know those persons ; they are villagers . 
I worked for M. Baloup , Boulevard de l'Hopital ; my name is Champmathieu . 
You are very clever to tell me where I was born ; I do n't know myself : it 's not everybody who has a house in which to come into the world ; that would be too convenient . 
I think that my father and mother were people who strolled along the highways ; I know nothing different . 
When I was a child , they called me young fellow ; now they call me old fellow ; those are my baptismal names ; take that as you like . 
I have been in Auvergne ; I have been at Faverolles . 
Pardi . 
Well ! 
ca n't a man have been in Auvergne , or at Faverolles , without having been in the galleys ? 
I tell you that I have not stolen , and that I am Father Champmathieu ; I have been with M. Baloup ; I have had a settled residence . 
You worry me with your nonsense , there ! 
Why is everybody pursuing me so furiously ? '' 
The district-attorney had remained standing ; he addressed the President : -- `` Monsieur le President , in view of the confused but exceedingly clever denials of the prisoner , who would like to pass himself off as an idiot , but who will not succeed in so doing , -- we shall attend to that , -- we demand that it shall please you and that it shall please the court to summon once more into this place the convicts Brevet , Cochepaille , and Chenildieu , and Police-Inspector Javert , and question them for the last time as to the identity of the prisoner with the convict Jean Valjean . '' 
`` I would remind the district-attorney , '' said the President , `` that Police-Inspector Javert , recalled by his duties to the capital of a neighboring arrondissement , left the court-room and the town as soon as he had made his deposition ; we have accorded him permission , with the consent of the district-attorney and of the counsel for the prisoner . '' 
`` That is true , Mr. President , '' responded the district-attorney . 
`` In the absence of sieur Javert , I think it my duty to remind the gentlemen of the jury of what he said here a few hours ago . 
Javert is an estimable man , who does honor by his rigorous and strict probity to inferior but important functions . 
These are the terms of his deposition : ` I do not even stand in need of circumstantial proofs and moral presumptions to give the lie to the prisoner 's denial . 
I recognize him perfectly . 
The name of this man is not Champmathieu ; he is an ex-convict named Jean Valjean , and is very vicious and much to be feared . 
It is only with extreme regret that he was released at the expiration of his term . 
He underwent nineteen years of penal servitude for theft . 
He made five or six attempts to escape . 
Besides the theft from Little Gervais , and from the Pierron orchard , I suspect him of a theft committed in the house of His Grace the late Bishop of D -- I often saw him at the time when I was adjutant of the galley-guard at the prison in Toulon . 
I repeat that I recognize him perfectly . ' '' 
This extremely precise statement appeared to produce a vivid impression on the public and on the jury . 
The district-attorney concluded by insisting , that in default of Javert , the three witnesses Brevet , Chenildieu , and Cochepaille should be heard once more and solemnly interrogated . 
The President transmitted the order to an usher , and , a moment later , the door of the witnesses ' room opened . 
The usher , accompanied by a gendarme ready to lend him armed assistance , introduced the convict Brevet . 
The audience was in suspense ; and all breasts heaved as though they had contained but one soul . 
The ex-convict Brevet wore the black and gray waistcoat of the central prisons . 
Brevet was a person sixty years of age , who had a sort of business man 's face , and the air of a rascal . 
The two sometimes go together . 
In prison , whither fresh misdeeds had led him , he had become something in the nature of a turnkey . 
He was a man of whom his superiors said , `` He tries to make himself of use . '' 
The chaplains bore good testimony as to his religious habits . 
It must not be forgotten that this passed under the Restoration . 
`` Brevet , '' said the President , `` you have undergone an ignominious sentence , and you can not take an oath . '' 
Brevet dropped his eyes . 
`` Nevertheless , '' continued the President , `` even in the man whom the law has degraded , there may remain , when the divine mercy permits it , a sentiment of honor and of equity . 
It is to this sentiment that I appeal at this decisive hour . 
If it still exists in you , -- and I hope it does , -- reflect before replying to me : consider on the one hand , this man , whom a word from you may ruin ; on the other hand , justice , which a word from you may enlighten . 
The instant is solemn ; there is still time to retract if you think you have been mistaken . 
Rise , prisoner . 
Brevet , take a good look at the accused , recall your souvenirs , and tell us on your soul and conscience , if you persist in recognizing this man as your former companion in the galleys , Jean Valjean ? '' 
Brevet looked at the prisoner , then turned towards the court . 
`` Yes , Mr. President , I was the first to recognize him , and I stick to it ; that man is Jean Valjean , who entered at Toulon in 1796 , and left in 1815 . 
I left a year later . 
He has the air of a brute now ; but it must be because age has brutalized him ; he was sly at the galleys : I recognize him positively . '' 
`` Take your seat , '' said the President . 
`` Prisoner , remain standing . '' 
Chenildieu was brought in , a prisoner for life , as was indicated by his red cassock and his green cap . 
He was serving out his sentence at the galleys of Toulon , whence he had been brought for this case . 
He was a small man of about fifty , brisk , wrinkled , frail , yellow , brazen-faced , feverish , who had a sort of sickly feebleness about all his limbs and his whole person , and an immense force in his glance . 
His companions in the galleys had nicknamed him I-deny-God -LRB- Je-nie Dieu , Chenildieu -RRB- . 
The President addressed him in nearly the same words which he had used to Brevet . 
At the moment when he reminded him of his infamy which deprived him of the right to take an oath , Chenildieu raised his head and looked the crowd in the face . 
The President invited him to reflection , and asked him as he had asked Brevet , if he persisted in recognition of the prisoner . 
Chenildieu burst out laughing . 
`` Pardieu , as if I did n't recognize him ! 
We were attached to the same chain for five years . 
So you are sulking , old fellow ? '' 
`` Go take your seat , '' said the President . 
The usher brought in Cochepaille . 
He was another convict for life , who had come from the galleys , and was dressed in red , like Chenildieu , was a peasant from Lourdes , and a half-bear of the Pyrenees . 
He had guarded the flocks among the mountains , and from a shepherd he had slipped into a brigand . 
Cochepaille was no less savage and seemed even more stupid than the prisoner . 
He was one of those wretched men whom nature has sketched out for wild beasts , and on whom society puts the finishing touches as convicts in the galleys . 
The President tried to touch him with some grave and pathetic words , and asked him , as he had asked the other two , if he persisted , without hesitation or trouble , in recognizing the man who was standing before him . 
`` He is Jean Valjean , '' said Cochepaille . 
`` He was even called Jean-the-Screw , because he was so strong . '' 
Each of these affirmations from these three men , evidently sincere and in good faith , had raised in the audience a murmur of bad augury for the prisoner , -- a murmur which increased and lasted longer each time that a fresh declaration was added to the proceeding . 
The prisoner had listened to them , with that astounded face which was , according to the accusation , his principal means of defence ; at the first , the gendarmes , his neighbors , had heard him mutter between his teeth : `` Ah , well , he 's a nice one ! '' 
after the second , he said , a little louder , with an air that was almost that of satisfaction , `` Good ! '' 
at the third , he cried , `` Famous ! '' 
The President addressed him : -- `` Have you heard , prisoner ? 
What have you to say ? '' 
He replied : -- `` I say , ` Famous ! ' '' 
An uproar broke out among the audience , and was communicated to the jury ; it was evident that the man was lost . 
`` Ushers , '' said the President , `` enforce silence ! 
I am going to sum up the arguments . '' 
At that moment there was a movement just beside the President ; a voice was heard crying : -- `` Brevet ! 
Chenildieu ! 
Cochepaille ! 
look here ! '' 
All who heard that voice were chilled , so lamentable and terrible was it ; all eyes were turned to the point whence it had proceeded . 
A man , placed among the privileged spectators who were seated behind the court , had just risen , had pushed open the half-door which separated the tribunal from the audience , and was standing in the middle of the hall ; the President , the district-attorney , M. Bamatabois , twenty persons , recognized him , and exclaimed in concert : -- `` M. Madeleine ! '' 
CHAMPMATHIEU MORE AND MORE ASTONISHED It was he , in fact . 
The clerk 's lamp illumined his countenance . 
He held his hat in his hand ; there was no disorder in his clothing ; his coat was carefully buttoned ; he was very pale , and he trembled slightly ; his hair , which had still been gray on his arrival in Arras , was now entirely white : it had turned white during the hour he had sat there . 
All heads were raised : the sensation was indescribable ; there was a momentary hesitation in the audience , the voice had been so heart-rending ; the man who stood there appeared so calm that they did not understand at first . 
They asked themselves whether he had indeed uttered that cry ; they could not believe that that tranquil man had been the one to give that terrible outcry . 
This indecision only lasted a few seconds . 
Even before the President and the district-attorney could utter a word , before the ushers and the gendarmes could make a gesture , the man whom all still called , at that moment , M. Madeleine , had advanced towards the witnesses Cochepaille , Brevet , and Chenildieu . 
`` Do you not recognize me ? '' 
said he . 
All three remained speechless , and indicated by a sign of the head that they did not know him . 
Cochepaille , who was intimidated , made a military salute . 
M. Madeleine turned towards the jury and the court , and said in a gentle voice : -- `` Gentlemen of the jury , order the prisoner to be released ! 
Mr. President , have me arrested . 
He is not the man whom you are in search of ; it is I : I am Jean Valjean . '' 
Not a mouth breathed ; the first commotion of astonishment had been followed by a silence like that of the grave ; those within the hall experienced that sort of religious terror which seizes the masses when something grand has been done . 
In the meantime , the face of the President was stamped with sympathy and sadness ; he had exchanged a rapid sign with the district-attorney and a few low-toned words with the assistant judges ; he addressed the public , and asked in accents which all understood : -- `` Is there a physician present ? '' 
The district-attorney took the word : -- `` Gentlemen of the jury , the very strange and unexpected incident which disturbs the audience inspires us , like yourselves , only with a sentiment which it is unnecessary for us to express . 
You all know , by reputation at least , the honorable M. Madeleine , mayor of M. sur M. ; if there is a physician in the audience , we join the President in requesting him to attend to M. Madeleine , and to conduct him to his home . '' 
M.Madeleine did not allow the district-attorney to finish ; he interrupted him in accents full of suavity and authority . 
These are the words which he uttered ; here they are literally , as they were written down , immediately after the trial by one of the witnesses to this scene , and as they now ring in the ears of those who heard them nearly forty years ago : -- `` I thank you , Mr. District-Attorney , but I am not mad ; you shall see ; you were on the point of committing a great error ; release this man ! 
I am fulfilling a duty ; I am that miserable criminal . 
I am the only one here who sees the matter clearly , and I am telling you the truth . 
God , who is on high , looks down on what I am doing at this moment , and that suffices . 
You can take me , for here I am : but I have done my best ; I concealed myself under another name ; I have become rich ; I have become a mayor ; I have tried to re-enter the ranks of the honest . 
It seems that that is not to be done . 
In short , there are many things which I can not tell . 
I will not narrate the story of my life to you ; you will hear it one of these days . 
I robbed Monseigneur the Bishop , it is true ; it is true that I robbed Little Gervais ; they were right in telling you that Jean Valjean was a very vicious wretch . 
Perhaps it was not altogether his fault . 
Listen , honorable judges ! 
a man who has been so greatly humbled as I have has neither any remonstrances to make to Providence , nor any advice to give to society ; but , you see , the infamy from which I have tried to escape is an injurious thing ; the galleys make the convict what he is ; reflect upon that , if you please . 
Before going to the galleys , I was a poor peasant , with very little intelligence , a sort of idiot ; the galleys wrought a change in me . 
I was stupid ; I became vicious : I was a block of wood ; I became a firebrand . 
Later on , indulgence and kindness saved me , as severity had ruined me . 
But , pardon me , you can not understand what I am saying . 
You will find at my house , among the ashes in the fireplace , the forty-sou piece which I stole , seven years ago , from little Gervais . 
I have nothing farther to add ; take me . 
Good God ! 
the district-attorney shakes his head ; you say , 'M . 
Madeleine has gone mad ! ' 
you do not believe me ! 
that is distressing . 
Do not , at least , condemn this man ! 
What ! 
these men do not recognize me ! 
I wish Javert were here ; he would recognize me . '' 
Nothing can reproduce the sombre and kindly melancholy of tone which accompanied these words . 
He turned to the three convicts , and said : -- `` Well , I recognize you ; do you remember , Brevet ? '' 
He paused , hesitated for an instant , and said : -- `` Do you remember the knitted suspenders with a checked pattern which you wore in the galleys ? '' 
Brevet gave a start of surprise , and surveyed him from head to foot with a frightened air . 
He continued : -- `` Chenildieu , you who conferred on yourself the name of ` Jenie-Dieu , ' your whole right shoulder bears a deep burn , because you one day laid your shoulder against the chafing-dish full of coals , in order to efface the three letters T. F. P. , which are still visible , nevertheless ; answer , is this true ? '' 
`` It is true , '' said Chenildieu . 
He addressed himself to Cochepaille : -- `` Cochepaille , you have , near the bend in your left arm , a date stamped in blue letters with burnt powder ; the date is that of the landing of the Emperor at Cannes , March 1 , 1815 ; pull up your sleeve ! '' 
Cochepaille pushed up his sleeve ; all eyes were focused on him and on his bare arm . 
A gendarme held a light close to it ; there was the date . 
The unhappy man turned to the spectators and the judges with a smile which still rends the hearts of all who saw it whenever they think of it . 
It was a smile of triumph ; it was also a smile of despair . 
`` You see plainly , '' he said , `` that I am Jean Valjean . '' 
In that chamber there were no longer either judges , accusers , nor gendarmes ; there was nothing but staring eyes and sympathizing hearts . 
No one recalled any longer the part that each might be called upon to play ; the district-attorney forgot he was there for the purpose of prosecuting , the President that he was there to preside , the counsel for the defence that he was there to defend . 
It was a striking circumstance that no question was put , that no authority intervened . 
The peculiarity of sublime spectacles is , that they capture all souls and turn witnesses into spectators . 
No one , probably , could have explained what he felt ; no one , probably , said to himself that he was witnessing the splendid outburst of a grand light : all felt themselves inwardly dazzled . 
It was evident that they had Jean Valjean before their eyes . 
That was clear . 
The appearance of this man had sufficed to suffuse with light that matter which had been so obscure but a moment previously , without any further explanation : the whole crowd , as by a sort of electric revelation , understood instantly and at a single glance the simple and magnificent history of a man who was delivering himself up so that another man might not be condemned in his stead . 
The details , the hesitations , little possible oppositions , were swallowed up in that vast and luminous fact . 
It was an impression which vanished speedily , but which was irresistible at the moment . 
`` I do not wish to disturb the court further , '' resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` I shall withdraw , since you do not arrest me . 
I have many things to do . 
The district-attorney knows who I am ; he knows whither I am going ; he can have me arrested when he likes . '' 
He directed his steps towards the door . 
Not a voice was raised , not an arm extended to hinder him . 
All stood aside . 
At that moment there was about him that divine something which causes multitudes to stand aside and make way for a man . 
He traversed the crowd slowly . 
It was never known who opened the door , but it is certain that he found the door open when he reached it . 
On arriving there he turned round and said : -- `` I am at your command , Mr. District-Attorney . '' 
Then he addressed the audience : -- `` All of you , all who are present -- consider me worthy of pity , do you not ? 
Good God ! 
When I think of what I was on the point of doing , I consider that I am to be envied . 
Nevertheless , I should have preferred not to have had this occur . '' 
He withdrew , and the door closed behind him as it had opened , for those who do certain sovereign things are always sure of being served by some one in the crowd . 
Less than an hour after this , the verdict of the jury freed the said Champmathieu from all accusations ; and Champmathieu , being at once released , went off in a state of stupefaction , thinking that all men were fools , and comprehending nothing of this vision . 
IN WHAT MIRROR M. MADELEINE CONTEMPLATES HIS HAIR The day had begun to dawn . 
Fantine had passed a sleepless and feverish night , filled with happy visions ; at daybreak she fell asleep . 
Sister Simplice , who had been watching with her , availed herself of this slumber to go and prepare a new potion of chinchona . 
The worthy sister had been in the laboratory of the infirmary but a few moments , bending over her drugs and phials , and scrutinizing things very closely , on account of the dimness which the half-light of dawn spreads over all objects . 
Suddenly she raised her head and uttered a faint shriek . 
M. Madeleine stood before her ; he had just entered silently . 
`` Is it you , Mr. Mayor ? '' 
she exclaimed . 
He replied in a low voice : -- `` How is that poor woman ? '' 
`` Not so bad just now ; but we have been very uneasy . '' 
She explained to him what had passed : that Fantine had been very ill the day before , and that she was better now , because she thought that the mayor had gone to Montfermeil to get her child . 
The sister dared not question the mayor ; but she perceived plainly from his air that he had not come from there . 
`` All that is good , '' said he ; `` you were right not to undeceive her . '' 
`` Yes , '' responded the sister ; `` but now , Mr. Mayor , she will see you and will not see her child . 
What shall we say to her ? '' 
He reflected for a moment . 
`` God will inspire us , '' said he . 
`` But we can not tell a lie , '' murmured the sister , half aloud . 
It was broad daylight in the room . 
The light fell full on M. Madeleine 's face . 
The sister chanced to raise her eyes to it . 
`` Good God , sir ! '' 
she exclaimed ; `` what has happened to you ? 
Your hair is perfectly white ! '' 
`` White ! '' 
said he . 
Sister Simplice had no mirror . 
She rummaged in a drawer , and pulled out the little glass which the doctor of the infirmary used to see whether a patient was dead and whether he no longer breathed . 
M. Madeleine took the mirror , looked at his hair , and said : -- `` Well ! '' 
He uttered the word indifferently , and as though his mind were on something else . 
The sister felt chilled by something strange of which she caught a glimpse in all this . 
He inquired : -- `` Can I see her ? '' 
`` Is not Monsieur le Maire going to have her child brought back to her ? '' 
said the sister , hardly venturing to put the question . 
`` Of course ; but it will take two or three days at least . '' 
`` If she were not to see Monsieur le Maire until that time , '' went on the sister , timidly , `` she would not know that Monsieur le Maire had returned , and it would be easy to inspire her with patience ; and when the child arrived , she would naturally think Monsieur le Maire had just come with the child . 
We should not have to enact a lie . '' 
M. Madeleine seemed to reflect for a few moments ; then he said with his calm gravity : -- `` No , sister , I must see her . 
I may , perhaps , be in haste . '' 
The nun did not appear to notice this word `` perhaps , '' which communicated an obscure and singular sense to the words of the mayor 's speech . 
She replied , lowering her eyes and her voice respectfully : -- `` In that case , she is asleep ; but Monsieur le Maire may enter . '' 
He made some remarks about a door which shut badly , and the noise of which might awaken the sick woman ; then he entered Fantine 's chamber , approached the bed and drew aside the curtains . 
She was asleep . 
Her breath issued from her breast with that tragic sound which is peculiar to those maladies , and which breaks the hearts of mothers when they are watching through the night beside their sleeping child who is condemned to death . 
But this painful respiration hardly troubled a sort of ineffable serenity which overspread her countenance , and which transfigured her in her sleep . 
Her pallor had become whiteness ; her cheeks were crimson ; her long golden lashes , the only beauty of her youth and her virginity which remained to her , palpitated , though they remained closed and drooping . 
Her whole person was trembling with an indescribable unfolding of wings , all ready to open wide and bear her away , which could be felt as they rustled , though they could not be seen . 
To see her thus , one would never have dreamed that she was an invalid whose life was almost despaired of . 
She resembled rather something on the point of soaring away than something on the point of dying . 
The branch trembles when a hand approaches it to pluck a flower , and seems to both withdraw and to offer itself at one and the same time . 
The human body has something of this tremor when the instant arrives in which the mysterious fingers of Death are about to pluck the soul . 
M. Madeleine remained for some time motionless beside that bed , gazing in turn upon the sick woman and the crucifix , as he had done two months before , on the day when he had come for the first time to see her in that asylum . 
They were both still there in the same attitude -- she sleeping , he praying ; only now , after the lapse of two months , her hair was gray and his was white . 
The sister had not entered with him . 
He stood beside the bed , with his finger on his lips , as though there were some one in the chamber whom he must enjoin to silence . 
She opened her eyes , saw him , and said quietly , with a smile : -- `` And Cosette ? '' 
FANTINE HAPPY She made no movement of either surprise or of joy ; she was joy itself . 
That simple question , `` And Cosette ? '' 
was put with so profound a faith , with so much certainty , with such a complete absence of disquiet and of doubt , that he found not a word of reply . 
She continued : -- `` I knew that you were there . 
I was asleep , but I saw you . 
I have seen you for a long , long time . 
I have been following you with my eyes all night long . 
You were in a glory , and you had around you all sorts of celestial forms . '' 
He raised his glance to the crucifix . 
`` But , '' she resumed , `` tell me where Cosette is . 
Why did not you place her on my bed against the moment of my waking ? '' 
He made some mechanical reply which he was never afterwards able to recall . 
Fortunately , the doctor had been warned , and he now made his appearance . 
He came to the aid of M. Madeleine . 
`` Calm yourself , my child , '' said the doctor ; `` your child is here . '' 
Fantine 's eyes beamed and filled her whole face with light . 
She clasped her hands with an expression which contained all that is possible to prayer in the way of violence and tenderness . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` bring her to me ! '' 
Touching illusion of a mother ! 
Cosette was , for her , still the little child who is carried . 
`` Not yet , '' said the doctor , `` not just now . 
You still have some fever . 
The sight of your child would agitate you and do you harm . 
You must be cured first . '' 
She interrupted him impetuously : -- `` But I am cured ! 
Oh , I tell you that I am cured ! 
What an ass that doctor is ! 
The idea ! 
I want to see my child ! '' 
`` You see , '' said the doctor , `` how excited you become . 
So long as you are in this state I shall oppose your having your child . 
It is not enough to see her ; it is necessary that you should live for her . 
When you are reasonable , I will bring her to you myself . '' 
The poor mother bowed her head . 
`` I beg your pardon , doctor , I really beg your pardon . 
Formerly I should never have spoken as I have just done ; so many misfortunes have happened to me , that I sometimes do not know what I am saying . 
I understand you ; you fear the emotion . 
I will wait as long as you like , but I swear to you that it would not have harmed me to see my daughter . 
I have been seeing her ; I have not taken my eyes from her since yesterday evening . 
Do you know ? 
If she were brought to me now , I should talk to her very gently . 
That is all . 
Is it not quite natural that I should desire to see my daughter , who has been brought to me expressly from Montfermeil ? 
I am not angry . 
I know well that I am about to be happy . 
All night long I have seen white things , and persons who smiled at me . 
When Monsieur le Docteur pleases , he shall bring me Cosette . 
I have no longer any fever ; I am well . 
I am perfectly conscious that there is nothing the matter with me any more ; but I am going to behave as though I were ill , and not stir , to please these ladies here . 
When it is seen that I am very calm , they will say , ` She must have her child . ' '' 
M. Madeleine was sitting on a chair beside the bed . 
She turned towards him ; she was making a visible effort to be calm and `` very good , '' as she expressed it in the feebleness of illness which resembles infancy , in order that , seeing her so peaceable , they might make no difficulty about bringing Cosette to her . 
But while she controlled herself she could not refrain from questioning M. Madeleine . 
`` Did you have a pleasant trip , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Oh ! 
how good you were to go and get her for me ! 
Only tell me how she is . 
Did she stand the journey well ? 
Alas ! 
she will not recognize me . 
She must have forgotten me by this time , poor darling ! 
Children have no memories . 
They are like birds . 
A child sees one thing to-day and another thing to-morrow , and thinks of nothing any longer . 
And did she have white linen ? 
Did those Thenardiers keep her clean ? 
How have they fed her ? 
Oh ! 
if you only knew how I have suffered , putting such questions as that to myself during all the time of my wretchedness . 
Now , it is all past . 
I am happy . 
Oh , how I should like to see her ! 
Do you think her pretty , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Is not my daughter beautiful ? 
You must have been very cold in that diligence ! 
Could she not be brought for just one little instant ? 
She might be taken away directly afterwards . 
Tell me ; you are the master ; it could be so if you chose ! '' 
He took her hand . 
`` Cosette is beautiful , '' he said , `` Cosette is well . 
You shall see her soon ; but calm yourself ; you are talking with too much vivacity , and you are throwing your arms out from under the clothes , and that makes you cough . '' 
In fact , fits of coughing interrupted Fantine at nearly every word . 
Fantine did not murmur ; she feared that she had injured by her too passionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous of inspiring , and she began to talk of indifferent things . 
`` Montfermeil is quite pretty , is it not ? 
People go there on pleasure parties in summer . 
Are the Thenardiers prosperous ? 
There are not many travellers in their parts . 
That inn of theirs is a sort of a cook-shop . '' 
M. Madeleine was still holding her hand , and gazing at her with anxiety ; it was evident that he had come to tell her things before which his mind now hesitated . 
The doctor , having finished his visit , retired . 
Sister Simplice remained alone with them . 
But in the midst of this pause Fantine exclaimed : -- `` I hear her ! 
mon Dieu , I hear her ! '' 
She stretched out her arm to enjoin silence about her , held her breath , and began to listen with rapture . 
There was a child playing in the yard -- the child of the portress or of some work-woman . 
It was one of those accidents which are always occurring , and which seem to form a part of the mysterious stage-setting of mournful scenes . 
The child -- a little girl -- was going and coming , running to warm herself , laughing , singing at the top of her voice . 
Alas ! 
in what are the plays of children not intermingled . 
It was this little girl whom Fantine heard singing . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she resumed , `` it is my Cosette ! 
I recognize her voice . '' 
The child retreated as it had come ; the voice died away . 
Fantine listened for a while longer , then her face clouded over , and M. Madeleine heard her say , in a low voice : `` How wicked that doctor is not to allow me to see my daughter ! 
That man has an evil countenance , that he has . '' 
But the smiling background of her thoughts came to the front again . 
She continued to talk to herself , with her head resting on the pillow : `` How happy we are going to be ! 
We shall have a little garden the very first thing ; M. Madeleine has promised it to me . 
My daughter will play in the garden . 
She must know her letters by this time . 
I will make her spell . 
She will run over the grass after butterflies . 
I will watch her . 
Then she will take her first communion . 
Ah ! 
when will she take her first communion ? '' 
She began to reckon on her fingers . 
`` One , two , three , four -- she is seven years old . 
In five years she will have a white veil , and openwork stockings ; she will look like a little woman . 
O my good sister , you do not know how foolish I become when I think of my daughter 's first communion ! '' 
She began to laugh . 
He had released Fantine 's hand . 
He listened to her words as one listens to the sighing of the breeze , with his eyes on the ground , his mind absorbed in reflection which had no bottom . 
All at once she ceased speaking , and this caused him to raise his head mechanically . 
Fantine had become terrible . 
She no longer spoke , she no longer breathed ; she had raised herself to a sitting posture , her thin shoulder emerged from her chemise ; her face , which had been radiant but a moment before , was ghastly , and she seemed to have fixed her eyes , rendered large with terror , on something alarming at the other extremity of the room . 
`` Good God ! '' 
he exclaimed ; `` what ails you , Fantine ? '' 
She made no reply ; she did not remove her eyes from the object which she seemed to see . 
She removed one hand from his arm , and with the other made him a sign to look behind him . 
He turned , and beheld Javert . 
JAVERT SATISFIED This is what had taken place . 
The half-hour after midnight had just struck when M. Madeleine quitted the Hall of Assizes in Arras . 
He regained his inn just in time to set out again by the mail-wagon , in which he had engaged his place . 
A little before six o'clock in the morning he had arrived at M. sur M. , and his first care had been to post a letter to M. Laffitte , then to enter the infirmary and see Fantine . 
However , he had hardly quitted the audience hall of the Court of Assizes , when the district-attorney , recovering from his first shock , had taken the word to deplore the mad deed of the honorable mayor of M. sur M. , to declare that his convictions had not been in the least modified by that curious incident , which would be explained thereafter , and to demand , in the meantime , the condemnation of that Champmathieu , who was evidently the real Jean Valjean . 
The district-attorney 's persistence was visibly at variance with the sentiments of every one , of the public , of the court , and of the jury . 
The counsel for the defence had some difficulty in refuting this harangue and in establishing that , in consequence of the revelations of M. Madeleine , that is to say , of the real Jean Valjean , the aspect of the matter had been thoroughly altered , and that the jury had before their eyes now only an innocent man . 
Thence the lawyer had drawn some epiphonemas , not very fresh , unfortunately , upon judicial errors , etc. , etc. ; the President , in his summing up , had joined the counsel for the defence , and in a few minutes the jury had thrown Champmathieu out of the case . 
Nevertheless , the district-attorney was bent on having a Jean Valjean ; and as he had no longer Champmathieu , he took Madeleine . 
Immediately after Champmathieu had been set at liberty , the district-attorney shut himself up with the President . 
They conferred `` as to the necessity of seizing the person of M. le Maire of M. sur M. '' This phrase , in which there was a great deal of of , is the district-attorney 's , written with his own hand , on the minutes of his report to the attorney-general . 
His first emotion having passed off , the President did not offer many objections . 
Justice must , after all , take its course . 
And then , when all was said , although the President was a kindly and a tolerably intelligent man , he was , at the same time , a devoted and almost an ardent royalist , and he had been shocked to hear the Mayor of M. sur M. say the Emperor , and not Bonaparte , when alluding to the landing at Cannes . 
The order for his arrest was accordingly despatched . 
The district-attorney forwarded it to M. sur M. by a special messenger , at full speed , and entrusted its execution to Police Inspector Javert . 
The reader knows that Javert had returned to M. sur M. immediately after having given his deposition . 
Javert was just getting out of bed when the messenger handed him the order of arrest and the command to produce the prisoner . 
The messenger himself was a very clever member of the police , who , in two words , informed Javert of what had taken place at Arras . 
The order of arrest , signed by the district-attorney , was couched in these words : `` Inspector Javert will apprehend the body of the Sieur Madeleine , mayor of M. sur M. , who , in this day 's session of the court , was recognized as the liberated convict , Jean Valjean . '' 
Any one who did not know Javert , and who had chanced to see him at the moment when he penetrated the antechamber of the infirmary , could have divined nothing of what had taken place , and would have thought his air the most ordinary in the world . 
He was cool , calm , grave , his gray hair was perfectly smooth upon his temples , and he had just mounted the stairs with his habitual deliberation . 
Any one who was thoroughly acquainted with him , and who had examined him attentively at the moment , would have shuddered . 
The buckle of his leather stock was under his left ear instead of at the nape of his neck . 
This betrayed unwonted agitation . 
Javert was a complete character , who never had a wrinkle in his duty or in his uniform ; methodical with malefactors , rigid with the buttons of his coat . 
That he should have set the buckle of his stock awry , it was indispensable that there should have taken place in him one of those emotions which may be designated as internal earthquakes . 
He had come in a simple way , had made a requisition on the neighboring post for a corporal and four soldiers , had left the soldiers in the courtyard , had had Fantine 's room pointed out to him by the portress , who was utterly unsuspicious , accustomed as she was to seeing armed men inquiring for the mayor . 
On arriving at Fantine 's chamber , Javert turned the handle , pushed the door open with the gentleness of a sick-nurse or a police spy , and entered . 
Properly speaking , he did not enter . 
He stood erect in the half-open door , his hat on his head and his left hand thrust into his coat , which was buttoned up to the chin . 
In the bend of his elbow the leaden head of his enormous cane , which was hidden behind him , could be seen . 
Thus he remained for nearly a minute , without his presence being perceived . 
All at once Fantine raised her eyes , saw him , and made M. Madeleine turn round . 
The instant that Madeleine 's glance encountered Javert 's glance , Javert , without stirring , without moving from his post , without approaching him , became terrible . 
No human sentiment can be as terrible as joy . 
It was the visage of a demon who has just found his damned soul . 
The satisfaction of at last getting hold of Jean Valjean caused all that was in his soul to appear in his countenance . 
The depths having been stirred up , mounted to the surface . 
The humiliation of having , in some slight degree , lost the scent , and of having indulged , for a few moments , in an error with regard to Champmathieu , was effaced by pride at having so well and accurately divined in the first place , and of having for so long cherished a just instinct . 
Javert 's content shone forth in his sovereign attitude . 
The deformity of triumph overspread that narrow brow . 
All the demonstrations of horror which a satisfied face can afford were there . 
Javert was in heaven at that moment . 
Without putting the thing clearly to himself , but with a confused intuition of the necessity of his presence and of his success , he , Javert , personified justice , light , and truth in their celestial function of crushing out evil . 
Behind him and around him , at an infinite distance , he had authority , reason , the case judged , the legal conscience , the public prosecution , all the stars ; he was protecting order , he was causing the law to yield up its thunders , he was avenging society , he was lending a helping hand to the absolute , he was standing erect in the midst of a glory . 
There existed in his victory a remnant of defiance and of combat . 
Erect , haughty , brilliant , he flaunted abroad in open day the superhuman bestiality of a ferocious archangel . 
The terrible shadow of the action which he was accomplishing caused the vague flash of the social sword to be visible in his clenched fist ; happy and indignant , he held his heel upon crime , vice , rebellion , perdition , hell ; he was radiant , he exterminated , he smiled , and there was an incontestable grandeur in this monstrous Saint Michael . 
Javert , though frightful , had nothing ignoble about him . 
Probity , sincerity , candor , conviction , the sense of duty , are things which may become hideous when wrongly directed ; but which , even when hideous , remain grand : their majesty , the majesty peculiar to the human conscience , clings to them in the midst of horror ; they are virtues which have one vice , -- error . 
The honest , pitiless joy of a fanatic in the full flood of his atrocity preserves a certain lugubriously venerable radiance . 
Without himself suspecting the fact , Javert in his formidable happiness was to be pitied , as is every ignorant man who triumphs . 
Nothing could be so poignant and so terrible as this face , wherein was displayed all that may be designated as the evil of the good . 
AUTHORITY REASSERTS ITS RIGHTS Fantine had not seen Javert since the day on which the mayor had torn her from the man . 
Her ailing brain comprehended nothing , but the only thing which she did not doubt was that he had come to get her . 
She could not endure that terrible face ; she felt her life quitting her ; she hid her face in both hands , and shrieked in her anguish : -- `` Monsieur Madeleine , save me ! '' 
Jean Valjean -- we shall henceforth not speak of him otherwise -- had risen . 
He said to Fantine in the gentlest and calmest of voices : -- `` Be at ease ; it is not for you that he is come . '' 
Then he addressed Javert , and said : -- `` I know what you want . '' 
Javert replied : -- `` Be quick about it ! '' 
There lay in the inflection of voice which accompanied these words something indescribably fierce and frenzied . 
Javert did not say , `` Be quick about it ! '' 
he said `` Bequiabouit . '' 
No orthography can do justice to the accent with which it was uttered : it was no longer a human word : it was a roar . 
He did not proceed according to his custom , he did not enter into the matter , he exhibited no warrant of arrest . 
In his eyes , Jean Valjean was a sort of mysterious combatant , who was not to be laid hands upon , a wrestler in the dark whom he had had in his grasp for the last five years , without being able to throw him . 
This arrest was not a beginning , but an end . 
He confined himself to saying , `` Be quick about it ! '' 
As he spoke thus , he did not advance a single step ; he hurled at Jean Valjean a glance which he threw out like a grappling-hook , and with which he was accustomed to draw wretches violently to him . 
It was this glance which Fantine had felt penetrating to the very marrow of her bones two months previously . 
At Javert 's exclamation , Fantine opened her eyes once more . 
But the mayor was there ; what had she to fear ? 
Javert advanced to the middle of the room , and cried : -- `` See here now ! 
Art thou coming ? '' 
The unhappy woman glanced about her . 
No one was present excepting the nun and the mayor . 
To whom could that abject use of `` thou '' be addressed ? 
To her only . 
She shuddered . 
Then she beheld a most unprecedented thing , a thing so unprecedented that nothing equal to it had appeared to her even in the blackest deliriums of fever . 
She beheld Javert , the police spy , seize the mayor by the collar ; she saw the mayor bow his head . 
It seemed to her that the world was coming to an end . 
Javert had , in fact , grasped Jean Valjean by the collar . 
`` Monsieur le Maire ! '' 
shrieked Fantine . 
Javert burst out laughing with that frightful laugh which displayed all his gums . 
`` There is no longer any Monsieur le Maire here ! '' 
Jean Valjean made no attempt to disengage the hand which grasped the collar of his coat . 
He said : -- `` Javert -- '' Javert interrupted him : `` Call me Mr. Inspector . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I should like to say a word to you in private . '' 
`` Aloud ! 
Say it aloud ! '' 
replied Javert ; `` people are in the habit of talking aloud to me . '' 
Jean Valjean went on in a lower tone : -- `` I have a request to make of you -- '' `` I tell you to speak loud . '' 
`` But you alone should hear it -- '' `` What difference does that make to me ? 
I shall not listen . '' 
Jean Valjean turned towards him and said very rapidly and in a very low voice : -- `` Grant me three days ' grace ! 
three days in which to go and fetch the child of this unhappy woman . 
I will pay whatever is necessary . 
You shall accompany me if you choose . '' 
`` You are making sport of me ! '' 
cried Javert . 
`` Come now , I did not think you such a fool ! 
You ask me to give you three days in which to run away ! 
You say that it is for the purpose of fetching that creature 's child ! 
Ah ! 
Ah ! 
That 's good ! 
That 's really capital ! '' 
Fantine was seized with a fit of trembling . 
`` My child ! '' 
she cried , `` to go and fetch my child ! 
She is not here , then ! 
Answer me , sister ; where is Cosette ? 
I want my child ! 
Monsieur Madeleine ! 
Monsieur le Maire ! '' 
Javert stamped his foot . 
`` And now there 's the other one ! 
Will you hold your tongue , you hussy ? 
It 's a pretty sort of a place where convicts are magistrates , and where women of the town are cared for like countesses ! 
Ah ! 
But we are going to change all that ; it is high time ! '' 
He stared intently at Fantine , and added , once more taking into his grasp Jean Valjean 's cravat , shirt and collar : -- `` I tell you that there is no Monsieur Madeleine and that there is no Monsieur le Maire . 
There is a thief , a brigand , a convict named Jean Valjean ! 
And I have him in my grasp ! 
That 's what there is ! '' 
Fantine raised herself in bed with a bound , supporting herself on her stiffened arms and on both hands : she gazed at Jean Valjean , she gazed at Javert , she gazed at the nun , she opened her mouth as though to speak ; a rattle proceeded from the depths of her throat , her teeth chattered ; she stretched out her arms in her agony , opening her hands convulsively , and fumbling about her like a drowning person ; then suddenly fell back on her pillow . 
Her head struck the head-board of the bed and fell forwards on her breast , with gaping mouth and staring , sightless eyes . 
She was dead . 
Jean Valjean laid his hand upon the detaining hand of Javert , and opened it as he would have opened the hand of a baby ; then he said to Javert : -- `` You have murdered that woman . '' 
`` Let 's have an end of this ! '' 
shouted Javert , in a fury ; `` I am not here to listen to argument . 
Let us economize all that ; the guard is below ; march on instantly , or you 'll get the thumb-screws ! '' 
In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead , which was in a decidedly decrepit state , and which served the sisters as a camp-bed when they were watching with the sick . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to this bed , in a twinkling wrenched off the head-piece , which was already in a dilapidated condition , an easy matter to muscles like his , grasped the principal rod like a bludgeon , and glanced at Javert . 
Javert retreated towards the door . 
Jean Valjean , armed with his bar of iron , walked slowly up to Fantine 's couch . 
When he arrived there he turned and said to Javert , in a voice that was barely audible : -- `` I advise you not to disturb me at this moment . '' 
One thing is certain , and that is , that Javert trembled . 
It did occur to him to summon the guard , but Jean Valjean might avail himself of that moment to effect his escape ; so he remained , grasped his cane by the small end , and leaned against the door-post , without removing his eyes from Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean rested his elbow on the knob at the head of the bed , and his brow on his hand , and began to contemplate the motionless body of Fantine , which lay extended there . 
He remained thus , mute , absorbed , evidently with no further thought of anything connected with this life . 
Upon his face and in his attitude there was nothing but inexpressible pity . 
After a few moments of this meditation he bent towards Fantine , and spoke to her in a low voice . 
What did he say to her ? 
What could this man , who was reproved , say to that woman , who was dead ? 
What words were those ? 
No one on earth heard them . 
Did the dead woman hear them ? 
There are some touching illusions which are , perhaps , sublime realities . 
The point as to which there exists no doubt is , that Sister Simplice , the sole witness of the incident , often said that at the moment that Jean Valjean whispered in Fantine 's ear , she distinctly beheld an ineffable smile dawn on those pale lips , and in those dim eyes , filled with the amazement of the tomb . 
Jean Valjean took Fantine 's head in both his hands , and arranged it on the pillow as a mother might have done for her child ; then he tied the string of her chemise , and smoothed her hair back under her cap . 
That done , he closed her eyes . 
Fantine 's face seemed strangely illuminated at that moment . 
Death , that signifies entrance into the great light . 
Fantine 's hand was hanging over the side of the bed . 
Jean Valjean knelt down before that hand , lifted it gently , and kissed it . 
Then he rose , and turned to Javert . 
`` Now , '' said he , `` I am at your disposal . '' 
A SUITABLE TOMB Javert deposited Jean Valjean in the city prison . 
The arrest of M. Madeleine occasioned a sensation , or rather , an extraordinary commotion in M. sur M . 
We are sorry that we can not conceal the fact , that at the single word , `` He was a convict , '' nearly every one deserted him . 
In less than two hours all the good that he had done had been forgotten , and he was nothing but a `` convict from the galleys . '' 
It is just to add that the details of what had taken place at Arras were not yet known . 
All day long conversations like the following were to be heard in all quarters of the town : -- `` You do n't know ? 
He was a liberated convict ! '' 
`` Who ? '' 
`` The mayor . '' 
`` Bah ! 
M. Madeleine ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` His name was not Madeleine at all ; he had a frightful name , Bejean , Bojean , Boujean . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Good God ! '' 
`` He has been arrested . '' 
`` Arrested ! '' 
`` In prison , in the city prison , while waiting to be transferred . '' 
`` Until he is transferred ! '' 
`` He is to be transferred ! '' 
`` Where is he to be taken ? '' 
`` He will be tried at the Assizes for a highway robbery which he committed long ago . '' 
`` Well ! 
I suspected as much . 
That man was too good , too perfect , too affected . 
He refused the cross ; he bestowed sous on all the little scamps he came across . 
I always thought there was some evil history back of all that . '' 
The `` drawing-rooms '' particularly abounded in remarks of this nature . 
One old lady , a subscriber to the Drapeau Blanc , made the following remark , the depth of which it is impossible to fathom : -- `` I am not sorry . 
It will be a lesson to the Bonapartists ! '' 
It was thus that the phantom which had been called M. Madeleine vanished from M. sur M. Only three or four persons in all the town remained faithful to his memory . 
The old portress who had served him was among the number . 
On the evening of that day the worthy old woman was sitting in her lodge , still in a thorough fright , and absorbed in sad reflections . 
The factory had been closed all day , the carriage gate was bolted , the street was deserted . 
There was no one in the house but the two nuns , Sister Perpetue and Sister Simplice , who were watching beside the body of Fantine . 
Towards the hour when M. Madeleine was accustomed to return home , the good portress rose mechanically , took from a drawer the key of M. Madeleine 's chamber , and the flat candlestick which he used every evening to go up to his quarters ; then she hung the key on the nail whence he was accustomed to take it , and set the candlestick on one side , as though she was expecting him . 
Then she sat down again on her chair , and became absorbed in thought once more . 
The poor , good old woman bad done all this without being conscious of it . 
It was only at the expiration of two hours that she roused herself from her revery , and exclaimed , `` Hold ! 
My good God Jesus ! 
And I hung his key on the nail ! '' 
At that moment the small window in the lodge opened , a hand passed through , seized the key and the candlestick , and lighted the taper at the candle which was burning there . 
The portress raised her eyes , and stood there with gaping mouth , and a shriek which she confined to her throat . 
She knew that hand , that arm , the sleeve of that coat . 
It was M. Madeleine . 
It was several seconds before she could speak ; she had a seizure , as she said herself , when she related the adventure afterwards . 
`` Good God , Monsieur le Maire , '' she cried at last , `` I thought you were -- '' She stopped ; the conclusion of her sentence would have been lacking in respect towards the beginning . 
Jean Valjean was still Monsieur le Maire to her . 
He finished her thought . 
`` In prison , '' said he . 
`` I was there ; I broke a bar of one of the windows ; I let myself drop from the top of a roof , and here I am . 
I am going up to my room ; go and find Sister Simplice for me . 
She is with that poor woman , no doubt . '' 
The old woman obeyed in all haste . 
He gave her no orders ; he was quite sure that she would guard him better than he should guard himself . 
No one ever found out how he had managed to get into the courtyard without opening the big gates . 
He had , and always carried about him , a pass-key which opened a little side-door ; but he must have been searched , and his latch-key must have been taken from him . 
This point was never explained . 
He ascended the staircase leading to his chamber . 
On arriving at the top , he left his candle on the top step of his stairs , opened his door with very little noise , went and closed his window and his shutters by feeling , then returned for his candle and re-entered his room . 
It was a useful precaution ; it will be recollected that his window could be seen from the street . 
He cast a glance about him , at his table , at his chair , at his bed which had not been disturbed for three days . 
No trace of the disorder of the night before last remained . 
The portress had `` done up '' his room ; only she had picked out of the ashes and placed neatly on the table the two iron ends of the cudgel and the forty-sou piece which had been blackened by the fire . 
He took a sheet of paper , on which he wrote : `` These are the two tips of my iron-shod cudgel and the forty-sou piece stolen from Little Gervais , which I mentioned at the Court of Assizes , '' and he arranged this piece of paper , the bits of iron , and the coin in such a way that they were the first things to be seen on entering the room . 
From a cupboard he pulled out one of his old shirts , which he tore in pieces . 
In the strips of linen thus prepared he wrapped the two silver candlesticks . 
He betrayed neither haste nor agitation ; and while he was wrapping up the Bishop 's candlesticks , he nibbled at a piece of black bread . 
It was probably the prison-bread which he had carried with him in his flight . 
This was proved by the crumbs which were found on the floor of the room when the authorities made an examination later on . 
There came two taps at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said he . 
It was Sister Simplice . 
She was pale ; her eyes were red ; the candle which she carried trembled in her hand . 
The peculiar feature of the violences of destiny is , that however polished or cool we may be , they wring human nature from our very bowels , and force it to reappear on the surface . 
The emotions of that day had turned the nun into a woman once more . 
She had wept , and she was trembling . 
Jean Valjean had just finished writing a few lines on a paper , which he handed to the nun , saying , `` Sister , you will give this to Monsieur le Cure . '' 
The paper was not folded . 
She cast a glance upon it . 
`` You can read it , '' said he . 
She read : -- `` I beg Monsieur le Cure to keep an eye on all that I leave behind me . 
He will be so good as to pay out of it the expenses of my trial , and of the funeral of the woman who died yesterday . 
The rest is for the poor . '' 
The sister tried to speak , but she only managed to stammer a few inarticulate sounds . 
She succeeded in saying , however : -- `` Does not Monsieur le Maire desire to take a last look at that poor , unhappy woman ? '' 
`` No , '' said he ; `` I am pursued ; it would only end in their arresting me in that room , and that would disturb her . '' 
He had hardly finished when a loud noise became audible on the staircase . 
They heard a tumult of ascending footsteps , and the old portress saying in her loudest and most piercing tones : -- `` My good sir , I swear to you by the good God , that not a soul has entered this house all day , nor all the evening , and that I have not even left the door . '' 
A man responded : -- `` But there is a light in that room , nevertheless . '' 
They recognized Javert 's voice . 
The chamber was so arranged that the door in opening masked the corner of the wall on the right . 
Jean Valjean blew out the light and placed himself in this angle . 
Sister Simplice fell on her knees near the table . 
The door opened . 
Javert entered . 
The whispers of many men and the protestations of the portress were audible in the corridor . 
The nun did not raise her eyes . 
She was praying . 
The candle was on the chimney-piece , and gave but very little light . 
Javert caught sight of the nun and halted in amazement . 
It will be remembered that the fundamental point in Javert , his element , the very air he breathed , was veneration for all authority . 
This was impregnable , and admitted of neither objection nor restriction . 
In his eyes , of course , the ecclesiastical authority was the chief of all ; he was religious , superficial and correct on this point as on all others . 
In his eyes , a priest was a mind , who never makes a mistake ; a nun was a creature who never sins ; they were souls walled in from this world , with a single door which never opened except to allow the truth to pass through . 
On perceiving the sister , his first movement was to retire . 
But there was also another duty which bound him and impelled him imperiously in the opposite direction . 
His second movement was to remain and to venture on at least one question . 
This was Sister Simplice , who had never told a lie in her life . 
Javert knew it , and held her in special veneration in consequence . 
`` Sister , '' said he , `` are you alone in this room ? '' 
A terrible moment ensued , during which the poor portress felt as though she should faint . 
The sister raised her eyes and answered : -- `` Yes . '' 
`` Then , '' resumed Javert , `` you will excuse me if I persist ; it is my duty ; you have not seen a certain person -- a man -- this evening ? 
He has escaped ; we are in search of him -- that Jean Valjean ; you have not seen him ? '' 
The sister replied : -- `` No . '' 
She lied . 
She had lied twice in succession , one after the other , without hesitation , promptly , as a person does when sacrificing herself . 
`` Pardon me , '' said Javert , and he retired with a deep bow . 
O sainted maid ! 
you left this world many years ago ; you have rejoined your sisters , the virgins , and your brothers , the angels , in the light ; may this lie be counted to your credit in paradise ! 
The sister 's affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he did not even observe the singularity of that candle which had but just been extinguished , and which was still smoking on the table . 
An hour later , a man , marching amid trees and mists , was rapidly departing from M. sur M. in the direction of Paris . 
That man was Jean Valjean . 
It has been established by the testimony of two or three carters who met him , that he was carrying a bundle ; that he was dressed in a blouse . 
Where had he obtained that blouse ? 
No one ever found out . 
But an aged workman had died in the infirmary of the factory a few days before , leaving behind him nothing but his blouse . 
Perhaps that was the one . 
One last word about Fantine . 
We all have a mother , -- the earth . 
Fantine was given back to that mother . 
The cure thought that he was doing right , and perhaps he really was , in reserving as much money as possible from what Jean Valjean had left for the poor . 
Who was concerned , after all ? 
A convict and a woman of the town . 
That is why he had a very simple funeral for Fantine , and reduced it to that strictly necessary form known as the pauper 's grave . 
So Fantine was buried in the free corner of the cemetery which belongs to anybody and everybody , and where the poor are lost . 
Fortunately , God knows where to find the soul again . 
Fantine was laid in the shade , among the first bones that came to hand ; she was subjected to the promiscuousness of ashes . 
She was thrown into the public grave . 
Her grave resembled her bed . 
-LSB- The end of Volume I. `` Fantine '' -RSB- COSETTE WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES Last year -LRB- 1861 -RRB- , on a beautiful May morning , a traveller , the person who is telling this story , was coming from Nivelles , and directing his course towards La Hulpe . 
He was on foot . 
He was pursuing a broad paved road , which undulated between two rows of trees , over the hills which succeed each other , raise the road and let it fall again , and produce something in the nature of enormous waves . 
He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac . 
In the west he perceived the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l'Alleud , which has the form of a reversed vase . 
He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence ; and at the angle of the cross-road , by the side of a sort of mouldy gibbet bearing the inscription Ancient Barrier No. 4 , a public house , bearing on its front this sign : At the Four Winds -LRB- Aux Quatre Vents -RRB- . 
Echabeau , Private Cafe . 
A quarter of a league further on , he arrived at the bottom of a little valley , where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through the embankment of the road . 
The clump of sparsely planted but very green trees , which fills the valley on one side of the road , is dispersed over the meadows on the other , and disappears gracefully and as in order in the direction of Braine-l'Alleud . 
On the right , close to the road , was an inn , with a four-wheeled cart at the door , a large bundle of hop-poles , a plough , a heap of dried brushwood near a flourishing hedge , lime smoking in a square hole , and a ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions . 
A young girl was weeding in a field , where a huge yellow poster , probably of some outside spectacle , such as a parish festival , was fluttering in the wind . 
At one corner of the inn , beside a pool in which a flotilla of ducks was navigating , a badly paved path plunged into the bushes . 
The wayfarer struck into this . 
After traversing a hundred paces , skirting a wall of the fifteenth century , surmounted by a pointed gable , with bricks set in contrast , he found himself before a large door of arched stone , with a rectilinear impost , in the sombre style of Louis XIV. , flanked by two flat medallions . 
A severe facade rose above this door ; a wall , perpendicular to the facade , almost touched the door , and flanked it with an abrupt right angle . 
In the meadow before the door lay three harrows , through which , in disorder , grew all the flowers of May . 
The door was closed . 
The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old rusty knocker . 
The sun was charming ; the branches had that soft shivering of May , which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind . 
A brave little bird , probably a lover , was carolling in a distracted manner in a large tree . 
The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation , resembling the hollow of a sphere , in the stone on the left , at the foot of the pier of the door . 
At this moment the leaves of the door parted , and a peasant woman emerged . 
She saw the wayfarer , and perceived what he was looking at . 
`` It was a French cannon-ball which made that , '' she said to him . 
And she added : -- `` That which you see there , higher up in the door , near a nail , is the hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg . 
The bullet did not pierce the wood . '' 
`` What is the name of this place ? '' 
inquired the wayfarer . 
`` Hougomont , '' said the peasant woman . 
The traveller straightened himself up . 
He walked on a few paces , and went off to look over the tops of the hedges . 
On the horizon through the trees , he perceived a sort of little elevation , and on this elevation something which at that distance resembled a lion . 
He was on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
HOUGOMONT Hougomont , -- this was a funereal spot , the beginning of the obstacle , the first resistance , which that great wood-cutter of Europe , called Napoleon , encountered at Waterloo , the first knot under the blows of his axe . 
It was a chateau ; it is no longer anything but a farm . 
For the antiquary , Hougomont is Hugomons . 
This manor was built by Hugo , Sire of Somerel , the same who endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey of Villiers . 
The traveller pushed open the door , elbowed an ancient calash under the porch , and entered the courtyard . 
The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of the sixteenth century , which here simulates an arcade , everything else having fallen prostrate around it . 
A monumental aspect often has its birth in ruin . 
In a wall near the arcade opens another arched door , of the time of Henry IV. , permitting a glimpse of the trees of an orchard ; beside this door , a manure-hole , some pickaxes , some shovels , some carts , an old well , with its flagstone and its iron reel , a chicken jumping , and a turkey spreading its tail , a chapel surmounted by a small bell-tower , a blossoming pear-tree trained in espalier against the wall of the chapel -- behold the court , the conquest of which was one of Napoleon 's dreams . 
This corner of earth , could he but have seized it , would , perhaps , have given him the world likewise . 
Chickens are scattering its dust abroad with their beaks . 
A growl is audible ; it is a huge dog , who shows his teeth and replaces the English . 
The English behaved admirably there . 
Cooke 's four companies of guards there held out for seven hours against the fury of an army . 
Hougomont viewed on the map , as a geometrical plan , comprising buildings and enclosures , presents a sort of irregular rectangle , one angle of which is nicked out . 
It is this angle which contains the southern door , guarded by this wall , which commands it only a gun 's length away . 
Hougomont has two doors , -- the southern door , that of the chateau ; and the northern door , belonging to the farm . 
Napoleon sent his brother Jerome against Hougomont ; the divisions of Foy , Guilleminot , and Bachelu hurled themselves against it ; nearly the entire corps of Reille was employed against it , and miscarried ; Kellermann 's balls were exhausted on this heroic section of wall . 
Bauduin 's brigade was not strong enough to force Hougomont on the north , and the brigade of Soye could not do more than effect the beginning of a breach on the south , but without taking it . 
The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south . 
A bit of the north door , broken by the French , hangs suspended to the wall . 
It consists of four planks nailed to two cross-beams , on which the scars of the attack are visible . 
The northern door , which was beaten in by the French , and which has had a piece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall , stands half-open at the bottom of the paddock ; it is cut squarely in the wall , built of stone below , of brick above which closes in the courtyard on the north . 
It is a simple door for carts , such as exist in all farms , with the two large leaves made of rustic planks : beyond lie the meadows . 
The dispute over this entrance was furious . 
For a long time , all sorts of imprints of bloody hands were visible on the door-posts . 
It was there that Bauduin was killed . 
The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard ; its horror is visible there ; the confusion of the fray was petrified there ; it lives and it dies there ; it was only yesterday . 
The walls are in the death agony , the stones fall ; the breaches cry aloud ; the holes are wounds ; the drooping , quivering trees seem to be making an effort to flee . 
This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day . 
Buildings which have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles . 
The English barricaded themselves there ; the French made their way in , but could not stand their ground . 
Beside the chapel , one wing of the chateau , the only ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont , rises in a crumbling state , -- disembowelled , one might say . 
The chateau served for a dungeon , the chapel for a block-house . 
There men exterminated each other . 
The French , fired on from every point , -- from behind the walls , from the summits of the garrets , from the depths of the cellars , through all the casements , through all the air-holes , through every crack in the stones , -- fetched fagots and set fire to walls and men ; the reply to the grape-shot was a conflagration . 
In the ruined wing , through windows garnished with bars of iron , the dismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible ; the English guards were in ambush in these rooms ; the spiral of the staircase , cracked from the ground floor to the very roof , appears like the inside of a broken shell . 
The staircase has two stories ; the English , besieged on the staircase , and massed on its upper steps , had cut off the lower steps . 
These consisted of large slabs of blue stone , which form a heap among the nettles . 
Half a score of steps still cling to the wall ; on the first is cut the figure of a trident . 
These inaccessible steps are solid in their niches . 
All the rest resembles a jaw which has been denuded of its teeth . 
There are two old trees there : one is dead ; the other is wounded at its base , and is clothed with verdure in April . 
Since 1815 it has taken to growing through the staircase . 
A massacre took place in the chapel . 
The interior , which has recovered its calm , is singular . 
The mass has not been said there since the carnage . 
Nevertheless , the altar has been left there -- an altar of unpolished wood , placed against a background of roughhewn stone . 
Four whitewashed walls , a door opposite the altar , two small arched windows ; over the door a large wooden crucifix , below the crucifix a square air-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay ; on the ground , in one corner , an old window-frame with the glass all broken to pieces -- such is the chapel . 
Near the altar there is nailed up a wooden statue of Saint Anne , of the fifteenth century ; the head of the infant Jesus has been carried off by a large ball . 
The French , who were masters of the chapel for a moment , and were then dislodged , set fire to it . 
The flames filled this building ; it was a perfect furnace ; the door was burned , the floor was burned , the wooden Christ was not burned . 
The fire preyed upon his feet , of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen ; then it stopped , -- a miracle , according to the assertion of the people of the neighborhood . 
The infant Jesus , decapitated , was less fortunate than the Christ . 
The walls are covered with inscriptions . 
Near the feet of Christ this name is to be read : Henquinez . 
Then these others : Conde de Rio Maior Marques y Marquesa de Almagro -LRB- Habana -RRB- . 
There are French names with exclamation points , -- a sign of wrath . 
The wall was freshly whitewashed in 1849 . 
The nations insulted each other there . 
It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up which held an axe in its hand ; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros . 
On emerging from the chapel , a well is visible on the left . 
There are two in this courtyard . 
One inquires , Why is there no bucket and pulley to this ? 
It is because water is no longer drawn there . 
Why is water not drawn there ? 
Because it is full of skeletons . 
The last person who drew water from the well was named Guillaume van Kylsom . 
He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont , and was gardener there . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , his family fled and concealed themselves in the woods . 
The forest surrounding the Abbey of Villiers sheltered these unfortunate people who had been scattered abroad , for many days and nights . 
There are at this day certain traces recognizable , such as old boles of burned trees , which mark the site of these poor bivouacs trembling in the depths of the thickets . 
Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont , `` to guard the chateau , '' and concealed himself in the cellar . 
The English discovered him there . 
They tore him from his hiding-place , and the combatants forced this frightened man to serve them , by administering blows with the flats of their swords . 
They were thirsty ; this Guillaume brought them water . 
It was from this well that he drew it . 
Many drank there their last draught . 
This well where drank so many of the dead was destined to die itself . 
After the engagement , they were in haste to bury the dead bodies . 
Death has a fashion of harassing victory , and she causes the pest to follow glory . 
The typhus is a concomitant of triumph . 
This well was deep , and it was turned into a sepulchre . 
Three hundred dead bodies were cast into it . 
With too much haste perhaps . 
Were they all dead ? 
Legend says they were not . 
It seems that on the night succeeding the interment , feeble voices were heard calling from the well . 
This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard . 
Three walls , part stone , part brick , and simulating a small , square tower , and folded like the leaves of a screen , surround it on all sides . 
The fourth side is open . 
It is there that the water was drawn . 
The wall at the bottom has a sort of shapeless loophole , possibly the hole made by a shell . 
This little tower had a platform , of which only the beams remain . 
The iron supports of the well on the right form a cross . 
On leaning over , the eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is filled with a heaped-up mass of shadows . 
The base of the walls all about the well is concealed in a growth of nettles . 
This well has not in front of it that large blue slab which forms the table for all wells in Belgium . 
The slab has here been replaced by a cross-beam , against which lean five or six shapeless fragments of knotty and petrified wood which resemble huge bones . 
There is no longer either pail , chain , or pulley ; but there is still the stone basin which served the overflow . 
The rain-water collects there , and from time to time a bird of the neighboring forests comes thither to drink , and then flies away . 
One house in this ruin , the farmhouse , is still inhabited . 
The door of this house opens on the courtyard . 
Upon this door , beside a pretty Gothic lock-plate , there is an iron handle with trefoils placed slanting . 
At the moment when the Hanoverian lieutenant , Wilda , grasped this handle in order to take refuge in the farm , a French sapper hewed off his hand with an axe . 
The family who occupy the house had for their grandfather Guillaume van Kylsom , the old gardener , dead long since . 
A woman with gray hair said to us : `` I was there . 
I was three years old . 
My sister , who was older , was terrified and wept . 
They carried us off to the woods . 
I went there in my mother 's arms . 
We glued our ears to the earth to hear . 
I imitated the cannon , and went boum ! 
boum ! '' 
A door opening from the courtyard on the left led into the orchard , so we were told . 
The orchard is terrible . 
It is in three parts ; one might almost say , in three acts . 
The first part is a garden , the second is an orchard , the third is a wood . 
These three parts have a common enclosure : on the side of the entrance , the buildings of the chateau and the farm ; on the left , a hedge ; on the right , a wall ; and at the end , a wall . 
The wall on the right is of brick , the wall at the bottom is of stone . 
One enters the garden first . 
It slopes downwards , is planted with gooseberry bushes , choked with a wild growth of vegetation , and terminated by a monumental terrace of cut stone , with balustrade with a double curve . 
It was a seignorial garden in the first French style which preceded Le Notre ; to-day it is ruins and briars . 
The pilasters are surmounted by globes which resemble cannon-balls of stone . 
Forty-three balusters can still be counted on their sockets ; the rest lie prostrate in the grass . 
Almost all bear scratches of bullets . 
One broken baluster is placed on the pediment like a fractured leg . 
It was in this garden , further down than the orchard , that six light-infantry men of the 1st , having made their way thither , and being unable to escape , hunted down and caught like bears in their dens , accepted the combat with two Hanoverian companies , one of which was armed with carbines . 
The Hanoverians lined this balustrade and fired from above . 
The infantry men , replying from below , six against two hundred , intrepid and with no shelter save the currant-bushes , took a quarter of an hour to die . 
One mounts a few steps and passes from the garden into the orchard , properly speaking . 
There , within the limits of those few square fathoms , fifteen hundred men fell in less than an hour . 
The wall seems ready to renew the combat . 
Thirty-eight loopholes , pierced by the English at irregular heights , are there still . 
In front of the sixth are placed two English tombs of granite . 
There are loopholes only in the south wall , as the principal attack came from that quarter . 
The wall is hidden on the outside by a tall hedge ; the French came up , thinking that they had to deal only with a hedge , crossed it , and found the wall both an obstacle and an ambuscade , with the English guards behind it , the thirty-eight loopholes firing at once a shower of grape-shot and balls , and Soye 's brigade was broken against it . 
Thus Waterloo began . 
Nevertheless , the orchard was taken . 
As they had no ladders , the French scaled it with their nails . 
They fought hand to hand amid the trees . 
All this grass has been soaked in blood . 
A battalion of Nassau , seven hundred strong , was overwhelmed there . 
The outside of the wall , against which Kellermann 's two batteries were trained , is gnawed by grape-shot . 
This orchard is sentient , like others , in the month of May . 
It has its buttercups and its daisies ; the grass is tall there ; the cart-horses browse there ; cords of hair , on which linen is drying , traverse the spaces between the trees and force the passer-by to bend his head ; one walks over this uncultivated land , and one 's foot dives into mole-holes . 
In the middle of the grass one observes an uprooted tree-bole which lies there all verdant . 
Major Blackmann leaned against it to die . 
Beneath a great tree in the neighborhood fell the German general , Duplat , descended from a French family which fled on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes . 
An aged and falling apple-tree leans far over to one side , its wound dressed with a bandage of straw and of clayey loam . 
Nearly all the apple-trees are falling with age . 
There is not one which has not had its bullet or its biscayan . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- The skeletons of dead trees abound in this orchard . 
Crows fly through their branches , and at the end of it is a wood full of violets . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- A bullet as large as an egg . 
Bauduin , killed , Foy wounded , conflagration , massacre , carnage , a rivulet formed of English blood , French blood , German blood mingled in fury , a well crammed with corpses , the regiment of Nassau and the regiment of Brunswick destroyed , Duplat killed , Blackmann killed , the English Guards mutilated , twenty French battalions , besides the forty from Reille 's corps , decimated , three thousand men in that hovel of Hougomont alone cut down , slashed to pieces , shot , burned , with their throats cut , -- and all this so that a peasant can say to-day to the traveller : Monsieur , give me three francs , and if you like , I will explain to you the affair of Waterloo ! 
THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE , 1815 Let us turn back , -- that is one of the story-teller 's rights , -- and put ourselves once more in the year 1815 , and even a little earlier than the epoch when the action narrated in the first part of this book took place . 
If it had not rained in the night between the 17th and the 18th of June , 1815 , the fate of Europe would have been different . 
A few drops of water , more or less , decided the downfall of Napoleon . 
All that Providence required in order to make Waterloo the end of Austerlitz was a little more rain , and a cloud traversing the sky out of season sufficed to make a world crumble . 
The battle of Waterloo could not be begun until half-past eleven o'clock , and that gave Blucher time to come up . 
Why ? 
Because the ground was wet . 
The artillery had to wait until it became a little firmer before they could manoeuvre . 
Napoleon was an artillery officer , and felt the effects of this . 
The foundation of this wonderful captain was the man who , in the report to the Directory on Aboukir , said : Such a one of our balls killed six men . 
All his plans of battle were arranged for projectiles . 
The key to his victory was to make the artillery converge on one point . 
He treated the strategy of the hostile general like a citadel , and made a breach in it . 
He overwhelmed the weak point with grape-shot ; he joined and dissolved battles with cannon . 
There was something of the sharpshooter in his genius . 
To beat in squares , to pulverize regiments , to break lines , to crush and disperse masses , -- for him everything lay in this , to strike , strike , strike incessantly , -- and he intrusted this task to the cannon-ball . 
A redoubtable method , and one which , united with genius , rendered this gloomy athlete of the pugilism of war invincible for the space of fifteen years . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , he relied all the more on his artillery , because he had numbers on his side . 
Wellington had only one hundred and fifty-nine mouths of fire ; Napoleon had two hundred and forty . 
Suppose the soil dry , and the artillery capable of moving , the action would have begun at six o'clock in the morning . 
The battle would have been won and ended at two o'clock , three hours before the change of fortune in favor of the Prussians . 
What amount of blame attaches to Napoleon for the loss of this battle ? 
Is the shipwreck due to the pilot ? 
Was it the evident physical decline of Napoleon that complicated this epoch by an inward diminution of force ? 
Had the twenty years of war worn out the blade as it had worn the scabbard , the soul as well as the body ? 
Did the veteran make himself disastrously felt in the leader ? 
In a word , was this genius , as many historians of note have thought , suffering from an eclipse ? 
Did he go into a frenzy in order to disguise his weakened powers from himself ? 
Did he begin to waver under the delusion of a breath of adventure ? 
Had he become -- a grave matter in a general -- unconscious of peril ? 
Is there an age , in this class of material great men , who may be called the giants of action , when genius grows short-sighted ? 
Old age has no hold on the geniuses of the ideal ; for the Dantes and Michael Angelos to grow old is to grow in greatness ; is it to grow less for the Hannibals and the Bonapartes ? 
Had Napoleon lost the direct sense of victory ? 
Had he reached the point where he could no longer recognize the reef , could no longer divine the snare , no longer discern the crumbling brink of abysses ? 
Had he lost his power of scenting out catastrophes ? 
He who had in former days known all the roads to triumph , and who , from the summit of his chariot of lightning , pointed them out with a sovereign finger , had he now reached that state of sinister amazement when he could lead his tumultuous legions harnessed to it , to the precipice ? 
Was he seized at the age of forty-six with a supreme madness ? 
Was that titanic charioteer of destiny no longer anything more than an immense dare-devil ? 
We do not think so . 
His plan of battle was , by the confession of all , a masterpiece . 
To go straight to the centre of the Allies ' line , to make a breach in the enemy , to cut them in two , to drive the British half back on Hal , and the Prussian half on Tongres , to make two shattered fragments of Wellington and Blucher , to carry Mont-Saint-Jean , to seize Brussels , to hurl the German into the Rhine , and the Englishman into the sea . 
All this was contained in that battle , according to Napoleon . 
Afterwards people would see . 
Of course , we do not here pretend to furnish a history of the battle of Waterloo ; one of the scenes of the foundation of the story which we are relating is connected with this battle , but this history is not our subject ; this history , moreover , has been finished , and finished in a masterly manner , from one point of view by Napoleon , and from another point of view by a whole pleiad of historians . 
-LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 7 -RSB- Walter Scott , Lamartine , Vaulabelle , Charras , Quinet , Thiers . 
As for us , we leave the historians at loggerheads ; we are but a distant witness , a passer-by on the plain , a seeker bending over that soil all made of human flesh , taking appearances for realities , perchance ; we have no right to oppose , in the name of science , a collection of facts which contain illusions , no doubt ; we possess neither military practice nor strategic ability which authorize a system ; in our opinion , a chain of accidents dominated the two leaders at Waterloo ; and when it becomes a question of destiny , that mysterious culprit , we judge like that ingenious judge , the populace . 
A Those persons who wish to gain a clear idea of the battle of Waterloo have only to place , mentally , on the ground , a capital A . 
The left limb of the A is the road to Nivelles , the right limb is the road to Genappe , the tie of the A is the hollow road to Ohain from Braine-l'Alleud . 
The top of the A is Mont-Saint-Jean , where Wellington is ; the lower left tip is Hougomont , where Reille is stationed with Jerome Bonaparte ; the right tip is the Belle-Alliance , where Napoleon was . 
At the centre of this chord is the precise point where the final word of the battle was pronounced . 
It was there that the lion has been placed , the involuntary symbol of the supreme heroism of the Imperial Guard . 
The triangle included in the top of the A , between the two limbs and the tie , is the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
The dispute over this plateau constituted the whole battle . 
The wings of the two armies extended to the right and left of the two roads to Genappe and Nivelles ; d'Erlon facing Picton , Reille facing Hill . 
Behind the tip of the A , behind the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , is the forest of Soignes . 
As for the plain itself , let the reader picture to himself a vast undulating sweep of ground ; each rise commands the next rise , and all the undulations mount towards Mont-Saint-Jean , and there end in the forest . 
Two hostile troops on a field of battle are two wrestlers . 
It is a question of seizing the opponent round the waist . 
The one seeks to trip up the other . 
They clutch at everything : a bush is a point of support ; an angle of the wall offers them a rest to the shoulder ; for the lack of a hovel under whose cover they can draw up , a regiment yields its ground ; an unevenness in the ground , a chance turn in the landscape , a cross-path encountered at the right moment , a grove , a ravine , can stay the heel of that colossus which is called an army , and prevent its retreat . 
He who quits the field is beaten ; hence the necessity devolving on the responsible leader , of examining the most insignificant clump of trees , and of studying deeply the slightest relief in the ground . 
The two generals had attentively studied the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean , now called the plain of Waterloo . 
In the preceding year , Wellington , with the sagacity of foresight , had examined it as the possible seat of a great battle . 
Upon this spot , and for this duel , on the 18th of June , Wellington had the good post , Napoleon the bad post . 
The English army was stationed above , the French army below . 
It is almost superfluous here to sketch the appearance of Napoleon on horseback , glass in hand , upon the heights of Rossomme , at daybreak , on June 18 , 1815 . 
All the world has seen him before we can show him . 
That calm profile under the little three-cornered hat of the school of Brienne , that green uniform , the white revers concealing the star of the Legion of Honor , his great coat hiding his epaulets , the corner of red ribbon peeping from beneath his vest , his leather trousers , the white horse with the saddle-cloth of purple velvet bearing on the corners crowned N 's and eagles , Hessian boots over silk stockings , silver spurs , the sword of Marengo , -- that whole figure of the last of the Caesars is present to all imaginations , saluted with acclamations by some , severely regarded by others . 
That figure stood for a long time wholly in the light ; this arose from a certain legendary dimness evolved by the majority of heroes , and which always veils the truth for a longer or shorter time ; but to-day history and daylight have arrived . 
That light called history is pitiless ; it possesses this peculiar and divine quality , that , pure light as it is , and precisely because it is wholly light , it often casts a shadow in places where people had hitherto beheld rays ; from the same man it constructs two different phantoms , and the one attacks the other and executes justice on it , and the shadows of the despot contend with the brilliancy of the leader . 
Hence arises a truer measure in the definitive judgments of nations . 
Babylon violated lessens Alexander , Rome enchained lessens Caesar , Jerusalem murdered lessens Titus , tyranny follows the tyrant . 
It is a misfortune for a man to leave behind him the night which bears his form . 
THE QUID OBSCURUM OF BATTLES Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle ; a beginning which was troubled , uncertain , hesitating , menacing to both armies , but still more so for the English than for the French . 
It had rained all night , the earth had been cut up by the downpour , the water had accumulated here and there in the hollows of the plain as if in casks ; at some points the gear of the artillery carriages was buried up to the axles , the circingles of the horses were dripping with liquid mud . 
If the wheat and rye trampled down by this cohort of transports on the march had not filled in the ruts and strewn a litter beneath the wheels , all movement , particularly in the valleys , in the direction of Papelotte would have been impossible . 
The affair began late . 
Napoleon , as we have already explained , was in the habit of keeping all his artillery well in hand , like a pistol , aiming it now at one point , now at another , of the battle ; and it had been his wish to wait until the horse batteries could move and gallop freely . 
In order to do that it was necessary that the sun should come out and dry the soil . 
But the sun did not make its appearance . 
It was no longer the rendezvous of Austerlitz . 
When the first cannon was fired , the English general , Colville , looked at his watch , and noted that it was thirty-five minutes past eleven . 
The action was begun furiously , with more fury , perhaps , than the Emperor would have wished , by the left wing of the French resting on Hougomont . 
At the same time Napoleon attacked the centre by hurling Quiot 's brigade on La Haie-Sainte , and Ney pushed forward the right wing of the French against the left wing of the English , which rested on Papelotte . 
The attack on Hougomont was something of a feint ; the plan was to draw Wellington thither , and to make him swerve to the left . 
This plan would have succeeded if the four companies of the English guards and the brave Belgians of Perponcher 's division had not held the position solidly , and Wellington , instead of massing his troops there , could confine himself to despatching thither , as reinforcements , only four more companies of guards and one battalion from Brunswick . 
The attack of the right wing of the French on Papelotte was calculated , in fact , to overthrow the English left , to cut off the road to Brussels , to bar the passage against possible Prussians , to force Mont-Saint-Jean , to turn Wellington back on Hougomont , thence on Braine-l'Alleud , thence on Hal ; nothing easier . 
With the exception of a few incidents this attack succeeded Papelotte was taken ; La Haie-Sainte was carried . 
A detail to be noted . 
There was in the English infantry , particularly in Kempt 's brigade , a great many raw recruits . 
These young soldiers were valiant in the presence of our redoubtable infantry ; their inexperience extricated them intrepidly from the dilemma ; they performed particularly excellent service as skirmishers : the soldier skirmisher , left somewhat to himself , becomes , so to speak , his own general . 
These recruits displayed some of the French ingenuity and fury . 
This novice of an infantry had dash . 
This displeased Wellington . 
After the taking of La Haie-Sainte the battle wavered . 
There is in this day an obscure interval , from mid-day to four o'clock ; the middle portion of this battle is almost indistinct , and participates in the sombreness of the hand-to-hand conflict . 
Twilight reigns over it . 
We perceive vast fluctuations in that fog , a dizzy mirage , paraphernalia of war almost unknown to-day , pendant colbacks , floating sabre-taches , cross-belts , cartridge-boxes for grenades , hussar dolmans , red boots with a thousand wrinkles , heavy shakos garlanded with torsades , the almost black infantry of Brunswick mingled with the scarlet infantry of England , the English soldiers with great , white circular pads on the slopes of their shoulders for epaulets , the Hanoverian light-horse with their oblong casques of leather , with brass hands and red horse-tails , the Scotch with their bare knees and plaids , the great white gaiters of our grenadiers ; pictures , not strategic lines -- what Salvator Rosa requires , not what is suited to the needs of Gribeauval . 
A certain amount of tempest is always mingled with a battle . 
Quid obscurum , quid divinum . 
Each historian traces , to some extent , the particular feature which pleases him amid this pellmell . 
Whatever may be the combinations of the generals , the shock of armed masses has an incalculable ebb . 
During the action the plans of the two leaders enter into each other and become mutually thrown out of shape . 
Such a point of the field of battle devours more combatants than such another , just as more or less spongy soils soak up more or less quickly the water which is poured on them . 
It becomes necessary to pour out more soldiers than one would like ; a series of expenditures which are the unforeseen . 
The line of battle waves and undulates like a thread , the trails of blood gush illogically , the fronts of the armies waver , the regiments form capes and gulfs as they enter and withdraw ; all these reefs are continually moving in front of each other . 
Where the infantry stood the artillery arrives , the cavalry rushes in where the artillery was , the battalions are like smoke . 
There was something there ; seek it . 
It has disappeared ; the open spots change place , the sombre folds advance and retreat , a sort of wind from the sepulchre pushes forward , hurls back , distends , and disperses these tragic multitudes . 
What is a fray ? 
an oscillation ? 
The immobility of a mathematical plan expresses a minute , not a day . 
In order to depict a battle , there is required one of those powerful painters who have chaos in their brushes . 
Rembrandt is better than Vandermeulen ; Vandermeulen , exact at noon , lies at three o'clock . 
Geometry is deceptive ; the hurricane alone is trustworthy . 
That is what confers on Folard the right to contradict Polybius . 
Let us add , that there is a certain instant when the battle degenerates into a combat , becomes specialized , and disperses into innumerable detailed feats , which , to borrow the expression of Napoleon himself , `` belong rather to the biography of the regiments than to the history of the army . '' 
The historian has , in this case , the evident right to sum up the whole . 
He can not do more than seize the principal outlines of the struggle , and it is not given to any one narrator , however conscientious he may be , to fix , absolutely , the form of that horrible cloud which is called a battle . 
This , which is true of all great armed encounters , is particularly applicable to Waterloo . 
Nevertheless , at a certain moment in the afternoon the battle came to a point . 
FOUR O'CLOCK IN THE AFTERNOON Towards four o'clock the condition of the English army was serious . 
The Prince of Orange was in command of the centre , Hill of the right wing , Picton of the left wing . 
The Prince of Orange , desperate and intrepid , shouted to the Hollando-Belgians : `` Nassau ! 
Brunswick ! 
Never retreat ! '' 
Hill , having been weakened , had come up to the support of Wellington ; Picton was dead . 
At the very moment when the English had captured from the French the flag of the 105th of the line , the French had killed the English general , Picton , with a bullet through the head . 
The battle had , for Wellington , two bases of action , Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte ; Hougomont still held out , but was on fire ; La Haie-Sainte was taken . 
Of the German battalion which defended it , only forty-two men survived ; all the officers , except five , were either dead or captured . 
Three thousand combatants had been massacred in that barn . 
A sergeant of the English Guards , the foremost boxer in England , reputed invulnerable by his companions , had been killed there by a little French drummer-boy . 
Baring had been dislodged , Alten put to the sword . 
Many flags had been lost , one from Alten 's division , and one from the battalion of Lunenburg , carried by a prince of the house of Deux-Ponts . 
The Scotch Grays no longer existed ; Ponsonby 's great dragoons had been hacked to pieces . 
That valiant cavalry had bent beneath the lancers of Bro and beneath the cuirassiers of Travers ; out of twelve hundred horses , six hundred remained ; out of three lieutenant-colonels , two lay on the earth , -- Hamilton wounded , Mater slain . 
Ponsonby had fallen , riddled by seven lance-thrusts . 
Gordon was dead . 
Marsh was dead . 
Two divisions , the fifth and the sixth , had been annihilated . 
Hougomont injured , La Haie-Sainte taken , there now existed but one rallying-point , the centre . 
That point still held firm . 
Wellington reinforced it . 
He summoned thither Hill , who was at Merle-Braine ; he summoned Chasse , who was at Braine-l'Alleud . 
The centre of the English army , rather concave , very dense , and very compact , was strongly posted . 
It occupied the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , having behind it the village , and in front of it the slope , which was tolerably steep then . 
It rested on that stout stone dwelling which at that time belonged to the domain of Nivelles , and which marks the intersection of the roads -- a pile of the sixteenth century , and so robust that the cannon-balls rebounded from it without injuring it . 
All about the plateau the English had cut the hedges here and there , made embrasures in the hawthorn-trees , thrust the throat of a cannon between two branches , embattled the shrubs . 
There artillery was ambushed in the brushwood . 
This punic labor , incontestably authorized by war , which permits traps , was so well done , that Haxo , who had been despatched by the Emperor at nine o'clock in the morning to reconnoitre the enemy 's batteries , had discovered nothing of it , and had returned and reported to Napoleon that there were no obstacles except the two barricades which barred the road to Nivelles and to Genappe . 
It was at the season when the grain is tall ; on the edge of the plateau a battalion of Kempt 's brigade , the 95th , armed with carabines , was concealed in the tall wheat . 
Thus assured and buttressed , the centre of the Anglo-Dutch army was well posted . 
The peril of this position lay in the forest of Soignes , then adjoining the field of battle , and intersected by the ponds of Groenendael and Boitsfort . 
An army could not retreat thither without dissolving ; the regiments would have broken up immediately there . 
The artillery would have been lost among the morasses . 
The retreat , according to many a man versed in the art , -- though it is disputed by others , -- would have been a disorganized flight . 
To this centre , Wellington added one of Chasse 's brigades taken from the right wing , and one of Wincke 's brigades taken from the left wing , plus Clinton 's division . 
To his English , to the regiments of Halkett , to the brigades of Mitchell , to the guards of Maitland , he gave as reinforcements and aids , the infantry of Brunswick , Nassau 's contingent , Kielmansegg 's Hanoverians , and Ompteda 's Germans . 
This placed twenty-six battalions under his hand . 
The right wing , as Charras says , was thrown back on the centre . 
An enormous battery was masked by sacks of earth at the spot where there now stands what is called the `` Museum of Waterloo . '' 
Besides this , Wellington had , behind a rise in the ground , Somerset 's Dragoon Guards , fourteen hundred horse strong . 
It was the remaining half of the justly celebrated English cavalry . 
Ponsonby destroyed , Somerset remained . 
The battery , which , if completed , would have been almost a redoubt , was ranged behind a very low garden wall , backed up with a coating of bags of sand and a large slope of earth . 
This work was not finished ; there had been no time to make a palisade for it . 
Wellington , uneasy but impassive , was on horseback , and there remained the whole day in the same attitude , a little in advance of the old mill of Mont-Saint-Jean , which is still in existence , beneath an elm , which an Englishman , an enthusiastic vandal , purchased later on for two hundred francs , cut down , and carried off . 
Wellington was coldly heroic . 
The bullets rained about him . 
His aide-de-camp , Gordon , fell at his side . 
Lord Hill , pointing to a shell which had burst , said to him : `` My lord , what are your orders in case you are killed ? '' 
`` To do like me , '' replied Wellington . 
To Clinton he said laconically , `` To hold this spot to the last man . '' 
The day was evidently turning out ill . 
Wellington shouted to his old companions of Talavera , of Vittoria , of Salamanca : `` Boys , can retreat be thought of ? 
Think of old England ! '' 
Towards four o'clock , the English line drew back . 
Suddenly nothing was visible on the crest of the plateau except the artillery and the sharpshooters ; the rest had disappeared : the regiments , dislodged by the shells and the French bullets , retreated into the bottom , now intersected by the back road of the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean ; a retrograde movement took place , the English front hid itself , Wellington drew back . 
`` The beginning of retreat ! '' 
cried Napoleon . 
NAPOLEON IN A GOOD HUMOR The Emperor , though ill and discommoded on horseback by a local trouble , had never been in a better humor than on that day . 
His impenetrability had been smiling ever since the morning . 
On the 18th of June , that profound soul masked by marble beamed blindly . 
The man who had been gloomy at Austerlitz was gay at Waterloo . 
The greatest favorites of destiny make mistakes . 
Our joys are composed of shadow . 
The supreme smile is God 's alone . 
Ridet Caesar , Pompeius flebit , said the legionaries of the Fulminatrix Legion . 
Pompey was not destined to weep on that occasion , but it is certain that Caesar laughed . 
While exploring on horseback at one o'clock on the preceding night , in storm and rain , in company with Bertrand , the communes in the neighborhood of Rossomme , satisfied at the sight of the long line of the English camp-fires illuminating the whole horizon from Frischemont to Braine-l'Alleud , it had seemed to him that fate , to whom he had assigned a day on the field of Waterloo , was exact to the appointment ; he stopped his horse , and remained for some time motionless , gazing at the lightning and listening to the thunder ; and this fatalist was heard to cast into the darkness this mysterious saying , `` We are in accord . '' 
Napoleon was mistaken . 
They were no longer in accord . 
He took not a moment for sleep ; every instant of that night was marked by a joy for him . 
He traversed the line of the principal outposts , halting here and there to talk to the sentinels . 
At half-past two , near the wood of Hougomont , he heard the tread of a column on the march ; he thought at the moment that it was a retreat on the part of Wellington . 
He said : `` It is the rear-guard of the English getting under way for the purpose of decamping . 
I will take prisoners the six thousand English who have just arrived at Ostend . '' 
He conversed expansively ; he regained the animation which he had shown at his landing on the first of March , when he pointed out to the Grand-Marshal the enthusiastic peasant of the Gulf Juan , and cried , `` Well , Bertrand , here is a reinforcement already ! '' 
On the night of the 17th to the 18th of June he rallied Wellington . 
`` That little Englishman needs a lesson , '' said Napoleon . 
The rain redoubled in violence ; the thunder rolled while the Emperor was speaking . 
At half-past three o'clock in the morning , he lost one illusion ; officers who had been despatched to reconnoitre announced to him that the enemy was not making any movement . 
Nothing was stirring ; not a bivouac-fire had been extinguished ; the English army was asleep . 
The silence on earth was profound ; the only noise was in the heavens . 
At four o'clock , a peasant was brought in to him by the scouts ; this peasant had served as guide to a brigade of English cavalry , probably Vivian 's brigade , which was on its way to take up a position in the village of Ohain , at the extreme left . 
At five o'clock , two Belgian deserters reported to him that they had just quitted their regiment , and that the English army was ready for battle . 
`` So much the better ! '' 
exclaimed Napoleon . 
`` I prefer to overthrow them rather than to drive them back . '' 
In the morning he dismounted in the mud on the slope which forms an angle with the Plancenoit road , had a kitchen table and a peasant 's chair brought to him from the farm of Rossomme , seated himself , with a truss of straw for a carpet , and spread out on the table the chart of the battle-field , saying to Soult as he did so , `` A pretty checker-board . '' 
In consequence of the rains during the night , the transports of provisions , embedded in the soft roads , had not been able to arrive by morning ; the soldiers had had no sleep ; they were wet and fasting . 
This did not prevent Napoleon from exclaiming cheerfully to Ney , `` We have ninety chances out of a hundred . '' 
At eight o'clock the Emperor 's breakfast was brought to him . 
He invited many generals to it . 
During breakfast , it was said that Wellington had been to a ball two nights before , in Brussels , at the Duchess of Richmond 's ; and Soult , a rough man of war , with a face of an archbishop , said , `` The ball takes place to-day . '' 
The Emperor jested with Ney , who said , `` Wellington will not be so simple as to wait for Your Majesty . '' 
That was his way , however . 
`` He was fond of jesting , '' says Fleury de Chaboulon . 
`` A merry humor was at the foundation of his character , '' says Gourgaud . 
`` He abounded in pleasantries , which were more peculiar than witty , '' says Benjamin Constant . 
These gayeties of a giant are worthy of insistence . 
It was he who called his grenadiers `` his grumblers '' ; he pinched their ears ; he pulled their mustaches . 
`` The Emperor did nothing but play pranks on us , '' is the remark of one of them . 
During the mysterious trip from the island of Elba to France , on the 27th of February , on the open sea , the French brig of war , Le Zephyr , having encountered the brig L'Inconstant , on which Napoleon was concealed , and having asked the news of Napoleon from L'Inconstant , the Emperor , who still wore in his hat the white and amaranthine cockade sown with bees , which he had adopted at the isle of Elba , laughingly seized the speaking-trumpet , and answered for himself , `` The Emperor is well . '' 
A man who laughs like that is on familiar terms with events . 
Napoleon indulged in many fits of this laughter during the breakfast at Waterloo . 
After breakfast he meditated for a quarter of an hour ; then two generals seated themselves on the truss of straw , pen in hand and their paper on their knees , and the Emperor dictated to them the order of battle . 
At nine o'clock , at the instant when the French army , ranged in echelons and set in motion in five columns , had deployed -- the divisions in two lines , the artillery between the brigades , the music at their head ; as they beat the march , with rolls on the drums and the blasts of trumpets , mighty , vast , joyous , a sea of casques , of sabres , and of bayonets on the horizon , the Emperor was touched , and twice exclaimed , `` Magnificent ! 
Magnificent ! '' 
Between nine o'clock and half-past ten the whole army , incredible as it may appear , had taken up its position and ranged itself in six lines , forming , to repeat the Emperor 's expression , `` the figure of six V 's . '' 
A few moments after the formation of the battle-array , in the midst of that profound silence , like that which heralds the beginning of a storm , which precedes engagements , the Emperor tapped Haxo on the shoulder , as he beheld the three batteries of twelve-pounders , detached by his orders from the corps of Erlon , Reille , and Lobau , and destined to begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean , which was situated at the intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads , and said to him , `` There are four and twenty handsome maids , General . '' 
Sure of the issue , he encouraged with a smile , as they passed before him , the company of sappers of the first corps , which he had appointed to barricade Mont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village should be carried . 
All this serenity had been traversed by but a single word of haughty pity ; perceiving on his left , at a spot where there now stands a large tomb , those admirable Scotch Grays , with their superb horses , massing themselves , he said , `` It is a pity . '' 
Then he mounted his horse , advanced beyond Rossomme , and selected for his post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right of the road from Genappe to Brussels , which was his second station during the battle . 
The third station , the one adopted at seven o'clock in the evening , between La Belle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte , is formidable ; it is a rather elevated knoll , which still exists , and behind which the guard was massed on a slope of the plain . 
Around this knoll the balls rebounded from the pavements of the road , up to Napoleon himself . 
As at Brienne , he had over his head the shriek of the bullets and of the heavy artillery . 
Mouldy cannon-balls , old sword-blades , and shapeless projectiles , eaten up with rust , were picked up at the spot where his horse ' feet stood . 
Scabra rubigine . 
A few years ago , a shell of sixty pounds , still charged , and with its fuse broken off level with the bomb , was unearthed . 
It was at this last post that the Emperor said to his guide , Lacoste , a hostile and terrified peasant , who was attached to the saddle of a hussar , and who turned round at every discharge of canister and tried to hide behind Napoleon : `` Fool , it is shameful ! 
You 'll get yourself killed with a ball in the back . '' 
He who writes these lines has himself found , in the friable soil of this knoll , on turning over the sand , the remains of the neck of a bomb , disintegrated , by the oxidization of six and forty years , and old fragments of iron which parted like elder-twigs between the fingers . 
Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of the plains , where the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington took place , are no longer what they were on June 18 , 1815 . 
By taking from this mournful field the wherewithal to make a monument to it , its real relief has been taken away , and history , disconcerted , no longer finds her bearings there . 
It has been disfigured for the sake of glorifying it . 
Wellington , when he beheld Waterloo once more , two years later , exclaimed , `` They have altered my field of battle ! '' 
Where the great pyramid of earth , surmounted by the lion , rises to-day , there was a hillock which descended in an easy slope towards the Nivelles road , but which was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe . 
The elevation of this escarpment can still be measured by the height of the two knolls of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road from Genappe to Brussels : one , the English tomb , is on the left ; the other , the German tomb , is on the right . 
There is no French tomb . 
The whole of that plain is a sepulchre for France . 
Thanks to the thousands upon thousands of cartloads of earth employed in the hillock one hundred and fifty feet in height and half a mile in circumference , the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean is now accessible by an easy slope . 
On the day of battle , particularly on the side of La Haie-Sainte , it was abrupt and difficult of approach . 
The slope there is so steep that the English cannon could not see the farm , situated in the bottom of the valley , which was the centre of the combat . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the rains had still farther increased this acclivity , the mud complicated the problem of the ascent , and the men not only slipped back , but stuck fast in the mire . 
Along the crest of the plateau ran a sort of trench whose presence it was impossible for the distant observer to divine . 
What was this trench ? 
Let us explain . 
Braine-l'Alleud is a Belgian village ; Ohain is another . 
These villages , both of them concealed in curves of the landscape , are connected by a road about a league and a half in length , which traverses the plain along its undulating level , and often enters and buries itself in the hills like a furrow , which makes a ravine of this road in some places . 
In 1815 , as at the present day , this road cut the crest of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean between the two highways from Genappe and Nivelles ; only , it is now on a level with the plain ; it was then a hollow way . 
Its two slopes have been appropriated for the monumental hillock . 
This road was , and still is , a trench throughout the greater portion of its course ; a hollow trench , sometimes a dozen feet in depth , and whose banks , being too steep , crumbled away here and there , particularly in winter , under driving rains . 
Accidents happened here . 
The road was so narrow at the Braine-l'Alleud entrance that a passer-by was crushed by a cart , as is proved by a stone cross which stands near the cemetery , and which gives the name of the dead , Monsieur Bernard Debrye , Merchant of Brussels , and the date of the accident , February , 1637 . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- It was so deep on the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant , Mathieu Nicaise , was crushed there , in 1783 , by a slide from the slope , as is stated on another stone cross , the top of which has disappeared in the process of clearing the ground , but whose overturned pedestal is still visible on the grassy slope to the left of the highway between La Haie-Sainte and the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- This is the inscription : -- D. O. M. CY A ETE ECRASE PAR MALHEUR SOUS UN CHARIOT , MONSIEUR BERNARD DE BRYE MARCHAND A BRUXELLE LE -LSB- Illegible -RSB- FEVRIER 1637 . 
On the day of battle , this hollow road whose existence was in no way indicated , bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean , a trench at the summit of the escarpment , a rut concealed in the soil , was invisible ; that is to say , terrible . 
THE EMPEROR PUTS A QUESTION TO THE GUIDE LACOSTE So , on the morning of Waterloo , Napoleon was content . 
He was right ; the plan of battle conceived by him was , as we have seen , really admirable . 
The battle once begun , its very various changes , -- the resistance of Hougomont ; the tenacity of La Haie-Sainte ; the killing of Bauduin ; the disabling of Foy ; the unexpected wall against which Soye 's brigade was shattered ; Guilleminot 's fatal heedlessness when he had neither petard nor powder sacks ; the miring of the batteries ; the fifteen unescorted pieces overwhelmed in a hollow way by Uxbridge ; the small effect of the bombs falling in the English lines , and there embedding themselves in the rain-soaked soil , and only succeeding in producing volcanoes of mud , so that the canister was turned into a splash ; the uselessness of Pire 's demonstration on Braine-l'Alleud ; all that cavalry , fifteen squadrons , almost exterminated ; the right wing of the English badly alarmed , the left wing badly cut into ; Ney 's strange mistake in massing , instead of echelonning the four divisions of the first corps ; men delivered over to grape-shot , arranged in ranks twenty-seven deep and with a frontage of two hundred ; the frightful holes made in these masses by the cannon-balls ; attacking columns disorganized ; the side-battery suddenly unmasked on their flank ; Bourgeois , Donzelot , and Durutte compromised ; Quiot repulsed ; Lieutenant Vieux , that Hercules graduated at the Polytechnic School , wounded at the moment when he was beating in with an axe the door of La Haie-Sainte under the downright fire of the English barricade which barred the angle of the road from Genappe to Brussels ; Marcognet 's division caught between the infantry and the cavalry , shot down at the very muzzle of the guns amid the grain by Best and Pack , put to the sword by Ponsonby ; his battery of seven pieces spiked ; the Prince of Saxe-Weimar holding and guarding , in spite of the Comte d'Erlon , both Frischemont and Smohain ; the flag of the 105th taken , the flag of the 45th captured ; that black Prussian hussar stopped by runners of the flying column of three hundred light cavalry on the scout between Wavre and Plancenoit ; the alarming things that had been said by prisoners ; Grouchy 's delay ; fifteen hundred men killed in the orchard of Hougomont in less than an hour ; eighteen hundred men overthrown in a still shorter time about La Haie-Sainte , -- all these stormy incidents passing like the clouds of battle before Napoleon , had hardly troubled his gaze and had not overshadowed that face of imperial certainty . 
Napoleon was accustomed to gaze steadily at war ; he never added up the heart-rending details , cipher by cipher ; ciphers mattered little to him , provided that they furnished the total , victory ; he was not alarmed if the beginnings did go astray , since he thought himself the master and the possessor at the end ; he knew how to wait , supposing himself to be out of the question , and he treated destiny as his equal : he seemed to say to fate , Thou wilt not dare . 
Composed half of light and half of shadow , Napoleon thought himself protected in good and tolerated in evil . 
He had , or thought that he had , a connivance , one might almost say a complicity , of events in his favor , which was equivalent to the invulnerability of antiquity . 
Nevertheless , when one has Beresina , Leipzig , and Fontainebleau behind one , it seems as though one might distrust Waterloo . 
A mysterious frown becomes perceptible in the depths of the heavens . 
At the moment when Wellington retreated , Napoleon shuddered . 
He suddenly beheld the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean cleared , and the van of the English army disappear . 
It was rallying , but hiding itself . 
The Emperor half rose in his stirrups . 
The lightning of victory flashed from his eyes . 
Wellington , driven into a corner at the forest of Soignes and destroyed -- that was the definitive conquest of England by France ; it was Crecy , Poitiers , Malplaquet , and Ramillies avenged . 
The man of Marengo was wiping out Agincourt . 
So the Emperor , meditating on this terrible turn of fortune , swept his glass for the last time over all the points of the field of battle . 
His guard , standing behind him with grounded arms , watched him from below with a sort of religion . 
He pondered ; he examined the slopes , noted the declivities , scrutinized the clumps of trees , the square of rye , the path ; he seemed to be counting each bush . 
He gazed with some intentness at the English barricades of the two highways , -- two large abatis of trees , that on the road to Genappe above La Haie-Sainte , armed with two cannon , the only ones out of all the English artillery which commanded the extremity of the field of battle , and that on the road to Nivelles where gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chasse 's brigade . 
Near this barricade he observed the old chapel of Saint Nicholas , painted white , which stands at the angle of the cross-road near Braine-l'Alleud ; he bent down and spoke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste . 
The guide made a negative sign with his head , which was probably perfidious . 
The Emperor straightened himself up and fell to thinking . 
Wellington had drawn back . 
All that remained to do was to complete this retreat by crushing him . 
Napoleon turning round abruptly , despatched an express at full speed to Paris to announce that the battle was won . 
Napoleon was one of those geniuses from whom thunder darts . 
He had just found his clap of thunder . 
He gave orders to Milhaud 's cuirassiers to carry the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
THE UNEXPECTED There were three thousand five hundred of them . 
They formed a front a quarter of a league in extent . 
They were giant men , on colossal horses . 
There were six and twenty squadrons of them ; and they had behind them to support them Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's division , -- the one hundred and six picked gendarmes , the light cavalry of the Guard , eleven hundred and ninety-seven men , and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred and eighty lances . 
They wore casques without horse-tails , and cuirasses of beaten iron , with horse-pistols in their holsters , and long sabre-swords . 
That morning the whole army had admired them , when , at nine o'clock , with braying of trumpets and all the music playing `` Let us watch o'er the Safety of the Empire , '' they had come in a solid column , with one of their batteries on their flank , another in their centre , and deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe and Frischemont , and taken up their position for battle in that powerful second line , so cleverly arranged by Napoleon , which , having on its extreme left Kellermann 's cuirassiers and on its extreme right Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had , so to speak , two wings of iron . 
Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor 's orders . 
Ney drew his sword and placed himself at their head . 
The enormous squadrons were set in motion . 
Then a formidable spectacle was seen . 
All their cavalry , with upraised swords , standards and trumpets flung to the breeze , formed in columns by divisions , descended , by a simultaneous movement and like one man , with the precision of a brazen battering-ram which is effecting a breach , the hill of La Belle Alliance , plunged into the terrible depths in which so many men had already fallen , disappeared there in the smoke , then emerging from that shadow , reappeared on the other side of the valley , still compact and in close ranks , mounting at a full trot , through a storm of grape-shot which burst upon them , the terrible muddy slope of the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
They ascended , grave , threatening , imperturbable ; in the intervals between the musketry and the artillery , their colossal trampling was audible . 
Being two divisions , there were two columns of them ; Wathier 's division held the right , Delort 's division was on the left . 
It seemed as though two immense adders of steel were to be seen crawling towards the crest of the table-land . 
It traversed the battle like a prodigy . 
Nothing like it had been seen since the taking of the great redoubt of the Muskowa by the heavy cavalry ; Murat was lacking here , but Ney was again present . 
It seemed as though that mass had become a monster and had but one soul . 
Each column undulated and swelled like the ring of a polyp . 
They could be seen through a vast cloud of smoke which was rent here and there . 
A confusion of helmets , of cries , of sabres , a stormy heaving of the cruppers of horses amid the cannons and the flourish of trumpets , a terrible and disciplined tumult ; over all , the cuirasses like the scales on the hydra . 
These narrations seemed to belong to another age . 
Something parallel to this vision appeared , no doubt , in the ancient Orphic epics , which told of the centaurs , the old hippanthropes , those Titans with human heads and equestrian chests who scaled Olympus at a gallop , horrible , invulnerable , sublime -- gods and beasts . 
Odd numerical coincidence , -- twenty-six battalions rode to meet twenty-six battalions . 
Behind the crest of the plateau , in the shadow of the masked battery , the English infantry , formed into thirteen squares , two battalions to the square , in two lines , with seven in the first line , six in the second , the stocks of their guns to their shoulders , taking aim at that which was on the point of appearing , waited , calm , mute , motionless . 
They did not see the cuirassiers , and the cuirassiers did not see them . 
They listened to the rise of this flood of men . 
They heard the swelling noise of three thousand horse , the alternate and symmetrical tramp of their hoofs at full trot , the jingling of the cuirasses , the clang of the sabres and a sort of grand and savage breathing . 
There ensued a most terrible silence ; then , all at once , a long file of uplifted arms , brandishing sabres , appeared above the crest , and casques , trumpets , and standards , and three thousand heads with gray mustaches , shouting , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
All this cavalry debouched on the plateau , and it was like the appearance of an earthquake . 
All at once , a tragic incident ; on the English left , on our right , the head of the column of cuirassiers reared up with a frightful clamor . 
On arriving at the culminating point of the crest , ungovernable , utterly given over to fury and their course of extermination of the squares and cannon , the cuirassiers had just caught sight of a trench , -- a trench between them and the English . 
It was the hollow road of Ohain . 
It was a terrible moment . 
The ravine was there , unexpected , yawning , directly under the horses ' feet , two fathoms deep between its double slopes ; the second file pushed the first into it , and the third pushed on the second ; the horses reared and fell backward , landed on their haunches , slid down , all four feet in the air , crushing and overwhelming the riders ; and there being no means of retreat , -- the whole column being no longer anything more than a projectile , -- the force which had been acquired to crush the English crushed the French ; the inexorable ravine could only yield when filled ; horses and riders rolled there pell-mell , grinding each other , forming but one mass of flesh in this gulf : when this trench was full of living men , the rest marched over them and passed on . 
Almost a third of Dubois 's brigade fell into that abyss . 
This began the loss of the battle . 
A local tradition , which evidently exaggerates matters , says that two thousand horses and fifteen hundred men were buried in the hollow road of Ohain . 
This figure probably comprises all the other corpses which were flung into this ravine the day after the combat . 
Let us note in passing that it was Dubois 's sorely tried brigade which , an hour previously , making a charge to one side , had captured the flag of the Lunenburg battalion . 
Napoleon , before giving the order for this charge of Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had scrutinized the ground , but had not been able to see that hollow road , which did not even form a wrinkle on the surface of the plateau . 
Warned , nevertheless , and put on the alert by the little white chapel which marks its angle of junction with the Nivelles highway , he had probably put a question as to the possibility of an obstacle , to the guide Lacoste . 
The guide had answered No . 
We might almost affirm that Napoleon 's catastrophe originated in that sign of a peasant 's head . 
Other fatalities were destined to arise . 
Was it possible that Napoleon should have won that battle ? 
We answer No . 
Why ? 
Because of Wellington ? 
Because of Blucher ? 
No . 
Because of God . 
Bonaparte victor at Waterloo ; that does not come within the law of the nineteenth century . 
Another series of facts was in preparation , in which there was no longer any room for Napoleon . 
The ill will of events had declared itself long before . 
It was time that this vast man should fall . 
The excessive weight of this man in human destiny disturbed the balance . 
This individual alone counted for more than a universal group . 
These plethoras of all human vitality concentrated in a single head ; the world mounting to the brain of one man , -- this would be mortal to civilization were it to last . 
The moment had arrived for the incorruptible and supreme equity to alter its plan . 
Probably the principles and the elements , on which the regular gravitations of the moral , as of the material , world depend , had complained . 
Smoking blood , over-filled cemeteries , mothers in tears , -- these are formidable pleaders . 
When the earth is suffering from too heavy a burden , there are mysterious groanings of the shades , to which the abyss lends an ear . 
Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had been decided on . 
He embarrassed God . 
Waterloo is not a battle ; it is a change of front on the part of the Universe . 
THE PLATEAU OF MONT-SAINT-JEAN The battery was unmasked at the same moment with the ravine . 
Sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point-blank on the cuirassiers . 
The intrepid General Delort made the military salute to the English battery . 
The whole of the flying artillery of the English had re-entered the squares at a gallop . 
The cuirassiers had not had even the time for a halt . 
The disaster of the hollow road had decimated , but not discouraged them . 
They belonged to that class of men who , when diminished in number , increase in courage . 
Wathier 's column alone had suffered in the disaster ; Delort 's column , which Ney had deflected to the left , as though he had a presentiment of an ambush , had arrived whole . 
The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares . 
At full speed , with bridles loose , swords in their teeth pistols in fist , -- such was the attack . 
There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man until the soldier is changed into a statue , and when all this flesh turns into granite . 
The English battalions , desperately assaulted , did not stir . 
Then it was terrible . 
All the faces of the English squares were attacked at once . 
A frenzied whirl enveloped them . 
That cold infantry remained impassive . 
The first rank knelt and received the cuirassiers on their bayonets , the second ranks shot them down ; behind the second rank the cannoneers charged their guns , the front of the square parted , permitted the passage of an eruption of grape-shot , and closed again . 
The cuirassiers replied by crushing them . 
Their great horses reared , strode across the ranks , leaped over the bayonets and fell , gigantic , in the midst of these four living wells . 
The cannon-balls ploughed furrows in these cuirassiers ; the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares . 
Files of men disappeared , ground to dust under the horses . 
The bayonets plunged into the bellies of these centaurs ; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probably never been seen anywhere else . 
The squares , wasted by this mad cavalry , closed up their ranks without flinching . 
Inexhaustible in the matter of grape-shot , they created explosions in their assailants ' midst . 
The form of this combat was monstrous . 
These squares were no longer battalions , they were craters ; those cuirassiers were no longer cavalry , they were a tempest . 
Each square was a volcano attacked by a cloud ; lava contended with lightning . 
The square on the extreme right , the most exposed of all , being in the air , was almost annihilated at the very first shock . 
lt was formed of the 75th regiment of Highlanders . 
The bagpipe-player in the centre dropped his melancholy eyes , filled with the reflections of the forests and the lakes , in profound inattention , while men were being exterminated around him , and seated on a drum , with his pibroch under his arm , played the Highland airs . 
These Scotchmen died thinking of Ben Lothian , as did the Greeks recalling Argos . 
The sword of a cuirassier , which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm which bore it , put an end to the song by killing the singer . 
The cuirassiers , relatively few in number , and still further diminished by the catastrophe of the ravine , had almost the whole English army against them , but they multiplied themselves so that each man of them was equal to ten . 
Nevertheless , some Hanoverian battalions yielded . 
Wellington perceived it , and thought of his cavalry . 
Had Napoleon at that same moment thought of his infantry , he would have won the battle . 
This forgetfulness was his great and fatal mistake . 
All at once , the cuirassiers , who had been the assailants , found themselves assailed . 
The English cavalry was at their back . 
Before them two squares , behind them Somerset ; Somerset meant fourteen hundred dragoons of the guard . 
On the right , Somerset had Dornberg with the German light-horse , and on his left , Trip with the Belgian carabineers ; the cuirassiers attacked on the flank and in front , before and in the rear , by infantry and cavalry , had to face all sides . 
What mattered it to them ? 
They were a whirlwind . 
Their valor was something indescribable . 
In addition to this , they had behind them the battery , which was still thundering . 
It was necessary that it should be so , or they could never have been wounded in the back . 
One of their cuirasses , pierced on the shoulder by a ball from a biscayan , -LSB- 9 -RSB- is in the collection of the Waterloo Museum . 
-LSB- 9 -RSB- A heavy rifled gun . 
For such Frenchmen nothing less than such Englishmen was needed . 
It was no longer a hand-to-hand conflict ; it was a shadow , a fury , a dizzy transport of souls and courage , a hurricane of lightning swords . 
In an instant the fourteen hundred dragoon guards numbered only eight hundred . 
Fuller , their lieutenant-colonel , fell dead . 
Ney rushed up with the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's light-horse . 
The plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean was captured , recaptured , captured again . 
The cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry ; or , to put it more exactly , the whole of that formidable rout collared each other without releasing the other . 
The squares still held firm . 
There were a dozen assaults . 
Ney had four horses killed under him . 
Half the cuirassiers remained on the plateau . 
This conflict lasted two hours . 
The English army was profoundly shaken . 
There is no doubt that , had they not been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster of the hollow road the cuirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre and decided the victory . 
This extraordinary cavalry petrified Clinton , who had seen Talavera and Badajoz . 
Wellington , three-quarters vanquished , admired heroically . 
He said in an undertone , `` Sublime ! '' 
The cuirassiers annihilated seven squares out of thirteen , took or spiked sixty pieces of ordnance , and captured from the English regiments six flags , which three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of the Guard bore to the Emperor , in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance . 
Wellington 's situation had grown worse . 
This strange battle was like a duel between two raging , wounded men , each of whom , still fighting and still resisting , is expending all his blood . 
Which of the two will be the first to fall ? 
The conflict on the plateau continued . 
What had become of the cuirassiers ? 
No one could have told . 
One thing is certain , that on the day after the battle , a cuirassier and his horse were found dead among the woodwork of the scales for vehicles at Mont-Saint-Jean , at the very point where the four roads from Nivelles , Genappe , La Hulpe , and Brussels meet and intersect each other . 
This horseman had pierced the English lines . 
One of the men who picked up the body still lives at Mont-Saint-Jean . 
His name is Dehaze . 
He was eighteen years old at that time . 
Wellington felt that he was yielding . 
The crisis was at hand . 
The cuirassiers had not succeeded , since the centre was not broken through . 
As every one was in possession of the plateau , no one held it , and in fact it remained , to a great extent , with the English . 
Wellington held the village and the culminating plain ; Ney had only the crest and the slope . 
They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both sides . 
But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable . 
The bleeding of that army was horrible . 
Kempt , on the left wing , demanded reinforcements . 
`` There are none , '' replied Wellington ; `` he must let himself be killed ! '' 
Almost at that same moment , a singular coincidence which paints the exhaustion of the two armies , Ney demanded infantry from Napoleon , and Napoleon exclaimed , `` Infantry ! 
Where does he expect me to get it ? 
Does he think I can make it ? '' 
Nevertheless , the English army was in the worse case of the two . 
The furious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron and breasts of steel had ground the infantry to nothing . 
A few men clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment ; such and such a battalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant ; Alten 's division , already so roughly handled at La Haie-Sainte , was almost destroyed ; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze 's brigade strewed the rye-fields all along the Nivelles road ; hardly anything was left of those Dutch grenadiers , who , intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks in 1811 , fought against Wellington ; and who , in 1815 , rallied to the English standard , fought against Napoleon . 
The loss in officers was considerable . 
Lord Uxbridge , who had his leg buried on the following day , had his knee shattered . 
If , on the French side , in that tussle of the cuirassiers , Delort , l'Heritier , Colbert , Dnop , Travers , and Blancard were disabled , on the side of the English there was Alten wounded , Barne wounded , Delancey killed , Van Meeren killed , Ompteda killed , the whole of Wellington 's staff decimated , and England had the worse of it in that bloody scale . 
The second regiment of foot-guards had lost five lieutenant-colonels , four captains , and three ensigns ; the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200 soldiers ; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded , 18 officers killed , 450 soldiers killed . 
The Hanoverian hussars of Cumberland , a whole regiment , with Colonel Hacke at its head , who was destined to be tried later on and cashiered , had turned bridle in the presence of the fray , and had fled to the forest of Soignes , sowing defeat all the way to Brussels . 
The transports , ammunition-wagons , the baggage-wagons , the wagons filled with wounded , on perceiving that the French were gaining ground and approaching the forest , rushed headlong thither . 
The Dutch , mowed down by the French cavalry , cried , `` Alarm ! '' 
From Vert-Coucou to Groentendael , for a distance of nearly two leagues in the direction of Brussels , according to the testimony of eye-witnesses who are still alive , the roads were encumbered with fugitives . 
This panic was such that it attacked the Prince de Conde at Mechlin , and Louis XVIII . 
at Ghent . 
With the exception of the feeble reserve echelonned behind the ambulance established at the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean , and of Vivian 's and Vandeleur 's brigades , which flanked the left wing , Wellington had no cavalry left . 
A number of batteries lay unhorsed . 
These facts are attested by Siborne ; and Pringle , exaggerating the disaster , goes so far as to say that the Anglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men . 
The Iron Duke remained calm , but his lips blanched . 
Vincent , the Austrian commissioner , Alava , the Spanish commissioner , who were present at the battle in the English staff , thought the Duke lost . 
At five o'clock Wellington drew out his watch , and he was heard to murmur these sinister words , `` Blucher , or night ! '' 
It was at about that moment that a distant line of bayonets gleamed on the heights in the direction of Frischemont . 
Here comes the change of face in this giant drama . 
A BAD GUIDE TO NAPOLEON ; A GOOD GUIDE TO BULOW The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known . 
Grouchy hoped for , Blucher arriving . 
Death instead of life . 
Fate has these turns ; the throne of the world was expected ; it was Saint Helena that was seen . 
If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bulow , Blucher 's lieutenant , had advised him to debouch from the forest above Frischemont , instead of below Plancenoit , the form of the nineteenth century might , perhaps , have been different . 
Napoleon would have won the battle of Waterloo . 
By any other route than that below Plancenoit , the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable for artillery , and Bulow would not have arrived . 
Now the Prussian general , Muffling , declares that one hour 's delay , and Blucher would not have found Wellington on his feet . 
`` The battle was lost . '' 
It was time that Bulow should arrive , as will be seen . 
He had , moreover , been very much delayed . 
He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont , and had set out at daybreak ; but the roads were impassable , and his divisions stuck fast in the mire . 
The ruts were up to the hubs of the cannons . 
Moreover , he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrow bridge of Wavre ; the street leading to the bridge had been fired by the French , so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could not pass between two rows of burning houses , and had been obliged to wait until the conflagration was extinguished . 
It was mid-day before Bulow 's vanguard had been able to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert . 
Had the action been begun two hours earlier , it would have been over at four o'clock , and Blucher would have fallen on the battle won by Napoleon . 
Such are these immense risks proportioned to an infinite which we can not comprehend . 
The Emperor had been the first , as early as mid-day , to descry with his field-glass , on the extreme horizon , something which had attracted his attention . 
He had said , `` I see yonder a cloud , which seems to me to be troops . '' 
Then he asked the Duc de Dalmatie , `` Soult , what do you see in the direction of Chapelle-Saint-Lambert ? '' 
The marshal , levelling his glass , answered , `` Four or five thousand men , Sire ; evidently Grouchy . '' 
But it remained motionless in the mist . 
All the glasses of the staff had studied `` the cloud '' pointed out by the Emperor . 
Some said : `` It is trees . '' 
The truth is , that the cloud did not move . 
The Emperor detached Domon 's division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter . 
Bulow had not moved , in fact . 
His vanguard was very feeble , and could accomplish nothing . 
He was obliged to wait for the body of the army corps , and he had received orders to concentrate his forces before entering into line ; but at five o'clock , perceiving Wellington 's peril , Blucher ordered Bulow to attack , and uttered these remarkable words : `` We must give air to the English army . '' 
A little later , the divisions of Losthin , Hiller , Hacke , and Ryssel deployed before Lobau 's corps , the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia debouched from the forest of Paris , Plancenoit was in flames , and the Prussian cannon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard in reserve behind Napoleon . 
THE GUARD Every one knows the rest , -- the irruption of a third army ; the battle broken to pieces ; eighty-six months of fire thundering simultaneously ; Pirch the first coming up with Bulow ; Zieten 's cavalry led by Blucher in person , the French driven back ; Marcognet swept from the plateau of Ohain ; Durutte dislodged from Papelotte ; Donzelot and Quiot retreating ; Lobau caught on the flank ; a fresh battle precipitating itself on our dismantled regiments at nightfall ; the whole English line resuming the offensive and thrust forward ; the gigantic breach made in the French army ; the English grape-shot and the Prussian grape-shot aiding each other ; the extermination ; disaster in front ; disaster on the flank ; the Guard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all things . 
Conscious that they were about to die , they shouted , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
History records nothing more touching than that agony bursting forth in acclamations . 
The sky had been overcast all day long . 
All of a sudden , at that very moment , -- it was eight o'clock in the evening -- the clouds on the horizon parted , and allowed the grand and sinister glow of the setting sun to pass through , athwart the elms on the Nivelles road . 
They had seen it rise at Austerlitz . 
Each battalion of the Guard was commanded by a general for this final catastrophe . 
Friant , Michel , Roguet , Harlet , Mallet , Poret de Morvan , were there . 
When the tall caps of the grenadiers of the Guard , with their large plaques bearing the eagle appeared , symmetrical , in line , tranquil , in the midst of that combat , the enemy felt a respect for France ; they thought they beheld twenty victories entering the field of battle , with wings outspread , and those who were the conquerors , believing themselves to be vanquished , retreated ; but Wellington shouted , `` Up , Guards , and aim straight ! '' 
The red regiment of English guards , lying flat behind the hedges , sprang up , a cloud of grape-shot riddled the tricolored flag and whistled round our eagles ; all hurled themselves forwards , and the final carnage began . 
In the darkness , the Imperial Guard felt the army losing ground around it , and in the vast shock of the rout it heard the desperate flight which had taken the place of the `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
and , with flight behind it , it continued to advance , more crushed , losing more men at every step that it took . 
There were none who hesitated , no timid men in its ranks . 
The soldier in that troop was as much of a hero as the general . 
Not a man was missing in that suicide . 
Ney , bewildered , great with all the grandeur of accepted death , offered himself to all blows in that tempest . 
He had his fifth horse killed under him there . 
Perspiring , his eyes aflame , foaming at the mouth , with uniform unbuttoned , one of his epaulets half cut off by a sword-stroke from a horseguard , his plaque with the great eagle dented by a bullet ; bleeding , bemired , magnificent , a broken sword in his hand , he said , `` Come and see how a Marshal of France dies on the field of battle ! '' 
But in vain ; he did not die . 
He was haggard and angry . 
At Drouet d'Erlon he hurled this question , `` Are you not going to get yourself killed ? '' 
In the midst of all that artillery engaged in crushing a handful of men , he shouted : `` So there is nothing for me ! 
Oh ! 
I should like to have all these English bullets enter my bowels ! '' 
Unhappy man , thou wert reserved for French bullets ! 
THE CATASTROPHE The rout behind the Guard was melancholy . 
The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once , -- Hougomont , La Haie-Sainte , Papelotte , Plancenoit . 
The cry `` Treachery ! '' 
was followed by a cry of `` Save yourselves who can ! '' 
An army which is disbanding is like a thaw . 
All yields , splits , cracks , floats , rolls , falls , jostles , hastens , is precipitated . 
The disintegration is unprecedented . 
Ney borrows a horse , leaps upon it , and without hat , cravat , or sword , places himself across the Brussels road , stopping both English and French . 
He strives to detain the army , he recalls it to its duty , he insults it , he clings to the rout . 
He is overwhelmed . 
The soldiers fly from him , shouting , `` Long live Marshal Ney ! '' 
Two of Durutte 's regiments go and come in affright as though tossed back and forth between the swords of the Uhlans and the fusillade of the brigades of Kempt , Best , Pack , and Rylandt ; the worst of hand-to-hand conflicts is the defeat ; friends kill each other in order to escape ; squadrons and battalions break and disperse against each other , like the tremendous foam of battle . 
Lobau at one extremity , and Reille at the other , are drawn into the tide . 
In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him of his Guard ; in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceable squadrons . 
Quiot retreats before Vivian , Kellermann before Vandeleur , Lobau before Bulow , Morand before Pirch , Domon and Subervic before Prince William of Prussia ; Guyot , who led the Emperor 's squadrons to the charge , falls beneath the feet of the English dragoons . 
Napoleon gallops past the line of fugitives , harangues , urges , threatens , entreats them . 
All the mouths which in the morning had shouted , `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
remain gaping ; they hardly recognize him . 
The Prussian cavalry , newly arrived , dashes forwards , flies , hews , slashes , kills , exterminates . 
Horses lash out , the cannons flee ; the soldiers of the artillery-train unharness the caissons and use the horses to make their escape ; transports overturned , with all four wheels in the air , clog the road and occasion massacres . 
Men are crushed , trampled down , others walk over the dead and the living . 
Arms are lost . 
A dizzy multitude fills the roads , the paths , the bridges , the plains , the hills , the valleys , the woods , encumbered by this invasion of forty thousand men . 
Shouts despair , knapsacks and guns flung among the rye , passages forced at the point of the sword , no more comrades , no more officers , no more generals , an inexpressible terror . 
Zieten putting France to the sword at its leisure . 
Lions converted into goats . 
Such was the flight . 
At Genappe , an effort was made to wheel about , to present a battle front , to draw up in line . 
Lobau rallied three hundred men . 
The entrance to the village was barricaded , but at the first volley of Prussian canister , all took to flight again , and Lobau was taken . 
That volley of grape-shot can be seen to-day imprinted on the ancient gable of a brick building on the right of the road at a few minutes ' distance before you enter Genappe . 
The Prussians threw themselves into Genappe , furious , no doubt , that they were not more entirely the conquerors . 
The pursuit was stupendous . 
Blucher ordered extermination . 
Roguet had set the lugubrious example of threatening with death any French grenadier who should bring him a Prussian prisoner . 
Blucher outdid Roguet . 
Duhesme , the general of the Young Guard , hemmed in at the doorway of an inn at Genappe , surrendered his sword to a huzzar of death , who took the sword and slew the prisoner . 
The victory was completed by the assassination of the vanquished . 
Let us inflict punishment , since we are history : old Blucher disgraced himself . 
This ferocity put the finishing touch to the disaster . 
The desperate route traversed Genappe , traversed Quatre-Bras , traversed Gosselies , traversed Frasnes , traversed Charleroi , traversed Thuin , and only halted at the frontier . 
Alas ! 
and who , then , was fleeing in that manner ? 
The Grand Army . 
This vertigo , this terror , this downfall into ruin of the loftiest bravery which ever astounded history , -- is that causeless ? 
No . 
The shadow of an enormous right is projected athwart Waterloo . 
It is the day of destiny . 
The force which is mightier than man produced that day . 
Hence the terrified wrinkle of those brows ; hence all those great souls surrendering their swords . 
Those who had conquered Europe have fallen prone on the earth , with nothing left to say nor to do , feeling the present shadow of a terrible presence . 
Hoc erat in fatis . 
That day the perspective of the human race underwent a change . 
Waterloo is the hinge of the nineteenth century . 
The disappearance of the great man was necessary to the advent of the great century . 
Some one , a person to whom one replies not , took the responsibility on himself . 
The panic of heroes can be explained . 
In the battle of Waterloo there is something more than a cloud , there is something of the meteor . 
God has passed by . 
At nightfall , in a meadow near Genappe , Bernard and Bertrand seized by the skirt of his coat and detained a man , haggard , pensive , sinister , gloomy , who , dragged to that point by the current of the rout , had just dismounted , had passed the bridle of his horse over his arm , and with wild eye was returning alone to Waterloo . 
It was Napoleon , the immense somnambulist of this dream which had crumbled , essaying once more to advance . 
THE LAST SQUARE Several squares of the Guard , motionless amid this stream of the defeat , as rocks in running water , held their own until night . 
Night came , death also ; they awaited that double shadow , and , invincible , allowed themselves to be enveloped therein . 
Each regiment , isolated from the rest , and having no bond with the army , now shattered in every part , died alone . 
They had taken up position for this final action , some on the heights of Rossomme , others on the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
There , abandoned , vanquished , terrible , those gloomy squares endured their death-throes in formidable fashion . 
Ulm , Wagram , Jena , Friedland , died with them . 
At twilight , towards nine o'clock in the evening , one of them was left at the foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
In that fatal valley , at the foot of that declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended , now inundated by the masses of the English , under the converging fires of the victorious hostile cavalry , under a frightful density of projectiles , this square fought on . 
It was commanded by an obscure officer named Cambronne . 
At each discharge , the square diminished and replied . 
It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade , continually contracting its four walls . 
The fugitives pausing breathless for a moment in the distance , listened in the darkness to that gloomy and ever-decreasing thunder . 
When this legion had been reduced to a handful , when nothing was left of their flag but a rag , when their guns , the bullets all gone , were no longer anything but clubs , when the heap of corpses was larger than the group of survivors , there reigned among the conquerors , around those men dying so sublimely , a sort of sacred terror , and the English artillery , taking breath , became silent . 
This furnished a sort of respite . 
These combatants had around them something in the nature of a swarm of spectres , silhouettes of men on horseback , the black profiles of cannon , the white sky viewed through wheels and gun-carriages , the colossal death 's - head , which the heroes saw constantly through the smoke , in the depths of the battle , advanced upon them and gazed at them . 
Through the shades of twilight they could hear the pieces being loaded ; the matches all lighted , like the eyes of tigers at night , formed a circle round their heads ; all the lintstocks of the English batteries approached the cannons , and then , with emotion , holding the supreme moment suspended above these men , an English general , Colville according to some , Maitland according to others , shouted to them , `` Surrender , brave Frenchmen ! '' 
Cambronne replied , '' ----- . '' 
-LCB- EDITOR 'S COMMENTARY : Another edition of this book has the word `` Merde ! '' 
in lieu of the ----- above . -RCB- 
CAMBRONNE If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended , one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is perhaps the finest reply that a Frenchman ever made . 
This would enjoin us from consigning something sublime to History . 
At our own risk and peril , let us violate this injunction . 
Now , then , among those giants there was one Titan , -- Cambronne . 
To make that reply and then perish , what could be grander ? 
For being willing to die is the same as to die ; and it was not this man 's fault if he survived after he was shot . 
The winner of the battle of Waterloo was not Napoleon , who was put to flight ; nor Wellington , giving way at four o'clock , in despair at five ; nor Blucher , who took no part in the engagement . 
The winner of Waterloo was Cambronne . 
To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills you is to conquer ! 
Thus to answer the Catastrophe , thus to speak to Fate , to give this pedestal to the future lion , to hurl such a challenge to the midnight rainstorm , to the treacherous wall of Hougomont , to the sunken road of Ohain , to Grouchy 's delay , to Blucher 's arrival , to be Irony itself in the tomb , to act so as to stand upright though fallen , to drown in two syllables the European coalition , to offer kings privies which the Caesars once knew , to make the lowest of words the most lofty by entwining with it the glory of France , insolently to end Waterloo with Mardigras , to finish Leonidas with Rabellais , to set the crown on this victory by a word impossible to speak , to lose the field and preserve history , to have the laugh on your side after such a carnage , -- this is immense ! 
It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl ! 
It reaches the grandeur of AEschylus ! 
Cambronne 's reply produces the effect of a violent break . 
'T is like the breaking of a heart under a weight of scorn . 
'T is the overflow of agony bursting forth . 
Who conquered ? 
Wellington ? 
No ! 
Had it not been for Blucher , he was lost . 
Was it Blucher ? 
No ! 
If Wellington had not begun , Blucher could not have finished . 
This Cambronne , this man spending his last hour , this unknown soldier , this infinitesimal of war , realizes that here is a falsehood , a falsehood in a catastrophe , and so doubly agonizing ; and at the moment when his rage is bursting forth because of it , he is offered this mockery , -- life ! 
How could he restrain himself ? 
Yonder are all the kings of Europe , the general 's flushed with victory , the Jupiter 's darting thunderbolts ; they have a hundred thousand victorious soldiers , and back of the hundred thousand a million ; their cannon stand with yawning mouths , the match is lighted ; they grind down under their heels the Imperial guards , and the grand army ; they have just crushed Napoleon , and only Cambronne remains , -- only this earthworm is left to protest . 
He will protest . 
Then he seeks for the appropriate word as one seeks for a sword . 
His mouth froths , and the froth is the word . 
In face of this mean and mighty victory , in face of this victory which counts none victorious , this desperate soldier stands erect . 
He grants its overwhelming immensity , but he establishes its triviality ; and he does more than spit upon it . 
Borne down by numbers , by superior force , by brute matter , he finds in his soul an expression : `` Excrement ! '' 
We repeat it , -- to use that word , to do thus , to invent such an expression , is to be the conqueror ! 
The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent on that unknown man . 
Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as Rouget invents the `` Marseillaise , '' under the visitation of a breath from on high . 
An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth and comes sweeping over these men , and they shake , and one of them sings the song supreme , and the other utters the frightful cry . 
This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe in the name of the Empire , -- that would be a trifle : he hurls it at the past in the name of the Revolution . 
It is heard , and Cambronne is recognized as possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans . 
Danton seems to be speaking ! 
Kleber seems to be bellowing ! 
At that word from Cambronne , the English voice responded , `` Fire ! '' 
The batteries flamed , the hill trembled , from all those brazen mouths belched a last terrible gush of grape-shot ; a vast volume of smoke , vaguely white in the light of the rising moon , rolled out , and when the smoke dispersed , there was no longer anything there . 
That formidable remnant had been annihilated ; the Guard was dead . 
The four walls of the living redoubt lay prone , and hardly was there discernible , here and there , even a quiver in the bodies ; it was thus that the French legions , greater than the Roman legions , expired on Mont-Saint-Jean , on the soil watered with rain and blood , amid the gloomy grain , on the spot where nowadays Joseph , who drives the post-wagon from Nivelles , passes whistling , and cheerfully whipping up his horse at four o'clock in the morning . 
QUOT LIBRAS IN DUCE ? 
The battle of Waterloo is an enigma . 
It is as obscure to those who won it as to those who lost it . 
For Napoleon it was a panic ; -LSB- 10 -RSB- Blucher sees nothing in it but fire ; Wellington understands nothing in regard to it . 
Look at the reports . 
The bulletins are confused , the commentaries involved . 
Some stammer , others lisp . 
Jomini divides the battle of Waterloo into four moments ; Muffling cuts it up into three changes ; Charras alone , though we hold another judgment than his on some points , seized with his haughty glance the characteristic outlines of that catastrophe of human genius in conflict with divine chance . 
All the other historians suffer from being somewhat dazzled , and in this dazzled state they fumble about . 
It was a day of lightning brilliancy ; in fact , a crumbling of the military monarchy which , to the vast stupefaction of kings , drew all the kingdoms after it -- the fall of force , the defeat of war . 
-LSB- 10 -RSB- `` A battle terminated , a day finished , false measures repaired , greater successes assured for the morrow , -- all was lost by a moment of panic , terror . '' 
-- Napoleon , Dictees de Sainte Helene . 
In this event , stamped with superhuman necessity , the part played by men amounts to nothing . 
If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blucher , do we thereby deprive England and Germany of anything ? 
No . 
Neither that illustrious England nor that august Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo . 
Thank Heaven , nations are great , independently of the lugubrious feats of the sword . 
Neither England , nor Germany , nor France is contained in a scabbard . 
At this epoch when Waterloo is only a clashing of swords , above Blucher , Germany has Schiller ; above Wellington , England has Byron . 
A vast dawn of ideas is the peculiarity of our century , and in that aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance . 
They are majestic because they think . 
The elevation of level which they contribute to civilization is intrinsic with them ; it proceeds from themselves and not from an accident . 
The aggrandizement which they have brought to the nineteenth century has not Waterloo as its source . 
It is only barbarous peoples who undergo rapid growth after a victory . 
That is the temporary vanity of torrents swelled by a storm . 
Civilized people , especially in our day , are neither elevated nor abased by the good or bad fortune of a captain . 
Their specific gravity in the human species results from something more than a combat . 
Their honor , thank God ! 
their dignity , their intelligence , their genius , are not numbers which those gamblers , heroes and conquerors , can put in the lottery of battles . 
Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered . 
There is less glory and more liberty . 
The drum holds its peace ; reason takes the word . 
It is a game in which he who loses wins . 
Let us , therefore , speak of Waterloo coldly from both sides . 
Let us render to chance that which is due to chance , and to God that which is due to God . 
What is Waterloo ? 
A victory ? 
No . 
The winning number in the lottery . 
The quine -LSB- 11 -RSB- won by Europe , paid by France . 
-LSB- 11 -RSB- Five winning numbers in a lottery . 
It was not worth while to place a lion there . 
Waterloo , moreover , is the strangest encounter in history . 
Napoleon and Wellington . 
They are not enemies ; they are opposites . 
Never did God , who is fond of antitheses , make a more striking contrast , a more extraordinary comparison . 
On one side , precision , foresight , geometry , prudence , an assured retreat , reserves spared , with an obstinate coolness , an imperturbable method , strategy , which takes advantage of the ground , tactics , which preserve the equilibrium of battalions , carnage , executed according to rule , war regulated , watch in hand , nothing voluntarily left to chance , the ancient classic courage , absolute regularity ; on the other , intuition , divination , military oddity , superhuman instinct , a flaming glance , an indescribable something which gazes like an eagle , and which strikes like the lightning , a prodigious art in disdainful impetuosity , all the mysteries of a profound soul , associated with destiny ; the stream , the plain , the forest , the hill , summoned , and in a manner , forced to obey , the despot going even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle ; faith in a star mingled with strategic science , elevating but perturbing it . 
Wellington was the Bareme of war ; Napoleon was its Michael Angelo ; and on this occasion , genius was vanquished by calculation . 
On both sides some one was awaited . 
It was the exact calculator who succeeded . 
Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy ; he did not come . 
Wellington expected Blucher ; he came . 
Wellington is classic war taking its revenge . 
Bonaparte , at his dawning , had encountered him in Italy , and beaten him superbly . 
The old owl had fled before the young vulture . 
The old tactics had been not only struck as by lightning , but disgraced . 
Who was that Corsican of six and twenty ? 
What signified that splendid ignoramus , who , with everything against him , nothing in his favor , without provisions , without ammunition , without cannon , without shoes , almost without an army , with a mere handful of men against masses , hurled himself on Europe combined , and absurdly won victories in the impossible ? 
Whence had issued that fulminating convict , who almost without taking breath , and with the same set of combatants in hand , pulverized , one after the other , the five armies of the emperor of Germany , upsetting Beaulieu on Alvinzi , Wurmser on Beaulieu , Melas on Wurmser , Mack on Melas ? 
Who was this novice in war with the effrontery of a luminary ? 
The academical military school excommunicated him , and as it lost its footing ; hence , the implacable rancor of the old Caesarism against the new ; of the regular sword against the flaming sword ; and of the exchequer against genius . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , that rancor had the last word . 
and beneath Lodi , Montebello , Montenotte , Mantua , Arcola , it wrote : Waterloo . 
A triumph of the mediocres which is sweet to the majority . 
Destiny consented to this irony . 
In his decline , Napoleon found Wurmser , the younger , again in front of him . 
In fact , to get Wurmser , it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington . 
Waterloo is a battle of the first order , won by a captain of the second . 
That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo , is England ; the English firmness , the English resolution , the English blood ; the superb thing about England there , no offence to her , was herself . 
It was not her captain ; it was her army . 
Wellington , oddly ungrateful , declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst , that his army , the army which fought on the 18th of June , 1815 , was a `` detestable army . '' 
What does that sombre intermingling of bones buried beneath the furrows of Waterloo think of that ? 
England has been too modest in the matter of Wellington . 
To make Wellington so great is to belittle England . 
Wellington is nothing but a hero like many another . 
Those Scotch Grays , those Horse Guards , those regiments of Maitland and of Mitchell , that infantry of Pack and Kempt , that cavalry of Ponsonby and Somerset , those Highlanders playing the pibroch under the shower of grape-shot , those battalions of Rylandt , those utterly raw recruits , who hardly knew how to handle a musket holding their own against Essling 's and Rivoli 's old troops , -- that is what was grand . 
Wellington was tenacious ; in that lay his merit , and we are not seeking to lessen it : but the least of his foot-soldiers and of his cavalry would have been as solid as he . 
The iron soldier is worth as much as the Iron Duke . 
As for us , all our glorification goes to the English soldier , to the English army , to the English people . 
If trophy there be , it is to England that the trophy is due . 
The column of Waterloo would be more just , if , instead of the figure of a man , it bore on high the statue of a people . 
But this great England will be angry at what we are saying here . 
She still cherishes , after her own 1688 and our 1789 , the feudal illusion . 
She believes in heredity and hierarchy . 
This people , surpassed by none in power and glory , regards itself as a nation , and not as a people . 
And as a people , it willingly subordinates itself and takes a lord for its head . 
As a workman , it allows itself to be disdained ; as a soldier , it allows itself to be flogged . 
It will be remembered , that at the battle of Inkermann a sergeant who had , it appears , saved the army , could not be mentioned by Lord Paglan , as the English military hierarchy does not permit any hero below the grade of an officer to be mentioned in the reports . 
That which we admire above all , in an encounter of the nature of Waterloo , is the marvellous cleverness of chance . 
A nocturnal rain , the wall of Hougomont , the hollow road of Ohain , Grouchy deaf to the cannon , Napoleon 's guide deceiving him , Bulow 's guide enlightening him , -- the whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully conducted . 
On the whole , let us say it plainly , it was more of a massacre than of a battle at Waterloo . 
Of all pitched battles , Waterloo is the one which has the smallest front for such a number of combatants . 
Napoleon three-quarters of a league ; Wellington , half a league ; seventy-two thousand combatants on each side . 
From this denseness the carnage arose . 
The following calculation has been made , and the following proportion established : Loss of men : at Austerlitz , French , fourteen per cent ; Russians , thirty per cent ; Austrians , forty-four per cent . 
At Wagram , French , thirteen per cent ; Austrians , fourteen . 
At the Moskowa , French , thirty-seven per cent ; Russians , forty-four . 
At Bautzen , French , thirteen per cent ; Russians and Prussians , fourteen . 
At Waterloo , French , fifty-six per cent ; the Allies , thirty-one . 
Total for Waterloo , forty-one per cent ; one hundred and forty-four thousand combatants ; sixty thousand dead . 
To-day the field of Waterloo has the calm which belongs to the earth , the impassive support of man , and it resembles all plains . 
At night , moreover , a sort of visionary mist arises from it ; and if a traveller strolls there , if he listens , if he watches , if he dreams like Virgil in the fatal plains of Philippi , the hallucination of the catastrophe takes possession of him . 
The frightful 18th of June lives again ; the false monumental hillock disappears , the lion vanishes in air , the battle-field resumes its reality , lines of infantry undulate over the plain , furious gallops traverse the horizon ; the frightened dreamer beholds the flash of sabres , the gleam of bayonets , the flare of bombs , the tremendous interchange of thunders ; he hears , as it were , the death rattle in the depths of a tomb , the vague clamor of the battle phantom ; those shadows are grenadiers , those lights are cuirassiers ; that skeleton Napoleon , that other skeleton is Wellington ; all this no longer exists , and yet it clashes together and combats still ; and the ravines are empurpled , and the trees quiver , and there is fury even in the clouds and in the shadows ; all those terrible heights , Hougomont , Mont-Saint-Jean , Frischemont , Papelotte , Plancenoit , appear confusedly crowned with whirlwinds of spectres engaged in exterminating each other . 
IS WATERLOO TO BE CONSIDERED GOOD ? 
There exists a very respectable liberal school which does not hate Waterloo . 
We do not belong to it . 
To us , Waterloo is but the stupefied date of liberty . 
That such an eagle should emerge from such an egg is certainly unexpected . 
If one places one 's self at the culminating point of view of the question , Waterloo is intentionally a counter-revolutionary victory . 
It is Europe against France ; it is Petersburg , Berlin , and Vienna against Paris ; it is the statu quo against the initiative ; it is the 14th of July , 1789 , attacked through the 20th of March , 1815 ; it is the monarchies clearing the decks in opposition to the indomitable French rioting . 
The final extinction of that vast people which had been in eruption for twenty-six years -- such was the dream . 
The solidarity of the Brunswicks , the Nassaus , the Romanoffs , the Hohenzollerns , the Hapsburgs with the Bourbons . 
Waterloo bears divine right on its crupper . 
It is true , that the Empire having been despotic , the kingdom by the natural reaction of things , was forced to be liberal , and that a constitutional order was the unwilling result of Waterloo , to the great regret of the conquerors . 
It is because revolution can not be really conquered , and that being providential and absolutely fatal , it is always cropping up afresh : before Waterloo , in Bonaparte overthrowing the old thrones ; after Waterloo , in Louis XVIII . 
granting and conforming to the charter . 
Bonaparte places a postilion on the throne of Naples , and a sergeant on the throne of Sweden , employing inequality to demonstrate equality ; Louis XVIII . 
at Saint-Ouen countersigns the declaration of the rights of man . 
If you wish to gain an idea of what revolution is , call it Progress ; and if you wish to acquire an idea of the nature of progress , call it To-morrow . 
To-morrow fulfils its work irresistibly , and it is already fulfilling it to-day . 
It always reaches its goal strangely . 
It employs Wellington to make of Foy , who was only a soldier , an orator . 
Foy falls at Hougomont and rises again in the tribune . 
Thus does progress proceed . 
There is no such thing as a bad tool for that workman . 
It does not become disconcerted , but adjusts to its divine work the man who has bestridden the Alps , and the good old tottering invalid of Father Elysee . 
It makes use of the gouty man as well as of the conqueror ; of the conqueror without , of the gouty man within . 
Waterloo , by cutting short the demolition of European thrones by the sword , had no other effect than to cause the revolutionary work to be continued in another direction . 
The slashers have finished ; it was the turn of the thinkers . 
The century that Waterloo was intended to arrest has pursued its march . 
That sinister victory was vanquished by liberty . 
In short , and incontestably , that which triumphed at Waterloo ; that which smiled in Wellington 's rear ; that which brought him all the marshals ' staffs of Europe , including , it is said , the staff of a marshal of France ; that which joyously trundled the barrows full of bones to erect the knoll of the lion ; that which triumphantly inscribed on that pedestal the date `` June 18 , 1815 '' ; that which encouraged Blucher , as he put the flying army to the sword ; that which , from the heights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , hovered over France as over its prey , was the counter-revolution . 
It was the counter-revolution which murmured that infamous word `` dismemberment . '' 
On arriving in Paris , it beheld the crater close at hand ; it felt those ashes which scorched its feet , and it changed its mind ; it returned to the stammer of a charter . 
Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo . 
Of intentional liberty there is none . 
The counter-revolution was involuntarily liberal , in the same manner as , by a corresponding phenomenon , Napoleon was involuntarily revolutionary . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the mounted Robespierre was hurled from his saddle . 
A RECRUDESCENCE OF DIVINE RIGHT End of the dictatorship . 
A whole European system crumbled away . 
The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman world as it expired . 
Again we behold the abyss , as in the days of the barbarians ; only the barbarism of 1815 , which must be called by its pet name of the counter-revolution , was not long breathed , soon fell to panting , and halted short . 
The Empire was bewept , -- let us acknowledge the fact , -- and bewept by heroic eyes . 
If glory lies in the sword converted into a sceptre , the Empire had been glory in person . 
It had diffused over the earth all the light which tyranny can give a sombre light . 
We will say more ; an obscure light . 
Compared to the true daylight , it is night . 
This disappearance of night produces the effect of an eclipse . 
Louis XVIII . 
re-entered Paris . 
The circling dances of the 8th of July effaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March . 
The Corsican became the antithesis of the Bearnese . 
The flag on the dome of the Tuileries was white . 
The exile reigned . 
Hartwell 's pine table took its place in front of the fleur-de-lys-strewn throne of Louis XIV . 
Bouvines and Fontenoy were mentioned as though they had taken place on the preceding day , Austerlitz having become antiquated . 
The altar and the throne fraternized majestically . 
One of the most undisputed forms of the health of society in the nineteenth century was established over France , and over the continent . 
Europe adopted the white cockade . 
Trestaillon was celebrated . 
The device non pluribus impar re-appeared on the stone rays representing a sun upon the front of the barracks on the Quai d'Orsay . 
Where there had been an Imperial Guard , there was now a red house . 
The Arc du Carrousel , all laden with badly borne victories , thrown out of its element among these novelties , a little ashamed , it may be , of Marengo and Arcola , extricated itself from its predicament with the statue of the Duc d'Angouleme . 
The cemetery of the Madeleine , a terrible pauper 's grave in 1793 , was covered with jasper and marble , since the bones of Louis XVI . 
and Marie Antoinette lay in that dust . 
In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth , recalling the fact that the Duc d'Enghien had perished in the very month when Napoleon was crowned . 
Pope Pius VII. , who had performed the coronation very near this death , tranquilly bestowed his blessing on the fall as he had bestowed it on the elevation . 
At Schoenbrunn there was a little shadow , aged four , whom it was seditious to call the King of Rome . 
And these things took place , and the kings resumed their thrones , and the master of Europe was put in a cage , and the old regime became the new regime , and all the shadows and all the light of the earth changed place , because , on the afternoon of a certain summer 's day , a shepherd said to a Prussian in the forest , `` Go this way , and not that ! '' 
This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April . 
Ancient unhealthy and poisonous realities were covered with new appearances . 
A lie wedded 1789 ; the right divine was masked under a charter ; fictions became constitutional ; prejudices , superstitions and mental reservations , with Article 14 in the heart , were varnished over with liberalism . 
It was the serpent 's change of skin . 
Man had been rendered both greater and smaller by Napoleon . 
Under this reign of splendid matter , the ideal had received the strange name of ideology ! 
It is a grave imprudence in a great man to turn the future into derision . 
The populace , however , that food for cannon which is so fond of the cannoneer , sought him with its glance . 
Where is he ? 
What is he doing ? 
`` Napoleon is dead , '' said a passer-by to a veteran of Marengo and Waterloo . 
`` He dead ! '' 
cried the soldier ; `` you do n't know him . '' 
Imagination distrusted this man , even when overthrown . 
The depths of Europe were full of darkness after Waterloo . 
Something enormous remained long empty through Napoleon 's disappearance . 
The kings placed themselves in this void . 
Ancient Europe profited by it to undertake reforms . 
There was a Holy Alliance ; Belle-Alliance , Beautiful Alliance , the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance . 
In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed , the features of a new France were sketched out . 
The future , which the Emperor had rallied , made its entry . 
On its brow it bore the star , Liberty . 
The glowing eyes of all young generations were turned on it . 
Singular fact ! 
people were , at one and the same time , in love with the future , Liberty , and the past , Napoleon . 
Defeat had rendered the vanquished greater . 
Bonaparte fallen seemed more lofty than Napoleon erect . 
Those who had triumphed were alarmed . 
England had him guarded by Hudson Lowe , and France had him watched by Montchenu . 
His folded arms became a source of uneasiness to thrones . 
Alexander called him `` my sleeplessness . '' 
This terror was the result of the quantity of revolution which was contained in him . 
That is what explains and excuses Bonapartist liberalism . 
This phantom caused the old world to tremble . 
The kings reigned , but ill at their ease , with the rock of Saint Helena on the horizon . 
While Napoleon was passing through the death struggle at Longwood , the sixty thousand men who had fallen on the field of Waterloo were quietly rotting , and something of their peace was shed abroad over the world . 
The Congress of Vienna made the treaties in 1815 , and Europe called this the Restoration . 
This is what Waterloo was . 
But what matters it to the Infinite ? 
all that tempest , all that cloud , that war , then that peace ? 
All that darkness did not trouble for a moment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping from one blade of grass to another equals the eagle soaring from belfry to belfry on the towers of Notre Dame . 
THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT Let us return -- it is a necessity in this book -- to that fatal battle-field . 
On the 18th of June the moon was full . 
Its light favored Blucher 's ferocious pursuit , betrayed the traces of the fugitives , delivered up that disastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry , and aided the massacre . 
Such tragic favors of the night do occur sometimes during catastrophes . 
After the last cannon-shot had been fired , the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean remained deserted . 
The English occupied the encampment of the French ; it is the usual sign of victory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished . 
They established their bivouac beyond Rossomme . 
The Prussians , let loose on the retreating rout , pushed forward . 
Wellington went to the village of Waterloo to draw up his report to Lord Bathurst . 
If ever the sic vos non vobis was applicable , it certainly is to that village of Waterloo . 
Waterloo took no part , and lay half a league from the scene of action . 
Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded , Hougomont was burned , La Haie-Sainte was taken by assault , Papelotte was burned , Plancenoit was burned , La Belle-Alliance beheld the embrace of the two conquerors ; these names are hardly known , and Waterloo , which worked not in the battle , bears off all the honor . 
We are not of the number of those who flatter war ; when the occasion presents itself , we tell the truth about it . 
War has frightful beauties which we have not concealed ; it has also , we acknowledge , some hideous features . 
One of the most surprising is the prompt stripping of the bodies of the dead after the victory . 
The dawn which follows a battle always rises on naked corpses . 
Who does this ? 
Who thus soils the triumph ? 
What hideous , furtive hand is that which is slipped into the pocket of victory ? 
What pickpockets are they who ply their trade in the rear of glory ? 
Some philosophers -- Voltaire among the number -- affirm that it is precisely those persons have made the glory . 
It is the same men , they say ; there is no relief corps ; those who are erect pillage those who are prone on the earth . 
The hero of the day is the vampire of the night . 
One has assuredly the right , after all , to strip a corpse a bit when one is the author of that corpse . 
For our own part , we do not think so ; it seems to us impossible that the same hand should pluck laurels and purloin the shoes from a dead man . 
One thing is certain , which is , that generally after conquerors follow thieves . 
But let us leave the soldier , especially the contemporary soldier , out of the question . 
Every army has a rear-guard , and it is that which must be blamed . 
Bat-like creatures , half brigands and lackeys ; all the sorts of vespertillos that that twilight called war engenders ; wearers of uniforms , who take no part in the fighting ; pretended invalids ; formidable limpers ; interloping sutlers , trotting along in little carts , sometimes accompanied by their wives , and stealing things which they sell again ; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers ; soldiers ' servants ; marauders ; armies on the march in days gone by , -- we are not speaking of the present , -- dragged all this behind them , so that in the special language they are called `` stragglers . '' 
No army , no nation , was responsible for those beings ; they spoke Italian and followed the Germans , then spoke French and followed the English . 
It was by one of these wretches , a Spanish straggler who spoke French , that the Marquis of Fervacques , deceived by his Picard jargon , and taking him for one of our own men , was traitorously slain and robbed on the battle-field itself , in the course of the night which followed the victory of Cerisoles . 
The rascal sprang from this marauding . 
The detestable maxim , Live on the enemy ! 
produced this leprosy , which a strict discipline alone could heal . 
There are reputations which are deceptive ; one does not always know why certain generals , great in other directions , have been so popular . 
Turenne was adored by his soldiers because he tolerated pillage ; evil permitted constitutes part of goodness . 
Turenne was so good that he allowed the Palatinate to be delivered over to fire and blood . 
The marauders in the train of an army were more or less in number , according as the chief was more or less severe . 
Hoche and Marceau had no stragglers ; Wellington had few , and we do him the justice to mention it . 
Nevertheless , on the night from the 18th to the 19th of June , the dead were robbed . 
Wellington was rigid ; he gave orders that any one caught in the act should be shot ; but rapine is tenacious . 
The marauders stole in one corner of the battlefield while others were being shot in another . 
The moon was sinister over this plain . 
Towards midnight , a man was prowling about , or rather , climbing in the direction of the hollow road of Ohain . 
To all appearance he was one of those whom we have just described , -- neither English nor French , neither peasant nor soldier , less a man than a ghoul attracted by the scent of the dead bodies having theft for his victory , and come to rifle Waterloo . 
He was clad in a blouse that was something like a great coat ; he was uneasy and audacious ; he walked forwards and gazed behind him . 
Who was this man ? 
The night probably knew more of him than the day . 
He had no sack , but evidently he had large pockets under his coat . 
From time to time he halted , scrutinized the plain around him as though to see whether he were observed , bent over abruptly , disturbed something silent and motionless on the ground , then rose and fled . 
His sliding motion , his attitudes , his mysterious and rapid gestures , caused him to resemble those twilight larvae which haunt ruins , and which ancient Norman legends call the Alleurs . 
Certain nocturnal wading birds produce these silhouettes among the marshes . 
A glance capable of piercing all that mist deeply would have perceived at some distance a sort of little sutler 's wagon with a fluted wicker hood , harnessed to a famished nag which was cropping the grass across its bit as it halted , hidden , as it were , behind the hovel which adjoins the highway to Nivelles , at the angle of the road from Mont-Saint-Jean to Braine l'Alleud ; and in the wagon , a sort of woman seated on coffers and packages . 
Perhaps there was some connection between that wagon and that prowler . 
The darkness was serene . 
Not a cloud in the zenith . 
What matters it if the earth be red ! 
the moon remains white ; these are the indifferences of the sky . 
In the fields , branches of trees broken by grape-shot , but not fallen , upheld by their bark , swayed gently in the breeze of night . 
A breath , almost a respiration , moved the shrubbery . 
Quivers which resembled the departure of souls ran through the grass . 
In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general rounds of the English camp were audible . 
Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn , forming , one in the west , the other in the east , two great flames which were joined by the cordon of bivouac fires of the English , like a necklace of rubies with two carbuncles at the extremities , as they extended in an immense semicircle over the hills along the horizon . 
We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain . 
The heart is terrified at the thought of what that death must have been to so many brave men . 
If there is anything terrible , if there exists a reality which surpasses dreams , it is this : to live , to see the sun ; to be in full possession of virile force ; to possess health and joy ; to laugh valiantly ; to rush towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front of one ; to feel in one 's breast lungs which breathe , a heart which beats , a will which reasons ; to speak , think , hope , love ; to have a mother , to have a wife , to have children ; to have the light -- and all at once , in the space of a shout , in less than a minute , to sink into an abyss ; to fall , to roll , to crush , to be crushed ; to see ears of wheat , flowers , leaves , branches ; not to be able to catch hold of anything ; to feel one 's sword useless , men beneath one , horses on top of one ; to struggle in vain , since one 's bones have been broken by some kick in the darkness ; to feel a heel which makes one 's eyes start from their sockets ; to bite horses ' shoes in one 's rage ; to stifle , to yell , to writhe ; to be beneath , and to say to one 's self , `` But just a little while ago I was a living man ! '' 
There , where that lamentable disaster had uttered its death-rattle , all was silence now . 
The edges of the hollow road were encumbered with horses and riders , inextricably heaped up . 
Terrible entanglement ! 
There was no longer any slope , for the corpses had levelled the road with the plain , and reached the brim like a well-filled bushel of barley . 
A heap of dead bodies in the upper part , a river of blood in the lower part -- such was that road on the evening of the 18th of June , 1815 . 
The blood ran even to the Nivelles highway , and there overflowed in a large pool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way , at a spot which is still pointed out . 
It will be remembered that it was at the opposite point , in the direction of the Genappe road , that the destruction of the cuirassiers had taken place . 
The thickness of the layer of bodies was proportioned to the depth of the hollow road . 
Towards the middle , at the point where it became level , where Delort 's division had passed , the layer of corpses was thinner . 
The nocturnal prowler whom we have just shown to the reader was going in that direction . 
He was searching that vast tomb . 
He gazed about . 
He passed the dead in some sort of hideous review . 
He walked with his feet in the blood . 
All at once he paused . 
A few paces in front of him , in the hollow road , at the point where the pile of dead came to an end , an open hand , illumined by the moon , projected from beneath that heap of men . 
That hand had on its finger something sparkling , which was a ring of gold . 
The man bent over , remained in a crouching attitude for a moment , and when he rose there was no longer a ring on the hand . 
He did not precisely rise ; he remained in a stooping and frightened attitude , with his back turned to the heap of dead , scanning the horizon on his knees , with the whole upper portion of his body supported on his two forefingers , which rested on the earth , and his head peering above the edge of the hollow road . 
The jackal 's four paws suit some actions . 
Then coming to a decision , he rose to his feet . 
At that moment , he gave a terrible start . 
He felt some one clutch him from behind . 
He wheeled round ; it was the open hand , which had closed , and had seized the skirt of his coat . 
An honest man would have been terrified ; this man burst into a laugh . 
`` Come , '' said he , `` it 's only a dead body . 
I prefer a spook to a gendarme . '' 
But the hand weakened and released him . 
Effort is quickly exhausted in the grave . 
`` Well now , '' said the prowler , `` is that dead fellow alive ? 
Let 's see . '' 
He bent down again , fumbled among the heap , pushed aside everything that was in his way , seized the hand , grasped the arm , freed the head , pulled out the body , and a few moments later he was dragging the lifeless , or at least the unconscious , man , through the shadows of hollow road . 
He was a cuirassier , an officer , and even an officer of considerable rank ; a large gold epaulette peeped from beneath the cuirass ; this officer no longer possessed a helmet . 
A furious sword-cut had scarred his face , where nothing was discernible but blood . 
However , he did not appear to have any broken limbs , and , by some happy chance , if that word is permissible here , the dead had been vaulted above him in such a manner as to preserve him from being crushed . 
His eyes were still closed . 
On his cuirass he wore the silver cross of the Legion of Honor . 
The prowler tore off this cross , which disappeared into one of the gulfs which he had beneath his great coat . 
Then he felt of the officer 's fob , discovered a watch there , and took possession of it . 
Next he searched his waistcoat , found a purse and pocketed it . 
When he had arrived at this stage of succor which he was administering to this dying man , the officer opened his eyes . 
`` Thanks , '' he said feebly . 
The abruptness of the movements of the man who was manipulating him , the freshness of the night , the air which he could inhale freely , had roused him from his lethargy . 
The prowler made no reply . 
He raised his head . 
A sound of footsteps was audible in the plain ; some patrol was probably approaching . 
The officer murmured , for the death agony was still in his voice : -- `` Who won the battle ? '' 
`` The English , '' answered the prowler . 
The officer went on : -- `` Look in my pockets ; you will find a watch and a purse . 
Take them . '' 
It was already done . 
The prowler executed the required feint , and said : -- `` There is nothing there . '' 
`` I have been robbed , '' said the officer ; `` I am sorry for that . 
You should have had them . '' 
The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct . 
`` Some one is coming , '' said the prowler , with the movement of a man who is taking his departure . 
The officer raised his arm feebly , and detained him . 
`` You have saved my life . 
Who are you ? '' 
The prowler answered rapidly , and in a low voice : -- `` Like yourself , I belonged to the French army . 
I must leave you . 
If they were to catch me , they would shoot me . 
I have saved your life . 
Now get out of the scrape yourself . '' 
`` What is your rank ? '' 
`` Sergeant . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Thenardier . '' 
`` I shall not forget that name , '' said the officer ; `` and do you remember mine . 
My name is Pontmercy . '' 
BOOK SECOND . 
-- THE SHIP ORION NUMBER 24,601 BECOMES NUMBER 9,430 Jean Valjean had been recaptured . 
The reader will be grateful to us if we pass rapidly over the sad details . 
We will confine ourselves to transcribing two paragraphs published by the journals of that day , a few months after the surprising events which had taken place at M. sur M . 
These articles are rather summary . 
It must be remembered , that at that epoch the Gazette des Tribunaux was not yet in existence . 
We borrow the first from the Drapeau Blanc . 
It bears the date of July 25 , 1823 . 
An arrondissement of the Pas de Calais has just been the theatre of an event quite out of the ordinary course . 
A man , who was a stranger in the Department , and who bore the name of M. Madeleine , had , thanks to the new methods , resuscitated some years ago an ancient local industry , the manufacture of jet and of black glass trinkets . 
He had made his fortune in the business , and that of the arrondissement as well , we will admit . 
He had been appointed mayor , in recognition of his services . 
The police discovered that M. Madeleine was no other than an ex-convict who had broken his ban , condemned in 1796 for theft , and named Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean has been recommitted to prison . 
It appears that previous to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawing from the hands of M. Laffitte , a sum of over half a million which he had lodged there , and which he had , moreover , and by perfectly legitimate means , acquired in his business . 
No one has been able to discover where Jean Valjean has concealed this money since his return to prison at Toulon . 
The second article , which enters a little more into detail , is an extract from the Journal de Paris , of the same date . 
A former convict , who had been liberated , named Jean Valjean , has just appeared before the Court of Assizes of the Var , under circumstances calculated to attract attention . 
This wretch had succeeded in escaping the vigilance of the police , he had changed his name , and had succeeded in getting himself appointed mayor of one of our small northern towns ; in this town he had established a considerable commerce . 
He has at last been unmasked and arrested , thanks to the indefatigable zeal of the public prosecutor . 
He had for his concubine a woman of the town , who died of a shock at the moment of his arrest . 
This scoundrel , who is endowed with Herculean strength , found means to escape ; but three or four days after his flight the police laid their hands on him once more , in Paris itself , at the very moment when he was entering one of those little vehicles which run between the capital and the village of Montfermeil -LRB- Seine-et-Oise -RRB- . 
He is said to have profited by this interval of three or four days of liberty , to withdraw a considerable sum deposited by him with one of our leading bankers . 
This sum has been estimated at six or seven hundred thousand francs . 
If the indictment is to be trusted , he has hidden it in some place known to himself alone , and it has not been possible to lay hands on it . 
However that may be , the said Jean Valjean has just been brought before the Assizes of the Department of the Var as accused of highway robbery accompanied with violence , about eight years ago , on the person of one of those honest children who , as the patriarch of Ferney has said , in immortal verse , '' ... Arrive from Savoy every year , And who , with gentle hands , do clear Those long canals choked up with soot . '' 
This bandit refused to defend himself . 
It was proved by the skilful and eloquent representative of the public prosecutor , that the theft was committed in complicity with others , and that Jean Valjean was a member of a band of robbers in the south . 
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty and was condemned to the death penalty in consequence . 
This criminal refused to lodge an appeal . 
The king , in his inexhaustible clemency , has deigned to commute his penalty to that of penal servitude for life . 
Jean Valjean was immediately taken to the prison at Toulon . 
The reader has not forgotten that Jean Valjean had religious habits at M. sur M . 
Some papers , among others the Constitutional , presented this commutation as a triumph of the priestly party . 
Jean Valjean changed his number in the galleys . 
He was called 9,430 . 
However , and we will mention it at once in order that we may not be obliged to recur to the subject , the prosperity of M. sur M. vanished with M. Madeleine ; all that he had foreseen during his night of fever and hesitation was realized ; lacking him , there actually was a soul lacking . 
After this fall , there took place at M. sur M. that egotistical division of great existences which have fallen , that fatal dismemberment of flourishing things which is accomplished every day , obscurely , in the human community , and which history has noted only once , because it occurred after the death of Alexander . 
Lieutenants are crowned kings ; superintendents improvise manufacturers out of themselves . 
Envious rivalries arose . 
M. Madeleine 's vast workshops were shut ; his buildings fell to ruin , his workmen were scattered . 
Some of them quitted the country , others abandoned the trade . 
Thenceforth , everything was done on a small scale , instead of on a grand scale ; for lucre instead of the general good . 
There was no longer a centre ; everywhere there was competition and animosity . 
M. Madeleine had reigned over all and directed all . 
No sooner had he fallen , than each pulled things to himself ; the spirit of combat succeeded to the spirit of organization , bitterness to cordiality , hatred of one another to the benevolence of the founder towards all ; the threads which M. Madeleine had set were tangled and broken , the methods were adulterated , the products were debased , confidence was killed ; the market diminished , for lack of orders ; salaries were reduced , the workshops stood still , bankruptcy arrived . 
And then there was nothing more for the poor . 
All had vanished . 
The state itself perceived that some one had been crushed somewhere . 
Less than four years after the judgment of the Court of Assizes establishing the identity of Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine , for the benefit of the galleys , the cost of collecting taxes had doubled in the arrondissement of M. sur M. ; and M. de Villele called attention to the fact in the rostrum , in the month of February , 1827 . 
IN WHICH THE READER WILL PERUSE TWO VERSES , WHICH ARE OF THE DEVIL 'S COMPOSITION , POSSIBLY Before proceeding further , it will be to the purpose to narrate in some detail , a singular occurrence which took place at about the same epoch , in Montfermeil , and which is not lacking in coincidence with certain conjectures of the indictment . 
There exists in the region of Montfermeil a very ancient superstition , which is all the more curious and all the more precious , because a popular superstition in the vicinity of Paris is like an aloe in Siberia . 
We are among those who respect everything which is in the nature of a rare plant . 
Here , then , is the superstition of Montfermeil : it is thought that the devil , from time immemorial , has selected the forest as a hiding-place for his treasures . 
Goodwives affirm that it is no rarity to encounter at nightfall , in secluded nooks of the forest , a black man with the air of a carter or a wood-chopper , wearing wooden shoes , clad in trousers and a blouse of linen , and recognizable by the fact , that , instead of a cap or hat , he has two immense horns on his head . 
This ought , in fact , to render him recognizable . 
This man is habitually engaged in digging a hole . 
There are three ways of profiting by such an encounter . 
The first is to approach the man and speak to him . 
Then it is seen that the man is simply a peasant , that he appears black because it is nightfall ; that he is not digging any hole whatever , but is cutting grass for his cows , and that what had been taken for horns is nothing but a dung-fork which he is carrying on his back , and whose teeth , thanks to the perspective of evening , seemed to spring from his head . 
The man returns home and dies within the week . 
The second way is to watch him , to wait until he has dug his hole , until he has filled it and has gone away ; then to run with great speed to the trench , to open it once more and to seize the `` treasure '' which the black man has necessarily placed there . 
In this case one dies within the month . 
Finally , the last method is not to speak to the black man , not to look at him , and to flee at the best speed of one 's legs . 
One then dies within the year . 
As all three methods are attended with their special inconveniences , the second , which at all events , presents some advantages , among others that of possessing a treasure , if only for a month , is the one most generally adopted . 
So bold men , who are tempted by every chance , have quite frequently , as we are assured , opened the holes excavated by the black man , and tried to rob the devil . 
The success of the operation appears to be but moderate . 
At least , if the tradition is to be believed , and in particular the two enigmatical lines in barbarous Latin , which an evil Norman monk , a bit of a sorcerer , named Tryphon has left on this subject . 
This Tryphon is buried at the Abbey of Saint-Georges de Bocherville , near Rouen , and toads spawn on his grave . 
Accordingly , enormous efforts are made . 
Such trenches are ordinarily extremely deep ; a man sweats , digs , toils all night -- for it must be done at night ; he wets his shirt , burns out his candle , breaks his mattock , and when he arrives at the bottom of the hole , when he lays his hand on the `` treasure , '' what does he find ? 
What is the devil 's treasure ? 
A sou , sometimes a crown-piece , a stone , a skeleton , a bleeding body , sometimes a spectre folded in four like a sheet of paper in a portfolio , sometimes nothing . 
This is what Tryphon 's verses seem to announce to the indiscreet and curious : -- `` Fodit , et in fossa thesauros condit opaca , As , nummas , lapides , cadaver , simulacra , nihilque . '' 
It seems that in our day there is sometimes found a powder-horn with bullets , sometimes an old pack of cards greasy and worn , which has evidently served the devil . 
Tryphon does not record these two finds , since Tryphon lived in the twelfth century , and since the devil does not appear to have had the wit to invent powder before Roger Bacon 's time , and cards before the time of Charles VI . 
Moreover , if one plays at cards , one is sure to lose all that one possesses ! 
and as for the powder in the horn , it possesses the property of making your gun burst in your face . 
Now , a very short time after the epoch when it seemed to the prosecuting attorney that the liberated convict Jean Valjean during his flight of several days had been prowling around Montfermeil , it was remarked in that village that a certain old road-laborer , named Boulatruelle , had `` peculiar ways '' in the forest . 
People thereabouts thought they knew that this Boulatruelle had been in the galleys . 
He was subjected to certain police supervision , and , as he could find work nowhere , the administration employed him at reduced rates as a road-mender on the cross-road from Gagny to Lagny . 
This Boulatruelle was a man who was viewed with disfavor by the inhabitants of the district as too respectful , too humble , too prompt in removing his cap to every one , and trembling and smiling in the presence of the gendarmes , -- probably affiliated to robber bands , they said ; suspected of lying in ambush at verge of copses at nightfall . 
The only thing in his favor was that he was a drunkard . 
This is what people thought they had noticed : -- Of late , Boulatruelle had taken to quitting his task of stone-breaking and care of the road at a very early hour , and to betaking himself to the forest with his pickaxe . 
He was encountered towards evening in the most deserted clearings , in the wildest thickets ; and he had the appearance of being in search of something , and sometimes he was digging holes . 
The goodwives who passed took him at first for Beelzebub ; then they recognized Boulatruelle , and were not in the least reassured thereby . 
These encounters seemed to cause Boulatruelle a lively displeasure . 
It was evident that he sought to hide , and that there was some mystery in what he was doing . 
It was said in the village : `` It is clear that the devil has appeared . 
Boulatruelle has seen him , and is on the search . 
In sooth , he is cunning enough to pocket Lucifer 's hoard . '' 
The Voltairians added , `` Will Boulatruelle catch the devil , or will the devil catch Boulatruelle ? '' 
The old women made a great many signs of the cross . 
In the meantime , Boulatruelle 's manoeuvres in the forest ceased ; and he resumed his regular occupation of roadmending ; and people gossiped of something else . 
Some persons , however , were still curious , surmising that in all this there was probably no fabulous treasure of the legends , but some fine windfall of a more serious and palpable sort than the devil 's bank-bills , and that the road-mender had half discovered the secret . 
The most `` puzzled '' were the school-master and Thenardier , the proprietor of the tavern , who was everybody 's friend , and had not disdained to ally himself with Boulatruelle . 
`` He has been in the galleys , '' said Thenardier . 
`` Eh ! 
Good God ! 
no one knows who has been there or will be there . '' 
One evening the schoolmaster affirmed that in former times the law would have instituted an inquiry as to what Boulatruelle did in the forest , and that the latter would have been forced to speak , and that he would have been put to the torture in case of need , and that Boulatruelle would not have resisted the water test , for example . 
`` Let us put him to the wine test , '' said Thenardier . 
They made an effort , and got the old road-mender to drinking . 
Boulatruelle drank an enormous amount , but said very little . 
He combined with admirable art , and in masterly proportions , the thirst of a gormandizer with the discretion of a judge . 
Nevertheless , by dint of returning to the charge and of comparing and putting together the few obscure words which he did allow to escape him , this is what Thenardier and the schoolmaster imagined that they had made out : -- One morning , when Boulatruelle was on his way to his work , at daybreak , he had been surprised to see , at a nook of the forest in the underbrush , a shovel and a pickaxe , concealed , as one might say . 
However , he might have supposed that they were probably the shovel and pick of Father Six-Fours , the water-carrier , and would have thought no more about it . 
But , on the evening of that day , he saw , without being seen himself , as he was hidden by a large tree , `` a person who did not belong in those parts , and whom he , Boulatruelle , knew well , '' directing his steps towards the densest part of the wood . 
Translation by Thenardier : A comrade of the galleys . 
Boulatruelle obstinately refused to reveal his name . 
This person carried a package -- something square , like a large box or a small trunk . 
Surprise on the part of Boulatruelle . 
However , it was only after the expiration of seven or eight minutes that the idea of following that `` person '' had occurred to him . 
But it was too late ; the person was already in the thicket , night had descended , and Boulatruelle had not been able to catch up with him . 
Then he had adopted the course of watching for him at the edge of the woods . 
`` It was moonlight . '' 
Two or three hours later , Boulatruelle had seen this person emerge from the brushwood , carrying no longer the coffer , but a shovel and pick . 
Boulatruelle had allowed the person to pass , and had not dreamed of accosting him , because he said to himself that the other man was three times as strong as he was , and armed with a pickaxe , and that he would probably knock him over the head on recognizing him , and on perceiving that he was recognized . 
Touching effusion of two old comrades on meeting again . 
But the shovel and pick had served as a ray of light to Boulatruelle ; he had hastened to the thicket in the morning , and had found neither shovel nor pick . 
From this he had drawn the inference that this person , once in the forest , had dug a hole with his pick , buried the coffer , and reclosed the hole with his shovel . 
Now , the coffer was too small to contain a body ; therefore it contained money . 
Hence his researches . 
Boulatruelle had explored , sounded , searched the entire forest and the thicket , and had dug wherever the earth appeared to him to have been recently turned up . 
In vain . 
He had `` ferreted out '' nothing . 
No one in Montfermeil thought any more about it . 
There were only a few brave gossips , who said , `` You may be certain that the mender on the Gagny road did not take all that trouble for nothing ; he was sure that the devil had come . '' 
THE ANKLE-CHAIN MUST HAVE UNDERGONE A CERTAIN PREPARATORY MANIPULATION TO BE THUS BROKEN WITH A BLOW FROM A HAMMER Towards the end of October , in that same year , 1823 , the inhabitants of Toulon beheld the entry into their port , after heavy weather , and for the purpose of repairing some damages , of the ship Orion , which was employed later at Brest as a school-ship , and which then formed a part of the Mediterranean squadron . 
This vessel , battered as it was , -- for the sea had handled it roughly , -- produced a fine effect as it entered the roads . 
It flew some colors which procured for it the regulation salute of eleven guns , which it returned , shot for shot ; total , twenty-two . 
It has been calculated that what with salvos , royal and military politenesses , courteous exchanges of uproar , signals of etiquette , formalities of roadsteads and citadels , sunrises and sunsets , saluted every day by all fortresses and all ships of war , openings and closings of ports , etc. , the civilized world , discharged all over the earth , in the course of four and twenty hours , one hundred and fifty thousand useless shots . 
At six francs the shot , that comes to nine hundred thousand francs a day , three hundred millions a year , which vanish in smoke . 
This is a mere detail . 
All this time the poor were dying of hunger . 
The year 1823 was what the Restoration called `` the epoch of the Spanish war . '' 
This war contained many events in one , and a quantity of peculiarities . 
A grand family affair for the house of Bourbon ; the branch of France succoring and protecting the branch of Madrid , that is to say , performing an act devolving on the elder ; an apparent return to our national traditions , complicated by servitude and by subjection to the cabinets of the North ; M. le Duc d'Angouleme , surnamed by the liberal sheets the hero of Andujar , compressing in a triumphal attitude that was somewhat contradicted by his peaceable air , the ancient and very powerful terrorism of the Holy Office at variance with the chimerical terrorism of the liberals ; the sansculottes resuscitated , to the great terror of dowagers , under the name of descamisados ; monarchy opposing an obstacle to progress described as anarchy ; the theories of '89 roughly interrupted in the sap ; a European halt , called to the French idea , which was making the tour of the world ; beside the son of France as generalissimo , the Prince de Carignan , afterwards Charles Albert , enrolling himself in that crusade of kings against people as a volunteer , with grenadier epaulets of red worsted ; the soldiers of the Empire setting out on a fresh campaign , but aged , saddened , after eight years of repose , and under the white cockade ; the tricolored standard waved abroad by a heroic handful of Frenchmen , as the white standard had been thirty years earlier at Coblentz ; monks mingled with our troops ; the spirit of liberty and of novelty brought to its senses by bayonets ; principles slaughtered by cannonades ; France undoing by her arms that which she had done by her mind ; in addition to this , hostile leaders sold , soldiers hesitating , cities besieged by millions ; no military perils , and yet possible explosions , as in every mine which is surprised and invaded ; but little bloodshed , little honor won , shame for some , glory for no one . 
Such was this war , made by the princes descended from Louis XIV. , and conducted by generals who had been under Napoleon . 
Its sad fate was to recall neither the grand war nor grand politics . 
Some feats of arms were serious ; the taking of the Trocadero , among others , was a fine military action ; but after all , we repeat , the trumpets of this war give back a cracked sound , the whole effect was suspicious ; history approves of France for making a difficulty about accepting this false triumph . 
It seemed evident that certain Spanish officers charged with resistance yielded too easily ; the idea of corruption was connected with the victory ; it appears as though generals and not battles had been won , and the conquering soldier returned humiliated . 
A debasing war , in short , in which the Bank of France could be read in the folds of the flag . 
Soldiers of the war of 1808 , on whom Saragossa had fallen in formidable ruin , frowned in 1823 at the easy surrender of citadels , and began to regret Palafox . 
It is the nature of France to prefer to have Rostopchine rather than Ballesteros in front of her . 
From a still more serious point of view , and one which it is also proper to insist upon here , this war , which wounded the military spirit of France , enraged the democratic spirit . 
It was an enterprise of inthralment . 
In that campaign , the object of the French soldier , the son of democracy , was the conquest of a yoke for others . 
A hideous contradiction . 
France is made to arouse the soul of nations , not to stifle it . 
All the revolutions of Europe since 1792 are the French Revolution : liberty darts rays from France . 
That is a solar fact . 
Blind is he who will not see ! 
It was Bonaparte who said it . 
The war of 1823 , an outrage on the generous Spanish nation , was then , at the same time , an outrage on the French Revolution . 
It was France who committed this monstrous violence ; by foul means , for , with the exception of wars of liberation , everything that armies do is by foul means . 
The words passive obedience indicate this . 
An army is a strange masterpiece of combination where force results from an enormous sum of impotence . 
Thus is war , made by humanity against humanity , despite humanity , explained . 
As for the Bourbons , the war of 1823 was fatal to them . 
They took it for a success . 
They did not perceive the danger that lies in having an idea slain to order . 
They went astray , in their innocence , to such a degree that they introduced the immense enfeeblement of a crime into their establishment as an element of strength . 
The spirit of the ambush entered into their politics . 
1830 had its germ in 1823 . 
The Spanish campaign became in their counsels an argument for force and for adventures by right Divine . 
France , having re-established elrey netto in Spain , might well have re-established the absolute king at home . 
They fell into the alarming error of taking the obedience of the soldier for the consent of the nation . 
Such confidence is the ruin of thrones . 
It is not permitted to fall asleep , either in the shadow of a machineel tree , nor in the shadow of an army . 
Let us return to the ship Orion . 
During the operations of the army commanded by the prince generalissimo , a squadron had been cruising in the Mediterranean . 
We have just stated that the Orion belonged to this fleet , and that accidents of the sea had brought it into port at Toulon . 
The presence of a vessel of war in a port has something about it which attracts and engages a crowd . 
It is because it is great , and the crowd loves what is great . 
A ship of the line is one of the most magnificent combinations of the genius of man with the powers of nature . 
A ship of the line is composed , at the same time , of the heaviest and the lightest of possible matter , for it deals at one and the same time with three forms of substance , -- solid , liquid , and fluid , -- and it must do battle with all three . 
It has eleven claws of iron with which to seize the granite on the bottom of the sea , and more wings and more antennae than winged insects , to catch the wind in the clouds . 
Its breath pours out through its hundred and twenty cannons as through enormous trumpets , and replies proudly to the thunder . 
The ocean seeks to lead it astray in the alarming sameness of its billows , but the vessel has its soul , its compass , which counsels it and always shows it the north . 
In the blackest nights , its lanterns supply the place of the stars . 
Thus , against the wind , it has its cordage and its canvas ; against the water , wood ; against the rocks , its iron , brass , and lead ; against the shadows , its light ; against immensity , a needle . 
If one wishes to form an idea of all those gigantic proportions which , taken as a whole , constitute the ship of the line , one has only to enter one of the six-story covered construction stocks , in the ports of Brest or Toulon . 
The vessels in process of construction are under a bell-glass there , as it were . 
This colossal beam is a yard ; that great column of wood which stretches out on the earth as far as the eye can reach is the main-mast . 
Taking it from its root in the stocks to its tip in the clouds , it is sixty fathoms long , and its diameter at its base is three feet . 
The English main-mast rises to a height of two hundred and seventeen feet above the water-line . 
The navy of our fathers employed cables , ours employs chains . 
The simple pile of chains on a ship of a hundred guns is four feet high , twenty feet in breadth , and eight feet in depth . 
And how much wood is required to make this ship ? 
Three thousand cubic metres . 
It is a floating forest . 
And moreover , let this be borne in mind , it is only a question here of the military vessel of forty years ago , of the simple sailing-vessel ; steam , then in its infancy , has since added new miracles to that prodigy which is called a war vessel . 
At the present time , for example , the mixed vessel with a screw is a surprising machine , propelled by three thousand square metres of canvas and by an engine of two thousand five hundred horse-power . 
Not to mention these new marvels , the ancient vessel of Christopher Columbus and of De Ruyter is one of the masterpieces of man . 
It is as inexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales ; it stores up the wind in its sails , it is precise in the immense vagueness of the billows , it floats , and it reigns . 
There comes an hour , nevertheless , when the gale breaks that sixty-foot yard like a straw , when the wind bends that mast four hundred feet tall , when that anchor , which weighs tens of thousands , is twisted in the jaws of the waves like a fisherman 's hook in the jaws of a pike , when those monstrous cannons utter plaintive and futile roars , which the hurricane bears forth into the void and into night , when all that power and all that majesty are engulfed in a power and majesty which are superior . 
Every time that immense force is displayed to culminate in an immense feebleness it affords men food for thought , Hence in the ports curious people abound around these marvellous machines of war and of navigation , without being able to explain perfectly to themselves why . 
Every day , accordingly , from morning until night , the quays , sluices , and the jetties of the port of Toulon were covered with a multitude of idlers and loungers , as they say in Paris , whose business consisted in staring at the Orion . 
The Orion was a ship that had been ailing for a long time ; in the course of its previous cruises thick layers of barnacles had collected on its keel to such a degree as to deprive it of half its speed ; it had gone into the dry dock the year before this , in order to have the barnacles scraped off , then it had put to sea again ; but this cleaning had affected the bolts of the keel : in the neighborhood of the Balearic Isles the sides had been strained and had opened ; and , as the plating in those days was not of sheet iron , the vessel had sprung a leak . 
A violent equinoctial gale had come up , which had first staved in a grating and a porthole on the larboard side , and damaged the foretop-gallant-shrouds ; in consequence of these injuries , the Orion had run back to Toulon . 
It anchored near the Arsenal ; it was fully equipped , and repairs were begun . 
The hull had received no damage on the starboard , but some of the planks had been unnailed here and there , according to custom , to permit of air entering the hold . 
One morning the crowd which was gazing at it witnessed an accident . 
The crew was busy bending the sails ; the topman , who had to take the upper corner of the main-top-sail on the starboard , lost his balance ; he was seen to waver ; the multitude thronging the Arsenal quay uttered a cry ; the man 's head overbalanced his body ; the man fell around the yard , with his hands outstretched towards the abyss ; on his way he seized the footrope , first with one hand , then with the other , and remained hanging from it : the sea lay below him at a dizzy depth ; the shock of his fall had imparted to the foot-rope a violent swinging motion ; the man swayed back and forth at the end of that rope , like a stone in a sling . 
It was incurring a frightful risk to go to his assistance ; not one of the sailors , all fishermen of the coast , recently levied for the service , dared to attempt it . 
In the meantime , the unfortunate topman was losing his strength ; his anguish could not be discerned on his face , but his exhaustion was visible in every limb ; his arms were contracted in horrible twitchings ; every effort which he made to re-ascend served but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope ; he did not shout , for fear of exhausting his strength . 
All were awaiting the minute when he should release his hold on the rope , and , from instant to instant , heads were turned aside that his fall might not be seen . 
There are moments when a bit of rope , a pole , the branch of a tree , is life itself , and it is a terrible thing to see a living being detach himself from it and fall like a ripe fruit . 
All at once a man was seen climbing into the rigging with the agility of a tiger-cat ; this man was dressed in red ; he was a convict ; he wore a green cap ; he was a life convict . 
On arriving on a level with the top , a gust of wind carried away his cap , and allowed a perfectly white head to be seen : he was not a young man . 
A convict employed on board with a detachment from the galleys had , in fact , at the very first instant , hastened to the officer of the watch , and , in the midst of the consternation and the hesitation of the crew , while all the sailors were trembling and drawing back , he had asked the officer 's permission to risk his life to save the topman ; at an affirmative sign from the officer he had broken the chain riveted to his ankle with one blow of a hammer , then he had caught up a rope , and had dashed into the rigging : no one noticed , at the instant , with what ease that chain had been broken ; it was only later on that the incident was recalled . 
In a twinkling he was on the yard ; he paused for a few seconds and appeared to be measuring it with his eye ; these seconds , during which the breeze swayed the topman at the extremity of a thread , seemed centuries to those who were looking on . 
At last , the convict raised his eyes to heaven and advanced a step : the crowd drew a long breath . 
He was seen to run out along the yard : on arriving at the point , he fastened the rope which he had brought to it , and allowed the other end to hang down , then he began to descend the rope , hand over hand , and then , -- and the anguish was indescribable , -- instead of one man suspended over the gulf , there were two . 
One would have said it was a spider coming to seize a fly , only here the spider brought life , not death . 
Ten thousand glances were fastened on this group ; not a cry , not a word ; the same tremor contracted every brow ; all mouths held their breath as though they feared to add the slightest puff to the wind which was swaying the two unfortunate men . 
In the meantime , the convict had succeeded in lowering himself to a position near the sailor . 
It was high time ; one minute more , and the exhausted and despairing man would have allowed himself to fall into the abyss . 
The convict had moored him securely with the cord to which he clung with one hand , while he was working with the other . 
At last , he was seen to climb back on the yard , and to drag the sailor up after him ; he held him there a moment to allow him to recover his strength , then he grasped him in his arms and carried him , walking on the yard himself to the cap , and from there to the main-top , where he left him in the hands of his comrades . 
At that moment the crowd broke into applause : old convict-sergeants among them wept , and women embraced each other on the quay , and all voices were heard to cry with a sort of tender rage , `` Pardon for that man ! '' 
He , in the meantime , had immediately begun to make his descent to rejoin his detachment . 
In order to reach them the more speedily , he dropped into the rigging , and ran along one of the lower yards ; all eyes were following him . 
At a certain moment fear assailed them ; whether it was that he was fatigued , or that his head turned , they thought they saw him hesitate and stagger . 
All at once the crowd uttered a loud shout : the convict had fallen into the sea . 
The fall was perilous . 
The frigate Algesiras was anchored alongside the Orion , and the poor convict had fallen between the two vessels : it was to be feared that he would slip under one or the other of them . 
Four men flung themselves hastily into a boat ; the crowd cheered them on ; anxiety again took possession of all souls ; the man had not risen to the surface ; he had disappeared in the sea without leaving a ripple , as though he had fallen into a cask of oil : they sounded , they dived . 
In vain . 
The search was continued until the evening : they did not even find the body . 
On the following day the Toulon newspaper printed these lines : -- `` Nov. 17 , 1823 . 
Yesterday , a convict belonging to the detachment on board of the Orion , on his return from rendering assistance to a sailor , fell into the sea and was drowned . 
The body has not yet been found ; it is supposed that it is entangled among the piles of the Arsenal point : this man was committed under the number 9,430 , and his name was Jean Valjean . '' 
THE WATER QUESTION AT MONTFERMEIL Montfermeil is situated between Livry and Chelles , on the southern edge of that lofty table-land which separates the Ourcq from the Marne . 
At the present day it is a tolerably large town , ornamented all the year through with plaster villas , and on Sundays with beaming bourgeois . 
In 1823 there were at Montfermeil neither so many white houses nor so many well-satisfied citizens : it was only a village in the forest . 
Some pleasure-houses of the last century were to be met with there , to be sure , which were recognizable by their grand air , their balconies in twisted iron , and their long windows , whose tiny panes cast all sorts of varying shades of green on the white of the closed shutters ; but Montfermeil was none the less a village . 
Retired cloth-merchants and rusticating attorneys had not discovered it as yet ; it was a peaceful and charming place , which was not on the road to anywhere : there people lived , and cheaply , that peasant rustic life which is so bounteous and so easy ; only , water was rare there , on account of the elevation of the plateau . 
It was necessary to fetch it from a considerable distance ; the end of the village towards Gagny drew its water from the magnificent ponds which exist in the woods there . 
The other end , which surrounds the church and which lies in the direction of Chelles , found drinking-water only at a little spring half-way down the slope , near the road to Chelles , about a quarter of an hour from Montfermeil . 
Thus each household found it hard work to keep supplied with water . 
The large houses , the aristocracy , of which the Thenardier tavern formed a part , paid half a farthing a bucketful to a man who made a business of it , and who earned about eight sous a day in his enterprise of supplying Montfermeil with water ; but this good man only worked until seven o'clock in the evening in summer , and five in winter ; and night once come and the shutters on the ground floor once closed , he who had no water to drink went to fetch it for himself or did without it . 
This constituted the terror of the poor creature whom the reader has probably not forgotten , -- little Cosette . 
It will be remembered that Cosette was useful to the Thenardiers in two ways : they made the mother pay them , and they made the child serve them . 
So when the mother ceased to pay altogether , the reason for which we have read in preceding chapters , the Thenardiers kept Cosette . 
She took the place of a servant in their house . 
In this capacity she it was who ran to fetch water when it was required . 
So the child , who was greatly terrified at the idea of going to the spring at night , took great care that water should never be lacking in the house . 
Christmas of the year 1823 was particularly brilliant at Montfermeil . 
The beginning of the winter had been mild ; there had been neither snow nor frost up to that time . 
Some mountebanks from Paris had obtained permission of the mayor to erect their booths in the principal street of the village , and a band of itinerant merchants , under protection of the same tolerance , had constructed their stalls on the Church Square , and even extended them into Boulanger Alley , where , as the reader will perhaps remember , the Thenardiers ' hostelry was situated . 
These people filled the inns and drinking-shops , and communicated to that tranquil little district a noisy and joyous life . 
In order to play the part of a faithful historian , we ought even to add that , among the curiosities displayed in the square , there was a menagerie , in which frightful clowns , clad in rags and coming no one knew whence , exhibited to the peasants of Montfermeil in 1823 one of those horrible Brazilian vultures , such as our Royal Museum did not possess until 1845 , and which have a tricolored cockade for an eye . 
I believe that naturalists call this bird Caracara Polyborus ; it belongs to the order of the Apicides , and to the family of the vultures . 
Some good old Bonapartist soldiers , who had retired to the village , went to see this creature with great devotion . 
The mountebanks gave out that the tricolored cockade was a unique phenomenon made by God expressly for their menagerie . 
On Christmas eve itself , a number of men , carters , and peddlers , were seated at table , drinking and smoking around four or five candles in the public room of Thenardier 's hostelry . 
This room resembled all drinking-shop rooms , -- tables , pewter jugs , bottles , drinkers , smokers ; but little light and a great deal of noise . 
The date of the year 1823 was indicated , nevertheless , by two objects which were then fashionable in the bourgeois class : to wit , a kaleidoscope and a lamp of ribbed tin . 
The female Thenardier was attending to the supper , which was roasting in front of a clear fire ; her husband was drinking with his customers and talking politics . 
Besides political conversations which had for their principal subjects the Spanish war and M. le Duc d'Angouleme , strictly local parentheses , like the following , were audible amid the uproar : -- `` About Nanterre and Suresnes the vines have flourished greatly . 
When ten pieces were reckoned on there have been twelve . 
They have yielded a great deal of juice under the press . '' 
`` But the grapes can not be ripe ? '' 
`` In those parts the grapes should not be ripe ; the wine turns oily as soon as spring comes . '' 
`` Then it is very thin wine ? '' 
`` There are wines poorer even than these . 
The grapes must be gathered while green . '' 
Etc. . 
Or a miller would call out : -- `` Are we responsible for what is in the sacks ? 
We find in them a quantity of small seed which we can not sift out , and which we are obliged to send through the mill-stones ; there are tares , fennel , vetches , hempseed , fox-tail , and a host of other weeds , not to mention pebbles , which abound in certain wheat , especially in Breton wheat . 
I am not fond of grinding Breton wheat , any more than long-sawyers like to saw beams with nails in them . 
You can judge of the bad dust that makes in grinding . 
And then people complain of the flour . 
They are in the wrong . 
The flour is no fault of ours . '' 
In a space between two windows a mower , who was seated at table with a landed proprietor who was fixing on a price for some meadow work to be performed in the spring , was saying : -- `` It does no harm to have the grass wet . 
It cuts better . 
Dew is a good thing , sir . 
It makes no difference with that grass . 
Your grass is young and very hard to cut still . 
It 's terribly tender . 
It yields before the iron . '' 
Etc. . 
Cosette was in her usual place , seated on the cross-bar of the kitchen table near the chimney . 
She was in rags ; her bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes , and by the firelight she was engaged in knitting woollen stockings destined for the young Thenardiers . 
A very young kitten was playing about among the chairs . 
Laughter and chatter were audible in the adjoining room , from two fresh children 's voices : it was Eponine and Azelma . 
In the chimney-corner a cat-o ' - nine-tails was hanging on a nail . 
At intervals the cry of a very young child , which was somewhere in the house , rang through the noise of the dram-shop . 
It was a little boy who had been born to the Thenardiers during one of the preceding winters , -- `` she did not know why , '' she said , `` the result of the cold , '' -- and who was a little more than three years old . 
The mother had nursed him , but she did not love him . 
When the persistent clamor of the brat became too annoying , `` Your son is squalling , '' Thenardier would say ; `` do go and see what he wants . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
the mother would reply , `` he bothers me . '' 
And the neglected child continued to shriek in the dark . 
TWO COMPLETE PORTRAITS So far in this book the Thenardiers have been viewed only in profile ; the moment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple , and considering it under all its aspects . 
Thenardier had just passed his fiftieth birthday ; Madame Thenardier was approaching her forties , which is equivalent to fifty in a woman ; so that there existed a balance of age between husband and wife . 
Our readers have possibly preserved some recollection of this Thenardier woman , ever since her first appearance , -- tall , blond , red , fat , angular , square , enormous , and agile ; she belonged , as we have said , to the race of those colossal wild women , who contort themselves at fairs with paving-stones hanging from their hair . 
She did everything about the house , -- made the beds , did the washing , the cooking , and everything else . 
Cosette was her only servant ; a mouse in the service of an elephant . 
Everything trembled at the sound of her voice , -- window panes , furniture , and people . 
Her big face , dotted with red blotches , presented the appearance of a skimmer . 
She had a beard . 
She was an ideal market-porter dressed in woman 's clothes . 
She swore splendidly ; she boasted of being able to crack a nut with one blow of her fist . 
Except for the romances which she had read , and which made the affected lady peep through the ogress at times , in a very queer way , the idea would never have occurred to any one to say of her , `` That is a woman . '' 
This Thenardier female was like the product of a wench engrafted on a fishwife . 
When one heard her speak , one said , `` That is a gendarme '' ; when one saw her drink , one said , `` That is a carter '' ; when one saw her handle Cosette , one said , `` That is the hangman . '' 
One of her teeth projected when her face was in repose . 
Thenardier was a small , thin , pale , angular , bony , feeble man , who had a sickly air and who was wonderfully healthy . 
His cunning began here ; he smiled habitually , by way of precaution , and was almost polite to everybody , even to the beggar to whom he refused half a farthing . 
He had the glance of a pole-cat and the bearing of a man of letters . 
He greatly resembled the portraits of the Abbe Delille . 
His coquetry consisted in drinking with the carters . 
No one had ever succeeded in rendering him drunk . 
He smoked a big pipe . 
He wore a blouse , and under his blouse an old black coat . 
He made pretensions to literature and to materialism . 
There were certain names which he often pronounced to support whatever things he might be saying , -- Voltaire , Raynal , Parny , and , singularly enough , Saint Augustine . 
He declared that he had `` a system . '' 
In addition , he was a great swindler . 
A filousophe -LSB- philosophe -RSB- , a scientific thief . 
The species does exist . 
It will be remembered that he pretended to have served in the army ; he was in the habit of relating with exuberance , how , being a sergeant in the 6th or the 9th light something or other , at Waterloo , he had alone , and in the presence of a squadron of death-dealing hussars , covered with his body and saved from death , in the midst of the grape-shot , `` a general , who had been dangerously wounded . '' 
Thence arose for his wall the flaring sign , and for his inn the name which it bore in the neighborhood , of `` the cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo . '' 
He was a liberal , a classic , and a Bonapartist . 
He had subscribed for the Champ d'Asile . 
It was said in the village that he had studied for the priesthood . 
We believe that he had simply studied in Holland for an inn-keeper . 
This rascal of composite order was , in all probability , some Fleming from Lille , in Flanders , a Frenchman in Paris , a Belgian at Brussels , being comfortably astride of both frontiers . 
As for his prowess at Waterloo , the reader is already acquainted with that . 
It will be perceived that he exaggerated it a trifle . 
Ebb and flow , wandering , adventure , was the leven of his existence ; a tattered conscience entails a fragmentary life , and , apparently at the stormy epoch of June 18 , 1815 , Thenardier belonged to that variety of marauding sutlers of which we have spoken , beating about the country , selling to some , stealing from others , and travelling like a family man , with wife and children , in a rickety cart , in the rear of troops on the march , with an instinct for always attaching himself to the victorious army . 
This campaign ended , and having , as he said , `` some quibus , '' he had come to Montfermeil and set up an inn there . 
This quibus , composed of purses and watches , of gold rings and silver crosses , gathered in harvest-time in furrows sown with corpses , did not amount to a large total , and did not carry this sutler turned eating-house-keeper very far . 
Thenardier had that peculiar rectilinear something about his gestures which , accompanied by an oath , recalls the barracks , and by a sign of the cross , the seminary . 
He was a fine talker . 
He allowed it to be thought that he was an educated man . 
Nevertheless , the schoolmaster had noticed that he pronounced improperly . 
-LSB- 12 -RSB- -LSB- 12 -RSB- Literally `` made cuirs '' ; i. e. , pronounced a t or an s at the end of words where the opposite letter should occur , or used either one of them where neither exists . 
He composed the travellers ' tariff card in a superior manner , but practised eyes sometimes spied out orthographical errors in it . 
Thenardier was cunning , greedy , slothful , and clever . 
He did not disdain his servants , which caused his wife to dispense with them . 
This giantess was jealous . 
It seemed to her that that thin and yellow little man must be an object coveted by all . 
Thenardier , who was , above all , an astute and well-balanced man , was a scamp of a temperate sort . 
This is the worst species ; hypocrisy enters into it . 
It is not that Thenardier was not , on occasion , capable of wrath to quite the same degree as his wife ; but this was very rare , and at such times , since he was enraged with the human race in general , as he bore within him a deep furnace of hatred . 
And since he was one of those people who are continually avenging their wrongs , who accuse everything that passes before them of everything which has befallen them , and who are always ready to cast upon the first person who comes to hand , as a legitimate grievance , the sum total of the deceptions , the bankruptcies , and the calamities of their lives , -- when all this leaven was stirred up in him and boiled forth from his mouth and eyes , he was terrible . 
Woe to the person who came under his wrath at such a time ! 
In addition to his other qualities , Thenardier was attentive and penetrating , silent or talkative , according to circumstances , and always highly intelligent . 
He had something of the look of sailors , who are accustomed to screw up their eyes to gaze through marine glasses . 
Thenardier was a statesman . 
Every new-comer who entered the tavern said , on catching sight of Madame Thenardier , `` There is the master of the house . '' 
A mistake . 
She was not even the mistress . 
The husband was both master and mistress . 
She worked ; he created . 
He directed everything by a sort of invisible and constant magnetic action . 
A word was sufficient for him , sometimes a sign ; the mastodon obeyed . 
Thenardier was a sort of special and sovereign being in Madame Thenardier 's eyes , though she did not thoroughly realize it . 
She was possessed of virtues after her own kind ; if she had ever had a disagreement as to any detail with `` Monsieur Thenardier , '' -- which was an inadmissible hypothesis , by the way , -- she would not have blamed her husband in public on any subject whatever . 
She would never have committed `` before strangers '' that mistake so often committed by women , and which is called in parliamentary language , `` exposing the crown . '' 
Although their concord had only evil as its result , there was contemplation in Madame Thenardier 's submission to her husband . 
That mountain of noise and of flesh moved under the little finger of that frail despot . 
Viewed on its dwarfed and grotesque side , this was that grand and universal thing , the adoration of mind by matter ; for certain ugly features have a cause in the very depths of eternal beauty . 
There was an unknown quantity about Thenardier ; hence the absolute empire of the man over that woman . 
At certain moments she beheld him like a lighted candle ; at others she felt him like a claw . 
This woman was a formidable creature who loved no one except her children , and who did not fear any one except her husband . 
She was a mother because she was mammiferous . 
But her maternity stopped short with her daughters , and , as we shall see , did not extend to boys . 
The man had but one thought , -- how to enrich himself . 
He did not succeed in this . 
A theatre worthy of this great talent was lacking . 
Thenardier was ruining himself at Montfermeil , if ruin is possible to zero ; in Switzerland or in the Pyrenees this penniless scamp would have become a millionaire ; but an inn-keeper must browse where fate has hitched him . 
It will be understood that the word inn-keeper is here employed in a restricted sense , and does not extend to an entire class . 
In this same year , 1823 , Thenardier was burdened with about fifteen hundred francs ' worth of petty debts , and this rendered him anxious . 
Whatever may have been the obstinate injustice of destiny in this case , Thenardier was one of those men who understand best , with the most profundity and in the most modern fashion , that thing which is a virtue among barbarous peoples and an object of merchandise among civilized peoples , -- hospitality . 
Besides , he was an admirable poacher , and quoted for his skill in shooting . 
He had a certain cold and tranquil laugh , which was particularly dangerous . 
His theories as a landlord sometimes burst forth in lightning flashes . 
He had professional aphorisms , which he inserted into his wife 's mind . 
`` The duty of the inn-keeper , '' he said to her one day , violently , and in a low voice , `` is to sell to the first comer , stews , repose , light , fire , dirty sheets , a servant , lice , and a smile ; to stop passers-by , to empty small purses , and to honestly lighten heavy ones ; to shelter travelling families respectfully : to shave the man , to pluck the woman , to pick the child clean ; to quote the window open , the window shut , the chimney-corner , the arm-chair , the chair , the ottoman , the stool , the feather-bed , the mattress and the truss of straw ; to know how much the shadow uses up the mirror , and to put a price on it ; and , by five hundred thousand devils , to make the traveller pay for everything , even for the flies which his dog eats ! '' 
This man and this woman were ruse and rage wedded -- a hideous and terrible team . 
While the husband pondered and combined , Madame Thenardier thought not of absent creditors , took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow , and lived in a fit of anger , all in a minute . 
Such were these two beings . 
Cosette was between them , subjected to their double pressure , like a creature who is at the same time being ground up in a mill and pulled to pieces with pincers . 
The man and the woman each had a different method : Cosette was overwhelmed with blows -- this was the woman 's ; she went barefooted in winter -- that was the man 's doing . 
Cosette ran up stairs and down , washed , swept , rubbed , dusted , ran , fluttered about , panted , moved heavy articles , and weak as she was , did the coarse work . 
There was no mercy for her ; a fierce mistress and venomous master . 
The Thenardier hostelry was like a spider 's web , in which Cosette had been caught , and where she lay trembling . 
The ideal of oppression was realized by this sinister household . 
It was something like the fly serving the spiders . 
The poor child passively held her peace . 
What takes place within these souls when they have but just quitted God , find themselves thus , at the very dawn of life , very small and in the midst of men all naked ! 
MEN MUST HAVE WINE , AND HORSES MUST HAVE WATER Four new travellers had arrived . 
Cosette was meditating sadly ; for , although she was only eight years old , she had already suffered so much that she reflected with the lugubrious air of an old woman . 
Her eye was black in consequence of a blow from Madame Thenardier 's fist , which caused the latter to remark from time to time , `` How ugly she is with her fist-blow on her eye ! '' 
Cosette was thinking that it was dark , very dark , that the pitchers and caraffes in the chambers of the travellers who had arrived must have been filled and that there was no more water in the cistern . 
She was somewhat reassured because no one in the Thenardier establishment drank much water . 
Thirsty people were never lacking there ; but their thirst was of the sort which applies to the jug rather than to the pitcher . 
Any one who had asked for a glass of water among all those glasses of wine would have appeared a savage to all these men . 
But there came a moment when the child trembled ; Madame Thenardier raised the cover of a stew-pan which was boiling on the stove , then seized a glass and briskly approached the cistern . 
She turned the faucet ; the child had raised her head and was following all the woman 's movements . 
A thin stream of water trickled from the faucet , and half filled the glass . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` there is no more water ! '' 
A momentary silence ensued . 
The child did not breathe . 
`` Bah ! '' 
resumed Madame Thenardier , examining the half-filled glass , `` this will be enough . '' 
Cosette applied herself to her work once more , but for a quarter of an hour she felt her heart leaping in her bosom like a big snow-flake . 
She counted the minutes that passed in this manner , and wished it were the next morning . 
From time to time one of the drinkers looked into the street , and exclaimed , `` It 's as black as an oven ! '' 
or , `` One must needs be a cat to go about the streets without a lantern at this hour ! '' 
And Cosette trembled . 
All at once one of the pedlers who lodged in the hostelry entered , and said in a harsh voice : -- `` My horse has not been watered . '' 
`` Yes , it has , '' said Madame Thenardier . 
`` I tell you that it has not , '' retorted the pedler . 
Cosette had emerged from under the table . 
`` Oh , yes , sir ! '' 
said she , `` the horse has had a drink ; he drank out of a bucket , a whole bucketful , and it was I who took the water to him , and I spoke to him . '' 
It was not true ; Cosette lied . 
`` There 's a brat as big as my fist who tells lies as big as the house , '' exclaimed the pedler . 
`` I tell you that he has not been watered , you little jade ! 
He has a way of blowing when he has had no water , which I know well . '' 
Cosette persisted , and added in a voice rendered hoarse with anguish , and which was hardly audible : -- `` And he drank heartily . '' 
`` Come , '' said the pedler , in a rage , `` this wo n't do at all , let my horse be watered , and let that be the end of it ! '' 
Cosette crept under the table again . 
`` In truth , that is fair ! '' 
said Madame Thenardier , `` if the beast has not been watered , it must be . '' 
Then glancing about her : -- `` Well , now ! 
Where 's that other beast ? '' 
She bent down and discovered Cosette cowering at the other end of the table , almost under the drinkers ' feet . 
`` Are you coming ? '' 
shrieked Madame Thenardier . 
Cosette crawled out of the sort of hole in which she had hidden herself . 
The Thenardier resumed : -- `` Mademoiselle Dog-lack-name , go and water that horse . '' 
`` But , Madame , '' said Cosette , feebly , `` there is no water . '' 
The Thenardier threw the street door wide open : -- `` Well , go and get some , then ! '' 
Cosette dropped her head , and went for an empty bucket which stood near the chimney-corner . 
This bucket was bigger than she was , and the child could have set down in it at her ease . 
The Thenardier returned to her stove , and tasted what was in the stewpan , with a wooden spoon , grumbling the while : -- `` There 's plenty in the spring . 
There never was such a malicious creature as that . 
I think I should have done better to strain my onions . '' 
Then she rummaged in a drawer which contained sous , pepper , and shallots . 
`` See here , Mam ` selle Toad , '' she added , `` on your way back , you will get a big loaf from the baker . 
Here 's a fifteen-sou piece . '' 
Cosette had a little pocket on one side of her apron ; she took the coin without saying a word , and put it in that pocket . 
Then she stood motionless , bucket in hand , the open door before her . 
She seemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue . 
`` Get along with you ! '' 
screamed the Thenardier . 
Cosette went out . 
The door closed behind her . 
ENTRANCE ON THE SCENE OF A DOLL The line of open-air booths starting at the church , extended , as the reader will remember , as far as the hostelry of the Thenardiers . 
These booths were all illuminated , because the citizens would soon pass on their way to the midnight mass , with candles burning in paper funnels , which , as the schoolmaster , then seated at the table at the Thenardiers ' observed , produced `` a magical effect . '' 
In compensation , not a star was visible in the sky . 
The last of these stalls , established precisely opposite the Thenardiers ' door , was a toy-shop all glittering with tinsel , glass , and magnificent objects of tin . 
In the first row , and far forwards , the merchant had placed on a background of white napkins , an immense doll , nearly two feet high , who was dressed in a robe of pink crepe , with gold wheat-ears on her head , which had real hair and enamel eyes . 
All that day , this marvel had been displayed to the wonderment of all passers-by under ten years of age , without a mother being found in Montfermeil sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it to her child . 
Eponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it , and Cosette herself had ventured to cast a glance at it , on the sly , it is true . 
At the moment when Cosette emerged , bucket in hand , melancholy and overcome as she was , she could not refrain from lifting her eyes to that wonderful doll , towards the lady , as she called it . 
The poor child paused in amazement . 
She had not yet beheld that doll close to . 
The whole shop seemed a palace to her : the doll was not a doll ; it was a vision . 
It was joy , splendor , riches , happiness , which appeared in a sort of chimerical halo to that unhappy little being so profoundly engulfed in gloomy and chilly misery . 
With the sad and innocent sagacity of childhood , Cosette measured the abyss which separated her from that doll . 
She said to herself that one must be a queen , or at least a princess , to have a `` thing '' like that . 
She gazed at that beautiful pink dress , that beautiful smooth hair , and she thought , `` How happy that doll must be ! '' 
She could not take her eyes from that fantastic stall . 
The more she looked , the more dazzled she grew . 
She thought she was gazing at paradise . 
There were other dolls behind the large one , which seemed to her to be fairies and genii . 
The merchant , who was pacing back and forth in front of his shop , produced on her somewhat the effect of being the Eternal Father . 
In this adoration she forgot everything , even the errand with which she was charged . 
All at once the Thenardier 's coarse voice recalled her to reality : `` What , you silly jade ! 
you have not gone ? 
Wait ! 
I 'll give it to you ! 
I want to know what you are doing there ! 
Get along , you little monster ! '' 
The Thenardier had cast a glance into the street , and had caught sight of Cosette in her ecstasy . 
Cosette fled , dragging her pail , and taking the longest strides of which she was capable . 
THE LITTLE ONE ALL ALONE As the Thenardier hostelry was in that part of the village which is near the church , it was to the spring in the forest in the direction of Chelles that Cosette was obliged to go for her water . 
She did not glance at the display of a single other merchant . 
So long as she was in Boulanger Lane and in the neighborhood of the church , the lighted stalls illuminated the road ; but soon the last light from the last stall vanished . 
The poor child found herself in the dark . 
She plunged into it . 
Only , as a certain emotion overcame her , she made as much motion as possible with the handle of the bucket as she walked along . 
This made a noise which afforded her company . 
The further she went , the denser the darkness became . 
There was no one in the streets . 
However , she did encounter a woman , who turned around on seeing her , and stood still , muttering between her teeth : `` Where can that child be going ? 
Is it a werewolf child ? '' 
Then the woman recognized Cosette . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` it 's the Lark ! '' 
In this manner Cosette traversed the labyrinth of tortuous and deserted streets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil on the side of Chelles . 
So long as she had the houses or even the walls only on both sides of her path , she proceeded with tolerable boldness . 
From time to time she caught the flicker of a candle through the crack of a shutter -- this was light and life ; there were people there , and it reassured her . 
But in proportion as she advanced , her pace slackened mechanically , as it were . 
When she had passed the corner of the last house , Cosette paused . 
It had been hard to advance further than the last stall ; it became impossible to proceed further than the last house . 
She set her bucket on the ground , thrust her hand into her hair , and began slowly to scratch her head , -- a gesture peculiar to children when terrified and undecided what to do . 
It was no longer Montfermeil ; it was the open fields . 
Black and desert space was before her . 
She gazed in despair at that darkness , where there was no longer any one , where there were beasts , where there were spectres , possibly . 
She took a good look , and heard the beasts walking on the grass , and she distinctly saw spectres moving in the trees . 
Then she seized her bucket again ; fear had lent her audacity . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said she ; `` I will tell him that there was no more water ! '' 
And she resolutely re-entered Montfermeil . 
Hardly had she gone a hundred paces when she paused and began to scratch her head again . 
Now it was the Thenardier who appeared to her , with her hideous , hyena mouth , and wrath flashing in her eyes . 
The child cast a melancholy glance before her and behind her . 
What was she to do ? 
What was to become of her ? 
Where was she to go ? 
In front of her was the spectre of the Thenardier ; behind her all the phantoms of the night and of the forest . 
It was before the Thenardier that she recoiled . 
She resumed her path to the spring , and began to run . 
She emerged from the village , she entered the forest at a run , no longer looking at or listening to anything . 
She only paused in her course when her breath failed her ; but she did not halt in her advance . 
She went straight before her in desperation . 
As she ran she felt like crying . 
The nocturnal quivering of the forest surrounded her completely . 
She no longer thought , she no longer saw . 
The immensity of night was facing this tiny creature . 
On the one hand , all shadow ; on the other , an atom . 
It was only seven or eight minutes ' walk from the edge of the woods to the spring . 
Cosette knew the way , through having gone over it many times in daylight . 
Strange to say , she did not get lost . 
A remnant of instinct guided her vaguely . 
But she did not turn her eyes either to right or to left , for fear of seeing things in the branches and in the brushwood . 
In this manner she reached the spring . 
It was a narrow , natural basin , hollowed out by the water in a clayey soil , about two feet deep , surrounded with moss and with those tall , crimped grasses which are called Henry IV . 
's frills , and paved with several large stones . 
A brook ran out of it , with a tranquil little noise . 
Cosette did not take time to breathe . 
It was very dark , but she was in the habit of coming to this spring . 
She felt with her left hand in the dark for a young oak which leaned over the spring , and which usually served to support her , found one of its branches , clung to it , bent down , and plunged the bucket in the water . 
She was in a state of such violent excitement that her strength was trebled . 
While thus bent over , she did not notice that the pocket of her apron had emptied itself into the spring . 
The fifteen-sou piece fell into the water . 
Cosette neither saw nor heard it fall . 
She drew out the bucket nearly full , and set it on the grass . 
That done , she perceived that she was worn out with fatigue . 
She would have liked to set out again at once , but the effort required to fill the bucket had been such that she found it impossible to take a step . 
She was forced to sit down . 
She dropped on the grass , and remained crouching there . 
She shut her eyes ; then she opened them again , without knowing why , but because she could not do otherwise . 
The agitated water in the bucket beside her was describing circles which resembled tin serpents . 
Overhead the sky was covered with vast black clouds , which were like masses of smoke . 
The tragic mask of shadow seemed to bend vaguely over the child . 
Jupiter was setting in the depths . 
The child stared with bewildered eyes at this great star , with which she was unfamiliar , and which terrified her . 
The planet was , in fact , very near the horizon and was traversing a dense layer of mist which imparted to it a horrible ruddy hue . 
The mist , gloomily empurpled , magnified the star . 
One would have called it a luminous wound . 
A cold wind was blowing from the plain . 
The forest was dark , not a leaf was moving ; there were none of the vague , fresh gleams of summertide . 
Great boughs uplifted themselves in frightful wise . 
Slender and misshapen bushes whistled in the clearings . 
The tall grasses undulated like eels under the north wind . 
The nettles seemed to twist long arms furnished with claws in search of prey . 
Some bits of dry heather , tossed by the breeze , flew rapidly by , and had the air of fleeing in terror before something which was coming after . 
On all sides there were lugubrious stretches . 
The darkness was bewildering . 
Man requires light . 
Whoever buries himself in the opposite of day feels his heart contract . 
When the eye sees black , the heart sees trouble . 
In an eclipse in the night , in the sooty opacity , there is anxiety even for the stoutest of hearts . 
No one walks alone in the forest at night without trembling . 
Shadows and trees -- two formidable densities . 
A chimerical reality appears in the indistinct depths . 
The inconceivable is outlined a few paces distant from you with a spectral clearness . 
One beholds floating , either in space or in one 's own brain , one knows not what vague and intangible thing , like the dreams of sleeping flowers . 
There are fierce attitudes on the horizon . 
One inhales the effluvia of the great black void . 
One is afraid to glance behind him , yet desirous of doing so . 
The cavities of night , things grown haggard , taciturn profiles which vanish when one advances , obscure dishevelments , irritated tufts , livid pools , the lugubrious reflected in the funereal , the sepulchral immensity of silence , unknown but possible beings , bendings of mysterious branches , alarming torsos of trees , long handfuls of quivering plants , -- against all this one has no protection . 
There is no hardihood which does not shudder and which does not feel the vicinity of anguish . 
One is conscious of something hideous , as though one 's soul were becoming amalgamated with the darkness . 
This penetration of the shadows is indescribably sinister in the case of a child . 
Forests are apocalypses , and the beating of the wings of a tiny soul produces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault . 
Without understanding her sensations , Cosette was conscious that she was seized upon by that black enormity of nature ; it was no longer terror alone which was gaining possession of her ; it was something more terrible even than terror ; she shivered . 
There are no words to express the strangeness of that shiver which chilled her to the very bottom of her heart ; her eye grew wild ; she thought she felt that she should not be able to refrain from returning there at the same hour on the morrow . 
Then , by a sort of instinct , she began to count aloud , one , two , three , four , and so on up to ten , in order to escape from that singular state which she did not understand , but which terrified her , and , when she had finished , she began again ; this restored her to a true perception of the things about her . 
Her hands , which she had wet in drawing the water , felt cold ; she rose ; her terror , a natural and unconquerable terror , had returned : she had but one thought now , -- to flee at full speed through the forest , across the fields to the houses , to the windows , to the lighted candles . 
Her glance fell upon the water which stood before her ; such was the fright which the Thenardier inspired in her , that she dared not flee without that bucket of water : she seized the handle with both hands ; she could hardly lift the pail . 
In this manner she advanced a dozen paces , but the bucket was full ; it was heavy ; she was forced to set it on the ground once more . 
She took breath for an instant , then lifted the handle of the bucket again , and resumed her march , proceeding a little further this time , but again she was obliged to pause . 
After some seconds of repose she set out again . 
She walked bent forward , with drooping head , like an old woman ; the weight of the bucket strained and stiffened her thin arms . 
The iron handle completed the benumbing and freezing of her wet and tiny hands ; she was forced to halt from time to time , and each time that she did so , the cold water which splashed from the pail fell on her bare legs . 
This took place in the depths of a forest , at night , in winter , far from all human sight ; she was a child of eight : no one but God saw that sad thing at the moment . 
And her mother , no doubt , alas ! 
For there are things that make the dead open their eyes in their graves . 
She panted with a sort of painful rattle ; sobs contracted her throat , but she dared not weep , so afraid was she of the Thenardier , even at a distance : it was her custom to imagine the Thenardier always present . 
However , she could not make much headway in that manner , and she went on very slowly . 
In spite of diminishing the length of her stops , and of walking as long as possible between them , she reflected with anguish that it would take her more than an hour to return to Montfermeil in this manner , and that the Thenardier would beat her . 
This anguish was mingled with her terror at being alone in the woods at night ; she was worn out with fatigue , and had not yet emerged from the forest . 
On arriving near an old chestnut-tree with which she was acquainted , made a last halt , longer than the rest , in order that she might get well rested ; then she summoned up all her strength , picked up her bucket again , and courageously resumed her march , but the poor little desperate creature could not refrain from crying , `` O my God ! 
my God ! '' 
At that moment she suddenly became conscious that her bucket no longer weighed anything at all : a hand , which seemed to her enormous , had just seized the handle , and lifted it vigorously . 
She raised her head . 
A large black form , straight and erect , was walking beside her through the darkness ; it was a man who had come up behind her , and whose approach she had not heard . 
This man , without uttering a word , had seized the handle of the bucket which she was carrying . 
There are instincts for all the encounters of life . 
The child was not afraid . 
WHICH POSSIBLY PROVES BOULATRUELLE 'S INTELLIGENCE On the afternoon of that same Christmas Day , 1823 , a man had walked for rather a long time in the most deserted part of the Boulevard de l'Hopital in Paris . 
This man had the air of a person who is seeking lodgings , and he seemed to halt , by preference , at the most modest houses on that dilapidated border of the faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
We shall see further on that this man had , in fact , hired a chamber in that isolated quarter . 
This man , in his attire , as in all his person , realized the type of what may be called the well-bred mendicant , -- extreme wretchedness combined with extreme cleanliness . 
This is a very rare mixture which inspires intelligent hearts with that double respect which one feels for the man who is very poor , and for the man who is very worthy . 
He wore a very old and very well brushed round hat ; a coarse coat , worn perfectly threadbare , of an ochre yellow , a color that was not in the least eccentric at that epoch ; a large waistcoat with pockets of a venerable cut ; black breeches , worn gray at the knee , stockings of black worsted ; and thick shoes with copper buckles . 
He would have been pronounced a preceptor in some good family , returned from the emigration . 
He would have been taken for more than sixty years of age , from his perfectly white hair , his wrinkled brow , his livid lips , and his countenance , where everything breathed depression and weariness of life . 
Judging from his firm tread , from the singular vigor which stamped all his movements , he would have hardly been thought fifty . 
The wrinkles on his brow were well placed , and would have disposed in his favor any one who observed him attentively . 
His lip contracted with a strange fold which seemed severe , and which was humble . 
There was in the depth of his glance an indescribable melancholy serenity . 
In his left hand he carried a little bundle tied up in a handkerchief ; in his right he leaned on a sort of a cudgel , cut from some hedge . 
This stick had been carefully trimmed , and had an air that was not too threatening ; the most had been made of its knots , and it had received a coral-like head , made from red wax : it was a cudgel , and it seemed to be a cane . 
There are but few passers-by on that boulevard , particularly in the winter . 
The man seemed to avoid them rather than to seek them , but this without any affectation . 
At that epoch , King Louis XVIII . 
went nearly every day to Choisy-le-Roi : it was one of his favorite excursions . 
Towards two o'clock , almost invariably , the royal carriage and cavalcade was seen to pass at full speed along the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
This served in lieu of a watch or clock to the poor women of the quarter who said , `` It is two o'clock ; there he is returning to the Tuileries . '' 
And some rushed forward , and others drew up in line , for a passing king always creates a tumult ; besides , the appearance and disappearance of Louis XVIII . 
produced a certain effect in the streets of Paris . 
It was rapid but majestic . 
This impotent king had a taste for a fast gallop ; as he was not able to walk , he wished to run : that cripple would gladly have had himself drawn by the lightning . 
He passed , pacific and severe , in the midst of naked swords . 
His massive couch , all covered with gilding , with great branches of lilies painted on the panels , thundered noisily along . 
There was hardly time to cast a glance upon it . 
In the rear angle on the right there was visible on tufted cushions of white satin a large , firm , and ruddy face , a brow freshly powdered a l'oiseau royal , a proud , hard , crafty eye , the smile of an educated man , two great epaulets with bullion fringe floating over a bourgeois coat , the Golden Fleece , the cross of Saint Louis , the cross of the Legion of Honor , the silver plaque of the Saint-Esprit , a huge belly , and a wide blue ribbon : it was the king . 
Outside of Paris , he held his hat decked with white ostrich plumes on his knees enwrapped in high English gaiters ; when he re-entered the city , he put on his hat and saluted rarely ; he stared coldly at the people , and they returned it in kind . 
When he appeared for the first time in the Saint-Marceau quarter , the whole success which he produced is contained in this remark of an inhabitant of the faubourg to his comrade , `` That big fellow yonder is the government . '' 
This infallible passage of the king at the same hour was , therefore , the daily event of the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
The promenader in the yellow coat evidently did not belong in the quarter , and probably did not belong in Paris , for he was ignorant as to this detail . 
When , at two o'clock , the royal carriage , surrounded by a squadron of the body-guard all covered with silver lace , debouched on the boulevard , after having made the turn of the Salpetriere , he appeared surprised and almost alarmed . 
There was no one but himself in this cross-lane . 
He drew up hastily behind the corner of the wall of an enclosure , though this did not prevent M. le Duc de Havre from spying him out . 
M. le Duc de Havre , as captain of the guard on duty that day , was seated in the carriage , opposite the king . 
He said to his Majesty , `` Yonder is an evil-looking man . '' 
Members of the police , who were clearing the king 's route , took equal note of him : one of them received an order to follow him . 
But the man plunged into the deserted little streets of the faubourg , and as twilight was beginning to fall , the agent lost trace of him , as is stated in a report addressed that same evening to M. le Comte d'Angles , Minister of State , Prefect of Police . 
When the man in the yellow coat had thrown the agent off his track , he redoubled his pace , not without turning round many a time to assure himself that he was not being followed . 
At a quarter-past four , that is to say , when night was fully come , he passed in front of the theatre of the Porte Saint-Martin , where The Two Convicts was being played that day . 
This poster , illuminated by the theatre lanterns , struck him ; for , although he was walking rapidly , he halted to read it . 
An instant later he was in the blind alley of La Planchette , and he entered the Plat d'Etain -LSB- the Pewter Platter -RSB- , where the office of the coach for Lagny was then situated . 
This coach set out at half-past four . 
The horses were harnessed , and the travellers , summoned by the coachman , were hastily climbing the lofty iron ladder of the vehicle . 
The man inquired : -- `` Have you a place ? '' 
`` Only one -- beside me on the box , '' said the coachman . 
`` I will take it . '' 
`` Climb up . '' 
Nevertheless , before setting out , the coachman cast a glance at the traveller 's shabby dress , at the diminutive size of his bundle , and made him pay his fare . 
`` Are you going as far as Lagny ? '' 
demanded the coachman . 
`` Yes , '' said the man . 
The traveller paid to Lagny . 
They started . 
When they had passed the barrier , the coachman tried to enter into conversation , but the traveller only replied in monosyllables . 
The coachman took to whistling and swearing at his horses . 
The coachman wrapped himself up in his cloak . 
It was cold . 
The man did not appear to be thinking of that . 
Thus they passed Gournay and Neuilly-sur-Marne . 
Towards six o'clock in the evening they reached Chelles . 
The coachman drew up in front of the carters ' inn installed in the ancient buildings of the Royal Abbey , to give his horses a breathing spell . 
`` I get down here , '' said the man . 
He took his bundle and his cudgel and jumped down from the vehicle . 
An instant later he had disappeared . 
He did not enter the inn . 
When the coach set out for Lagny a few minutes later , it did not encounter him in the principal street of Chelles . 
The coachman turned to the inside travellers . 
`` There , '' said he , `` is a man who does not belong here , for I do not know him . 
He had not the air of owning a sou , but he does not consider money ; he pays to Lagny , and he goes only as far as Chelles . 
It is night ; all the houses are shut ; he does not enter the inn , and he is not to be found . 
So he has dived through the earth . '' 
The man had not plunged into the earth , but he had gone with great strides through the dark , down the principal street of Chelles , then he had turned to the right before reaching the church , into the cross-road leading to Montfermeil , like a person who was acquainted with the country and had been there before . 
He followed this road rapidly . 
At the spot where it is intersected by the ancient tree-bordered road which runs from Gagny to Lagny , he heard people coming . 
He concealed himself precipitately in a ditch , and there waited until the passers-by were at a distance . 
The precaution was nearly superfluous , however ; for , as we have already said , it was a very dark December night . 
Not more than two or three stars were visible in the sky . 
It is at this point that the ascent of the hill begins . 
The man did not return to the road to Montfermeil ; he struck across the fields to the right , and entered the forest with long strides . 
Once in the forest he slackened his pace , and began a careful examination of all the trees , advancing , step by step , as though seeking and following a mysterious road known to himself alone . 
There came a moment when he appeared to lose himself , and he paused in indecision . 
At last he arrived , by dint of feeling his way inch by inch , at a clearing where there was a great heap of whitish stones . 
He stepped up briskly to these stones , and examined them attentively through the mists of night , as though he were passing them in review . 
A large tree , covered with those excrescences which are the warts of vegetation , stood a few paces distant from the pile of stones . 
He went up to this tree and passed his hand over the bark of the trunk , as though seeking to recognize and count all the warts . 
Opposite this tree , which was an ash , there was a chestnut-tree , suffering from a peeling of the bark , to which a band of zinc had been nailed by way of dressing . 
He raised himself on tiptoe and touched this band of zinc . 
Then he trod about for awhile on the ground comprised in the space between the tree and the heap of stones , like a person who is trying to assure himself that the soil has not recently been disturbed . 
That done , he took his bearings , and resumed his march through the forest . 
It was the man who had just met Cosette . 
As he walked through the thicket in the direction of Montfermeil , he had espied that tiny shadow moving with a groan , depositing a burden on the ground , then taking it up and setting out again . 
He drew near , and perceived that it was a very young child , laden with an enormous bucket of water . 
Then he approached the child , and silently grasped the handle of the bucket . 
COSETTE SIDE BY SIDE WITH THE STRANGER IN THE DARK Cosette , as we have said , was not frightened . 
The man accosted her . 
He spoke in a voice that was grave and almost bass . 
`` My child , what you are carrying is very heavy for you . '' 
Cosette raised her head and replied : -- `` Yes , sir . '' 
`` Give it to me , '' said the man ; `` I will carry it for you . '' 
Cosette let go of the bucket-handle . 
The man walked along beside her . 
`` It really is very heavy , '' he muttered between his teeth . 
Then he added : -- `` How old are you , little one ? '' 
`` Eight , sir . '' 
`` And have you come from far like this ? '' 
`` From the spring in the forest . '' 
`` Are you going far ? '' 
`` A good quarter of an hour 's walk from here . '' 
The man said nothing for a moment ; then he remarked abruptly : -- `` So you have no mother . '' 
`` I do n't know , '' answered the child . 
Before the man had time to speak again , she added : -- `` I do n't think so . 
Other people have mothers . 
I have none . '' 
And after a silence she went on : -- `` I think that I never had any . '' 
The man halted ; he set the bucket on the ground , bent down and placed both hands on the child 's shoulders , making an effort to look at her and to see her face in the dark . 
Cosette 's thin and sickly face was vaguely outlined by the livid light in the sky . 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said the man . 
`` Cosette . '' 
The man seemed to have received an electric shock . 
He looked at her once more ; then he removed his hands from Cosette 's shoulders , seized the bucket , and set out again . 
After a moment he inquired : -- `` Where do you live , little one ? '' 
`` At Montfermeil , if you know where that is . '' 
`` That is where we are going ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
He paused ; then began again : -- `` Who sent you at such an hour to get water in the forest ? '' 
`` It was Madame Thenardier . '' 
The man resumed , in a voice which he strove to render indifferent , but in which there was , nevertheless , a singular tremor : -- `` What does your Madame Thenardier do ? '' 
`` She is my mistress , '' said the child . 
`` She keeps the inn . '' 
`` The inn ? '' 
said the man . 
`` Well , I am going to lodge there to-night . 
Show me the way . '' 
`` We are on the way there , '' said the child . 
The man walked tolerably fast . 
Cosette followed him without difficulty . 
She no longer felt any fatigue . 
From time to time she raised her eyes towards the man , with a sort of tranquillity and an indescribable confidence . 
She had never been taught to turn to Providence and to pray ; nevertheless , she felt within her something which resembled hope and joy , and which mounted towards heaven . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
The man resumed : -- `` Is there no servant in Madame Thenardier 's house ? '' 
`` No , sir . '' 
`` Are you alone there ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
Another pause ensued . 
Cosette lifted up her voice : -- `` That is to say , there are two little girls . '' 
`` What little girls ? '' 
`` Ponine and Zelma . '' 
This was the way the child simplified the romantic names so dear to the female Thenardier . 
`` Who are Ponine and Zelma ? '' 
`` They are Madame Thenardier 's young ladies ; her daughters , as you would say . '' 
`` And what do those girls do ? '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
said the child , `` they have beautiful dolls ; things with gold in them , all full of affairs . 
They play ; they amuse themselves . '' 
`` All day long ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
`` And you ? '' 
`` I ? 
I work . '' 
`` All day long ? '' 
The child raised her great eyes , in which hung a tear , which was not visible because of the darkness , and replied gently : -- `` Yes , sir . '' 
After an interval of silence she went on : -- `` Sometimes , when I have finished my work and they let me , I amuse myself , too . '' 
`` How do you amuse yourself ? '' 
`` In the best way I can . 
They let me alone ; but I have not many playthings . 
Ponine and Zelma will not let me play with their dolls . 
I have only a little lead sword , no longer than that . '' 
The child held up her tiny finger . 
`` And it will not cut ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said the child ; `` it cuts salad and the heads of flies . '' 
They reached the village . 
Cosette guided the stranger through the streets . 
They passed the bakeshop , but Cosette did not think of the bread which she had been ordered to fetch . 
The man had ceased to ply her with questions , and now preserved a gloomy silence . 
When they had left the church behind them , the man , on perceiving all the open-air booths , asked Cosette : -- `` So there is a fair going on here ? '' 
`` No , sir ; it is Christmas . '' 
As they approached the tavern , Cosette timidly touched his arm : -- `` Monsieur ? '' 
`` What , my child ? '' 
`` We are quite near the house . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Will you let me take my bucket now ? '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` If Madame sees that some one has carried it for me , she will beat me . '' 
The man handed her the bucket . 
An instant later they were at the tavern door . 
THE UNPLEASANTNESS OF RECEIVING INTO ONE 'S HOUSE A POOR MAN WHO MAY BE A RICH MAN Cosette could not refrain from casting a sidelong glance at the big doll , which was still displayed at the toy-merchant 's ; then she knocked . 
The door opened . 
The Thenardier appeared with a candle in her hand . 
`` Ah ! 
so it 's you , you little wretch ! 
good mercy , but you 've taken your time ! 
The hussy has been amusing herself ! '' 
`` Madame , '' said Cosette , trembling all over , `` here 's a gentleman who wants a lodging . '' 
The Thenardier speedily replaced her gruff air by her amiable grimace , a change of aspect common to tavern-keepers , and eagerly sought the new-comer with her eyes . 
`` This is the gentleman ? '' 
said she . 
`` Yes , Madame , '' replied the man , raising his hand to his hat . 
Wealthy travellers are not so polite . 
This gesture , and an inspection of the stranger 's costume and baggage , which the Thenardier passed in review with one glance , caused the amiable grimace to vanish , and the gruff mien to reappear . 
She resumed dryly : -- `` Enter , my good man . '' 
The `` good man '' entered . 
The Thenardier cast a second glance at him , paid particular attention to his frock-coat , which was absolutely threadbare , and to his hat , which was a little battered , and , tossing her head , wrinkling her nose , and screwing up her eyes , she consulted her husband , who was still drinking with the carters . 
The husband replied by that imperceptible movement of the forefinger , which , backed up by an inflation of the lips , signifies in such cases : A regular beggar . 
Thereupon , the Thenardier exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
see here , my good man ; I am very sorry , but I have no room left . '' 
`` Put me where you like , '' said the man ; `` in the attic , in the stable . 
I will pay as though I occupied a room . '' 
`` Forty sous . '' 
`` Forty sous ; agreed . '' 
`` Very well , then ! '' 
`` Forty sous ! '' 
said a carter , in a low tone , to the Thenardier woman ; `` why , the charge is only twenty sous ! '' 
`` It is forty in his case , '' retorted the Thenardier , in the same tone . 
`` I do n't lodge poor folks for less . '' 
`` That 's true , '' added her husband , gently ; `` it ruins a house to have such people in it . '' 
In the meantime , the man , laying his bundle and his cudgel on a bench , had seated himself at a table , on which Cosette made haste to place a bottle of wine and a glass . 
The merchant who had demanded the bucket of water took it to his horse himself . 
Cosette resumed her place under the kitchen table , and her knitting . 
The man , who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he had poured out for himself , observed the child with peculiar attention . 
Cosette was ugly . 
If she had been happy , she might have been pretty . 
We have already given a sketch of that sombre little figure . 
Cosette was thin and pale ; she was nearly eight years old , but she seemed to be hardly six . 
Her large eyes , sunken in a sort of shadow , were almost put out with weeping . 
The corners of her mouth had that curve of habitual anguish which is seen in condemned persons and desperately sick people . 
Her hands were , as her mother had divined , `` ruined with chilblains . '' 
The fire which illuminated her at that moment brought into relief all the angles of her bones , and rendered her thinness frightfully apparent . 
As she was always shivering , she had acquired the habit of pressing her knees one against the other . 
Her entire clothing was but a rag which would have inspired pity in summer , and which inspired horror in winter . 
All she had on was hole-ridden linen , not a scrap of woollen . 
Her skin was visible here and there and everywhere black and blue spots could be descried , which marked the places where the Thenardier woman had touched her . 
Her naked legs were thin and red . 
The hollows in her neck were enough to make one weep . 
This child 's whole person , her mien , her attitude , the sound of her voice , the intervals which she allowed to elapse between one word and the next , her glance , her silence , her slightest gesture , expressed and betrayed one sole idea , -- fear . 
Fear was diffused all over her ; she was covered with it , so to speak ; fear drew her elbows close to her hips , withdrew her heels under her petticoat , made her occupy as little space as possible , allowed her only the breath that was absolutely necessary , and had become what might be called the habit of her body , admitting of no possible variation except an increase . 
In the depths of her eyes there was an astonished nook where terror lurked . 
Her fear was such , that on her arrival , wet as she was , Cosette did not dare to approach the fire and dry herself , but sat silently down to her work again . 
The expression in the glance of that child of eight years was habitually so gloomy , and at times so tragic , that it seemed at certain moments as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a demon . 
As we have stated , she had never known what it is to pray ; she had never set foot in a church . 
`` Have I the time ? '' 
said the Thenardier . 
The man in the yellow coat never took his eyes from Cosette . 
All at once , the Thenardier exclaimed : -- `` By the way , where 's that bread ? '' 
Cosette , according to her custom whenever the Thenardier uplifted her voice , emerged with great haste from beneath the table . 
She had completely forgotten the bread . 
She had recourse to the expedient of children who live in a constant state of fear . 
She lied . 
`` Madame , the baker 's shop was shut . '' 
`` You should have knocked . '' 
`` I did knock , Madame . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He did not open the door . '' 
`` I 'll find out to-morrow whether that is true , '' said the Thenardier ; `` and if you are telling me a lie , I 'll lead you a pretty dance . 
In the meantime , give me back my fifteen-sou piece . '' 
Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron , and turned green . 
The fifteen-sou piece was not there . 
`` Ah , come now , '' said Madame Thenardier , `` did you hear me ? '' 
Cosette turned her pocket inside out ; there was nothing in it . 
What could have become of that money ? 
The unhappy little creature could not find a word to say . 
She was petrified . 
`` Have you lost that fifteen-sou piece ? '' 
screamed the Thenardier , hoarsely , `` or do you want to rob me of it ? '' 
At the same time , she stretched out her arm towards the cat-o ' - nine-tails which hung on a nail in the chimney-corner . 
This formidable gesture restored to Cosette sufficient strength to shriek : -- `` Mercy , Madame , Madame ! 
I will not do so any more ! '' 
The Thenardier took down the whip . 
In the meantime , the man in the yellow coat had been fumbling in the fob of his waistcoat , without any one having noticed his movements . 
Besides , the other travellers were drinking or playing cards , and were not paying attention to anything . 
Cosette contracted herself into a ball , with anguish , within the angle of the chimney , endeavoring to gather up and conceal her poor half-nude limbs . 
The Thenardier raised her arm . 
`` Pardon me , Madame , '' said the man , `` but just now I caught sight of something which had fallen from this little one 's apron pocket , and rolled aside . 
Perhaps this is it . '' 
At the same time he bent down and seemed to be searching on the floor for a moment . 
`` Exactly ; here it is , '' he went on , straightening himself up . 
And he held out a silver coin to the Thenardier . 
`` Yes , that 's it , '' said she . 
It was not it , for it was a twenty-sou piece ; but the Thenardier found it to her advantage . 
She put the coin in her pocket , and confined herself to casting a fierce glance at the child , accompanied with the remark , `` Do n't let this ever happen again ! '' 
Cosette returned to what the Thenardier called `` her kennel , '' and her large eyes , which were riveted on the traveller , began to take on an expression such as they had never worn before . 
Thus far it was only an innocent amazement , but a sort of stupefied confidence was mingled with it . 
`` By the way , would you like some supper ? '' 
the Thenardier inquired of the traveller . 
He made no reply . 
He appeared to be absorbed in thought . 
`` What sort of a man is that ? '' 
she muttered between her teeth . 
`` He 's some frightfully poor wretch . 
He has n't a sou to pay for a supper . 
Will he even pay me for his lodging ? 
It 's very lucky , all the same , that it did not occur to him to steal the money that was on the floor . '' 
In the meantime , a door had opened , and Eponine and Azelma entered . 
They were two really pretty little girls , more bourgeois than peasant in looks , and very charming ; the one with shining chestnut tresses , the other with long black braids hanging down her back , both vivacious , neat , plump , rosy , and healthy , and a delight to the eye . 
They were warmly clad , but with so much maternal art that the thickness of the stuffs did not detract from the coquetry of arrangement . 
There was a hint of winter , though the springtime was not wholly effaced . 
Light emanated from these two little beings . 
Besides this , they were on the throne . 
In their toilettes , in their gayety , in the noise which they made , there was sovereignty . 
When they entered , the Thenardier said to them in a grumbling tone which was full of adoration , `` Ah ! 
there you are , you children ! '' 
Then drawing them , one after the other to her knees , smoothing their hair , tying their ribbons afresh , and then releasing them with that gentle manner of shaking off which is peculiar to mothers , she exclaimed , `` What frights they are ! '' 
They went and seated themselves in the chimney-corner . 
They had a doll , which they turned over and over on their knees with all sorts of joyous chatter . 
From time to time Cosette raised her eyes from her knitting , and watched their play with a melancholy air . 
Eponine and Azelma did not look at Cosette . 
She was the same as a dog to them . 
These three little girls did not yet reckon up four and twenty years between them , but they already represented the whole society of man ; envy on the one side , disdain on the other . 
The doll of the Thenardier sisters was very much faded , very old , and much broken ; but it seemed none the less admirable to Cosette , who had never had a doll in her life , a real doll , to make use of the expression which all children will understand . 
All at once , the Thenardier , who had been going back and forth in the room , perceived that Cosette 's mind was distracted , and that , instead of working , she was paying attention to the little ones at their play . 
`` Ah ! 
I 've caught you at it ! '' 
she cried . 
`` So that 's the way you work ! 
I 'll make you work to the tune of the whip ; that I will . '' 
The stranger turned to the Thenardier , without quitting his chair . 
`` Bah , Madame , '' he said , with an almost timid air , `` let her play ! '' 
Such a wish expressed by a traveller who had eaten a slice of mutton and had drunk a couple of bottles of wine with his supper , and who had not the air of being frightfully poor , would have been equivalent to an order . 
But that a man with such a hat should permit himself such a desire , and that a man with such a coat should permit himself to have a will , was something which Madame Thenardier did not intend to tolerate . 
She retorted with acrimony : -- `` She must work , since she eats . 
I do n't feed her to do nothing . '' 
`` What is she making ? '' 
went on the stranger , in a gentle voice which contrasted strangely with his beggarly garments and his porter 's shoulders . 
The Thenardier deigned to reply : -- `` Stockings , if you please . 
Stockings for my little girls , who have none , so to speak , and who are absolutely barefoot just now . '' 
The man looked at Cosette 's poor little red feet , and continued : -- `` When will she have finished this pair of stockings ? '' 
`` She has at least three or four good days ' work on them still , the lazy creature ! '' 
`` And how much will that pair of stockings be worth when she has finished them ? '' 
The Thenardier cast a glance of disdain on him . 
`` Thirty sous at least . '' 
`` Will you sell them for five francs ? '' 
went on the man . 
`` Good heavens ! '' 
exclaimed a carter who was listening , with a loud laugh ; `` five francs ! 
the deuce , I should think so ! 
five balls ! '' 
Thenardier thought it time to strike in . 
`` Yes , sir ; if such is your fancy , you will be allowed to have that pair of stockings for five francs . 
We can refuse nothing to travellers . '' 
`` You must pay on the spot , '' said the Thenardier , in her curt and peremptory fashion . 
`` I will buy that pair of stockings , '' replied the man , `` and , '' he added , drawing a five-franc piece from his pocket , and laying it on the table , `` I will pay for them . '' 
Then he turned to Cosette . 
`` Now I own your work ; play , my child . '' 
The carter was so much touched by the five-franc piece , that he abandoned his glass and hastened up . 
`` But it 's true ! '' 
he cried , examining it . 
`` A real hind wheel ! 
and not counterfeit ! '' 
Thenardier approached and silently put the coin in his pocket . 
The Thenardier had no reply to make . 
She bit her lips , and her face assumed an expression of hatred . 
In the meantime , Cosette was trembling . 
She ventured to ask : -- `` Is it true , Madame ? 
May I play ? '' 
`` Play ! '' 
said the Thenardier , in a terrible voice . 
`` Thanks , Madame , '' said Cosette . 
And while her mouth thanked the Thenardier , her whole little soul thanked the traveller . 
Thenardier had resumed his drinking ; his wife whispered in his ear : -- `` Who can this yellow man be ? '' 
`` I have seen millionaires with coats like that , '' replied Thenardier , in a sovereign manner . 
Cosette had dropped her knitting , but had not left her seat . 
Cosette always moved as little as possible . 
She picked up some old rags and her little lead sword from a box behind her . 
Eponine and Azelma paid no attention to what was going on . 
They had just executed a very important operation ; they had just got hold of the cat . 
They had thrown their doll on the ground , and Eponine , who was the elder , was swathing the little cat , in spite of its mewing and its contortions , in a quantity of clothes and red and blue scraps . 
While performing this serious and difficult work she was saying to her sister in that sweet and adorable language of children , whose grace , like the splendor of the butterfly 's wing , vanishes when one essays to fix it fast . 
`` You see , sister , this doll is more amusing than the other . 
She twists , she cries , she is warm . 
See , sister , let us play with her . 
She shall be my little girl . 
I will be a lady . 
I will come to see you , and you shall look at her . 
Gradually , you will perceive her whiskers , and that will surprise you . 
And then you will see her ears , and then you will see her tail and it will amaze you . 
And you will say to me , ` Ah ! 
Mon Dieu ! ' 
and I will say to you : ` Yes , Madame , it is my little girl . 
Little girls are made like that just at present . ' '' 
Azelma listened admiringly to Eponine . 
In the meantime , the drinkers had begun to sing an obscene song , and to laugh at it until the ceiling shook . 
Thenardier accompanied and encouraged them . 
As birds make nests out of everything , so children make a doll out of anything which comes to hand . 
While Eponine and Azelma were bundling up the cat , Cosette , on her side , had dressed up her sword . 
That done , she laid it in her arms , and sang to it softly , to lull it to sleep . 
The doll is one of the most imperious needs and , at the same time , one of the most charming instincts of feminine childhood . 
To care for , to clothe , to deck , to dress , to undress , to redress , to teach , scold a little , to rock , to dandle , to lull to sleep , to imagine that something is some one , -- therein lies the whole woman 's future . 
While dreaming and chattering , making tiny outfits , and baby clothes , while sewing little gowns , and corsages and bodices , the child grows into a young girl , the young girl into a big girl , the big girl into a woman . 
The first child is the continuation of the last doll . 
A little girl without a doll is almost as unhappy , and quite as impossible , as a woman without children . 
So Cosette had made herself a doll out of the sword . 
Madame Thenardier approached the yellow man ; `` My husband is right , '' she thought ; `` perhaps it is M. Laffitte ; there are such queer rich men ! '' 
She came and set her elbows on the table . 
`` Monsieur , '' said she . 
At this word , Monsieur , the man turned ; up to that time , the Thenardier had addressed him only as brave homme or bonhomme . 
`` You see , sir , '' she pursued , assuming a sweetish air that was even more repulsive to behold than her fierce mien , `` I am willing that the child should play ; I do not oppose it , but it is good for once , because you are generous . 
You see , she has nothing ; she must needs work . '' 
`` Then this child is not yours ? '' 
demanded the man . 
`` Oh ! 
mon Dieu ! 
no , sir ! 
she is a little beggar whom we have taken in through charity ; a sort of imbecile child . 
She must have water on the brain ; she has a large head , as you see . 
We do what we can for her , for we are not rich ; we have written in vain to her native place , and have received no reply these six months . 
It must be that her mother is dead . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the man , and fell into his revery once more . 
`` Her mother did n't amount to much , '' added the Thenardier ; `` she abandoned her child . '' 
During the whole of this conversation Cosette , as though warned by some instinct that she was under discussion , had not taken her eyes from the Thenardier 's face ; she listened vaguely ; she caught a few words here and there . 
Meanwhile , the drinkers , all three-quarters intoxicated , were repeating their unclean refrain with redoubled gayety ; it was a highly spiced and wanton song , in which the Virgin and the infant Jesus were introduced . 
The Thenardier went off to take part in the shouts of laughter . 
Cosette , from her post under the table , gazed at the fire , which was reflected from her fixed eyes . 
She had begun to rock the sort of baby which she had made , and , as she rocked it , she sang in a low voice , `` My mother is dead ! 
my mother is dead ! 
my mother is dead ! '' 
On being urged afresh by the hostess , the yellow man , `` the millionaire , '' consented at last to take supper . 
`` What does Monsieur wish ? '' 
`` Bread and cheese , '' said the man . 
`` Decidedly , he is a beggar '' thought Madame Thenardier . 
The drunken men were still singing their song , and the child under the table was singing hers . 
All at once , Cosette paused ; she had just turned round and caught sight of the little Thenardiers ' doll , which they had abandoned for the cat and had left on the floor a few paces from the kitchen table . 
Then she dropped the swaddled sword , which only half met her needs , and cast her eyes slowly round the room . 
Madame Thenardier was whispering to her husband and counting over some money ; Ponine and Zelma were playing with the cat ; the travellers were eating or drinking or singing ; not a glance was fixed on her . 
She had not a moment to lose ; she crept out from under the table on her hands and knees , made sure once more that no one was watching her ; then she slipped quickly up to the doll and seized it . 
An instant later she was in her place again , seated motionless , and only turned so as to cast a shadow on the doll which she held in her arms . 
The happiness of playing with a doll was so rare for her that it contained all the violence of voluptuousness . 
No one had seen her , except the traveller , who was slowly devouring his meagre supper . 
This joy lasted about a quarter of an hour . 
But with all the precautions that Cosette had taken she did not perceive that one of the doll 's legs stuck out and that the fire on the hearth lighted it up very vividly . 
That pink and shining foot , projecting from the shadow , suddenly struck the eye of Azelma , who said to Eponine , `` Look ! 
sister . '' 
The two little girls paused in stupefaction ; Cosette had dared to take their doll ! 
Eponine rose , and , without releasing the cat , she ran to her mother , and began to tug at her skirt . 
`` Let me alone ! '' 
said her mother ; `` what do you want ? '' 
`` Mother , '' said the child , `` look there ! '' 
And she pointed to Cosette . 
Cosette , absorbed in the ecstasies of possession , no longer saw or heard anything . 
Madame Thenardier 's countenance assumed that peculiar expression which is composed of the terrible mingled with the trifles of life , and which has caused this style of woman to be named megaeras . 
On this occasion , wounded pride exasperated her wrath still further . 
Cosette had overstepped all bounds ; Cosette had laid violent hands on the doll belonging to `` these young ladies . '' 
A czarina who should see a muzhik trying on her imperial son 's blue ribbon would wear no other face . 
She shrieked in a voice rendered hoarse with indignation : -- `` Cosette ! '' 
Cosette started as though the earth had trembled beneath her ; she turned round . 
`` Cosette ! '' 
repeated the Thenardier . 
Cosette took the doll and laid it gently on the floor with a sort of veneration , mingled with despair ; then , without taking her eyes from it , she clasped her hands , and , what is terrible to relate of a child of that age , she wrung them ; then -- not one of the emotions of the day , neither the trip to the forest , nor the weight of the bucket of water , nor the loss of the money , nor the sight of the whip , nor even the sad words which she had heard Madame Thenardier utter had been able to wring this from her -- she wept ; she burst out sobbing . 
Meanwhile , the traveller had risen to his feet . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
he said to the Thenardier . 
`` Do n't you see ? '' 
said the Thenardier , pointing to the corpus delicti which lay at Cosette 's feet . 
`` Well , what of it ? '' 
resumed the man . 
`` That beggar , '' replied the Thenardier , `` has permitted herself to touch the children 's doll ! '' 
`` All this noise for that ! '' 
said the man ; `` well , what if she did play with that doll ? '' 
`` She touched it with her dirty hands ! '' 
pursued the Thenardier , `` with her frightful hands ! '' 
Here Cosette redoubled her sobs . 
`` Will you stop your noise ? '' 
screamed the Thenardier . 
The man went straight to the street door , opened it , and stepped out . 
As soon as he had gone , the Thenardier profited by his absence to give Cosette a hearty kick under the table , which made the child utter loud cries . 
The door opened again , the man re-appeared ; he carried in both hands the fabulous doll which we have mentioned , and which all the village brats had been staring at ever since the morning , and he set it upright in front of Cosette , saying : -- `` Here ; this is for you . '' 
It must be supposed that in the course of the hour and more which he had spent there he had taken confused notice through his revery of that toy shop , lighted up by fire-pots and candles so splendidly that it was visible like an illumination through the window of the drinking-shop . 
Cosette raised her eyes ; she gazed at the man approaching her with that doll as she might have gazed at the sun ; she heard the unprecedented words , `` It is for you '' ; she stared at him ; she stared at the doll ; then she slowly retreated , and hid herself at the extreme end , under the table in a corner of the wall . 
She no longer cried ; she no longer wept ; she had the appearance of no longer daring to breathe . 
The Thenardier , Eponine , and Azelma were like statues also ; the very drinkers had paused ; a solemn silence reigned through the whole room . 
Madame Thenardier , petrified and mute , recommenced her conjectures : `` Who is that old fellow ? 
Is he a poor man ? 
Is he a millionaire ? 
Perhaps he is both ; that is to say , a thief . '' 
The face of the male Thenardier presented that expressive fold which accentuates the human countenance whenever the dominant instinct appears there in all its bestial force . 
The tavern-keeper stared alternately at the doll and at the traveller ; he seemed to be scenting out the man , as he would have scented out a bag of money . 
This did not last longer than the space of a flash of lightning . 
He stepped up to his wife and said to her in a low voice : -- `` That machine costs at least thirty francs . 
No nonsense . 
Down on your belly before that man ! '' 
Gross natures have this in common with naive natures , that they possess no transition state . 
`` Well , Cosette , '' said the Thenardier , in a voice that strove to be sweet , and which was composed of the bitter honey of malicious women , `` are n't you going to take your doll ? '' 
Cosette ventured to emerge from her hole . 
`` The gentleman has given you a doll , my little Cosette , '' said Thenardier , with a caressing air . 
`` Take it ; it is yours . '' 
Cosette gazed at the marvellous doll in a sort of terror . 
Her face was still flooded with tears , but her eyes began to fill , like the sky at daybreak , with strange beams of joy . 
What she felt at that moment was a little like what she would have felt if she had been abruptly told , `` Little one , you are the Queen of France . '' 
It seemed to her that if she touched that doll , lightning would dart from it . 
This was true , up to a certain point , for she said to herself that the Thenardier would scold and beat her . 
Nevertheless , the attraction carried the day . 
She ended by drawing near and murmuring timidly as she turned towards Madame Thenardier : -- `` May I , Madame ? '' 
No words can render that air , at once despairing , terrified , and ecstatic . 
`` Pardi ! '' 
cried the Thenardier , `` it is yours . 
The gentleman has given it to you . '' 
`` Truly , sir ? '' 
said Cosette . 
`` Is it true ? 
Is the ` lady ' mine ? '' 
The stranger 's eyes seemed to be full of tears . 
He appeared to have reached that point of emotion where a man does not speak for fear lest he should weep . 
He nodded to Cosette , and placed the `` lady 's '' hand in her tiny hand . 
Cosette hastily withdrew her hand , as though that of the `` lady '' scorched her , and began to stare at the floor . 
We are forced to add that at that moment she stuck out her tongue immoderately . 
All at once she wheeled round and seized the doll in a transport . 
`` I shall call her Catherine , '' she said . 
It was an odd moment when Cosette 's rags met and clasped the ribbons and fresh pink muslins of the doll . 
`` Madame , '' she resumed , `` may I put her on a chair ? '' 
`` Yes , my child , '' replied the Thenardier . 
It was now the turn of Eponine and Azelma to gaze at Cosette with envy . 
Cosette placed Catherine on a chair , then seated herself on the floor in front of her , and remained motionless , without uttering a word , in an attitude of contemplation . 
`` Play , Cosette , '' said the stranger . 
`` Oh ! 
I am playing , '' returned the child . 
This stranger , this unknown individual , who had the air of a visit which Providence was making on Cosette , was the person whom the Thenardier hated worse than any one in the world at that moment . 
However , it was necessary to control herself . 
Habituated as she was to dissimulation through endeavoring to copy her husband in all his actions , these emotions were more than she could endure . 
She made haste to send her daughters to bed , then she asked the man 's permission to send Cosette off also ; `` for she has worked hard all day , '' she added with a maternal air . 
Cosette went off to bed , carrying Catherine in her arms . 
From time to time the Thenardier went to the other end of the room where her husband was , to relieve her soul , as she said . 
She exchanged with her husband words which were all the more furious because she dared not utter them aloud . 
`` Old beast ! 
What has he got in his belly , to come and upset us in this manner ! 
To want that little monster to play ! 
to give away forty-franc dolls to a jade that I would sell for forty sous , so I would ! 
A little more and he will be saying Your Majesty to her , as though to the Duchess de Berry ! 
Is there any sense in it ? 
Is he mad , then , that mysterious old fellow ? '' 
`` Why ! 
it is perfectly simple , '' replied Thenardier , `` if that amuses him ! 
It amuses you to have the little one work ; it amuses him to have her play . 
He 's all right . 
A traveller can do what he pleases when he pays for it . 
If the old fellow is a philanthropist , what is that to you ? 
If he is an imbecile , it does not concern you . 
What are you worrying for , so long as he has money ? '' 
The language of a master , and the reasoning of an innkeeper , neither of which admitted of any reply . 
The man had placed his elbows on the table , and resumed his thoughtful attitude . 
All the other travellers , both pedlers and carters , had withdrawn a little , and had ceased singing . 
They were staring at him from a distance , with a sort of respectful awe . 
This poorly dressed man , who drew `` hind-wheels '' from his pocket with so much ease , and who lavished gigantic dolls on dirty little brats in wooden shoes , was certainly a magnificent fellow , and one to be feared . 
Many hours passed . 
The midnight mass was over , the chimes had ceased , the drinkers had taken their departure , the drinking-shop was closed , the public room was deserted , the fire extinct , the stranger still remained in the same place and the same attitude . 
From time to time he changed the elbow on which he leaned . 
That was all ; but he had not said a word since Cosette had left the room . 
The Thenardiers alone , out of politeness and curiosity , had remained in the room . 
`` Is he going to pass the night in that fashion ? '' 
grumbled the Thenardier . 
When two o'clock in the morning struck , she declared herself vanquished , and said to her husband , `` I 'm going to bed . 
Do as you like . '' 
Her husband seated himself at a table in the corner , lighted a candle , and began to read the Courrier Francais . 
A good hour passed thus . 
The worthy inn-keeper had perused the Courrier Francais at least three times , from the date of the number to the printer 's name . 
The stranger did not stir . 
Thenardier fidgeted , coughed , spit , blew his nose , and creaked his chair . 
Not a movement on the man 's part . 
`` Is he asleep ? '' 
thought Thenardier . 
The man was not asleep , but nothing could arouse him . 
At last Thenardier took off his cap , stepped gently up to him , and ventured to say : -- `` Is not Monsieur going to his repose ? '' 
Not going to bed would have seemed to him excessive and familiar . 
To repose smacked of luxury and respect . 
These words possess the mysterious and admirable property of swelling the bill on the following day . 
A chamber where one sleeps costs twenty sous ; a chamber in which one reposes costs twenty francs . 
`` Well ! '' 
said the stranger , `` you are right . 
Where is your stable ? '' 
`` Sir ! '' 
exclaimed Thenardier , with a smile , `` I will conduct you , sir . '' 
He took the candle ; the man picked up his bundle and cudgel , and Thenardier conducted him to a chamber on the first floor , which was of rare splendor , all furnished in mahogany , with a low bedstead , curtained with red calico . 
`` What is this ? '' 
said the traveller . 
`` It is really our bridal chamber , '' said the tavern-keeper . 
`` My wife and I occupy another . 
This is only entered three or four times a year . '' 
`` I should have liked the stable quite as well , '' said the man , abruptly . 
Thenardier pretended not to hear this unamiable remark . 
He lighted two perfectly fresh wax candles which figured on the chimney-piece . 
A very good fire was flickering on the hearth . 
On the chimney-piece , under a glass globe , stood a woman 's head-dress in silver wire and orange flowers . 
`` And what is this ? '' 
resumed the stranger . 
`` That , sir , '' said Thenardier , `` is my wife 's wedding bonnet . '' 
The traveller surveyed the object with a glance which seemed to say , `` There really was a time , then , when that monster was a maiden ? '' 
Thenardier lied , however . 
When he had leased this paltry building for the purpose of converting it into a tavern , he had found this chamber decorated in just this manner , and had purchased the furniture and obtained the orange flowers at second hand , with the idea that this would cast a graceful shadow on `` his spouse , '' and would result in what the English call respectability for his house . 
When the traveller turned round , the host had disappeared . 
Thenardier had withdrawn discreetly , without venturing to wish him a good night , as he did not wish to treat with disrespectful cordiality a man whom he proposed to fleece royally the following morning . 
The inn-keeper retired to his room . 
His wife was in bed , but she was not asleep . 
When she heard her husband 's step she turned over and said to him : -- `` Do you know , I 'm going to turn Cosette out of doors to-morrow . '' 
Thenardier replied coldly : -- `` How you do go on ! '' 
They exchanged no further words , and a few moments later their candle was extinguished . 
As for the traveller , he had deposited his cudgel and his bundle in a corner . 
The landlord once gone , he threw himself into an arm-chair and remained for some time buried in thought . 
Then he removed his shoes , took one of the two candles , blew out the other , opened the door , and quitted the room , gazing about him like a person who is in search of something . 
He traversed a corridor and came upon a staircase . 
There he heard a very faint and gentle sound like the breathing of a child . 
He followed this sound , and came to a sort of triangular recess built under the staircase , or rather formed by the staircase itself . 
This recess was nothing else than the space under the steps . 
There , in the midst of all sorts of old papers and potsherds , among dust and spiders ' webs , was a bed -- if one can call by the name of bed a straw pallet so full of holes as to display the straw , and a coverlet so tattered as to show the pallet . 
No sheets . 
This was placed on the floor . 
In this bed Cosette was sleeping . 
The man approached and gazed down upon her . 
Cosette was in a profound sleep ; she was fully dressed . 
In the winter she did not undress , in order that she might not be so cold . 
Against her breast was pressed the doll , whose large eyes , wide open , glittered in the dark . 
From time to time she gave vent to a deep sigh as though she were on the point of waking , and she strained the doll almost convulsively in her arms . 
Beside her bed there was only one of her wooden shoes . 
A door which stood open near Cosette 's pallet permitted a view of a rather large , dark room . 
The stranger stepped into it . 
At the further extremity , through a glass door , he saw two small , very white beds . 
They belonged to Eponine and Azelma . 
Behind these beds , and half hidden , stood an uncurtained wicker cradle , in which the little boy who had cried all the evening lay asleep . 
The stranger conjectured that this chamber connected with that of the Thenardier pair . 
He was on the point of retreating when his eye fell upon the fireplace -- one of those vast tavern chimneys where there is always so little fire when there is any fire at all , and which are so cold to look at . 
There was no fire in this one , there was not even ashes ; but there was something which attracted the stranger 's gaze , nevertheless . 
It was two tiny children 's shoes , coquettish in shape and unequal in size . 
The traveller recalled the graceful and immemorial custom in accordance with which children place their shoes in the chimney on Christmas eve , there to await in the darkness some sparkling gift from their good fairy . 
Eponine and Azelma had taken care not to omit this , and each of them had set one of her shoes on the hearth . 
The traveller bent over them . 
The fairy , that is to say , their mother , had already paid her visit , and in each he saw a brand-new and shining ten-sou piece . 
The man straightened himself up , and was on the point of withdrawing , when far in , in the darkest corner of the hearth , he caught sight of another object . 
He looked at it , and recognized a wooden shoe , a frightful shoe of the coarsest description , half dilapidated and all covered with ashes and dried mud . 
It was Cosette 's sabot . 
Cosette , with that touching trust of childhood , which can always be deceived yet never discouraged , had placed her shoe on the hearth-stone also . 
Hope in a child who has never known anything but despair is a sweet and touching thing . 
There was nothing in this wooden shoe . 
The stranger fumbled in his waistcoat , bent over and placed a louis d'or in Cosette 's shoe . 
Then he regained his own chamber with the stealthy tread of a wolf . 
THENARDIER AND HIS MANOEUVRES On the following morning , two hours at least before day-break , Thenardier , seated beside a candle in the public room of the tavern , pen in hand , was making out the bill for the traveller with the yellow coat . 
His wife , standing beside him , and half bent over him , was following him with her eyes . 
They exchanged not a word . 
On the one hand , there was profound meditation , on the other , the religious admiration with which one watches the birth and development of a marvel of the human mind . 
A noise was audible in the house ; it was the Lark sweeping the stairs . 
After the lapse of a good quarter of an hour , and some erasures , Thenardier produced the following masterpiece : -- BILL OF THE GENTLEMAN IN No. 1 . 
Supper ... 3 francs . 
Chamber ... 10 '' Candle ... 5 '' Fire ... 4 '' Service ... 1 '' ---------- Total ... 23 francs . 
Service was written servisse . 
`` Twenty-three francs ! '' 
cried the woman , with an enthusiasm which was mingled with some hesitation . 
Like all great artists , Thenardier was dissatisfied . 
`` Peuh ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
It was the accent of Castlereagh auditing France 's bill at the Congress of Vienna . 
`` Monsieur Thenardier , you are right ; he certainly owes that , '' murmured the wife , who was thinking of the doll bestowed on Cosette in the presence of her daughters . 
`` It is just , but it is too much . 
He will not pay it . '' 
Thenardier laughed coldly , as usual , and said : -- `` He will pay . '' 
This laugh was the supreme assertion of certainty and authority . 
That which was asserted in this manner must needs be so . 
His wife did not insist . 
She set about arranging the table ; her husband paced the room . 
A moment later he added : -- `` I owe full fifteen hundred francs ! '' 
He went and seated himself in the chimney-corner , meditating , with his feet among the warm ashes . 
`` Ah ! 
by the way , '' resumed his wife , `` you do n't forget that I 'm going to turn Cosette out of doors to-day ? 
The monster ! 
She breaks my heart with that doll of hers ! 
I 'd rather marry Louis XVIII . 
than keep her another day in the house ! '' 
Thenardier lighted his pipe , and replied between two puffs : -- `` You will hand that bill to the man . '' 
Then he went out . 
Hardly had he left the room when the traveller entered . 
Thenardier instantly reappeared behind him and remained motionless in the half-open door , visible only to his wife . 
The yellow man carried his bundle and his cudgel in his hand . 
`` Up so early ? '' 
said Madame Thenardier ; `` is Monsieur leaving us already ? '' 
As she spoke thus , she was twisting the bill about in her hands with an embarrassed air , and making creases in it with her nails . 
Her hard face presented a shade which was not habitual with it , -- timidity and scruples . 
To present such a bill to a man who had so completely the air `` of a poor wretch '' seemed difficult to her . 
The traveller appeared to be preoccupied and absent-minded . 
He replied : -- `` Yes , Madame , I am going . '' 
`` So Monsieur has no business in Montfermeil ? '' 
`` No , I was passing through . 
That is all . 
What do I owe you , Madame , '' he added . 
The Thenardier silently handed him the folded bill . 
The man unfolded the paper and glanced at it ; but his thoughts were evidently elsewhere . 
`` Madame , '' he resumed , `` is business good here in Montfermeil ? '' 
`` So so , Monsieur , '' replied the Thenardier , stupefied at not witnessing another sort of explosion . 
She continued , in a dreary and lamentable tone : -- `` Oh ! 
Monsieur , times are so hard ! 
and then , we have so few bourgeois in the neighborhood ! 
All the people are poor , you see . 
If we had not , now and then , some rich and generous travellers like Monsieur , we should not get along at all . 
We have so many expenses . 
Just see , that child is costing us our very eyes . '' 
`` What child ? '' 
`` Why , the little one , you know ! 
Cosette -- the Lark , as she is called hereabouts ! '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the man . 
She went on : -- `` How stupid these peasants are with their nicknames ! 
She has more the air of a bat than of a lark . 
You see , sir , we do not ask charity , and we can not bestow it . 
We earn nothing and we have to pay out a great deal . 
The license , the imposts , the door and window tax , the hundredths ! 
Monsieur is aware that the government demands a terrible deal of money . 
And then , I have my daughters . 
I have no need to bring up other people 's children . '' 
The man resumed , in that voice which he strove to render indifferent , and in which there lingered a tremor : -- `` What if one were to rid you of her ? '' 
`` Who ? 
Cosette ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
The landlady 's red and violent face brightened up hideously . 
`` Ah ! 
sir , my dear sir , take her , keep her , lead her off , carry her away , sugar her , stuff her with truffles , drink her , eat her , and the blessings of the good holy Virgin and of all the saints of paradise be upon you ! '' 
`` Agreed . '' 
`` Really ! 
You will take her away ? '' 
`` I will take her away . '' 
`` Immediately ? '' 
`` Immediately . 
Call the child . '' 
`` Cosette ! '' 
screamed the Thenardier . 
`` In the meantime , '' pursued the man , `` I will pay you what I owe you . 
How much is it ? '' 
He cast a glance on the bill , and could not restrain a start of surprise : -- `` Twenty-three francs ! '' 
He looked at the landlady , and repeated : -- `` Twenty-three francs ? '' 
There was in the enunciation of these words , thus repeated , an accent between an exclamation and an interrogation point . 
The Thenardier had had time to prepare herself for the shock . 
She replied , with assurance : -- `` Good gracious , yes , sir , it is twenty-three francs . '' 
The stranger laid five five-franc pieces on the table . 
`` Go and get the child , '' said he . 
At that moment Thenardier advanced to the middle of the room , and said : -- `` Monsieur owes twenty-six sous . '' 
`` Twenty-six sous ! '' 
exclaimed his wife . 
`` Twenty sous for the chamber , '' resumed Thenardier , coldly , `` and six sous for his supper . 
As for the child , I must discuss that matter a little with the gentleman . 
Leave us , wife . '' 
Madame Thenardier was dazzled as with the shock caused by unexpected lightning flashes of talent . 
She was conscious that a great actor was making his entrance on the stage , uttered not a word in reply , and left the room . 
As soon as they were alone , Thenardier offered the traveller a chair . 
The traveller seated himself ; Thenardier remained standing , and his face assumed a singular expression of good-fellowship and simplicity . 
`` Sir , '' said he , `` what I have to say to you is this , that I adore that child . '' 
The stranger gazed intently at him . 
`` What child ? '' 
Thenardier continued : -- `` How strange it is , one grows attached . 
What money is that ? 
Take back your hundred-sou piece . 
I adore the child . '' 
`` Whom do you mean ? '' 
demanded the stranger . 
`` Eh ! 
our little Cosette ! 
Are you not intending to take her away from us ? 
Well , I speak frankly ; as true as you are an honest man , I will not consent to it . 
I shall miss that child . 
I saw her first when she was a tiny thing . 
It is true that she costs us money ; it is true that she has her faults ; it is true that we are not rich ; it is true that I have paid out over four hundred francs for drugs for just one of her illnesses ! 
But one must do something for the good God 's sake . 
She has neither father nor mother . 
I have brought her up . 
I have bread enough for her and for myself . 
In truth , I think a great deal of that child . 
You understand , one conceives an affection for a person ; I am a good sort of a beast , I am ; I do not reason ; I love that little girl ; my wife is quick-tempered , but she loves her also . 
You see , she is just the same as our own child . 
I want to keep her to babble about the house . '' 
The stranger kept his eye intently fixed on Thenardier . 
The latter continued : -- `` Excuse me , sir , but one does not give away one 's child to a passer-by , like that . 
I am right , am I not ? 
Still , I do n't say -- you are rich ; you have the air of a very good man , -- if it were for her happiness . 
But one must find out that . 
You understand : suppose that I were to let her go and to sacrifice myself , I should like to know what becomes of her ; I should not wish to lose sight of her ; I should like to know with whom she is living , so that I could go to see her from time to time ; so that she may know that her good foster-father is alive , that he is watching over her . 
In short , there are things which are not possible . 
I do not even know your name . 
If you were to take her away , I should say : ` Well , and the Lark , what has become of her ? ' 
One must , at least , see some petty scrap of paper , some trifle in the way of a passport , you know ! '' 
The stranger , still surveying him with that gaze which penetrates , as the saying goes , to the very depths of the conscience , replied in a grave , firm voice : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier , one does not require a passport to travel five leagues from Paris . 
If I take Cosette away , I shall take her away , and that is the end of the matter . 
You will not know my name , you will not know my residence , you will not know where she is ; and my intention is that she shall never set eyes on you again so long as she lives . 
I break the thread which binds her foot , and she departs . 
Does that suit you ? 
Yes or no ? '' 
Since geniuses , like demons , recognize the presence of a superior God by certain signs , Thenardier comprehended that he had to deal with a very strong person . 
It was like an intuition ; he comprehended it with his clear and sagacious promptitude . 
While drinking with the carters , smoking , and singing coarse songs on the preceding evening , he had devoted the whole of the time to observing the stranger , watching him like a cat , and studying him like a mathematician . 
He had watched him , both on his own account , for the pleasure of the thing , and through instinct , and had spied upon him as though he had been paid for so doing . 
Not a movement , not a gesture , on the part of the man in the yellow great-coat had escaped him . 
Even before the stranger had so clearly manifested his interest in Cosette , Thenardier had divined his purpose . 
He had caught the old man 's deep glances returning constantly to the child . 
Who was this man ? 
Why this interest ? 
Why this hideous costume , when he had so much money in his purse ? 
Questions which he put to himself without being able to solve them , and which irritated him . 
He had pondered it all night long . 
He could not be Cosette 's father . 
Was he her grandfather ? 
Then why not make himself known at once ? 
When one has a right , one asserts it . 
This man evidently had no right over Cosette . 
What was it , then ? 
Thenardier lost himself in conjectures . 
He caught glimpses of everything , but he saw nothing . 
Be that as it may , on entering into conversation with the man , sure that there was some secret in the case , that the latter had some interest in remaining in the shadow , he felt himself strong ; when he perceived from the stranger 's clear and firm retort , that this mysterious personage was mysterious in so simple a way , he became conscious that he was weak . 
He had expected nothing of the sort . 
His conjectures were put to the rout . 
He rallied his ideas . 
He weighed everything in the space of a second . 
Thenardier was one of those men who take in a situation at a glance . 
He decided that the moment had arrived for proceeding straightforward , and quickly at that . 
He did as great leaders do at the decisive moment , which they know that they alone recognize ; he abruptly unmasked his batteries . 
`` Sir , '' said he , `` I am in need of fifteen hundred francs . '' 
The stranger took from his side pocket an old pocketbook of black leather , opened it , drew out three bank-bills , which he laid on the table . 
Then he placed his large thumb on the notes and said to the inn-keeper : -- `` Go and fetch Cosette . '' 
While this was taking place , what had Cosette been doing ? 
On waking up , Cosette had run to get her shoe . 
In it she had found the gold piece . 
It was not a Napoleon ; it was one of those perfectly new twenty-franc pieces of the Restoration , on whose effigy the little Prussian queue had replaced the laurel wreath . 
Cosette was dazzled . 
Her destiny began to intoxicate her . 
She did not know what a gold piece was ; she had never seen one ; she hid it quickly in her pocket , as though she had stolen it . 
Still , she felt that it really was hers ; she guessed whence her gift had come , but the joy which she experienced was full of fear . 
