There is no insurrection except in a forward direction . 
Any other sort of rising is bad ; every violent step towards the rear is a revolt ; to retreat is to commit a deed of violence against the human race . 
Insurrection is a fit of rage on the part of truth ; the pavements which the uprising disturbs give forth the spark of right . 
These pavements bequeath to the uprising only their mud . 
Danton against Louis XIV . 
is insurrection ; Hebert against Danton is revolt . 
Hence it results that if insurrection in given cases may be , as Lafayette says , the most holy of duties , an uprising may be the most fatal of crimes . 
There is also a difference in the intensity of heat ; insurrection is often a volcano , revolt is often only a fire of straw . 
Revolt , as we have said , is sometimes found among those in power . 
Polignac is a rioter ; Camille Desmoulins is one of the governing powers . 
Insurrection is sometimes resurrection . 
The solution of everything by universal suffrage being an absolutely modern fact , and all history anterior to this fact being , for the space of four thousand years , filled with violated right , and the suffering of peoples , each epoch of history brings with it that protest of which it is capable . 
Under the Caesars , there was no insurrection , but there was Juvenal . 
The facit indignatio replaces the Gracchi . 
Under the Caesars , there is the exile to Syene ; there is also the man of the Annales . 
We do not speak of the immense exile of Patmos who , on his part also , overwhelms the real world with a protest in the name of the ideal world , who makes of his vision an enormous satire and casts on Rome-Nineveh , on Rome-Babylon , on Rome-Sodom , the flaming reflection of the Apocalypse . 
John on his rock is the sphinx on its pedestal ; we may understand him , he is a Jew , and it is Hebrew ; but the man who writes the Annales is of the Latin race , let us rather say he is a Roman . 
As the Neros reign in a black way , they should be painted to match . 
The work of the graving-tool alone would be too pale ; there must be poured into the channel a concentrated prose which bites . 
Despots count for something in the question of philosophers . 
A word that is chained is a terrible word . 
The writer doubles and trebles his style when silence is imposed on a nation by its master . 
From this silence there arises a certain mysterious plenitude which filters into thought and there congeals into bronze . 
The compression of history produces conciseness in the historian . 
The granite solidity of such and such a celebrated prose is nothing but the accumulation effected by the tyrant . 
Tyranny constrains the writer to conditions of diameter which are augmentations of force . 
The Ciceronian period , which hardly sufficed for Verres , would be blunted on Caligula . 
The less spread of sail in the phrase , the more intensity in the blow . 
Tacitus thinks with all his might . 
The honesty of a great heart , condensed in justice and truth , overwhelms as with lightning . 
Be it remarked , in passing , that Tacitus is not historically superposed upon Caesar . 
The Tiberii were reserved for him . 
Caesar and Tacitus are two successive phenomena , a meeting between whom seems to be mysteriously avoided , by the One who , when He sets the centuries on the stage , regulates the entrances and the exits . 
Caesar is great , Tacitus is great ; God spares these two greatnesses by not allowing them to clash with one another . 
The guardian of justice , in striking Caesar , might strike too hard and be unjust . 
God does not will it . 
The great wars of Africa and Spain , the pirates of Sicily destroyed , civilization introduced into Gaul , into Britanny , into Germany , -- all this glory covers the Rubicon . 
There is here a sort of delicacy of the divine justice , hesitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper the formidable historian , sparing Caesar Tacitus , and according extenuating circumstances to genius . 
Certainly , despotism remains despotism , even under the despot of genius . 
There is corruption under all illustrious tyrants , but the moral pest is still more hideous under infamous tyrants . 
In such reigns , nothing veils the shame ; and those who make examples , Tacitus as well as Juvenal , slap this ignominy which can not reply , in the face , more usefully in the presence of all humanity . 
Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sylla . 
Under Claudius and under Domitian , there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the repulsiveness of the tyrant . 
The villainy of slaves is a direct product of the despot ; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences wherein the master is reflected ; public powers are unclean ; hearts are small ; consciences are dull , souls are like vermin ; thus it is under Caracalla , thus it is under Commodus , thus it is under Heliogabalus , while , from the Roman Senate , under Caesar , there comes nothing but the odor of the dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the eagles . 
Hence the advent , apparently tardy , of the Tacituses and the Juvenals ; it is in the hour for evidence , that the demonstrator makes his appearance . 
But Juvenal and Tacitus , like Isaiah in Biblical times , like Dante in the Middle Ages , is man ; riot and insurrection are the multitude , which is sometimes right and sometimes wrong . 
In the majority of cases , riot proceeds from a material fact ; insurrection is always a moral phenomenon . 
Riot is Masaniello ; insurrection , Spartacus . 
Insurrection borders on mind , riot on the stomach ; Gaster grows irritated ; but Gaster , assuredly , is not always in the wrong . 
In questions of famine , riot , Buzancais , for example , holds a true , pathetic , and just point of departure . 
Nevertheless , it remains a riot . 
Why ? 
It is because , right at bottom , it was wrong in form . 
Shy although in the right , violent although strong , it struck at random ; it walked like a blind elephant ; it left behind it the corpses of old men , of women , and of children ; it wished the blood of inoffensive and innocent persons without knowing why . 
The nourishment of the people is a good object ; to massacre them is a bad means . 
All armed protests , even the most legitimate , even that of the 10th of August , even that of July 14th , begin with the same troubles . 
Before the right gets set free , there is foam and tumult . 
In the beginning , the insurrection is a riot , just as a river is a torrent . 
Ordinarily it ends in that ocean : revolution . 
Sometimes , however , coming from those lofty mountains which dominate the moral horizon , justice , wisdom , reason , right , formed of the pure snow of the ideal , after a long fall from rock to rock , after having reflected the sky in its transparency and increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of triumph , insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire , as the Rhine is in a swamp . 
All this is of the past , the future is another thing . 
Universal suffrage has this admirable property , that it dissolves riot in its inception , and , by giving the vote to insurrection , it deprives it of its arms . 
The disappearance of wars , of street wars as well as of wars on the frontiers , such is the inevitable progression . 
Whatever To-day may be , To-morrow will be peace . 
However , insurrection , riot , and points of difference between the former and the latter , -- the bourgeois , properly speaking , knows nothing of such shades . 
In his mind , all is sedition , rebellion pure and simple , the revolt of the dog against his master , an attempt to bite whom must be punished by the chain and the kennel , barking , snapping , until such day as the head of the dog , suddenly enlarged , is outlined vaguely in the gloom face to face with the lion . 
Then the bourgeois shouts : `` Long live the people ! '' 
This explanation given , what does the movement of June , 1832 , signify , so far as history is concerned ? 
Is it a revolt ? 
Is it an insurrection ? 
It may happen to us , in placing this formidable event on the stage , to say revolt now and then , but merely to distinguish superficial facts , and always preserving the distinction between revolt , the form , and insurrection , the foundation . 
This movement of 1832 had , in its rapid outbreak and in its melancholy extinction , so much grandeur , that even those who see in it only an uprising , never refer to it otherwise than with respect . 
For them , it is like a relic of 1830 . 
Excited imaginations , say they , are not to be calmed in a day . 
A revolution can not be cut off short . 
It must needs undergo some undulations before it returns to a state of rest , like a mountain sinking into the plain . 
There are no Alps without their Jura , nor Pyrenees without the Asturias . 
This pathetic crisis of contemporary history which the memory of Parisians calls `` the epoch of the riots , '' is certainly a characteristic hour amid the stormy hours of this century . 
A last word , before we enter on the recital . 
The facts which we are about to relate belong to that dramatic and living reality , which the historian sometimes neglects for lack of time and space . 
There , nevertheless , we insist upon it , is life , palpitation , human tremor . 
Petty details , as we think we have already said , are , so to speak , the foliage of great events , and are lost in the distance of history . 
The epoch , surnamed `` of the riots , '' abounds in details of this nature . 
Judicial inquiries have not revealed , and perhaps have not sounded the depths , for another reason than history . 
We shall therefore bring to light , among the known and published peculiarities , things which have not heretofore been known , about facts over which have passed the forgetfulness of some , and the death of others . 
The majority of the actors in these gigantic scenes have disappeared ; beginning with the very next day they held their peace ; but of what we shall relate , we shall be able to say : `` We have seen this . '' 
We alter a few names , for history relates and does not inform against , but the deed which we shall paint will be genuine . 
In accordance with the conditions of the book which we are now writing , we shall show only one side and one episode , and certainly , the least known at that , of the two days , the 5th and the 6th of June , 1832 , but we shall do it in such wise that the reader may catch a glimpse , beneath the gloomy veil which we are about to lift , of the real form of this frightful public adventure . 
A BURIAL ; AN OCCASION TO BE BORN AGAIN In the spring of 1832 , although the cholera had been chilling all minds for the last three months and had cast over their agitation an indescribable and gloomy pacification , Paris had already long been ripe for commotion . 
As we have said , the great city resembles a piece of artillery ; when it is loaded , it suffices for a spark to fall , and the shot is discharged . 
In June , 1832 , the spark was the death of General Lamarque . 
Lamarque was a man of renown and of action . 
He had had in succession , under the Empire and under the Restoration , the sorts of bravery requisite for the two epochs , the bravery of the battle-field and the bravery of the tribune . 
He was as eloquent as he had been valiant ; a sword was discernible in his speech . 
Like Foy , his predecessor , after upholding the command , he upheld liberty ; he sat between the left and the extreme left , beloved of the people because he accepted the chances of the future , beloved of the populace because he had served the Emperor well ; he was , in company with Comtes Gerard and Drouet , one of Napoleon 's marshals in petto . 
The treaties of 1815 removed him as a personal offence . 
He hated Wellington with a downright hatred which pleased the multitude ; and , for seventeen years , he majestically preserved the sadness of Waterloo , paying hardly any attention to intervening events . 
In his death agony , at his last hour , he clasped to his breast a sword which had been presented to him by the officers of the Hundred Days . 
Napoleon had died uttering the word army , Lamarque uttering the word country . 
His death , which was expected , was dreaded by the people as a loss , and by the government as an occasion . 
This death was an affliction . 
Like everything that is bitter , affliction may turn to revolt . 
This is what took place . 
On the preceding evening , and on the morning of the 5th of June , the day appointed for Lamarque 's burial , the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , which the procession was to touch at , assumed a formidable aspect . 
This tumultuous network of streets was filled with rumors . 
They armed themselves as best they might . 
Joiners carried off door-weights of their establishment `` to break down doors . '' 
One of them had made himself a dagger of a stocking-weaver 's hook by breaking off the hook and sharpening the stump . 
Another , who was in a fever `` to attack , '' slept wholly dressed for three days . 
A carpenter named Lombier met a comrade , who asked him : `` Whither are you going ? '' 
`` Eh ! 
well , I have no weapons . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` I 'm going to my timber-yard to get my compasses . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' said Lombier . 
A certain Jacqueline , an expeditious man , accosted some passing artisans : `` Come here , you ! '' 
He treated them to ten sous ' worth of wine and said : `` Have you work ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Go to Filspierre , between the Barriere Charonne and the Barriere Montreuil , and you will find work . '' 
At Filspierre 's they found cartridges and arms . 
Certain well-known leaders were going the rounds , that is to say , running from one house to another , to collect their men . 
At Barthelemy 's , near the Barriere du Trone , at Capel 's , near the Petit-Chapeau , the drinkers accosted each other with a grave air . 
They were heard to say : `` Have you your pistol ? '' 
`` Under my blouse . '' 
`` And you ? '' 
`` Under my shirt . '' 
In the Rue Traversiere , in front of the Bland workshop , and in the yard of the Maison-Brulee , in front of tool-maker Bernier 's , groups whispered together . 
Among them was observed a certain Mavot , who never remained more than a week in one shop , as the masters always discharged him `` because they were obliged to dispute with him every day . '' 
Mavot was killed on the following day at the barricade of the Rue Menilmontant . 
Pretot , who was destined to perish also in the struggle , seconded Mavot , and to the question : `` What is your object ? '' 
he replied : `` Insurrection . '' 
Workmen assembled at the corner of the Rue de Bercy , waited for a certain Lemarin , the revolutionary agent for the Faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
Watchwords were exchanged almost publicly . 
On the 5th of June , accordingly , a day of mingled rain and sun , General Lamarque 's funeral procession traversed Paris with official military pomp , somewhat augmented through precaution . 
Two battalions , with draped drums and reversed arms , ten thousand National Guards , with their swords at their sides , escorted the coffin . 
The hearse was drawn by young men . 
The officers of the Invalides came immediately behind it , bearing laurel branches . 
Then came an innumerable , strange , agitated multitude , the sectionaries of the Friends of the People , the Law School , the Medical School , refugees of all nationalities , and Spanish , Italian , German , and Polish flags , tricolored horizontal banners , every possible sort of banner , children waving green boughs , stone-cutters and carpenters who were on strike at the moment , printers who were recognizable by their paper caps , marching two by two , three by three , uttering cries , nearly all of them brandishing sticks , some brandishing sabres , without order and yet with a single soul , now a tumultuous rout , again a column . 
Squads chose themselves leaders ; a man armed with a pair of pistols in full view , seemed to pass the host in review , and the files separated before him . 
On the side alleys of the boulevards , in the branches of the trees , on balconies , in windows , on the roofs , swarmed the heads of men , women , and children ; all eyes were filled with anxiety . 
An armed throng was passing , and a terrified throng looked on . 
The Government , on its side , was taking observations . 
It observed with its hand on its sword . 
Four squadrons of carabineers could be seen in the Place Louis XV . 
in their saddles , with their trumpets at their head , cartridge-boxes filled and muskets loaded , all in readiness to march ; in the Latin country and at the Jardin des Plantes , the Municipal Guard echelonned from street to street ; at the Halle-aux-Vins , a squadron of dragoons ; at the Greve half of the 12th Light Infantry , the other half being at the Bastille ; the 6th Dragoons at the Celestins ; and the courtyard of the Louvre full of artillery . 
The remainder of the troops were confined to their barracks , without reckoning the regiments of the environs of Paris . 
Power being uneasy , held suspended over the menacing multitude twenty-four thousand soldiers in the city and thirty thousand in the banlieue . 
Divers reports were in circulation in the cortege . 
Legitimist tricks were hinted at ; they spoke of the Duc de Reichstadt , whom God had marked out for death at that very moment when the populace were designating him for the Empire . 
One personage , whose name has remained unknown , announced that at a given hour two overseers who had been won over , would throw open the doors of a factory of arms to the people . 
That which predominated on the uncovered brows of the majority of those present was enthusiasm mingled with dejection . 
Here and there , also , in that multitude given over to such violent but noble emotions , there were visible genuine visages of criminals and ignoble mouths which said : `` Let us plunder ! '' 
There are certain agitations which stir up the bottoms of marshes and make clouds of mud rise through the water . 
A phenomenon to which `` well drilled '' policemen are no strangers . 
The procession proceeded , with feverish slowness , from the house of the deceased , by way of the boulevards as far as the Bastille . 
It rained from time to time ; the rain mattered nothing to that throng . 
Many incidents , the coffin borne round the Vendome column , stones thrown at the Duc de Fitz-James , who was seen on a balcony with his hat on his head , the Gallic cock torn from a popular flag and dragged in the mire , a policeman wounded with a blow from a sword at the Porte Saint-Martin , an officer of the 12th Light Infantry saying aloud : `` I am a Republican , '' the Polytechnic School coming up unexpectedly against orders to remain at home , the shouts of : `` Long live the Polytechnique ! 
Long live the Republic ! '' 
marked the passage of the funeral train . 
At the Bastille , long files of curious and formidable people who descended from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , effected a junction with the procession , and a certain terrible seething began to agitate the throng . 
One man was heard to say to another : `` Do you see that fellow with a red beard , he 's the one who will give the word when we are to fire . '' 
It appears that this red beard was present , at another riot , the Quenisset affair , entrusted with this same function . 
The hearse passed the Bastille , traversed the small bridge , and reached the esplanade of the bridge of Austerlitz . 
There it halted . 
The crowd , surveyed at that moment with a bird ` seye view , would have presented the aspect of a comet whose head was on the esplanade and whose tail spread out over the Quai Bourdon , covered the Bastille , and was prolonged on the boulevard as far as the Porte Saint-Martin . 
A circle was traced around the hearse . 
The vast rout held their peace . 
Lafayette spoke and bade Lamarque farewell . 
This was a touching and august instant , all heads uncovered , all hearts beat high . 
All at once , a man on horseback , clad in black , made his appearance in the middle of the group with a red flag , others say , with a pike surmounted with a red liberty-cap . 
Lafayette turned aside his head . 
Exelmans quitted the procession . 
This red flag raised a storm , and disappeared in the midst of it . 
From the Boulevard Bourdon to the bridge of Austerlitz one of those clamors which resemble billows stirred the multitude . 
Two prodigious shouts went up : `` Lamarque to the Pantheon ! 
-- Lafayette to the Town-hall ! '' 
Some young men , amid the declamations of the throng , harnessed themselves and began to drag Lamarque in the hearse across the bridge of Austerlitz and Lafayette in a hackney-coach along the Quai Morland . 
In the crowd which surrounded and cheered Lafayette , it was noticed that a German showed himself named Ludwig Snyder , who died a centenarian afterwards , who had also been in the war of 1776 , and who had fought at Trenton under Washington , and at Brandywine under Lafayette . 
In the meantime , the municipal cavalry on the left bank had been set in motion , and came to bar the bridge , on the right bank the dragoons emerged from the Celestins and deployed along the Quai Morland . 
The men who were dragging Lafayette suddenly caught sight of them at the corner of the quay and shouted : `` The dragoons ! '' 
The dragoons advanced at a walk , in silence , with their pistols in their holsters , their swords in their scabbards , their guns slung in their leather sockets , with an air of gloomy expectation . 
They halted two hundred paces from the little bridge . 
The carriage in which sat Lafayette advanced to them , their ranks opened and allowed it to pass , and then closed behind it . 
At that moment the dragoons and the crowd touched . 
The women fled in terror . 
What took place during that fatal minute ? 
No one can say . 
It is the dark moment when two clouds come together . 
Some declare that a blast of trumpets sounding the charge was heard in the direction of the Arsenal others that a blow from a dagger was given by a child to a dragoon . 
The fact is , that three shots were suddenly discharged : the first killed Cholet , chief of the squadron , the second killed an old deaf woman who was in the act of closing her window , the third singed the shoulder of an officer ; a woman screamed : `` They are beginning too soon ! '' 
and all at once , a squadron of dragoons which had remained in the barracks up to this time , was seen to debouch at a gallop with bared swords , through the Rue Bassompierre and the Boulevard Bourdon , sweeping all before them . 
Then all is said , the tempest is loosed , stones rain down , a fusillade breaks forth , many precipitate themselves to the bottom of the bank , and pass the small arm of the Seine , now filled in , the timber-yards of the Isle Louviers , that vast citadel ready to hand , bristle with combatants , stakes are torn up , pistol-shots fired , a barricade begun , the young men who are thrust back pass the Austerlitz bridge with the hearse at a run , and the municipal guard , the carabineers rush up , the dragoons ply their swords , the crowd disperses in all directions , a rumor of war flies to all four quarters of Paris , men shout : `` To arms ! '' 
they run , tumble down , flee , resist . 
Wrath spreads abroad the riot as wind spreads a fire . 
THE EBULLITIONS OF FORMER DAYS Nothing is more extraordinary than the first breaking out of a riot . 
Everything bursts forth everywhere at once . 
Was it foreseen ? 
Yes . 
Was it prepared ? 
No . 
Whence comes it ? 
From the pavements . 
Whence falls it ? 
From the clouds . 
Here insurrection assumes the character of a plot ; there of an improvisation . 
The first comer seizes a current of the throng and leads it whither he wills . 
A beginning full of terror , in which is mingled a sort of formidable gayety . 
First come clamors , the shops are closed , the displays of the merchants disappear ; then come isolated shots ; people flee ; blows from gun-stocks beat against portes cocheres , servants can be heard laughing in the courtyards of houses and saying : `` There 's going to be a row ! '' 
A quarter of an hour had not elapsed when this is what was taking place at twenty different spots in Paris at once . 
In the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie , twenty young men , bearded and with long hair , entered a dram-shop and emerged a moment later , carrying a horizontal tricolored flag covered with crape , and having at their head three men armed , one with a sword , one with a gun , and the third with a pike . 
In the Rue des Nonaindieres , a very well-dressed bourgeois , who had a prominent belly , a sonorous voice , a bald head , a lofty brow , a black beard , and one of these stiff mustaches which will not lie flat , offered cartridges publicly to passers-by . 
In the Rue Saint-Pierre-Montmartre , men with bare arms carried about a black flag , on which could be read in white letters this inscription : `` Republic or Death ! '' 
In the Rue des Jeuneurs , Rue du Cadran , Rue Montorgueil , Rue Mandar , groups appeared waving flags on which could be distinguished in gold letters , the word section with a number . 
One of these flags was red and blue with an almost imperceptible stripe of white between . 
They pillaged a factory of small-arms on the Boulevard Saint-Martin , and three armorers ' shops , the first in the Rue Beaubourg , the second in the Rue Michel-le-Comte , the other in the Rue du Temple . 
In a few minutes , the thousand hands of the crowd had seized and carried off two hundred and thirty guns , nearly all double-barrelled , sixty-four swords , and eighty-three pistols . 
In order to provide more arms , one man took the gun , the other the bayonet . 
Opposite the Quai de la Greve , young men armed with muskets installed themselves in the houses of some women for the purpose of firing . 
One of them had a flint-lock . 
They rang , entered , and set about making cartridges . 
One of these women relates : `` I did not know what cartridges were ; it was my husband who told me . '' 
One cluster broke into a curiosity shop in the Rue des Vielles Haudriettes , and seized yataghans and Turkish arms . 
The body of a mason who had been killed by a gun-shot lay in the Rue de la Perle . 
And then on the right bank , the left bank , on the quays , on the boulevards , in the Latin country , in the quarter of the Halles , panting men , artisans , students , members of sections read proclamations and shouted : `` To arms ! '' 
broke street lanterns , unharnessed carriages , unpaved the streets , broke in the doors of houses , uprooted trees , rummaged cellars , rolled out hogsheads , heaped up paving-stones , rough slabs , furniture and planks , and made barricades . 
They forced the bourgeois to assist them in this . 
They entered the dwellings of women , they forced them to hand over the swords and guns of their absent husbands , and they wrote on the door , with whiting : `` The arms have been delivered '' ; some signed `` their names '' to receipts for the guns and swords and said : `` Send for them to-morrow at the Mayor 's office . '' 
They disarmed isolated sentinels and National Guardsmen in the streets on their way to the Townhall . 
They tore the epaulets from officers . 
In the Rue du Cimitiere-Saint-Nicholas , an officer of the National Guard , on being pursued by a crowd armed with clubs and foils , took refuge with difficulty in a house , whence he was only able to emerge at nightfall and in disguise . 
In the Quartier Saint-Jacques , the students swarmed out of their hotels and ascended the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe to the Cafe du Progress , or descended to the Cafe des Sept-Billards , in the Rue des Mathurins . 
There , in front of the door , young men mounted on the stone corner-posts , distributed arms . 
They plundered the timber-yard in the Rue Transnonain in order to obtain material for barricades . 
On a single point the inhabitants resisted , at the corner of the Rue Sainte-Avoye and the Rue Simon-Le-Franc , where they destroyed the barricade with their own hands . 
At a single point the insurgents yielded ; they abandoned a barricade begun in the Rue de Temple after having fired on a detachment of the National Guard , and fled through the Rue de la Corderie . 
The detachment picked up in the barricade a red flag , a package of cartridges , and three hundred pistol-balls . 
The National Guardsmen tore up the flag , and carried off its tattered remains on the points of their bayonets . 
All that we are here relating slowly and successively took place simultaneously at all points of the city in the midst of a vast tumult , like a mass of tongues of lightning in one clap of thunder . 
In less than an hour , twenty-seven barricades sprang out of the earth in the quarter of the Halles alone . 
In the centre was that famous house No. 50 , which was the fortress of Jeanne and her six hundred companions , and which , flanked on the one hand by a barricade at Saint-Merry , and on the other by a barricade of the Rue Maubuee , commanded three streets , the Rue des Arcis , the Rue Saint-Martin , and the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher , which it faced . 
The barricades at right angles fell back , the one of the Rue Montorgueil on the Grande-Truanderie , the other of the Rue Geoffroy-Langevin on the Rue Sainte-Avoye . 
Without reckoning innumerable barricades in twenty other quarters of Paris , in the Marais , at Mont-Sainte-Genevieve ; one in the Rue Menilmontant , where was visible a porte cochere torn from its hinges ; another near the little bridge of the Hotel-Dieu made with an `` ecossais , '' which had been unharnessed and overthrown , three hundred paces from the Prefecture of Police . 
At the barricade of the Rue des Menetriers , a well-dressed man distributed money to the workmen . 
At the barricade of the Rue Grenetat , a horseman made his appearance and handed to the one who seemed to be the commander of the barricade what had the appearance of a roll of silver . 
`` Here , '' said he , `` this is to pay expenses , wine , et caetera . '' 
A light-haired young man , without a cravat , went from barricade to barricade , carrying pass-words . 
Another , with a naked sword , a blue police cap on his head , placed sentinels . 
In the interior , beyond the barricades , the wine-shops and porters ' lodges were converted into guard-houses . 
Otherwise the riot was conducted after the most scientific military tactics . 
The narrow , uneven , sinuous streets , full of angles and turns , were admirably chosen ; the neighborhood of the Halles , in particular , a network of streets more intricate than a forest . 
The Society of the Friends of the People had , it was said , undertaken to direct the insurrection in the Quartier Sainte-Avoye . 
A man killed in the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person a plan of Paris . 
That which had really undertaken the direction of the uprising was a sort of strange impetuosity which was in the air . 
The insurrection had abruptly built barricades with one hand , and with the other seized nearly all the posts of the garrison . 
In less than three hours , like a train of powder catching fire , the insurgents had invaded and occupied , on the right bank , the Arsenal , the Mayoralty of the Place Royale , the whole of the Marais , the Popincourt arms manufactory , la Galiote , the Chateau-d'Eau , and all the streets near the Halles ; on the left bank , the barracks of the Veterans , Sainte-Pelagie , the Place Maubert , the powder magazine of the Deux-Moulins , and all the barriers . 
At five o'clock in the evening , they were masters of the Bastille , of the Lingerie , of the Blancs-Manteaux ; their scouts had reached the Place des Victoires , and menaced the Bank , the Petits-Peres barracks , and the Post-Office . 
A third of Paris was in the hands of the rioters . 
The conflict had been begun on a gigantic scale at all points ; and , as a result of the disarming domiciliary visits , and armorers ' shops hastily invaded , was , that the combat which had begun with the throwing of stones was continued with gun-shots . 
About six o'clock in the evening , the Passage du Saumon became the field of battle . 
The uprising was at one end , the troops were at the other . 
They fired from one gate to the other . 
An observer , a dreamer , the author of this book , who had gone to get a near view of this volcano , found himself in the passage between the two fires . 
All that he had to protect him from the bullets was the swell of the two half-columns which separate the shops ; he remained in this delicate situation for nearly half an hour . 
Meanwhile the call to arms was beaten , the National Guard armed in haste , the legions emerged from the Mayoralities , the regiments from their barracks . 
Opposite the passage de l'Ancre a drummer received a blow from a dagger . 
Another , in the Rue du Cygne , was assailed by thirty young men who broke his instrument , and took away his sword . 
Another was killed in the Rue Grenier-Saint-Lazare . 
In the Rue-Michelle-Comte , three officers fell dead one after the other . 
Many of the Municipal Guards , on being wounded , in the Rue des Lombards , retreated . 
In front of the Cour-Batave , a detachment of National Guards found a red flag bearing the following inscription : Republican revolution , No. 127 . 
Was this a revolution , in fact ? 
The insurrection had made of the centre of Paris a sort of inextricable , tortuous , colossal citadel . 
There was the hearth ; there , evidently , was the question . 
All the rest was nothing but skirmishes . 
The proof that all would be decided there lay in the fact that there was no fighting going on there as yet . 
In some regiments , the soldiers were uncertain , which added to the fearful uncertainty of the crisis . 
They recalled the popular ovation which had greeted the neutrality of the 53d of the Line in July , 1830 . 
Two intrepid men , tried in great wars , the Marshal Lobau and General Bugeaud , were in command , Bugeaud under Lobau . 
Enormous patrols , composed of battalions of the Line , enclosed in entire companies of the National Guard , and preceded by a commissary of police wearing his scarf of office , went to reconnoitre the streets in rebellion . 
The insurgents , on their side , placed videttes at the corners of all open spaces , and audaciously sent their patrols outside the barricades . 
Each side was watching the other . 
The Government , with an army in its hand , hesitated ; the night was almost upon them , and the Saint-Merry tocsin began to make itself heard . 
The Minister of War at that time , Marshal Soult , who had seen Austerlitz , regarded this with a gloomy air . 
These old sailors , accustomed to correct manoeuvres and having as resource and guide only tactics , that compass of battles , are utterly disconcerted in the presence of that immense foam which is called public wrath . 
The National Guards of the suburbs rushed up in haste and disorder . 
A battalion of the 12th Light came at a run from Saint-Denis , the 14th of the Line arrived from Courbevoie , the batteries of the Military School had taken up their position on the Carrousel ; cannons were descending from Vincennes . 
Solitude was formed around the Tuileries . 
Louis Philippe was perfectly serene . 
ORIGINALITY OF PARIS During the last two years , as we have said , Paris had witnessed more than one insurrection . 
Nothing is , generally , more singularly calm than the physiognomy of Paris during an uprising beyond the bounds of the rebellious quarters . 
Paris very speedily accustoms herself to anything , -- it is only a riot , -- and Paris has so many affairs on hand , that she does not put herself out for so small a matter . 
These colossal cities alone can offer such spectacles . 
These immense enclosures alone can contain at the same time civil war and an odd and indescribable tranquillity . 
Ordinarily , when an insurrection commences , when the shop-keeper hears the drum , the call to arms , the general alarm , he contents himself with the remark : -- `` There appears to be a squabble in the Rue Saint-Martin . '' 
Or : -- `` In the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . '' 
Often he adds carelessly : -- `` Or somewhere in that direction . '' 
Later on , when the heart-rending and mournful hubbub of musketry and firing by platoons becomes audible , the shopkeeper says : -- `` It 's getting hot ! 
Hullo , it 's getting hot ! '' 
A moment later , the riot approaches and gains in force , he shuts up his shop precipitately , hastily dons his uniform , that is to say , he places his merchandise in safety and risks his own person . 
Men fire in a square , in a passage , in a blind alley ; they take and re-take the barricade ; blood flows , the grape-shot riddles the fronts of the houses , the balls kill people in their beds , corpses encumber the streets . 
A few streets away , the shock of billiard-balls can be heard in the cafes . 
The theatres open their doors and present vaudevilles ; the curious laugh and chat a couple of paces distant from these streets filled with war . 
Hackney-carriages go their way ; passers-by are going to a dinner somewhere in town . 
Sometimes in the very quarter where the fighting is going on . 
In 1831 , a fusillade was stopped to allow a wedding party to pass . 
At the time of the insurrection of 1839 , in the Rue Saint-Martin a little , infirm old man , pushing a hand-cart surmounted by a tricolored rag , in which he had carafes filled with some sort of liquid , went and came from barricade to troops and from troops to the barricade , offering his glasses of cocoa impartially , -- now to the Government , now to anarchy . 
Nothing can be stranger ; and this is the peculiar character of uprisings in Paris , which can not be found in any other capital . 
To this end , two things are requisite , the size of Paris and its gayety . 
The city of Voltaire and Napoleon is necessary . 
On this occasion , however , in the resort to arms of June 25th , 1832 , the great city felt something which was , perhaps , stronger than itself . 
It was afraid . 
Closed doors , windows , and shutters were to be seen everywhere , in the most distant and most `` disinterested '' quarters . 
The courageous took to arms , the poltroons hid . 
The busy and heedless passer-by disappeared . 
Many streets were empty at four o'clock in the morning . 
Alarming details were hawked about , fatal news was disseminated , -- that they were masters of the Bank ; -- that there were six hundred of them in the Cloister of Saint-Merry alone , entrenched and embattled in the church ; that the line was not to be depended on ; that Armand Carrel had been to see Marshal Clausel and that the Marshal had said : `` Get a regiment first '' ; that Lafayette was ill , but that he had said to them , nevertheless : `` I am with you . 
I will follow you wherever there is room for a chair '' ; that one must be on one 's guard ; that at night there would be people pillaging isolated dwellings in the deserted corners of Paris -LRB- there the imagination of the police , that Anne Radcliffe mixed up with the Government was recognizable -RRB- ; that a battery had been established in the Rue Aubry le Boucher ; that Lobau and Bugeaud were putting their heads together , and that , at midnight , or at daybreak at latest , four columns would march simultaneously on the centre of the uprising , the first coming from the Bastille , the second from the Porte Saint-Martin , the third from the Greve , the fourth from the Halles ; that perhaps , also , the troops would evacuate Paris and withdraw to the Champ-de-Mars ; that no one knew what would happen , but that this time , it certainly was serious . 
People busied themselves over Marshal Soult 's hesitations . 
Why did not he attack at once ? 
It is certain that he was profoundly absorbed . 
The old lion seemed to scent an unknown monster in that gloom . 
Evening came , the theatres did not open ; the patrols circulated with an air of irritation ; passers-by were searched ; suspicious persons were arrested . 
By nine o'clock , more than eight hundred persons had been arrested , the Prefecture of Police was encumbered with them , so was the Conciergerie , so was La Force . 
At the Conciergerie in particular , the long vault which is called the Rue de Paris was littered with trusses of straw upon which lay a heap of prisoners , whom the man of Lyons , Lagrange , harangued valiantly . 
All that straw rustled by all these men , produced the sound of a heavy shower . 
Elsewhere prisoners slept in the open air in the meadows , piled on top of each other . 
Anxiety reigned everywhere , and a certain tremor which was not habitual with Paris . 
People barricaded themselves in their houses ; wives and mothers were uneasy ; nothing was to be heard but this : `` Ah ! 
my God ! 
He has not come home ! '' 
There was hardly even the distant rumble of a vehicle to be heard . 
People listened on their thresholds , to the rumors , the shouts , the tumult , the dull and indistinct sounds , to the things that were said : `` It is cavalry , '' or : `` Those are the caissons galloping , '' to the trumpets , the drums , the firing , and , above all , to that lamentable alarm peal from Saint-Merry . 
They waited for the first cannon-shot . 
Men sprang up at the corners of the streets and disappeared , shouting : `` Go home ! '' 
And people made haste to bolt their doors . 
They said : `` How will all this end ? '' 
From moment to moment , in proportion as the darkness descended , Paris seemed to take on a more mournful hue from the formidable flaming of the revolt . 
SOME EXPLANATIONS WITH REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF GAVROCHE 'S POETRY . 
THE INFLUENCE OF AN ACADEMICIAN ON THIS POETRY At the instant when the insurrection , arising from the shock of the populace and the military in front of the Arsenal , started a movement in advance and towards the rear in the multitude which was following the hearse and which , through the whole length of the boulevards , weighed , so to speak , on the head of the procession , there arose a frightful ebb . 
The rout was shaken , their ranks were broken , all ran , fled , made their escape , some with shouts of attack , others with the pallor of flight . 
The great river which covered the boulevards divided in a twinkling , overflowed to right and left , and spread in torrents over two hundred streets at once with the roar of a sewer that has broken loose . 
At that moment , a ragged child who was coming down through the Rue Menilmontant , holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum which he had just plucked on the heights of Belleville , caught sight of an old holster-pistol in the show-window of a bric-a-brac merchant 's shop . 
`` Mother What 's - your-name , I 'm going to borrow your machine . '' 
And off he ran with the pistol . 
Two minutes later , a flood of frightened bourgeois who were fleeing through the Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse , encountered the lad brandishing his pistol and singing : -- La nuit on ne voit rien , Le jour on voit tres bien , D'un ecrit apocrypha Le bourgeois s ` ebouriffe , Pratiquez la vertu , Tutu , chapeau pointu ! 
-LSB- 44 -RSB- -LSB- 44 -RSB- At night one sees nothing , by day one sees very well ; the bourgeois gets flurried over an apocryphal scrawl , practice virtue , tutu , pointed hat ! 
It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars . 
On the boulevard he noticed that the pistol had no trigger . 
Who was the author of that couplet which served to punctuate his march , and of all the other songs which he was fond of singing on occasion ? 
We know not . 
Who does know ? 
Himself , perhaps . 
However , Gavroche was well up in all the popular tunes in circulation , and he mingled with them his own chirpings . 
An observing urchin and a rogue , he made a potpourri of the voices of nature and the voices of Paris . 
He combined the repertory of the birds with the repertory of the workshops . 
He was acquainted with thieves , a tribe contiguous to his own . 
He had , it appears , been for three months apprenticed to a printer . 
He had one day executed a commission for M. Baour-Lormian , one of the Forty . 
Gavroche was a gamin of letters . 
Moreover , Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he had offered the hospitality of his elephant to two brats on that villainously rainy night , it was to his own brothers that he had played the part of Providence . 
His brothers in the evening , his father in the morning ; that is what his night had been like . 
On quitting the Rue des Ballets at daybreak , he had returned in haste to the elephant , had artistically extracted from it the two brats , had shared with them some sort of breakfast which he had invented , and had then gone away , confiding them to that good mother , the street , who had brought him up , almost entirely . 
On leaving them , he had appointed to meet them at the same spot in the evening , and had left them this discourse by way of a farewell : `` I break a cane , otherwise expressed , I cut my stick , or , as they say at the court , I file off . 
If you do n't find papa and mamma , young ` uns , come back here this evening . 
I 'll scramble you up some supper , and I 'll give you a shakedown . '' 
The two children , picked up by some policeman and placed in the refuge , or stolen by some mountebank , or having simply strayed off in that immense Chinese puzzle of a Paris , did not return . 
The lowest depths of the actual social world are full of these lost traces . 
Gavroche did not see them again . 
Ten or twelve weeks had elapsed since that night . 
More than once he had scratched the back of his head and said : `` Where the devil are my two children ? '' 
In the meantime , he had arrived , pistol in hand , in the Rue du Pont-aux-Choux . 
He noticed that there was but one shop open in that street , and , a matter worthy of reflection , that was a pastry-cook 's shop . 
This presented a providential occasion to eat another apple-turnover before entering the unknown . 
Gavroche halted , fumbled in his fob , turned his pocket inside out , found nothing , not even a sou , and began to shout : `` Help ! '' 
It is hard to miss the last cake . 
Nevertheless , Gavroche pursued his way . 
Two minutes later he was in the Rue Saint-Louis . 
While traversing the Rue du Parc-Royal , he felt called upon to make good the loss of the apple-turnover which had been impossible , and he indulged himself in the immense delight of tearing down the theatre posters in broad daylight . 
A little further on , on catching sight of a group of comfortable-looking persons , who seemed to be landed proprietors , he shrugged his shoulders and spit out at random before him this mouthful of philosophical bile as they passed : `` How fat those moneyed men are ! 
They 're drunk ! 
They just wallow in good dinners . 
Ask 'em what they do with their money . 
They do n't know . 
They eat it , that 's what they do ! 
As much as their bellies will hold . '' 
GAVROCHE ON THE MARCH The brandishing of a triggerless pistol , grasped in one 's hand in the open street , is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt his fervor increasing with every moment . 
Amid the scraps of the Marseillaise which he was singing , he shouted : -- `` All goes well . 
I suffer a great deal in my left paw , I 'm all broken up with rheumatism , but I 'm satisfied , citizens . 
All that the bourgeois have to do is to bear themselves well , I 'll sneeze them out subversive couplets . 
What are the police spies ? 
Dogs . 
And I 'd just like to have one of them at the end of my pistol . 
I 'm just from the boulevard , my friends . 
It 's getting hot there , it 's getting into a little boil , it 's simmering . 
It 's time to skim the pot . 
Forward march , men ! 
Let an impure blood inundate the furrows ! 
I give my days to my country , I shall never see my concubine more , Nini , finished , yes , Nini ? 
But never mind ! 
Long live joy ! 
Let 's fight , crebleu ! 
I 've had enough of despotism . '' 
At that moment , the horse of a lancer of the National Guard having fallen , Gavroche laid his pistol on the pavement , and picked up the man , then he assisted in raising the horse . 
After which he picked up his pistol and resumed his way . 
In the Rue de Thorigny , all was peace and silence . 
This apathy , peculiar to the Marais , presented a contrast with the vast surrounding uproar . 
Four gossips were chatting in a doorway . 
Scotland has trios of witches , Paris has quartettes of old gossiping hags ; and the `` Thou shalt be King '' could be quite as mournfully hurled at Bonaparte in the Carrefour Baudoyer as at Macbeth on the heath of Armuyr . 
The croak would be almost identical . 
The gossips of the Rue de Thorigny busied themselves only with their own concerns . 
Three of them were portresses , and the fourth was a rag-picker with her basket on her back . 
All four of them seemed to be standing at the four corners of old age , which are decrepitude , decay , ruin , and sadness . 
The rag-picker was humble . 
In this open-air society , it is the rag-picker who salutes and the portress who patronizes . 
This is caused by the corner for refuse , which is fat or lean , according to the will of the portresses , and after the fancy of the one who makes the heap . 
There may be kindness in the broom . 
This rag-picker was a grateful creature , and she smiled , with what a smile ! 
on the three portresses . 
Things of this nature were said : -- `` Ah , by the way , is your cat still cross ? '' 
`` Good gracious , cats are naturally the enemies of dogs , you know . 
It 's the dogs who complain . '' 
`` And people also . '' 
`` But the fleas from a cat do n't go after people . '' 
`` That 's not the trouble , dogs are dangerous . 
I remember one year when there were so many dogs that it was necessary to put it in the newspapers . 
That was at the time when there were at the Tuileries great sheep that drew the little carriage of the King of Rome . 
Do you remember the King of Rome ? '' 
`` I liked the Duc de Bordeau better . '' 
`` I knew Louis XVIII . 
I prefer Louis XVIII . '' 
`` Meat is awfully dear , is n't it , Mother Patagon ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
do n't mention it , the butcher 's shop is a horror . 
A horrible horror -- one ca n't afford anything but the poor cuts nowadays . '' 
Here the rag-picker interposed : -- `` Ladies , business is dull . 
The refuse heaps are miserable . 
No one throws anything away any more . 
They eat everything . '' 
`` There are poorer people than you , la Vargouleme . '' 
`` Ah , that 's true , '' replied the rag-picker , with deference , `` I have a profession . '' 
A pause succeeded , and the rag-picker , yielding to that necessity for boasting which lies at the bottom of man , added : -- `` In the morning , on my return home , I pick over my basket , I sort my things . 
This makes heaps in my room . 
I put the rags in a basket , the cores and stalks in a bucket , the linen in my cupboard , the woollen stuff in my commode , the old papers in the corner of the window , the things that are good to eat in my bowl , the bits of glass in my fireplace , the old shoes behind my door , and the bones under my bed . '' 
Gavroche had stopped behind her and was listening . 
`` Old ladies , '' said he , `` what do you mean by talking politics ? '' 
He was assailed by a broadside , composed of a quadruple howl . 
`` Here 's another rascal . '' 
`` What 's that he 's got in his paddle ? 
A pistol ? '' 
`` Well , I 'd like to know what sort of a beggar 's brat this is ? '' 
`` That sort of animal is never easy unless he 's overturning the authorities . '' 
Gavroche disdainfully contented himself , by way of reprisal , with elevating the tip of his nose with his thumb and opening his hand wide . 
The rag-picker cried : -- `` You malicious , bare-pawed little wretch ! '' 
The one who answered to the name of Patagon clapped her hands together in horror . 
`` There 's going to be evil doings , that 's certain . 
The errand-boy next door has a little pointed beard , I have seen him pass every day with a young person in a pink bonnet on his arm ; to-day I saw him pass , and he had a gun on his arm . 
Mame Bacheux says , that last week there was a revolution at -- at -- at -- where 's the calf ! 
-- at Pontoise . 
And then , there you see him , that horrid scamp , with his pistol ! 
It seems that the Celestins are full of pistols . 
What do you suppose the Government can do with good-for-nothings who do n't know how to do anything but contrive ways of upsetting the world , when we had just begun to get a little quiet after all the misfortunes that have happened , good Lord ! 
to that poor queen whom I saw pass in the tumbril ! 
And all this is going to make tobacco dearer . 
It 's infamous ! 
And I shall certainly go to see him beheaded on the guillotine , the wretch ! '' 
`` You 've got the sniffles , old lady , '' said Gavroche . 
`` Blow your promontory . '' 
And he passed on . 
When he was in the Rue Pavee , the rag-picker occurred to his mind , and he indulged in this soliloquy : -- `` You 're in the wrong to insult the revolutionists , Mother Dust-Heap-Corner . 
This pistol is in your interests . 
It 's so that you may have more good things to eat in your basket . '' 
All at once , he heard a shout behind him ; it was the portress Patagon who had followed him , and who was shaking her fist at him in the distance and crying : -- `` You 're nothing but a bastard . '' 
`` Oh ! 
Come now , '' said Gavroche , `` I do n't care a brass farthing for that ! '' 
Shortly afterwards , he passed the Hotel Lamoignon . 
There he uttered this appeal : -- `` Forward march to the battle ! '' 
And he was seized with a fit of melancholy . 
He gazed at his pistol with an air of reproach which seemed an attempt to appease it : -- `` I 'm going off , '' said he , `` but you wo n't go off ! '' 
One dog may distract the attention from another dog . 
-LSB- 45 -RSB- A very gaunt poodle came along at the moment . 
Gavroche felt compassion for him . 
-LSB- 45 -RSB- Chien , dog , trigger . 
`` My poor doggy , '' said he , `` you must have gone and swallowed a cask , for all the hoops are visible . '' 
Then he directed his course towards l'Orme-Saint-Gervais . 
JUST INDIGNATION OF A HAIR-DRESSER The worthy hair-dresser who had chased from his shop the two little fellows to whom Gavroche had opened the paternal interior of the elephant was at that moment in his shop engaged in shaving an old soldier of the legion who had served under the Empire . 
They were talking . 
The hair-dresser had , naturally , spoken to the veteran of the riot , then of General Lamarque , and from Lamarque they had passed to the Emperor . 
Thence sprang up a conversation between barber and soldier which Prudhomme , had he been present , would have enriched with arabesques , and which he would have entitled : `` Dialogue between the razor and the sword . '' 
`` How did the Emperor ride , sir ? '' 
said the barber . 
`` Badly . 
He did not know how to fall -- so he never fell . '' 
`` Did he have fine horses ? 
He must have had fine horses ! '' 
`` On the day when he gave me my cross , I noticed his beast . 
It was a racing mare , perfectly white . 
Her ears were very wide apart , her saddle deep , a fine head marked with a black star , a very long neck , strongly articulated knees , prominent ribs , oblique shoulders and a powerful crupper . 
A little more than fifteen hands in height . '' 
`` A pretty horse , '' remarked the hair-dresser . 
`` It was His Majesty 's beast . '' 
The hair-dresser felt , that after this observation , a short silence would be fitting , so he conformed himself to it , and then went on : -- `` The Emperor was never wounded but once , was he , sir ? '' 
The old soldier replied with the calm and sovereign tone of a man who had been there : -- `` In the heel . 
At Ratisbon . 
I never saw him so well dressed as on that day . 
He was as neat as a new sou . '' 
`` And you , Mr. Veteran , you must have been often wounded ? '' 
`` I ? '' 
said the soldier , `` ah ! 
not to amount to anything . 
At Marengo , I received two sabre-blows on the back of my neck , a bullet in the right arm at Austerlitz , another in the left hip at Jena . 
At Friedland , a thrust from a bayonet , there , -- at the Moskowa seven or eight lance-thrusts , no matter where , at Lutzen a splinter of a shell crushed one of my fingers . 
Ah ! 
and then at Waterloo , a ball from a biscaien in the thigh , that 's all . '' 
`` How fine that is ! '' 
exclaimed the hair-dresser , in Pindaric accents , `` to die on the field of battle ! 
On my word of honor , rather than die in bed , of an illness , slowly , a bit by bit each day , with drugs , cataplasms , syringes , medicines , I should prefer to receive a cannon-ball in my belly ! '' 
`` You 're not over fastidious , '' said the soldier . 
He had hardly spoken when a fearful crash shook the shop . 
The show-window had suddenly been fractured . 
The wig-maker turned pale . 
`` Ah , good God ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` it 's one of them ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` A cannon-ball . '' 
`` Here it is , '' said the soldier . 
And he picked up something that was rolling about the floor . 
It was a pebble . 
The hair-dresser ran to the broken window and beheld Gavroche fleeing at the full speed , towards the Marche Saint-Jean . 
As he passed the hair-dresser 's shop Gavroche , who had the two brats still in his mind , had not been able to resist the impulse to say good day to him , and had flung a stone through his panes . 
`` You see ! '' 
shrieked the hair-dresser , who from white had turned blue , `` that fellow returns and does mischief for the pure pleasure of it . 
What has any one done to that gamin ? '' 
THE CHILD IS AMAZED AT THE OLD MAN In the meantime , in the Marche Saint-Jean , where the post had already been disarmed , Gavroche had just `` effected a junction '' with a band led by Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Combeferre , and Feuilly . 
They were armed after a fashion . 
Bahorel and Jean Prouvaire had found them and swelled the group . 
Enjolras had a double-barrelled hunting-gun , Combeferre the gun of a National Guard bearing the number of his legion , and in his belt , two pistols which his unbuttoned coat allowed to be seen , Jean Prouvaire an old cavalry musket , Bahorel a rifle ; Courfeyrac was brandishing an unsheathed sword-cane . 
Feuilly , with a naked sword in his hand , marched at their head shouting : `` Long live Poland ! '' 
They reached the Quai Morland . 
Cravatless , hatless , breathless , soaked by the rain , with lightning in their eyes . 
Gavroche accosted them calmly : -- `` Where are we going ? '' 
`` Come along , '' said Courfeyrac . 
Behind Feuilly marched , or rather bounded , Bahorel , who was like a fish in water in a riot . 
He wore a scarlet waistcoat , and indulged in the sort of words which break everything . 
His waistcoat astounded a passer-by , who cried in bewilderment : -- `` Here are the reds ! '' 
`` The reds , the reds ! '' 
retorted Bahorel . 
`` A queer kind of fear , bourgeois . 
For my part I do n't tremble before a poppy , the little red hat inspires me with no alarm . 
Take my advice , bourgeois , let 's leave fear of the red to horned cattle . '' 
He caught sight of a corner of the wall on which was placarded the most peaceable sheet of paper in the world , a permission to eat eggs , a Lenten admonition addressed by the Archbishop of Paris to his `` flock . '' 
Bahorel exclaimed : -- '' ` Flock ' ; a polite way of saying geese . '' 
And he tore the charge from the nail . 
This conquered Gavroche . 
From that instant Gavroche set himself to study Bahorel . 
`` Bahorel , '' observed Enjolras , `` you are wrong . 
You should have let that charge alone , he is not the person with whom we have to deal , you are wasting your wrath to no purpose . 
Take care of your supply . 
One does not fire out of the ranks with the soul any more than with a gun . '' 
`` Each one in his own fashion , Enjolras , '' retorted Bahorel . 
`` This bishop 's prose shocks me ; I want to eat eggs without being permitted . 
Your style is the hot and cold ; I am amusing myself . 
Besides , I 'm not wasting myself , I 'm getting a start ; and if I tore down that charge , Hercle ! 
't was only to whet my appetite . '' 
This word , Hercle , struck Gavroche . 
He sought all occasions for learning , and that tearer-down of posters possessed his esteem . 
He inquired of him : -- `` What does Hercle mean ? '' 
Bahorel answered : -- `` It means cursed name of a dog , in Latin . '' 
Here Bahorel recognized at a window a pale young man with a black beard who was watching them as they passed , probably a Friend of the A B C . 
He shouted to him : -- `` Quick , cartridges , para bellum . '' 
`` A fine man ! 
that 's true , '' said Gavroche , who now understood Latin . 
A tumultuous retinue accompanied them , -- students , artists , young men affiliated to the Cougourde of Aix , artisans , longshoremen , armed with clubs and bayonets ; some , like Combeferre , with pistols thrust into their trousers . 
An old man , who appeared to be extremely aged , was walking in the band . 
He had no arms , and he made great haste , so that he might not be left behind , although he had a thoughtful air . 
Gavroche caught sight of him : -- `` Keksekca ? '' 
said he to Courfeyrac . 
`` He 's an old duffer . '' 
It was M. Mabeuf . 
THE OLD MAN Let us recount what had taken place . 
Enjolras and his friends had been on the Boulevard Bourdon , near the public storehouses , at the moment when the dragoons had made their charge . 
Enjolras , Courfeyrac , and Combeferre were among those who had taken to the Rue Bassompierre , shouting : `` To the barricades ! '' 
In the Rue Lesdiguieres they had met an old man walking along . 
What had attracted their attention was that the goodman was walking in a zig-zag , as though he were intoxicated . 
Moreover , he had his hat in his hand , although it had been raining all the morning , and was raining pretty briskly at the very time . 
Courfeyrac had recognized Father Mabeuf . 
He knew him through having many times accompanied Marius as far as his door . 
As he was acquainted with the peaceful and more than timid habits of the old beadle-book-collector , and was amazed at the sight of him in the midst of that uproar , a couple of paces from the cavalry charges , almost in the midst of a fusillade , hatless in the rain , and strolling about among the bullets , he had accosted him , and the following dialogue had been exchanged between the rioter of fire and the octogenarian : -- `` M. Mabeuf , go to your home . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` There 's going to be a row . '' 
`` That 's well . '' 
`` Thrusts with the sword and firing , M. Mabeuf . '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` Firing from cannon . '' 
`` That is good . 
Where are the rest of you going ? '' 
`` We are going to fling the government to the earth . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
And he had set out to follow them . 
From that moment forth he had not uttered a word . 
His step had suddenly become firm ; artisans had offered him their arms ; he had refused with a sign of the head . 
He advanced nearly to the front rank of the column , with the movement of a man who is marching and the countenance of a man who is sleeping . 
`` What a fierce old fellow ! '' 
muttered the students . 
The rumor spread through the troop that he was a former member of the Convention , -- an old regicide . 
The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie . 
Little Gavroche marched in front with that deafening song which made of him a sort of trumpet . 
He sang : `` Voici la lune qui paratt , Quand irons-nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tou tou tou Pour Chatou . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Pour avoir bu de grand matin La rosee a meme le thym , Deux moineaux etaient en ribotte . 
Zi zi zi Pour Passy . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Et ces deux pauvres petits loups , Comme deux grives estaient souls ; Une tigre en riait dans sa grotte . 
Don don don Pour Meudon . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` L'un jurait et l'autre sacrait . 
Quand irons nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tin tin tin Pour Pantin . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . '' 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- They directed their course towards Saint-Merry . 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- Here is the morn appearing . 
When shall we go to the forest , Charlot asked Charlotte . 
Tou , tou , tou , for Chatou , I have but one God , one King , one half-farthing , and one boot . 
And these two poor little wolves were as tipsy as sparrows from having drunk dew and thyme very early in the morning . 
And these two poor little things were as drunk as thrushes in a vineyard ; a tiger laughed at them in his cave . 
The one cursed , the other swore . 
When shall we go to the forest ? 
Charlot asked Charlotte . 
RECRUITS The band augmented every moment . 
Near the Rue des Billettes , a man of lofty stature , whose hair was turning gray , and whose bold and daring mien was remarked by Courfeyrac , Enjolras , and Combeferre , but whom none of them knew , joined them . 
Gavroche , who was occupied in singing , whistling , humming , running on ahead and pounding on the shutters of the shops with the butt of his triggerless pistol ; paid no attention to this man . 
It chanced that in the Rue de la Verrerie , they passed in front of Courfeyrac 's door . 
`` This happens just right , '' said Courfeyrac , `` I have forgotten my purse , and I have lost my hat . '' 
He quitted the mob and ran up to his quarters at full speed . 
He seized an old hat and his purse . 
He also seized a large square coffer , of the dimensions of a large valise , which was concealed under his soiled linen . 
As he descended again at a run , the portress hailed him : -- `` Monsieur de Courfeyrac ! '' 
`` What 's your name , portress ? '' 
The portress stood bewildered . 
`` Why , you know perfectly well , I 'm the concierge ; my name is Mother Veuvain . '' 
`` Well , if you call me Monsieur de Courfeyrac again , I shall call you Mother de Veuvain . 
Now speak , what 's the matter ? 
What do you want ? '' 
`` There is some one who wants to speak with you . '' 
`` Who is it ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` Where is he ? '' 
`` In my lodge . '' 
`` The devil ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` But the person has been waiting your return for over an hour , '' said the portress . 
At the same time , a sort of pale , thin , small , freckled , and youthful artisan , clad in a tattered blouse and patched trousers of ribbed velvet , and who had rather the air of a girl accoutred as a man than of a man , emerged from the lodge and said to Courfeyrac in a voice which was not the least in the world like a woman 's voice : -- `` Monsieur Marius , if you please . '' 
`` He is not here . '' 
`` Will he return this evening ? '' 
`` I know nothing about it . '' 
And Courfeyrac added : -- `` For my part , I shall not return . '' 
The young man gazed steadily at him and said : -- `` Why not ? '' 
`` Because . '' 
`` Where are you going , then ? '' 
`` What business is that of yours ? '' 
`` Would you like to have me carry your coffer for you ? '' 
`` I am going to the barricades . '' 
`` Would you like to have me go with you ? '' 
`` If you like ! '' 
replied Courfeyrac . 
`` The street is free , the pavements belong to every one . '' 
And he made his escape at a run to join his friends . 
When he had rejoined them , he gave the coffer to one of them to carry . 
It was only a quarter of an hour after this that he saw the young man , who had actually followed them . 
A mob does not go precisely where it intends . 
We have explained that a gust of wind carries it away . 
They overshot Saint-Merry and found themselves , without precisely knowing how , in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
HISTORY OF CORINTHE FROM ITS FOUNDATION The Parisians who nowadays on entering on the Rue Rambuteau at the end near the Halles , notice on their right , opposite the Rue Mondetour , a basket-maker 's shop having for its sign a basket in the form of Napoleon the Great with this inscription : -- NAPOLEON IS MADE WHOLLY OF WILLOW , have no suspicion of the terrible scenes which this very spot witnessed hardly thirty years ago . 
It was there that lay the Rue de la Chanvrerie , which ancient deeds spell Chanverrerie , and the celebrated public-house called Corinthe . 
The reader will remember all that has been said about the barricade effected at this point , and eclipsed , by the way , by the barricade Saint-Merry . 
It was on this famous barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , now fallen into profound obscurity , that we are about to shed a little light . 
May we be permitted to recur , for the sake of clearness in the recital , to the simple means which we have already employed in the case of Waterloo . 
Persons who wish to picture to themselves in a tolerably exact manner the constitution of the houses which stood at that epoch near the Pointe Saint-Eustache , at the northeast angle of the Halles of Paris , where to-day lies the embouchure of the Rue Rambuteau , have only to imagine an N touching the Rue Saint-Denis with its summit and the Halles with its base , and whose two vertical bars should form the Rue de la Grande-Truanderie , and the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and whose transverse bar should be formed by the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie . 
The old Rue Mondetour cut the three strokes of the N at the most crooked angles . 
So that the labyrinthine confusion of these four streets sufficed to form , on a space three fathoms square , between the Halles and the Rue Saint-Denis on the one hand , and between the Rue du Cygne and the Rue des Precheurs on the other , seven islands of houses , oddly cut up , of varying sizes , placed crosswise and hap-hazard , and barely separated , like the blocks of stone in a dock , by narrow crannies . 
We say narrow crannies , and we can give no more just idea of those dark , contracted , many-angled alleys , lined with eight-story buildings . 
These buildings were so decrepit that , in the Rue de la Chanvrerie and the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie , the fronts were shored up with beams running from one house to another . 
The street was narrow and the gutter broad , the pedestrian there walked on a pavement that was always wet , skirting little stalls resembling cellars , big posts encircled with iron hoops , excessive heaps of refuse , and gates armed with enormous , century-old gratings . 
The Rue Rambuteau has devastated all that . 
The name of Mondetour paints marvellously well the sinuosities of that whole set of streets . 
A little further on , they are found still better expressed by the Rue Pirouette , which ran into the Rue Mondetour . 
The passer-by who got entangled from the Rue Saint-Denis in the Rue de la Chanvrerie beheld it gradually close in before him as though he had entered an elongated funnel . 
At the end of this street , which was very short , he found further passage barred in the direction of the Halles by a tall row of houses , and he would have thought himself in a blind alley , had he not perceived on the right and left two dark cuts through which he could make his escape . 
This was the Rue Mondetour , which on one side ran into the Rue de Precheurs , and on the other into the Rue du Cygne and the Petite-Truanderie . 
At the bottom of this sort of cul-de-sac , at the angle of the cutting on the right , there was to be seen a house which was not so tall as the rest , and which formed a sort of cape in the street . 
It is in this house , of two stories only , that an illustrious wine-shop had been merrily installed three hundred years before . 
This tavern created a joyous noise in the very spot which old Theophilus described in the following couplet : -- La branle le squelette horrible D'un pauvre amant qui se pendit . 
-LSB- 47 -RSB- -LSB- 47 -RSB- There swings the horrible skeleton of a poor lover who hung himself . 
The situation was good , and tavern-keepers succeeded each other there , from father to son . 
In the time of Mathurin Regnier , this cabaret was called the Pot-aux-Roses , and as the rebus was then in fashion , it had for its sign-board , a post -LRB- poteau -RRB- painted rose-color . 
In the last century , the worthy Natoire , one of the fantastic masters nowadays despised by the stiff school , having got drunk many times in this wine-shop at the very table where Regnier had drunk his fill , had painted , by way of gratitude , a bunch of Corinth grapes on the pink post . 
The keeper of the cabaret , in his joy , had changed his device and had caused to be placed in gilt letters beneath the bunch these words : `` At the Bunch of Corinth Grapes '' -LRB- `` Au Raisin de Corinthe '' -RRB- . 
Hence the name of Corinthe . 
Nothing is more natural to drunken men than ellipses . 
The ellipsis is the zig-zag of the phrase . 
Corinthe gradually dethroned the Pot-aux-Roses . 
The last proprietor of the dynasty , Father Hucheloup , no longer acquainted even with the tradition , had the post painted blue . 
A room on the ground floor , where the bar was situated , one on the first floor containing a billiard-table , a wooden spiral staircase piercing the ceiling , wine on the tables , smoke on the walls , candles in broad daylight , -- this was the style of this cabaret . 
A staircase with a trap-door in the lower room led to the cellar . 
On the second floor were the lodgings of the Hucheloup family . 
They were reached by a staircase which was a ladder rather than a staircase , and had for their entrance only a private door in the large room on the first floor . 
Under the roof , in two mansard attics , were the nests for the servants . 
The kitchen shared the ground-floor with the tap-room . 
Father Hucheloup had , possibly , been born a chemist , but the fact is that he was a cook ; people did not confine themselves to drinking alone in his wine-shop , they also ate there . 
Hucheloup had invented a capital thing which could be eaten nowhere but in his house , stuffed carps , which he called carpes au gras . 
These were eaten by the light of a tallow candle or of a lamp of the time of Louis XVI. , on tables to which were nailed waxed cloths in lieu of table-cloths . 
People came thither from a distance . 
Hucheloup , one fine morning , had seen fit to notify passers-by of this `` specialty '' ; he had dipped a brush in a pot of black paint , and as he was an orthographer on his own account , as well as a cook after his own fashion , he had improvised on his wall this remarkable inscription : -- CARPES HO GRAS . 
One winter , the rain-storms and the showers had taken a fancy to obliterate the S which terminated the first word , and the G which began the third ; this is what remained : -- CARPE HO RAS . 
Time and rain assisting , a humble gastronomical announcement had become a profound piece of advice . 
In this way it came about , that though he knew no French , Father Hucheloup understood Latin , that he had evoked philosophy from his kitchen , and that , desirous simply of effacing Lent , he had equalled Horace . 
And the striking thing about it was , that that also meant : `` Enter my wine-shop . '' 
Nothing of all this is in existence now . 
The Mondetour labyrinth was disembowelled and widely opened in 1847 , and probably no longer exists at the present moment . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie and Corinthe have disappeared beneath the pavement of the Rue Rambuteau . 
As we have already said , Corinthe was the meeting-place if not the rallying-point , of Courfeyrac and his friends . 
It was Grantaire who had discovered Corinthe . 
He had entered it on account of the Carpe horas , and had returned thither on account of the Carpes au gras . 
There they drank , there they ate , there they shouted ; they did not pay much , they paid badly , they did not pay at all , but they were always welcome . 
Father Hucheloup was a jovial host . 
Hucheloup , that amiable man , as was just said , was a wine-shop-keeper with a mustache ; an amusing variety . 
He always had an ill-tempered air , seemed to wish to intimidate his customers , grumbled at the people who entered his establishment , and had rather the mien of seeking a quarrel with them than of serving them with soup . 
And yet , we insist upon the word , people were always welcome there . 
This oddity had attracted customers to his shop , and brought him young men , who said to each other : `` Come hear Father Hucheloup growl . '' 
He had been a fencing-master . 
All of a sudden , he would burst out laughing . 
A big voice , a good fellow . 
He had a comic foundation under a tragic exterior , he asked nothing better than to frighten you , very much like those snuff-boxes which are in the shape of a pistol . 
The detonation makes one sneeze . 
Mother Hucheloup , his wife , was a bearded and a very homely creature . 
About 1830 , Father Hucheloup died . 
With him disappeared the secret of stuffed carps . 
His inconsolable widow continued to keep the wine-shop . 
But the cooking deteriorated , and became execrable ; the wine , which had always been bad , became fearfully bad . 
Nevertheless , Courfeyrac and his friends continued to go to Corinthe , -- out of pity , as Bossuet said . 
The Widow Hucheloup was breathless and misshapen and given to rustic recollections . 
She deprived them of their flatness by her pronunciation . 
She had a way of her own of saying things , which spiced her reminiscences of the village and of her springtime . 
It had formerly been her delight , so she affirmed , to hear the loups-de-gorge -LRB- rouges-gorges -RRB- chanter dans les ogrepines -LRB- aubepines -RRB- -- to hear the redbreasts sing in the hawthorn-trees . 
The hall on the first floor , where `` the restaurant '' was situated , was a large and long apartment encumbered with stools , chairs , benches , and tables , and with a crippled , lame , old billiard-table . 
It was reached by a spiral staircase which terminated in the corner of the room at a square hole like the hatchway of a ship . 
This room , lighted by a single narrow window , and by a lamp that was always burning , had the air of a garret . 
All the four-footed furniture comported itself as though it had but three legs -- the whitewashed walls had for their only ornament the following quatrain in honor of Mame Hucheloup : -- Elle etonne a dix pas , elle epouvente a deux , Une verrue habite en son nez hasardeux ; On tremble a chaque instant qu'elle ne vous la mouche Et qu'un beau jour son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche . 
-LSB- 48 -RSB- -LSB- 48 -RSB- She astounds at ten paces , she frightens at two , a wart inhabits her hazardous nose ; you tremble every instant lest she should blow it at you , and lest , some fine day , her nose should tumble into her mouth . 
This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall . 
Mame Hucheloup , a good likeness , went and came from morning till night before this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity . 
Two serving-maids , named Matelote and Gibelotte , -LSB- 49 -RSB- and who had never been known by any other names , helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables the jugs of poor wine , and the various broths which were served to the hungry patrons in earthenware bowls . 
Matelote , large , plump , redhaired , and noisy , the favorite ex-sultana of the defunct Hucheloup , was homelier than any mythological monster , be it what it may ; still , as it becomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the mistress , she was less homely than Mame Hucheloup . 
Gibelotte , tall , delicate , white with a lymphatic pallor , with circles round her eyes , and drooping lids , always languid and weary , afflicted with what may be called chronic lassitude , the first up in the house and the last in bed , waited on every one , even the other maid , silently and gently , smiling through her fatigue with a vague and sleepy smile . 
-LSB- 49 -RSB- Matelote : a culinary preparation of various fishes . 
Gibelotte : stewed rabbits . 
Before entering the restaurant room , the visitor read on the door the following line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac : -- Regale si tu peux et mange si tu l'oses . 
-LSB- 50 -RSB- -LSB- 50 -RSB- Treat if you can , and eat if you dare . 
PRELIMINARY GAYETIES Laigle de Meaux , as the reader knows , lived more with Joly than elsewhere . 
He had a lodging , as a bird has one on a branch . 
The two friends lived together , ate together , slept together . 
They had everything in common , even Musichetta , to some extent . 
They were , what the subordinate monks who accompany monks are called , bini . 
On the morning of the 5th of June , they went to Corinthe to breakfast . 
Joly , who was all stuffed up , had a catarrh which Laigle was beginning to share . 
Laigle 's coat was threadbare , but Joly was well dressed . 
It was about nine o'clock in the morning , when they opened the door of Corinthe . 
They ascended to the first floor . 
Matelote and Gibelotte received them . 
`` Oysters , cheese , and ham , '' said Laigle . 
And they seated themselves at a table . 
The wine-shop was empty ; there was no one there but themselves . 
Gibelotte , knowing Joly and Laigle , set a bottle of wine on the table . 
While they were busy with their first oysters , a head appeared at the hatchway of the staircase , and a voice said : -- `` I am passing by . 
I smell from the street a delicious odor of Brie cheese . 
I enter . '' 
It was Grantaire . 
Grantaire took a stool and drew up to the table . 
At the sight of Grantaire , Gibelotte placed two bottles of wine on the table . 
That made three . 
`` Are you going to drink those two bottles ? '' 
Laigle inquired of Grantaire . 
Grantaire replied : -- `` All are ingenious , thou alone art ingenuous . 
Two bottles never yet astonished a man . '' 
The others had begun by eating , Grantaire began by drinking . 
Half a bottle was rapidly gulped down . 
`` So you have a hole in your stomach ? '' 
began Laigle again . 
`` You have one in your elbow , '' said Grantaire . 
And after having emptied his glass , he added : -- `` Ah , by the way , Laigle of the funeral oration , your coat is old . '' 
`` I should hope so , '' retorted Laigle . 
`` That 's why we get on well together , my coat and I . 
It has acquired all my folds , it does not bind me anywhere , it is moulded on my deformities , it falls in with all my movements , I am only conscious of it because it keeps me warm . 
Old coats are just like old friends . '' 
`` That 's true , '' ejaculated Joly , striking into the dialogue , `` an old goat is an old abi '' -LRB- ami , friend -RRB- . 
`` Especially in the mouth of a man whose head is stuffed up , '' said Grantaire . 
`` Grantaire , '' demanded Laigle , `` have you just come from the boulevard ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` We have just seen the head of the procession pass , Joly and I. '' `` It 's a marvellous sight , '' said Joly . 
`` How quiet this street is ! '' 
exclaimed Laigle . 
`` Who would suspect that Paris was turned upside down ? 
How plainly it is to be seen that in former days there were nothing but convents here ! 
In this neighborhood ! 
Du Breul and Sauval give a list of them , and so does the Abbe Lebeuf . 
They were all round here , they fairly swarmed , booted and barefooted , shaven , bearded , gray , black , white , Franciscans , Minims , Capuchins , Carmelites , Little Augustines , Great Augustines , old Augustines -- there was no end of them . '' 
`` Do n't let 's talk of monks , '' interrupted Grantaire , `` it makes one want to scratch one 's self . '' 
Then he exclaimed : -- `` Bouh ! 
I 've just swallowed a bad oyster . 
Now hypochondria is taking possession of me again . 
The oysters are spoiled , the servants are ugly . 
I hate the human race . 
I just passed through the Rue Richelieu , in front of the big public library . 
That pile of oyster-shells which is called a library is disgusting even to think of . 
What paper ! 
What ink ! 
What scrawling ! 
And all that has been written ! 
What rascal was it who said that man was a featherless biped ? 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- And then , I met a pretty girl of my acquaintance , who is as beautiful as the spring , worthy to be called Floreal , and who is delighted , enraptured , as happy as the angels , because a wretch yesterday , a frightful banker all spotted with small-pox , deigned to take a fancy to her ! 
Alas ! 
woman keeps on the watch for a protector as much as for a lover ; cats chase mice as well as birds . 
Two months ago that young woman was virtuous in an attic , she adjusted little brass rings in the eyelet-holes of corsets , what do you call it ? 
She sewed , she had a camp bed , she dwelt beside a pot of flowers , she was contented . 
Now here she is a bankeress . 
This transformation took place last night . 
I met the victim this morning in high spirits . 
The hideous point about it is , that the jade is as pretty to-day as she was yesterday . 
Her financier did not show in her face . 
Roses have this advantage or disadvantage over women , that the traces left upon them by caterpillars are visible . 
Ah ! 
there is no morality on earth . 
I call to witness the myrtle , the symbol of love , the laurel , the symbol of air , the olive , that ninny , the symbol of peace , the apple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips , and the fig-tree , the grandfather of petticoats . 
As for right , do you know what right is ? 
The Gauls covet Clusium , Rome protects Clusium , and demands what wrong Clusium has done to them . 
Brennus answers : ` The wrong that Alba did to you , the wrong that Fidenae did to you , the wrong that the Eques , the Volsci , and the Sabines have done to you . 
They were your neighbors . 
The Clusians are ours . 
We understand neighborliness just as you do . 
You have stolen Alba , we shall take Clusium . ' 
Rome said : ` You shall not take Clusium . ' 
Brennus took Rome . 
Then he cried : ` Vae victis ! ' 
That is what right is . 
Ah ! 
what beasts of prey there are in this world ! 
What eagles ! 
It makes my flesh creep . '' 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- Bipede sans plume : biped without feathers -- pen . 
He held out his glass to Joly , who filled it , then he drank and went on , having hardly been interrupted by this glass of wine , of which no one , not even himself , had taken any notice : -- `` Brennus , who takes Rome , is an eagle ; the banker who takes the grisette is an eagle . 
There is no more modesty in the one case than in the other . 
So we believe in nothing . 
There is but one reality : drink . 
Whatever your opinion may be in favor of the lean cock , like the Canton of Uri , or in favor of the fat cock , like the Canton of Glaris , it matters little , drink . 
You talk to me of the boulevard , of that procession , et caetera , et caetera . 
Come now , is there going to be another revolution ? 
This poverty of means on the part of the good God astounds me . 
He has to keep greasing the groove of events every moment . 
There is a hitch , it wo n't work . 
Quick , a revolution ! 
The good God has his hands perpetually black with that cart-grease . 
If I were in his place , I 'd be perfectly simple about it , I would not wind up my mechanism every minute , I 'd lead the human race in a straightforward way , I 'd weave matters mesh by mesh , without breaking the thread , I would have no provisional arrangements , I would have no extraordinary repertory . 
What the rest of you call progress advances by means of two motors , men and events . 
But , sad to say , from time to time , the exceptional becomes necessary . 
The ordinary troupe suffices neither for event nor for men : among men geniuses are required , among events revolutions . 
Great accidents are the law ; the order of things can not do without them ; and , judging from the apparition of comets , one would be tempted to think that Heaven itself finds actors needed for its performance . 
At the moment when one expects it the least , God placards a meteor on the wall of the firmament . 
Some queer star turns up , underlined by an enormous tail . 
And that causes the death of Caesar . 
Brutus deals him a blow with a knife , and God a blow with a comet . 
Crac , and behold an aurora borealis , behold a revolution , behold a great man ; '93 in big letters , Napoleon on guard , the comet of 1811 at the head of the poster . 
Ah ! 
what a beautiful blue theatre all studded with unexpected flashes ! 
Boum ! 
Boum ! 
extraordinary show ! 
Raise your eyes , boobies . 
Everything is in disorder , the star as well as the drama . 
Good God , it is too much and not enough . 
These resources , gathered from exception , seem magnificence and poverty . 
My friends , Providence has come down to expedients . 
What does a revolution prove ? 
That God is in a quandry . 
He effects a coup d'etat because he , God , has not been able to make both ends meet . 
In fact , this confirms me in my conjectures as to Jehovah 's fortune ; and when I see so much distress in heaven and on earth , from the bird who has not a grain of millet to myself without a hundred thousand livres of income , when I see human destiny , which is very badly worn , and even royal destiny , which is threadbare , witness the Prince de Conde hung , when I see winter , which is nothing but a rent in the zenith through which the wind blows , when I see so many rags even in the perfectly new purple of the morning on the crests of hills , when I see the drops of dew , those mock pearls , when I see the frost , that paste , when I see humanity ripped apart and events patched up , and so many spots on the sun and so many holes in the moon , when I see so much misery everywhere , I suspect that God is not rich . 
The appearance exists , it is true , but I feel that he is hard up . 
He gives a revolution as a tradesman whose money-box is empty gives a ball . 
God must not be judged from appearances . 
Beneath the gilding of heaven I perceive a poverty-stricken universe . 
Creation is bankrupt . 
That is why I am discontented . 
Here it is the 4th of June , it is almost night ; ever since this morning I have been waiting for daylight to come ; it has not come , and I bet that it wo n't come all day . 
This is the inexactness of an ill-paid clerk . 
Yes , everything is badly arranged , nothing fits anything else , this old world is all warped , I take my stand on the opposition , everything goes awry ; the universe is a tease . 
It 's like children , those who want them have none , and those who do n't want them have them . 
Total : I 'm vexed . 
Besides , Laigle de Meaux , that bald-head , offends my sight . 
It humiliates me to think that I am of the same age as that baldy . 
However , I criticise , but I do not insult . 
The universe is what it is . 
I speak here without evil intent and to ease my conscience . 
Receive , Eternal Father , the assurance of my distinguished consideration . 
Ah ! 
by all the saints of Olympus and by all the gods of paradise , I was not intended to be a Parisian , that is to say , to rebound forever , like a shuttlecock between two battledores , from the group of the loungers to the group of the roysterers . 
I was made to be a Turk , watching oriental houris all day long , executing those exquisite Egyptian dances , as sensuous as the dream of a chaste man , or a Beauceron peasant , or a Venetian gentleman surrounded by gentlewoman , or a petty German prince , furnishing the half of a foot-soldier to the Germanic confederation , and occupying his leisure with drying his breeches on his hedge , that is to say , his frontier . 
Those are the positions for which I was born ! 
Yes , I have said a Turk , and I will not retract . 
I do not understand how people can habitually take Turks in bad part ; Mohammed had his good points ; respect for the inventor of seraglios with houris and paradises with odalisques ! 
Let us not insult Mohammedanism , the only religion which is ornamented with a hen-roost ! 
Now , I insist on a drink . 
The earth is a great piece of stupidity . 
And it appears that they are going to fight , all those imbeciles , and to break each other 's profiles and to massacre each other in the heart of summer , in the month of June , when they might go off with a creature on their arm , to breathe the immense heaps of new-mown hay in the meadows ! 
Really , people do commit altogether too many follies . 
An old broken lantern which I have just seen at a bric-a-brac merchant 's suggests a reflection to my mind ; it is time to enlighten the human race . 
Yes , behold me sad again . 
That 's what comes of swallowing an oyster and a revolution the wrong way ! 
I am growing melancholy once more . 
Oh ! 
frightful old world . 
People strive , turn each other out , prostitute themselves , kill each other , and get used to it ! '' 
And Grantaire , after this fit of eloquence , had a fit of coughing , which was well earned . 
`` A propos of revolution , '' said Joly , `` it is decidedly abberent that Barius is in lub . '' 
`` Does any one know with whom ? '' 
demanded Laigle . 
`` Do . '' 
`` No ? '' 
`` Do ! 
I tell you . '' 
`` Marius ' love affairs ! '' 
exclaimed Grantaire . 
`` I can imagine it . 
Marius is a fog , and he must have found a vapor . 
Marius is of the race of poets . 
He who says poet , says fool , madman , Tymbraeus Apollo . 
Marius and his Marie , or his Marion , or his Maria , or his Mariette . 
They must make a queer pair of lovers . 
I know just what it is like . 
Ecstasies in which they forget to kiss . 
Pure on earth , but joined in heaven . 
They are souls possessed of senses . 
They lie among the stars . '' 
Grantaire was attacking his second bottle and , possibly , his second harangue , when a new personage emerged from the square aperture of the stairs . 
It was a boy less than ten years of age , ragged , very small , yellow , with an odd phiz , a vivacious eye , an enormous amount of hair drenched with rain , and wearing a contented air . 
The child unhesitatingly making his choice among the three , addressed himself to Laigle de Meaux . 
`` Are you Monsieur Bossuet ? '' 
`` That is my nickname , '' replied Laigle . 
`` What do you want with me ? '' 
`` This . 
A tall blonde fellow on the boulevard said to me : ` Do you know Mother Hucheloup ? ' 
I said : ` Yes , Rue Chanvrerie , the old man 's widow ; ' he said to me : ` Go there . 
There you will find M. Bossuet . 
Tell him from me : `` A B C '' . ' 
It 's a joke that they 're playing on you , is n't it . 
He gave me ten sous . '' 
`` Joly , lend me ten sous , '' said Laigle ; and , turning to Grantaire : `` Grantaire , lend me ten sous . '' 
This made twenty sous , which Laigle handed to the lad . 
`` Thank you , sir , '' said the urchin . 
`` What is your name ? '' 
inquired Laigle . 
`` Navet , Gavroche 's friend . '' 
`` Stay with us , '' said Laigle . 
`` Breakfast with us , '' said Grantaire , The child replied : -- `` I ca n't , I belong in the procession , I 'm the one to shout ` Down with Polignac ! ' '' 
And executing a prolonged scrape of his foot behind him , which is the most respectful of all possible salutes , he took his departure . 
The child gone , Grantaire took the word : -- `` That is the pure-bred gamin . 
There are a great many varieties of the gamin species . 
The notary 's gamin is called Skip-the-Gutter , the cook 's gamin is called a scullion , the baker 's gamin is called a mitron , the lackey 's gamin is called a groom , the marine gamin is called the cabin-boy , the soldier 's gamin is called the drummer-boy , the painter 's gamin is called paint-grinder , the tradesman 's gamin is called an errand-boy , the courtesan gamin is called the minion , the kingly gamin is called the dauphin , the god gamin is called the bambino . '' 
In the meantime , Laigle was engaged in reflection ; he said half aloud : -- `` A B C , that is to say : the burial of Lamarque . '' 
`` The tall blonde , '' remarked Grantaire , `` is Enjolras , who is sending you a warning . '' 
`` Shall we go ? '' 
ejaculated Bossuet . 
`` It 's raiding , '' said Joly . 
`` I have sworn to go through fire , but not through water . 
I do n't wand to ged a gold . '' 
`` I shall stay here , '' said Grantaire . 
`` I prefer a breakfast to a hearse . '' 
`` Conclusion : we remain , '' said Laigle . 
`` Well , then , let us drink . 
Besides , we might miss the funeral without missing the riot . '' 
`` Ah ! 
the riot , I am with you ! '' 
cried Joly . 
Laigle rubbed his hands . 
`` Now we 're going to touch up the revolution of 1830 . 
As a matter of fact , it does hurt the people along the seams . '' 
`` I do n't think much of your revolution , '' said Grantaire . 
`` I do n't execrate this Government . 
It is the crown tempered by the cotton night-cap . 
It is a sceptre ending in an umbrella . 
In fact , I think that to-day , with the present weather , Louis Philippe might utilize his royalty in two directions , he might extend the tip of the sceptre end against the people , and open the umbrella end against heaven . '' 
The room was dark , large clouds had just finished the extinction of daylight . 
There was no one in the wine-shop , or in the street , every one having gone off `` to watch events . '' 
`` Is it mid-day or midnight ? '' 
cried Bossuet . 
`` You ca n't see your hand before your face . 
Gibelotte , fetch a light . '' 
Grantaire was drinking in a melancholy way . 
`` Enjolras disdains me , '' he muttered . 
`` Enjolras said : ` Joly is ill , Grantaire is drunk . ' 
It was to Bossuet that he sent Navet . 
If he had come for me , I would have followed him . 
So much the worse for Enjolras ! 
I wo n't go to his funeral . '' 
This resolution once arrived at , Bossuet , Joly , and Grantaire did not stir from the wine-shop . 
By two o'clock in the afternoon , the table at which they sat was covered with empty bottles . 
Two candles were burning on it , one in a flat copper candlestick which was perfectly green , the other in the neck of a cracked carafe . 
Grantaire had seduced Joly and Bossuet to wine ; Bossuet and Joly had conducted Grantaire back towards cheerfulness . 
As for Grantaire , he had got beyond wine , that merely moderate inspirer of dreams , ever since mid-day . 
Wine enjoys only a conventional popularity with serious drinkers . 
There is , in fact , in the matter of inebriety , white magic and black magic ; wine is only white magic . 
Grantaire was a daring drinker of dreams . 
The blackness of a terrible fit of drunkenness yawning before him , far from arresting him , attracted him . 
He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass . 
The beer-glass is the abyss . 
Having neither opium nor hashish on hand , and being desirous of filling his brain with twilight , he had had recourse to that fearful mixture of brandy , stout , absinthe , which produces the most terrible of lethargies . 
It is of these three vapors , beer , brandy , and absinthe , that the lead of the soul is composed . 
They are three grooms ; the celestial butterfly is drowned in them ; and there are formed there in a membranous smoke , vaguely condensed into the wing of the bat , three mute furies , Nightmare , Night , and Death , which hover about the slumbering Psyche . 
Grantaire had not yet reached that lamentable phase ; far from it . 
He was tremendously gay , and Bossuet and Joly retorted . 
They clinked glasses . 
Grantaire added to the eccentric accentuation of words and ideas , a peculiarity of gesture ; he rested his left fist on his knee with dignity , his arm forming a right angle , and , with cravat untied , seated astride a stool , his full glass in his right hand , he hurled solemn words at the big maid-servant Matelote : -- `` Let the doors of the palace be thrown open ! 
Let every one be a member of the French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup . 
Let us drink . '' 
And turning to Madame Hucheloup , he added : -- `` Woman ancient and consecrated by use , draw near that I may contemplate thee ! '' 
And Joly exclaimed : -- `` Matelote and Gibelotte , dod ' t gib Grantaire anything more to drink . 
He has already devoured , since this bording , in wild prodigality , two francs and ninety-five centibes . '' 
And Grantaire began again : -- `` Who has been unhooking the stars without my permission , and putting them on the table in the guise of candles ? '' 
Bossuet , though very drunk , preserved his equanimity . 
He was seated on the sill of the open window , wetting his back in the falling rain , and gazing at his two friends . 
All at once , he heard a tumult behind him , hurried footsteps , cries of `` To arms ! '' 
He turned round and saw in the Rue Saint-Denis , at the end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , Enjolras passing , gun in hand , and Gavroche with his pistol , Feuilly with his sword , Courfeyrac with his sword , and Jean Prouvaire with his blunderbuss , Combeferre with his gun , Bahorel with his gun , and the whole armed and stormy rabble which was following them . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie was not more than a gunshot long . 
Bossuet improvised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around his mouth , and shouted : -- `` Courfeyrac ! 
Courfeyrac ! 
Hohee ! '' 
Courfeyrac heard the shout , caught sight of Bossuet , and advanced a few paces into the Rue de la Chanvrerie , shouting : `` What do you want ? '' 
which crossed a `` Where are you going ? '' 
`` To make a barricade , '' replied Courfeyrac . 
`` Well , here ! 
This is a good place ! 
Make it here ! '' 
`` That 's true , Aigle , '' said Courfeyrac . 
And at a signal from Courfeyrac , the mob flung themselves into the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
NIGHT BEGINS TO DESCEND UPON GRANTAIRE The spot was , in fact , admirably adapted , the entrance to the street widened out , the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket without exit . 
Corinthe created an obstacle , the Rue Mondetour was easily barricaded on the right and the left , no attack was possible except from the Rue Saint-Denis , that is to say , in front , and in full sight . 
Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of a fasting Hannibal . 
Terror had seized on the whole street at the irruption of the mob . 
There was not a passer-by who did not get out of sight . 
In the space of a flash of lightning , in the rear , to right and left , shops , stables , area-doors , windows , blinds , attic skylights , shutters of every description were closed , from the ground floor to the roof . 
A terrified old woman fixed a mattress in front of her window on two clothes-poles for drying linen , in order to deaden the effect of musketry . 
The wine-shop alone remained open ; and that for a very good reason , that the mob had rushed into it . 
-- `` Ah my God ! 
Ah my God ! '' 
sighed Mame Hucheloup . 
Bossuet had gone down to meet Courfeyrac . 
Joly , who had placed himself at the window , exclaimed : -- `` Courfeyrac , you ought to have brought an umbrella . 
You will gatch gold . '' 
In the meantime , in the space of a few minutes , twenty iron bars had been wrenched from the grated front of the wine-shop , ten fathoms of street had been unpaved ; Gavroche and Bahorel had seized in its passage , and overturned , the dray of a lime-dealer named Anceau ; this dray contained three barrels of lime , which they placed beneath the piles of paving-stones : Enjolras raised the cellar trap , and all the widow Hucheloup 's empty casks were used to flank the barrels of lime ; Feuilly , with his fingers skilled in painting the delicate sticks of fans , had backed up the barrels and the dray with two massive heaps of blocks of rough stone . 
Blocks which were improvised like the rest and procured no one knows where . 
The beams which served as props were torn from the neighboring house-fronts and laid on the casks . 
When Bossuet and Courfeyrac turned round , half the street was already barred with a rampart higher than a man . 
There is nothing like the hand of the populace for building everything that is built by demolishing . 
Matelote and Gibelotte had mingled with the workers . 
Gibelotte went and came loaded with rubbish . 
Her lassitude helped on the barricade . 
She served the barricade as she would have served wine , with a sleepy air . 
An omnibus with two white horses passed the end of the street . 
Bossuet strode over the paving-stones , ran to it , stopped the driver , made the passengers alight , offered his hand to `` the ladies , '' dismissed the conductor , and returned , leading the vehicle and the horses by the bridle . 
`` Omnibuses , '' said he , `` do not pass the Corinthe . 
Non licet omnibus adire Corinthum . '' 
An instant later , the horses were unharnessed and went off at their will , through the Rue Mondetour , and the omnibus lying on its side completed the bar across the street . 
Mame Hucheloup , quite upset , had taken refuge in the first story . 
Her eyes were vague , and stared without seeing anything , and she cried in a low tone . 
Her terrified shrieks did not dare to emerge from her throat . 
`` The end of the world has come , '' she muttered . 
Joly deposited a kiss on Mame Hucheloup 's fat , red , wrinkled neck , and said to Grantaire : `` My dear fellow , I have always regarded a woman 's neck as an infinitely delicate thing . '' 
But Grantaire attained to the highest regions of dithryamb . 
Matelote had mounted to the first floor once more , Grantaire seized her round her waist , and gave vent to long bursts of laughter at the window . 
`` Matelote is homely ! '' 
he cried : `` Matelote is of a dream of ugliness ! 
Matelote is a chimaera . 
This is the secret of her birth : a Gothic Pygmalion , who was making gargoyles for cathedrals , fell in love with one of them , the most horrible , one fine morning . 
He besought Love to give it life , and this produced Matelote . 
Look at her , citizens ! 
She has chromate-of-lead-colored hair , like Titian 's mistress , and she is a good girl . 
I guarantee that she will fight well . 
Every good girl contains a hero . 
As for Mother Hucheloup , she 's an old warrior . 
Look at her moustaches ! 
She inherited them from her husband . 
A hussar indeed ! 
She will fight too . 
These two alone will strike terror to the heart of the banlieue . 
Comrades , we shall overthrow the government as true as there are fifteen intermediary acids between margaric acid and formic acid ; however , that is a matter of perfect indifference to me . 
Gentlemen , my father always detested me because I could not understand mathematics . 
I understand only love and liberty . 
I am Grantaire , the good fellow . 
Having never had any money , I never acquired the habit of it , and the result is that I have never lacked it ; but , if I had been rich , there would have been no more poor people ! 
You would have seen ! 
Oh , if the kind hearts only had fat purses , how much better things would go ! 
I picture myself Jesus Christ with Rothschild 's fortune ! 
How much good he would do ! 
Matelote , embrace me ! 
You are voluptuous and timid ! 
You have cheeks which invite the kiss of a sister , and lips which claim the kiss of a lover . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , you cask ! '' 
said Courfeyrac . 
Grantaire retorted : -- `` I am the capitoul -LSB- 52 -RSB- and the master of the floral games ! '' 
-LSB- 52 -RSB- Municipal officer of Toulouse . 
Enjolras , who was standing on the crest of the barricade , gun in hand , raised his beautiful , austere face . 
Enjolras , as the reader knows , had something of the Spartan and of the Puritan in his composition . 
He would have perished at Thermopylae with Leonidas , and burned at Drogheda with Cromwell . 
`` Grantaire , '' he shouted , `` go get rid of the fumes of your wine somewhere else than here . 
This is the place for enthusiasm , not for drunkenness . 
Do n't disgrace the barricade ! '' 
This angry speech produced a singular effect on Grantaire . 
One would have said that he had had a glass of cold water flung in his face . 
He seemed to be rendered suddenly sober . 
He sat down , put his elbows on a table near the window , looked at Enjolras with indescribable gentleness , and said to him : -- `` Let me sleep here . '' 
`` Go and sleep somewhere else , '' cried Enjolras . 
But Grantaire , still keeping his tender and troubled eyes fixed on him , replied : -- `` Let me sleep here , -- until I die . '' 
Enjolras regarded him with disdainful eyes : -- `` Grantaire , you are incapable of believing , of thinking , of willing , of living , and of dying . '' 
Grantaire replied in a grave tone : -- `` You will see . '' 
He stammered a few more unintelligible words , then his head fell heavily on the table , and , as is the usual effect of the second period of inebriety , into which Enjolras had roughly and abruptly thrust him , an instant later he had fallen asleep . 
AN ATTEMPT TO CONSOLE THE WIDOW HUCHELOUP Bahorel , in ecstasies over the barricade , shouted : -- `` Here 's the street in its low-necked dress ! 
How well it looks ! '' 
Courfeyrac , as he demolished the wine-shop to some extent , sought to console the widowed proprietress . 
`` Mother Hucheloup , were n't you complaining the other day because you had had a notice served on you for infringing the law , because Gibelotte shook a counterpane out of your window ? '' 
`` Yes , my good Monsieur Courfeyrac . 
Ah ! 
good Heavens , are you going to put that table of mine in your horror , too ? 
And it was for the counterpane , and also for a pot of flowers which fell from the attic window into the street , that the government collected a fine of a hundred francs . 
If that is n't an abomination , what is ! '' 
`` Well , Mother Hucheloup , we are avenging you . '' 
Mother Hucheloup did not appear to understand very clearly the benefit which she was to derive from these reprisals made on her account . 
She was satisfied after the manner of that Arab woman , who , having received a box on the ear from her husband , went to complain to her father , and cried for vengeance , saying : `` Father , you owe my husband affront for affront . '' 
The father asked : `` On which cheek did you receive the blow ? '' 
`` On the left cheek . '' 
The father slapped her right cheek and said : `` Now you are satisfied . 
Go tell your husband that he boxed my daughter 's ears , and that I have accordingly boxed his wife 's . '' 
The rain had ceased . 
Recruits had arrived . 
Workmen had brought under their blouses a barrel of powder , a basket containing bottles of vitriol , two or three carnival torches , and a basket filled with fire-pots , `` left over from the King 's festival . '' 
This festival was very recent , having taken place on the 1st of May . 
It was said that these munitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine named Pepin . 
They smashed the only street lantern in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the lantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis , and all the lanterns in the surrounding streets , de Mondetour , du Cygne , des Precheurs , and de la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie . 
Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac directed everything . 
Two barricades were now in process of construction at once , both of them resting on the Corinthe house and forming a right angle ; the larger shut off the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the other closed the Rue Mondetour , on the side of the Rue de Cygne . 
This last barricade , which was very narrow , was constructed only of casks and paving-stones . 
There were about fifty workers on it ; thirty were armed with guns ; for , on their way , they had effected a wholesale loan from an armorer 's shop . 
Nothing could be more bizarre and at the same time more motley than this troop . 
One had a round-jacket , a cavalry sabre , and two holster-pistols , another was in his shirt-sleeves , with a round hat , and a powder-horn slung at his side , a third wore a plastron of nine sheets of gray paper and was armed with a saddler 's awl . 
There was one who was shouting : `` Let us exterminate them to the last man and die at the point of our bayonet . '' 
This man had no bayonet . 
Another spread out over his coat the cross-belt and cartridge-box of a National Guardsman , the cover of the cartridge-box being ornamented with this inscription in red worsted : Public Order . 
There were a great many guns bearing the numbers of the legions , few hats , no cravats , many bare arms , some pikes . 
Add to this , all ages , all sorts of faces , small , pale young men , and bronzed longshoremen . 
All were in haste ; and as they helped each other , they discussed the possible chances . 
That they would receive succor about three o'clock in the morning -- that they were sure of one regiment , that Paris would rise . 
Terrible sayings with which was mingled a sort of cordial joviality . 
One would have pronounced them brothers , but they did not know each other 's names . 
Great perils have this fine characteristic , that they bring to light the fraternity of strangers . 
A fire had been lighted in the kitchen , and there they were engaged in moulding into bullets , pewter mugs , spoons , forks , and all the brass table-ware of the establishment . 
In the midst of it all , they drank . 
Caps and buckshot were mixed pell-mell on the tables with glasses of wine . 
In the billiard-hall , Mame Hucheloup , Matelote , and Gibelotte , variously modified by terror , which had stupefied one , rendered another breathless , and roused the third , were tearing up old dish-cloths and making lint ; three insurgents were assisting them , three bushy-haired , jolly blades with beards and moustaches , who plucked away at the linen with the fingers of seamstresses and who made them tremble . 
The man of lofty stature whom Courfeyrac , Combeferre , and Enjolras had observed at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the Rue des Billettes , was at work on the smaller barricade and was making himself useful there . 
Gavroche was working on the larger one . 
As for the young man who had been waiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings , and who had inquired for M. Marius , he had disappeared at about the time when the omnibus had been overturned . 
Gavroche , completely carried away and radiant , had undertaken to get everything in readiness . 
He went , came , mounted , descended , re-mounted , whistled , and sparkled . 
He seemed to be there for the encouragement of all . 
Had he any incentive ? 
Yes , certainly , his poverty ; had he wings ? 
yes , certainly , his joy . 
Gavroche was a whirlwind . 
He was constantly visible , he was incessantly audible . 
He filled the air , as he was everywhere at once . 
He was a sort of almost irritating ubiquity ; no halt was possible with him . 
The enormous barricade felt him on its haunches . 
He troubled the loungers , he excited the idle , he reanimated the weary , he grew impatient over the thoughtful , he inspired gayety in some , and breath in others , wrath in others , movement in all , now pricking a student , now biting an artisan ; he alighted , paused , flew off again , hovered over the tumult , and the effort , sprang from one party to another , murmuring and humming , and harassed the whole company ; a fly on the immense revolutionary coach . 
Perpetual motion was in his little arms and perpetual clamor in his little lungs . 
`` Courage ! 
more paving-stones ! 
more casks ! 
more machines ! 
Where are you now ? 
A hod of plaster for me to stop this hole with ! 
Your barricade is very small . 
It must be carried up . 
Put everything on it , fling everything there , stick it all in . 
Break down the house . 
A barricade is Mother Gibou 's tea . 
Hullo , here 's a glass door . '' 
This elicited an exclamation from the workers . 
`` A glass door ? 
what do you expect us to do with a glass door , tubercle ? '' 
`` Hercules yourselves ! '' 
retorted Gavroche . 
`` A glass door is an excellent thing in a barricade . 
It does not prevent an attack , but it prevents the enemy taking it . 
So you 've never prigged apples over a wall where there were broken bottles ? 
A glass door cuts the corns of the National Guard when they try to mount on the barricade . 
Pardi ! 
glass is a treacherous thing . 
Well , you have n't a very wildly lively imagination , comrades . '' 
However , he was furious over his triggerless pistol . 
He went from one to another , demanding : `` A gun , I want a gun ! 
Why do n't you give me a gun ? '' 
`` Give you a gun ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` Come now ! '' 
said Gavroche , `` why not ? 
I had one in 1830 when we had a dispute with Charles X. '' Enjolras shrugged his shoulders . 
`` When there are enough for the men , we will give some to the children . '' 
Gavroche wheeled round haughtily , and answered : -- `` If you are killed before me , I shall take yours . '' 
`` Gamin ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
`` Greenhorn ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
A dandy who had lost his way and who lounged past the end of the street created a diversion ! 
Gavroche shouted to him : -- `` Come with us , young fellow ! 
well now , do n't we do anything for this old country of ours ? '' 
The dandy fled . 
PREPARATIONS The journals of the day which said that that nearly impregnable structure , of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , as they call it , reached to the level of the first floor , were mistaken . 
The fact is , that it did not exceed an average height of six or seven feet . 
It was built in such a manner that the combatants could , at their will , either disappear behind it or dominate the barrier and even scale its crest by means of a quadruple row of paving-stones placed on top of each other and arranged as steps in the interior . 
On the outside , the front of the barricade , composed of piles of paving-stones and casks bound together by beams and planks , which were entangled in the wheels of Anceau 's dray and of the overturned omnibus , had a bristling and inextricable aspect . 
An aperture large enough to allow a man to pass through had been made between the wall of the houses and the extremity of the barricade which was furthest from the wine-shop , so that an exit was possible at this point . 
The pole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up with ropes , and a red flag , fastened to this pole , floated over the barricade . 
The little Mondetour barricade , hidden behind the wine-shop building , was not visible . 
The two barricades united formed a veritable redoubt . 
Enjolras and Courfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the other fragment of the Rue Mondetour which opens through the Rue des Precheurs an issue into the Halles , wishing , no doubt , to preserve a possible communication with the outside , and not entertaining much fear of an attack through the dangerous and difficult street of the Rue des Precheurs . 
With the exception of this issue which was left free , and which constituted what Folard in his strategical style would have termed a branch and taking into account , also , the narrow cutting arranged on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the interior of the barricade , where the wine-shop formed a salient angle , presented an irregular square , closed on all sides . 
There existed an interval of twenty paces between the grand barrier and the lofty houses which formed the background of the street , so that one might say that the barricade rested on these houses , all inhabited , but closed from top to bottom . 
All this work was performed without any hindrance , in less than an hour , and without this handful of bold men seeing a single bear-skin cap or a single bayonet make their appearance . 
The very bourgeois who still ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a glance at the Rue de la Chanvrerie , caught sight of the barricade , and redoubled their pace . 
The two barricades being finished , and the flag run up , a table was dragged out of the wine-shop ; and Courfeyrac mounted on the table . 
Enjolras brought the square coffer , and Courfeyrac opened it . 
This coffer was filled with cartridges . 
When the mob saw the cartridges , a tremor ran through the bravest , and a momentary silence ensued . 
Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile . 
Each one received thirty cartridges . 
Many had powder , and set about making others with the bullets which they had run . 
As for the barrel of powder , it stood on a table on one side , near the door , and was held in reserve . 
The alarm beat which ran through all Paris , did not cease , but it had finally come to be nothing more than a monotonous noise to which they no longer paid any attention . 
This noise retreated at times , and again drew near , with melancholy undulations . 
They loaded the guns and carbines , all together , without haste , with solemn gravity . 
Enjolras went and stationed three sentinels outside the barricades , one in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the second in the Rue des Precheurs , the third at the corner of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Then , the barricades having been built , the posts assigned , the guns loaded , the sentinels stationed , they waited , alone in those redoubtable streets through which no one passed any longer , surrounded by those dumb houses which seemed dead and in which no human movement palpitated , enveloped in the deepening shades of twilight which was drawing on , in the midst of that silence through which something could be felt advancing , and which had about it something tragic and terrifying , isolated , armed , determined , and tranquil . 
WAITING During those hours of waiting , what did they do ? 
We must needs tell , since this is a matter of history . 
While the men made bullets and the women lint , while a large saucepan of melted brass and lead , destined to the bullet-mould smoked over a glowing brazier , while the sentinels watched , weapon in hand , on the barricade , while Enjolras , whom it was impossible to divert , kept an eye on the sentinels , Combeferre , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Feuilly , Bossuet , Joly , Bahorel , and some others , sought each other out and united as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in their student life , and , in one corner of this wine-shop which had been converted into a casement , a couple of paces distant from the redoubt which they had built , with their carbines loaded and primed resting against the backs of their chairs , these fine young fellows , so close to a supreme hour , began to recite love verses . 
What verses ? 
These : -- Vous rappelez-vous notre douce vie , Lorsque nous etions si jeunes tous deux , Et que nous n'avions au coeur d'autre envie Que d'etre bien mis et d'etre amoureux , Lorsqu'en ajoutant votre age a mon age , Nous ne comptions pas a deux quarante ans , Et que , dans notre humble et petit menage , Tout , meme l'hiver , nous etait printemps ? 
Beaux jours ! 
Manuel etait fier et sage , Paris s ` asseyait a de saints banquets , Foy lancait la foudre , et votre corsage Avait une epingle ou je me piquais . 
Tout vous contemplait . 
Avocat sans causes , Quand je vous menais au Prado diner , Vous etiez jolie au point que les roses Me faisaient l'effet de se retourner . 
Je les entendais dire : Est elle belle ! 
Comme elle sent bon ! 
Quels cheveux a flots ! 
Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile , Son bonnet charmant est a peine eclos . 
J'errais avec toi , pressant ton bras souple . 
Les passants crovaient que l'amour charme Avait marie , dans notre heureux couple , Le doux mois d'avril au beau mois de mai . 
Nous vivions caches , contents , porte close , Devorant l'amour , bon fruit defendu , Ma bouche n'avait pas dit une chose Que deja ton coeur avait repondu . 
La Sorbonne etait l'endroit bucolique Ou je t ` adorais du soir au matin . 
C'est ainsi qu'une ame amoureuse applique La carte du Tendre au pays Latin . 
O place Maubert ! 
o place Dauphine ! 
Quand , dans le taudis frais et printanier , Tu tirais ton bas sur ton jambe fine , Je voyais un astre au fond du grenier . 
J'ai fort lu Platon , mais rien ne m ` en reste ; Mieux que Malebranche et que Lamennais , Tu me demontrais la bonte celeste Avec une fleur que tu me donnais . 
Je t ` obeissais , tu m ' etais soumise ; O grenier dore ! 
te lacer ! 
te voir Aller et venir des l'aube en chemise , Mirant ton jeune front a ton vieux miroir . 
Et qui done pourrait perde la memoire De ces temps d'aurore et de firmament , De rubans , de fleurs , de gaze et de moire , Ou l'amour begaye un argot charmant ? 
Nos jardins etaient un pot de tulipe ; Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon ; Je prenais le bol de terre de pipe , Et je te donnais le tasse en japon . 
Et ces grands malheurs qui nous faisaient rire ! 
Ton manchon brule , ton boa perdu ! 
Et ce cher portrait du divin Shakespeare Qu'un soir pour souper nons avons vendu ! 
J'etais mendiant et toi charitable . 
Je baisais au vol tes bras frais et ronds . 
Dante in folio nous servait de table Pour manger gaiment un cent de marrons . 
La premiere fois qu'en mon joyeux bouge Je pris un baiser a ton levre en feu , Quand tu t ` en allais decoiffee et rouge , Je restai tout pale et je crus en Dieu ! 
Te rappelles-tu nos bonheurs sans nombre , Et tous ces fichus changes en chiffons ? 
Oh que de soupirs , de nos coeurs pleins d'ombre , Se sont envoles dans les cieux profonds ! 
-LSB- 53 -RSB- -LSB- 53 -RSB- Do you remember our sweet life , when we were both so young , and when we had no other desire in our hearts than to be well dressed and in love ? 
When , by adding your age to my age , we could not count forty years between us , and when , in our humble and tiny household , everything was spring to us even in winter . 
Fair days ! 
Manuel was proud and wise , Paris sat at sacred banquets , Foy launched thunderbolts , and your corsage had a pin on which I pricked myself . 
Everything gazed upon you . 
A briefless lawyer , when I took you to the Prado to dine , you were so beautiful that the roses seemed to me to turn round , and I heard them say : Is she not beautiful ! 
How good she smells ! 
What billowing hair ! 
Beneath her mantle she hides a wing . 
Her charming bonnet is hardly unfolded . 
I wandered with thee , pressing thy supple arm . 
The passers-by thought that love bewitched had wedded , in our happy couple , the gentle month of April to the fair month of May . 
We lived concealed , content , with closed doors , devouring love , that sweet forbidden fruit . 
My mouth had not uttered a thing when thy heart had already responded . 
The Sorbonne was the bucolic spot where I adored thee from eve till morn . 
'T is thus that an amorous soul applies the chart of the Tender to the Latin country . 
O Place Maubert ! 
O Place Dauphine ! 
When in the fresh spring-like hut thou didst draw thy stocking on thy delicate leg , I saw a star in the depths of the garret . 
I have read a great deal of Plato , but nothing of it remains by me ; better than Malebranche and then Lamennais thou didst demonstrate to me celestial goodness with a flower which thou gavest to me , I obeyed thee , thou didst submit to me ; oh gilded garret ! 
to lace thee ! 
to behold thee going and coming from dawn in thy chemise , gazing at thy young brow in thine ancient mirror ! 
And who , then , would forego the memory of those days of aurora and the firmament , of flowers , of gauze and of moire , when love stammers a charming slang ? 
Our gardens consisted of a pot of tulips ; thou didst mask the window with thy petticoat ; I took the earthenware bowl and I gave thee the Japanese cup . 
And those great misfortunes which made us laugh ! 
Thy cuff scorched , thy boa lost ! 
And that dear portrait of the divine Shakespeare which we sold one evening that we might sup ! 
I was a beggar and thou wert charitable . 
I kissed thy fresh round arms in haste . 
A folio Dante served us as a table on which to eat merrily a centime 's worth of chestnuts . 
The first time that , in my joyous den , I snatched a kiss from thy fiery lip , when thou wentest forth , dishevelled and blushing , I turned deathly pale and I believed in God . 
Dost thou recall our innumerable joys , and all those fichus changed to rags ? 
Oh ! 
what sighs from our hearts full of gloom fluttered forth to the heavenly depths ! 
The hour , the spot , these souvenirs of youth recalled , a few stars which began to twinkle in the sky , the funeral repose of those deserted streets , the imminence of the inexorable adventure , which was in preparation , gave a pathetic charm to these verses murmured in a low tone in the dusk by Jean Prouvaire , who , as we have said , was a gentle poet . 
In the meantime , a lamp had been lighted in the small barricade , and in the large one , one of those wax torches such as are to be met with on Shrove-Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks , on their way to la Courtille . 
These torches , as the reader has seen , came from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The torch had been placed in a sort of cage of paving-stones closed on three sides to shelter it from the wind , and disposed in such a fashion that all the light fell on the flag . 
The street and the barricade remained sunk in gloom , and nothing was to be seen except the red flag formidably illuminated as by an enormous dark-lantern . 
This light enhanced the scarlet of the flag , with an indescribable and terrible purple . 
THE MAN RECRUITED IN THE RUE DES BILLETTES Night was fully come , nothing made its appearance . 
All that they heard was confused noises , and at intervals , fusillades ; but these were rare , badly sustained and distant . 
This respite , which was thus prolonged , was a sign that the Government was taking its time , and collecting its forces . 
These fifty men were waiting for sixty thousand . 
Enjolras felt attacked by that impatience which seizes on strong souls on the threshold of redoubtable events . 
He went in search of Gavroche , who had set to making cartridges in the tap-room , by the dubious light of two candles placed on the counter by way of precaution , on account of the powder which was scattered on the tables . 
These two candles cast no gleam outside . 
The insurgents had , moreover , taken pains not to have any light in the upper stories . 
Gavroche was deeply preoccupied at that moment , but not precisely with his cartridges . 
The man of the Rue des Billettes had just entered the tap-room and had seated himself at the table which was the least lighted . 
A musket of large model had fallen to his share , and he held it between his legs . 
Gavroche , who had been , up to that moment , distracted by a hundred `` amusing '' things , had not even seen this man . 
When he entered , Gavroche followed him mechanically with his eyes , admiring his gun ; then , all at once , when the man was seated , the street urchin sprang to his feet . 
Any one who had spied upon that man up to that moment , would have seen that he was observing everything in the barricade and in the band of insurgents , with singular attention ; but , from the moment when he had entered this room , he had fallen into a sort of brown study , and no longer seemed to see anything that was going on . 
The gamin approached this pensive personage , and began to step around him on tiptoe , as one walks in the vicinity of a person whom one is afraid of waking . 
At the same time , over his childish countenance which was , at once so impudent and so serious , so giddy and so profound , so gay and so heart-breaking , passed all those grimaces of an old man which signify : Ah bah ! 
impossible ! 
My sight is bad ! 
I am dreaming ! 
can this be ? 
no , it is not ! 
but yes ! 
why , no ! 
etc. . 
Gavroche balanced on his heels , clenched both fists in his pockets , moved his neck around like a bird , expended in a gigantic pout all the sagacity of his lower lip . 
He was astounded , uncertain , incredulous , convinced , dazzled . 
He had the mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart , discovering a Venus among the blowsy females , and the air of an amateur recognizing a Raphael in a heap of daubs . 
His whole being was at work , the instinct which scents out , and the intelligence which combines . 
It was evident that a great event had happened in Gavroche 's life . 
It was at the most intense point of this preoccupation that Enjolras accosted him . 
`` You are small , '' said Enjolras , `` you will not be seen . 
Go out of the barricade , slip along close to the houses , skirmish about a bit in the streets , and come back and tell me what is going on . '' 
Gavroche raised himself on his haunches . 
`` So the little chaps are good for something ! 
that 's very lucky ! 
I 'll go ! 
In the meanwhile , trust to the little fellows , and distrust the big ones . '' 
And Gavroche , raising his head and lowering his voice , added , as he indicated the man of the Rue des Billettes : `` Do you see that big fellow there ? '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He 's a police spy . '' 
`` Are you sure of it ? '' 
`` It is n't two weeks since he pulled me off the cornice of the Port Royal , where I was taking the air , by my ear . '' 
Enjolras hastily quitted the urchin and murmured a few words in a very low tone to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be at hand . 
The man left the room , and returned almost immediately , accompanied by three others . 
The four men , four porters with broad shoulders , went and placed themselves without doing anything to attract his attention , behind the table on which the man of the Rue des Billettes was leaning with his elbows . 
They were evidently ready to hurl themselves upon him . 
Then Enjolras approached the man and demanded of him : -- `` Who are you ? '' 
At this abrupt query , the man started . 
He plunged his gaze deep into Enjolras ' clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter 's meaning . 
He smiled with a smile than which nothing more disdainful , more energetic , and more resolute could be seen in the world , and replied with haughty gravity : -- `` I see what it is . 
Well , yes ! '' 
`` You are a police spy ? '' 
`` I am an agent of the authorities . '' 
`` And your name ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Enjolras made a sign to the four men . 
In the twinkling of an eye , before Javert had time to turn round , he was collared , thrown down , pinioned and searched . 
They found on him a little round card pasted between two pieces of glass , and bearing on one side the arms of France , engraved , and with this motto : Supervision and vigilance , and on the other this note : `` JAVERT , inspector of police , aged fifty-two , '' and the signature of the Prefect of Police of that day , M. Gisquet . 
Besides this , he had his watch and his purse , which contained several gold pieces . 
They left him his purse and his watch . 
Under the watch , at the bottom of his fob , they felt and seized a paper in an envelope , which Enjolras unfolded , and on which he read these five lines , written in the very hand of the Prefect of Police : -- `` As soon as his political mission is accomplished , Inspector Javert will make sure , by special supervision , whether it is true that the malefactors have instituted intrigues on the right bank of the Seine , near the Jena bridge . '' 
The search ended , they lifted Javert to his feet , bound his arms behind his back , and fastened him to that celebrated post in the middle of the room which had formerly given the wine-shop its name . 
Gavroche , who had looked on at the whole of this scene and had approved of everything with a silent toss of his head , stepped up to Javert and said to him : -- `` It 's the mouse who has caught the cat . '' 
All this was so rapidly executed , that it was all over when those about the wine-shop noticed it . 
Javert had not uttered a single cry . 
At the sight of Javert bound to the post , Courfeyrac , Bossuet , Joly , Combeferre , and the men scattered over the two barricades came running up . 
Javert , with his back to the post , and so surrounded with ropes that he could not make a movement , raised his head with the intrepid serenity of the man who has never lied . 
`` He is a police spy , '' said Enjolras . 
And turning to Javert : `` You will be shot ten minutes before the barricade is taken . '' 
Javert replied in his most imperious tone : -- `` Why not at once ? '' 
`` We are saving our powder . '' 
`` Then finish the business with a blow from a knife . '' 
`` Spy , '' said the handsome Enjolras , `` we are judges and not assassins . '' 
Then he called Gavroche : -- `` Here you ! 
go about your business ! 
Do what I told you ! '' 
`` I 'm going ! '' 
cried Gavroche . 
And halting as he was on the point of setting out : -- `` By the way , you will give me his gun ! '' 
and he added : `` I leave you the musician , but I want the clarionet . '' 
The gamin made the military salute and passed gayly through the opening in the large barricade . 
MANY INTERROGATION POINTS WITH REGARD TO A CERTAIN LE CABUC WHOSE NAME MAY NOT HAVE BEEN LE CABUC The tragic picture which we have undertaken would not be complete , the reader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in a revolutionary birth , which contain convulsion mingled with effort , in their exact and real relief , were we to omit , in the sketch here outlined , an incident full of epic and savage horror which occurred almost immediately after Gavroche 's departure . 
Mobs , as the reader knows , are like a snowball , and collect as they roll along , a throng of tumultuous men . 
These men do not ask each other whence they come . 
Among the passers-by who had joined the rabble led by Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac , there had been a person wearing the jacket of a street porter , which was very threadbare on the shoulders , who gesticulated and vociferated , and who had the look of a drunken savage . 
This man , whose name or nickname was Le Cabuc , and who was , moreover , an utter stranger to those who pretended to know him , was very drunk , or assumed the appearance of being so , and had seated himself with several others at a table which they had dragged outside of the wine-shop . 
This Cabuc , while making those who vied with him drunk seemed to be examining with a thoughtful air the large house at the extremity of the barricade , whose five stories commanded the whole street and faced the Rue Saint-Denis . 
All at once he exclaimed : -- `` Do you know , comrades , it is from that house yonder that we must fire . 
When we are at the windows , the deuce is in it if any one can advance into the street ! '' 
`` Yes , but the house is closed , '' said one of the drinkers . 
`` Let us knock ! '' 
`` They will not open . '' 
`` Let us break in the door ! '' 
Le Cabuc runs to the door , which had a very massive knocker , and knocks . 
The door opens not . 
He strikes a second blow . 
No one answers . 
A third stroke . 
The same silence . 
`` Is there any one here ? '' 
shouts Cabuc . 
Nothing stirs . 
Then he seizes a gun and begins to batter the door with the butt end . 
It was an ancient alley door , low , vaulted , narrow , solid , entirely of oak , lined on the inside with a sheet of iron and iron stays , a genuine prison postern . 
The blows from the butt end of the gun made the house tremble , but did not shake the door . 
Nevertheless , it is probable that the inhabitants were disturbed , for a tiny , square window was finally seen to open on the third story , and at this aperture appeared the reverend and terrified face of a gray-haired old man , who was the porter , and who held a candle . 
The man who was knocking paused . 
`` Gentlemen , '' said the porter , `` what do you want ? '' 
`` Open ! '' 
said Cabuc . 
`` That can not be , gentlemen . '' 
`` Open , nevertheless . '' 
`` Impossible , gentlemen . '' 
Le Cabuc took his gun and aimed at the porter ; but as he was below , and as it was very dark , the porter did not see him . 
`` Will you open , yes or no ? '' 
`` No , gentlemen . '' 
`` Do you say no ? '' 
`` I say no , my goo -- '' The porter did not finish . 
The shot was fired ; the ball entered under his chin and came out at the nape of his neck , after traversing the jugular vein . 
The old man fell back without a sigh . 
The candle fell and was extinguished , and nothing more was to be seen except a motionless head lying on the sill of the small window , and a little whitish smoke which floated off towards the roof . 
`` There ! '' 
said Le Cabuc , dropping the butt end of his gun to the pavement . 
He had hardly uttered this word , when he felt a hand laid on his shoulder with the weight of an eagle 's talon , and he heard a voice saying to him : -- `` On your knees . '' 
The murderer turned round and saw before him Enjolras ' cold , white face . 
Enjolras held a pistol in his hand . 
He had hastened up at the sound of the discharge . 
He had seized Cabuc 's collar , blouse , shirt , and suspender with his left hand . 
`` On your knees ! '' 
he repeated . 
And , with an imperious motion , the frail young man of twenty years bent the thickset and sturdy porter like a reed , and brought him to his knees in the mire . 
Le Cabuc attempted to resist , but he seemed to have been seized by a superhuman hand . 
Enjolras , pale , with bare neck and dishevelled hair , and his woman 's face , had about him at that moment something of the antique Themis . 
His dilated nostrils , his downcast eyes , gave to his implacable Greek profile that expression of wrath and that expression of Chastity which , as the ancient world viewed the matter , befit Justice . 
The whole barricade hastened up , then all ranged themselves in a circle at a distance , feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in the presence of the thing which they were about to behold . 
Le Cabuc , vanquished , no longer tried to struggle , and trembled in every limb . 
Enjolras released him and drew out his watch . 
`` Collect yourself , '' said he . 
`` Think or pray . 
You have one minute . '' 
`` Mercy ! '' 
murmured the murderer ; then he dropped his head and stammered a few inarticulate oaths . 
Enjolras never took his eyes off of him : he allowed a minute to pass , then he replaced his watch in his fob . 
That done , he grasped Le Cabuc by the hair , as the latter coiled himself into a ball at his knees and shrieked , and placed the muzzle of the pistol to his ear . 
Many of those intrepid men , who had so tranquilly entered upon the most terrible of adventures , turned aside their heads . 
An explosion was heard , the assassin fell to the pavement face downwards . 
Enjolras straightened himself up , and cast a convinced and severe glance around him . 
Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said : -- `` Throw that outside . '' 
Three men raised the body of the unhappy wretch , which was still agitated by the last mechanical convulsions of the life that had fled , and flung it over the little barricade into the Rue Mondetour . 
Enjolras was thoughtful . 
It is impossible to say what grandiose shadows slowly spread over his redoubtable serenity . 
All at once he raised his voice . 
A silence fell upon them . 
`` Citizens , '' said Enjolras , `` what that man did is frightful , what I have done is horrible . 
He killed , therefore I killed him . 
I had to do it , because insurrection must have its discipline . 
Assassination is even more of a crime here than elsewhere ; we are under the eyes of the Revolution , we are the priests of the Republic , we are the victims of duty , and must not be possible to slander our combat . 
I have , therefore , tried that man , and condemned him to death . 
As for myself , constrained as I am to do what I have done , and yet abhorring it , I have judged myself also , and you shall soon see to what I have condemned myself . '' 
Those who listened to him shuddered . 
`` We will share thy fate , '' cried Combeferre . 
`` So be it , '' replied Enjolras . 
`` One word more . 
In executing this man , I have obeyed necessity ; but necessity is a monster of the old world , necessity 's name is Fatality . 
Now , the law of progress is , that monsters shall disappear before the angels , and that Fatality shall vanish before Fraternity . 
It is a bad moment to pronounce the word love . 
No matter , I do pronounce it . 
And I glorify it . 
Love , the future is thine . 
Death , I make use of thee , but I hate thee . 
Citizens , in the future there will be neither darkness nor thunderbolts ; neither ferocious ignorance , nor bloody retaliation . 
As there will be no more Satan , there will be no more Michael . 
In the future no one will kill any one else , the earth will beam with radiance , the human race will love . 
The day will come , citizens , when all will be concord , harmony , light , joy and life ; it will come , and it is in order that it may come that we are about to die . '' 
Enjolras ceased . 
His virgin lips closed ; and he remained for some time standing on the spot where he had shed blood , in marble immobility . 
His staring eye caused those about him to speak in low tones . 
Jean Prouvaire and Combeferre pressed each other 's hands silently , and , leaning against each other in an angle of the barricade , they watched with an admiration in which there was some compassion , that grave young man , executioner and priest , composed of light , like crystal , and also of rock . 
Let us say at once that later on , after the action , when the bodies were taken to the morgue and searched , a police agent 's card was found on Le Cabuc . 
The author of this book had in his hands , in 1848 , the special report on this subject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832 . 
We will add , that if we are to believe a tradition of the police , which is strange but probably well founded , Le Cabuc was Claquesous . 
The fact is , that dating from the death of Le Cabuc , there was no longer any question of Claquesous . 
Claquesous had nowhere left any trace of his disappearance ; he would seem to have amalgamated himself with the invisible . 
His life had been all shadows , his end was night . 
The whole insurgent group was still under the influence of the emotion of that tragic case which had been so quickly tried and so quickly terminated , when Courfeyrac again beheld on the barricade , the small young man who had inquired of him that morning for Marius . 
This lad , who had a bold and reckless air , had come by night to join the insurgents . 
BOOK THIRTEENTH . 
-- MARIUS ENTERS THE SHADOW FROM THE RUE PLUMET TO THE QUARTIER SAINT-DENIS The voice which had summoned Marius through the twilight to the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , had produced on him the effect of the voice of destiny . 
He wished to die ; the opportunity presented itself ; he knocked at the door of the tomb , a hand in the darkness offered him the key . 
These melancholy openings which take place in the gloom before despair , are tempting . 
Marius thrust aside the bar which had so often allowed him to pass , emerged from the garden , and said : `` I will go . '' 
Mad with grief , no longer conscious of anything fixed or solid in his brain , incapable of accepting anything thenceforth of fate after those two months passed in the intoxication of youth and love , overwhelmed at once by all the reveries of despair , he had but one desire remaining , to make a speedy end of all . 
He set out at rapid pace . 
He found himself most opportunely armed , as he had Javert 's pistols with him . 
The young man of whom he thought that he had caught a glimpse , had vanished from his sight in the street . 
Marius , who had emerged from the Rue Plumet by the boulevard , traversed the Esplanade and the bridge of the Invalides , the Champs Elysees , the Place Louis XV. , and reached the Rue de Rivoli . 
The shops were open there , the gas was burning under the arcades , women were making their purchases in the stalls , people were eating ices in the Cafe Laiter , and nibbling small cakes at the English pastry-cook 's shop . 
Only a few posting-chaises were setting out at a gallop from the Hotel des Princes and the Hotel Meurice . 
Marius entered the Rue Saint-Honore through the Passage Delorme . 
There the shops were closed , the merchants were chatting in front of their half-open doors , people were walking about , the street lanterns were lighted , beginning with the first floor , all the windows were lighted as usual . 
There was cavalry on the Place du Palais-Royal . 
Marius followed the Rue Saint-Honore . 
In proportion as he left the Palais-Royal behind him , there were fewer lighted windows , the shops were fast shut , no one was chatting on the thresholds , the street grew sombre , and , at the same time , the crowd increased in density . 
For the passers-by now amounted to a crowd . 
No one could be seen to speak in this throng , and yet there arose from it a dull , deep murmur . 
Near the fountain of the Arbre-Sec , there were `` assemblages '' , motionless and gloomy groups which were to those who went and came as stones in the midst of running water . 
At the entrance to the Rue des Prouvaires , the crowd no longer walked . 
It formed a resisting , massive , solid , compact , almost impenetrable block of people who were huddled together , and conversing in low tones . 
There were hardly any black coats or round hats now , but smock frocks , blouses , caps , and bristling and cadaverous heads . 
This multitude undulated confusedly in the nocturnal gloom . 
Its whisperings had the hoarse accent of a vibration . 
Although not one of them was walking , a dull trampling was audible in the mire . 
Beyond this dense portion of the throng , in the Rue du Roule , in the Rue des Prouvaires , and in the extension of the Rue Saint-Honore , there was no longer a single window in which a candle was burning . 
Only the solitary and diminishing rows of lanterns could be seen vanishing into the street in the distance . 
The lanterns of that date resembled large red stars , hanging to ropes , and shed upon the pavement a shadow which had the form of a huge spider . 
These streets were not deserted . 
There could be descried piles of guns , moving bayonets , and troops bivouacking . 
No curious observer passed that limit . 
There circulation ceased . 
There the rabble ended and the army began . 
Marius willed with the will of a man who hopes no more . 
He had been summoned , he must go . 
He found a means to traverse the throng and to pass the bivouac of the troops , he shunned the patrols , he avoided the sentinels . 
He made a circuit , reached the Rue de Bethisy , and directed his course towards the Halles . 
At the corner of the Rue des Bourdonnais , there were no longer any lanterns . 
After having passed the zone of the crowd , he had passed the limits of the troops ; he found himself in something startling . 
There was no longer a passer-by , no longer a soldier , no longer a light , there was no one ; solitude , silence , night , I know not what chill which seized hold upon one . 
Entering a street was like entering a cellar . 
He continued to advance . 
He took a few steps . 
Some one passed close to him at a run . 
Was it a man ? 
Or a woman ? 
Were there many of them ? 
he could not have told . 
It had passed and vanished . 
Proceeding from circuit to circuit , he reached a lane which he judged to be the Rue de la Poterie ; near the middle of this street , he came in contact with an obstacle . 
He extended his hands . 
It was an overturned wagon ; his foot recognized pools of water , gullies , and paving-stones scattered and piled up . 
A barricade had been begun there and abandoned . 
He climbed over the stones and found himself on the other side of the barrier . 
He walked very near the street-posts , and guided himself along the walls of the houses . 
A little beyond the barricade , it seemed to him that he could make out something white in front of him . 
He approached , it took on a form . 
It was two white horses ; the horses of the omnibus harnessed by Bossuet in the morning , who had been straying at random all day from street to street , and had finally halted there , with the weary patience of brutes who no more understand the actions of men , than man understands the actions of Providence . 
Marius left the horses behind him . 
As he was approaching a street which seemed to him to be the Rue du Contrat-Social , a shot coming no one knows whence , and traversing the darkness at random , whistled close by him , and the bullet pierced a brass shaving-dish suspended above his head over a hairdresser 's shop . 
This pierced shaving-dish was still to be seen in 1848 , in the Rue du Contrat-Social , at the corner of the pillars of the market . 
This shot still betokened life . 
From that instant forth he encountered nothing more . 
The whole of this itinerary resembled a descent of black steps . 
Nevertheless , Marius pressed forward . 
AN OWL 'S VIEW OF PARIS A being who could have hovered over Paris that night with the wing of the bat or the owl would have had beneath his eyes a gloomy spectacle . 
All that old quarter of the Halles , which is like a city within a city , through which run the Rues Saint-Denis and Saint-Martin , where a thousand lanes cross , and of which the insurgents had made their redoubt and their stronghold , would have appeared to him like a dark and enormous cavity hollowed out in the centre of Paris . 
There the glance fell into an abyss . 
Thanks to the broken lanterns , thanks to the closed windows , there all radiance , all life , all sound , all movement ceased . 
The invisible police of the insurrection were on the watch everywhere , and maintained order , that is to say , night . 
The necessary tactics of insurrection are to drown small numbers in a vast obscurity , to multiply every combatant by the possibilities which that obscurity contains . 
At dusk , every window where a candle was burning received a shot . 
The light was extinguished , sometimes the inhabitant was killed . 
Hence nothing was stirring . 
There was nothing but fright , mourning , stupor in the houses ; and in the streets , a sort of sacred horror . 
Not even the long rows of windows and stores , the indentations of the chimneys , and the roofs , and the vague reflections which are cast back by the wet and muddy pavements , were visible . 
An eye cast upward at that mass of shadows might , perhaps , have caught a glimpse here and there , at intervals , of indistinct gleams which brought out broken and eccentric lines , and profiles of singular buildings , something like the lights which go and come in ruins ; it was at such points that the barricades were situated . 
The rest was a lake of obscurity , foggy , heavy , and funereal , above which , in motionless and melancholy outlines , rose the tower of Saint-Jacques , the church of Saint-Merry , and two or three more of those grand edifices of which man makes giants and the night makes phantoms . 
All around this deserted and disquieting labyrinth , in the quarters where the Parisian circulation had not been annihilated , and where a few street lanterns still burned , the aerial observer might have distinguished the metallic gleam of swords and bayonets , the dull rumble of artillery , and the swarming of silent battalions whose ranks were swelling from minute to minute ; a formidable girdle which was slowly drawing in and around the insurrection . 
The invested quarter was no longer anything more than a monstrous cavern ; everything there appeared to be asleep or motionless , and , as we have just seen , any street which one might come to offered nothing but darkness . 
A wild darkness , full of traps , full of unseen and formidable shocks , into which it was alarming to penetrate , and in which it was terrible to remain , where those who entered shivered before those whom they awaited , where those who waited shuddered before those who were coming . 
Invisible combatants were entrenched at every corner of the street ; snares of the sepulchre concealed in the density of night . 
All was over . 
No more light was to be hoped for , henceforth , except the lightning of guns , no further encounter except the abrupt and rapid apparition of death . 
Where ? 
How ? 
When ? 
No one knew , but it was certain and inevitable . 
In this place which had been marked out for the struggle , the Government and the insurrection , the National Guard , and popular societies , the bourgeois and the uprising , groping their way , were about to come into contact . 
The necessity was the same for both . 
The only possible issue thenceforth was to emerge thence killed or conquerors . 
A situation so extreme , an obscurity so powerful , that the most timid felt themselves seized with resolution , and the most daring with terror . 
Moreover , on both sides , the fury , the rage , and the determination were equal . 
For the one party , to advance meant death , and no one dreamed of retreating ; for the other , to remain meant death , and no one dreamed of flight . 
It was indispensable that all should be ended on the following day , that triumph should rest either here or there , that the insurrection should prove itself a revolution or a skirmish . 
The Government understood this as well as the parties ; the most insignificant bourgeois felt it . 
Hence a thought of anguish which mingled with the impenetrable gloom of this quarter where all was at the point of being decided ; hence a redoubled anxiety around that silence whence a catastrophe was on the point of emerging . 
Here only one sound was audible , a sound as heart-rending as the death rattle , as menacing as a malediction , the tocsin of Saint-Merry . 
Nothing could be more blood-curdling than the clamor of that wild and desperate bell , wailing amid the shadows . 
As it often happens , nature seemed to have fallen into accord with what men were about to do . 
Nothing disturbed the harmony of the whole effect . 
The stars had disappeared , heavy clouds filled the horizon with their melancholy folds . 
A black sky rested on these dead streets , as though an immense winding-sheet were being outspread over this immense tomb . 
While a battle that was still wholly political was in preparation in the same locality which had already witnessed so many revolutionary events , while youth , the secret associations , the schools , in the name of principles , and the middle classes , in the name of interests , were approaching preparatory to dashing themselves together , clasping and throwing each other , while each one hastened and invited the last and decisive hour of the crisis , far away and quite outside of this fatal quarter , in the most profound depths of the unfathomable cavities of that wretched old Paris which disappears under the splendor of happy and opulent Paris , the sombre voice of the people could be heard giving utterance to a dull roar . 
A fearful and sacred voice which is composed of the roar of the brute and of the word of God , which terrifies the weak and which warns the wise , which comes both from below like the voice of the lion , and from on high like the voice of the thunder . 
THE EXTREME EDGE Marius had reached the Halles . 
There everything was still calmer , more obscure and more motionless than in the neighboring streets . 
One would have said that the glacial peace of the sepulchre had sprung forth from the earth and had spread over the heavens . 
Nevertheless , a red glow brought out against this black background the lofty roofs of the houses which barred the Rue de la Chanvrerie on the Saint-Eustache side . 
It was the reflection of the torch which was burning in the Corinthe barricade . 
Marius directed his steps towards that red light . 
It had drawn him to the Marche-aux-Poirees , and he caught a glimpse of the dark mouth of the Rue des Precheurs . 
He entered it . 
The insurgents ' sentinel , who was guarding the other end , did not see him . 
He felt that he was very close to that which he had come in search of , and he walked on tiptoe . 
In this manner he reached the elbow of that short section of the Rue Mondetour which was , as the reader will remember , the only communication which Enjolras had preserved with the outside world . 
At the corner of the last house , on his left , he thrust his head forward , and looked into the fragment of the Rue Mondetour . 
A little beyond the angle of the lane and the Rue de la Chanvrerie which cast a broad curtain of shadow , in which he was himself engulfed , he perceived some light on the pavement , a bit of the wine-shop , and beyond , a flickering lamp within a sort of shapeless wall , and men crouching down with guns on their knees . 
All this was ten fathoms distant from him . 
It was the interior of the barricade . 
The houses which bordered the lane on the right concealed the rest of the wine-shop , the large barricade , and the flag from him . 
Marius had but a step more to take . 
Then the unhappy young man seated himself on a post , folded his arms , and fell to thinking about his father . 
He thought of that heroic Colonel Pontmercy , who had been so proud a soldier , who had guarded the frontier of France under the Republic , and had touched the frontier of Asia under Napoleon , who had beheld Genoa , Alexandria , Milan , Turin , Madrid , Vienna , Dresden , Berlin , Moscow , who had left on all the victorious battle-fields of Europe drops of that same blood , which he , Marius , had in his veins , who had grown gray before his time in discipline and command , who had lived with his sword-belt buckled , his epaulets falling on his breast , his cockade blackened with powder , his brow furrowed with his helmet , in barracks , in camp , in the bivouac , in ambulances , and who , at the expiration of twenty years , had returned from the great wars with a scarred cheek , a smiling countenance , tranquil , admirable , pure as a child , having done everything for France and nothing against her . 
He said to himself that his day had also come now , that his hour had struck , that following his father , he too was about to show himself brave , intrepid , bold , to run to meet the bullets , to offer his breast to bayonets , to shed his blood , to seek the enemy , to seek death , that he was about to wage war in his turn and descend to the field of battle , and that the field of battle upon which he was to descend was the street , and that the war in which he was about to engage was civil war ! 
He beheld civil war laid open like a gulf before him , and into this he was about to fall . 
Then he shuddered . 
He thought of his father 's sword , which his grandfather had sold to a second-hand dealer , and which he had so mournfully regretted . 
He said to himself that that chaste and valiant sword had done well to escape from him , and to depart in wrath into the gloom ; that if it had thus fled , it was because it was intelligent and because it had foreseen the future ; that it had had a presentiment of this rebellion , the war of the gutters , the war of the pavements , fusillades through cellar-windows , blows given and received in the rear ; it was because , coming from Marengo and Friedland , it did not wish to go to the Rue de la Chanvrerie ; it was because , after what it had done with the father , it did not wish to do this for the son ! 
He told himself that if that sword were there , if after taking possession of it at his father 's pillow , he had dared to take it and carry it off for this combat of darkness between Frenchmen in the streets , it would assuredly have scorched his hands and burst out aflame before his eyes , like the sword of the angel ! 
He told himself that it was fortunate that it was not there and that it had disappeared , that that was well , that that was just , that his grandfather had been the true guardian of his father 's glory , and that it was far better that the colonel 's sword should be sold at auction , sold to the old-clothes man , thrown among the old junk , than that it should , to-day , wound the side of his country . 
And then he fell to weeping bitterly . 
This was horrible . 
But what was he to do ? 
Live without Cosette he could not . 
Since she was gone , he must needs die . 
Had he not given her his word of honor that he would die ? 
She had gone knowing that ; this meant that it pleased her that Marius should die . 
And then , it was clear that she no longer loved him , since she had departed thus without warning , without a word , without a letter , although she knew his address ! 
What was the good of living , and why should he live now ? 
And then , what ! 
should he retreat after going so far ? 
should he flee from danger after having approached it ? 
should he slip away after having come and peeped into the barricade ? 
slip away , all in a tremble , saying : `` After all , I have had enough of it as it is . 
I have seen it , that suffices , this is civil war , and I shall take my leave ! '' 
Should he abandon his friends who were expecting him ? 
Who were in need of him possibly ! 
who were a mere handful against an army ! 
Should he be untrue at once to his love , to country , to his word ? 
Should he give to his cowardice the pretext of patriotism ? 
But this was impossible , and if the phantom of his father was there in the gloom , and beheld him retreating , he would beat him on the loins with the flat of his sword , and shout to him : `` March on , you poltroon ! '' 
Thus a prey to the conflicting movements of his thoughts , he dropped his head . 
All at once he raised it . 
A sort of splendid rectification had just been effected in his mind . 
There is a widening of the sphere of thought which is peculiar to the vicinity of the grave ; it makes one see clearly to be near death . 
The vision of the action into which he felt that he was , perhaps , on the point of entering , appeared to him no more as lamentable , but as superb . 
The war of the street was suddenly transfigured by some unfathomable inward working of his soul , before the eye of his thought . 
All the tumultuous interrogation points of revery recurred to him in throngs , but without troubling him . 
He left none of them unanswered . 
Let us see , why should his father be indignant ? 
Are there not cases where insurrection rises to the dignity of duty ? 
What was there that was degrading for the son of Colonel Pontmercy in the combat which was about to begin ? 
It is no longer Montmirail nor Champaubert ; it is something quite different . 
The question is no longer one of sacred territory , -- but of a holy idea . 
The country wails , that may be , but humanity applauds . 
But is it true that the country does wail ? 
France bleeds , but liberty smiles ; and in the presence of liberty 's smile , France forgets her wound . 
And then if we look at things from a still more lofty point of view , why do we speak of civil war ? 
Civil war -- what does that mean ? 
Is there a foreign war ? 
Is not all war between men war between brothers ? 
War is qualified only by its object . 
There is no such thing as foreign or civil war ; there is only just and unjust war . 
Until that day when the grand human agreement is concluded , war , that at least which is the effort of the future , which is hastening on against the past , which is lagging in the rear , may be necessary . 
What have we to reproach that war with ? 
War does not become a disgrace , the sword does not become a disgrace , except when it is used for assassinating the right , progress , reason , civilization , truth . 
Then war , whether foreign or civil , is iniquitous ; it is called crime . 
Outside the pale of that holy thing , justice , by what right does one form of man despise another ? 
By what right should the sword of Washington disown the pike of Camille Desmoulins ? 
Leonidas against the stranger , Timoleon against the tyrant , which is the greater ? 
the one is the defender , the other the liberator . 
Shall we brand every appeal to arms within a city 's limits without taking the object into a consideration ? 
Then note the infamy of Brutus , Marcel , Arnould von Blankenheim , Coligny , Hedgerow war ? 
War of the streets ? 
Why not ? 
That was the war of Ambiorix , of Artevelde , of Marnix , of Pelagius . 
But Ambiorix fought against Rome , Artevelde against France , Marnix against Spain , Pelagius against the Moors ; all against the foreigner . 
Well , the monarchy is a foreigner ; oppression is a stranger ; the right divine is a stranger . 
Despotism violates the moral frontier , an invasion violates the geographical frontier . 
Driving out the tyrant or driving out the English , in both cases , regaining possession of one 's own territory . 
There comes an hour when protestation no longer suffices ; after philosophy , action is required ; live force finishes what the idea has sketched out ; Prometheus chained begins , Arostogeiton ends ; the encyclopedia enlightens souls , the 10th of August electrifies them . 
After AEschylus , Thrasybulus ; after Diderot , Danton . 
Multitudes have a tendency to accept the master . 
Their mass bears witness to apathy . 
A crowd is easily led as a whole to obedience . 
Men must be stirred up , pushed on , treated roughly by the very benefit of their deliverance , their eyes must be wounded by the true , light must be hurled at them in terrible handfuls . 
They must be a little thunderstruck themselves at their own well-being ; this dazzling awakens them . 
Hence the necessity of tocsins and wars . 
Great combatants must rise , must enlighten nations with audacity , and shake up that sad humanity which is covered with gloom by the right divine , Caesarian glory , force , fanaticism , irresponsible power , and absolute majesty ; a rabble stupidly occupied in the contemplation , in their twilight splendor , of these sombre triumphs of the night . 
Down with the tyrant ! 
Of whom are you speaking ? 
Do you call Louis Philippe the tyrant ? 
No ; no more than Louis XVI . 
Both of them are what history is in the habit of calling good kings ; but principles are not to be parcelled out , the logic of the true is rectilinear , the peculiarity of truth is that it lacks complaisance ; no concessions , then ; all encroachments on man should be repressed . 
There is a divine right in Louis XVI. , there is because a Bourbon in Louis Philippe ; both represent in a certain measure the confiscation of right , and , in order to clear away universal insurrection , they must be combated ; it must be done , France being always the one to begin . 
When the master falls in France , he falls everywhere . 
In short , what cause is more just , and consequently , what war is greater , than that which re-establishes social truth , restores her throne to liberty , restores the people to the people , restores sovereignty to man , replaces the purple on the head of France , restores equity and reason in their plenitude , suppresses every germ of antagonism by restoring each one to himself , annihilates the obstacle which royalty presents to the whole immense universal concord , and places the human race once more on a level with the right ? 
These wars build up peace . 
An enormous fortress of prejudices , privileges , superstitions , lies , exactions , abuses , violences , iniquities , and darkness still stands erect in this world , with its towers of hatred . 
It must be cast down . 
This monstrous mass must be made to crumble . 
To conquer at Austerlitz is grand ; to take the Bastille is immense . 
There is no one who has not noticed it in his own case -- the soul , -- and therein lies the marvel of its unity complicated with ubiquity , has a strange aptitude for reasoning almost coldly in the most violent extremities , and it often happens that heartbroken passion and profound despair in the very agony of their blackest monologues , treat subjects and discuss theses . 
Logic is mingled with convulsion , and the thread of the syllogism floats , without breaking , in the mournful storm of thought . 
This was the situation of Marius ' mind . 
As he meditated thus , dejected but resolute , hesitating in every direction , and , in short , shuddering at what he was about to do , his glance strayed to the interior of the barricade . 
The insurgents were here conversing in a low voice , without moving , and there was perceptible that quasi-silence which marks the last stage of expectation . 
Overhead , at the small window in the third story Marius descried a sort of spectator who appeared to him to be singularly attentive . 
This was the porter who had been killed by Le Cabuc . 
Below , by the lights of the torch , which was thrust between the paving-stones , this head could be vaguely distinguished . 
Nothing could be stranger , in that sombre and uncertain gleam , than that livid , motionless , astonished face , with its bristling hair , its eyes fixed and staring , and its yawning mouth , bent over the street in an attitude of curiosity . 
One would have said that the man who was dead was surveying those who were about to die . 
A long trail of blood which had flowed from that head , descended in reddish threads from the window to the height of the first floor , where it stopped . 
THE FLAG : ACT FIRST As yet , nothing had come . 
Ten o'clock had sounded from Saint-Merry . 
Enjolras and Combeferre had gone and seated themselves , carbines in hand , near the outlet of the grand barricade . 
They no longer addressed each other , they listened , seeking to catch even the faintest and most distant sound of marching . 
Suddenly , in the midst of the dismal calm , a clear , gay , young voice , which seemed to come from the Rue Saint-Denis , rose and began to sing distinctly , to the old popular air of `` By the Light of the Moon , '' this bit of poetry , terminated by a cry like the crow of a cock : -- Mon nez est en larmes , Mon ami Bugeaud , Prete moi tes gendarmes Pour leur dire un mot . 
En capote bleue , La poule au shako , Voici la banlieue ! 
Co-cocorico ! 
-LSB- 54 -RSB- -LSB- 54 -RSB- My nose is in tears , my friend Bugeaud , lend me thy gendarmes that I may say a word to them . 
With a blue capote and a chicken in his shako , here 's the banlieue , co-cocorico . 
They pressed each other 's hands . 
`` That is Gavroche , '' said Enjolras . 
`` He is warning us , '' said Combeferre . 
A hasty rush troubled the deserted street ; they beheld a being more agile than a clown climb over the omnibus , and Gavroche bounded into the barricade , all breathless , saying : -- `` My gun ! 
Here they are ! '' 
An electric quiver shot through the whole barricade , and the sound of hands seeking their guns became audible . 
`` Would you like my carbine ? '' 
said Enjolras to the lad . 
`` I want a big gun , '' replied Gavroche . 
And he seized Javert 's gun . 
Two sentinels had fallen back , and had come in almost at the same moment as Gavroche . 
They were the sentinels from the end of the street , and the vidette of the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie . 
The vidette of the Lane des Precheurs had remained at his post , which indicated that nothing was approaching from the direction of the bridges and Halles . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie , of which a few paving-stones alone were dimly visible in the reflection of the light projected on the flag , offered to the insurgents the aspect of a vast black door vaguely opened into a smoke . 
Each man had taken up his position for the conflict . 
Forty-three insurgents , among whom were Enjolras , Combeferre , Courfeyrac , Bossuet , Joly , Bahorel , and Gavroche , were kneeling inside the large barricade , with their heads on a level with the crest of the barrier , the barrels of their guns and carbines aimed on the stones as though at loop-holes , attentive , mute , ready to fire . 
Six , commanded by Feuilly , had installed themselves , with their guns levelled at their shoulders , at the windows of the two stories of Corinthe . 
Several minutes passed thus , then a sound of footsteps , measured , heavy , and numerous , became distinctly audible in the direction of Saint-Leu . 
This sound , faint at first , then precise , then heavy and sonorous , approached slowly , without halt , without intermission , with a tranquil and terrible continuity . 
Nothing was to be heard but this . 
It was that combined silence and sound , of the statue of the commander , but this stony step had something indescribably enormous and multiple about it which awakened the idea of a throng , and , at the same time , the idea of a spectre . 
One thought one heard the terrible statue Legion marching onward . 
This tread drew near ; it drew still nearer , and stopped . 
It seemed as though the breathing of many men could be heard at the end of the street . 
Nothing was to be seen , however , but at the bottom of that dense obscurity there could be distinguished a multitude of metallic threads , as fine as needles and almost imperceptible , which moved about like those indescribable phosphoric networks which one sees beneath one 's closed eyelids , in the first mists of slumber at the moment when one is dropping off to sleep . 
These were bayonets and gun-barrels confusedly illuminated by the distant reflection of the torch . 
A pause ensued , as though both sides were waiting . 
All at once , from the depths of this darkness , a voice , which was all the more sinister , since no one was visible , and which appeared to be the gloom itself speaking , shouted : -- `` Who goes there ? '' 
At the same time , the click of guns , as they were lowered into position , was heard . 
Enjolras replied in a haughty and vibrating tone : -- `` The French Revolution ! '' 
`` Fire ! '' 
shouted the voice . 
A flash empurpled all the facades in the street as though the door of a furnace had been flung open , and hastily closed again . 
A fearful detonation burst forth on the barricade . 
The red flag fell . 
The discharge had been so violent and so dense that it had cut the staff , that is to say , the very tip of the omnibus pole . 
Bullets which had rebounded from the cornices of the houses penetrated the barricade and wounded several men . 
The impression produced by this first discharge was freezing . 
The attack had been rough , and of a nature to inspire reflection in the boldest . 
It was evident that they had to deal with an entire regiment at the very least . 
`` Comrades ! '' 
shouted Courfeyrac , `` let us not waste our powder . 
Let us wait until they are in the street before replying . '' 
`` And , above all , '' said Enjolras , `` let us raise the flag again . '' 
He picked up the flag , which had fallen precisely at his feet . 
Outside , the clatter of the ramrods in the guns could be heard ; the troops were re-loading their arms . 
Enjolras went on : -- `` Who is there here with a bold heart ? 
Who will plant the flag on the barricade again ? '' 
Not a man responded . 
To mount on the barricade at the very moment when , without any doubt , it was again the object of their aim , was simply death . 
The bravest hesitated to pronounce his own condemnation . 
Enjolras himself felt a thrill . 
He repeated : -- `` Does no one volunteer ? '' 
THE FLAG : ACT SECOND Since they had arrived at Corinthe , and had begun the construction of the barricade , no attention had been paid to Father Mabeuf . 
M. Mabeuf had not quitted the mob , however ; he had entered the ground-floor of the wine-shop and had seated himself behind the counter . 
There he had , so to speak , retreated into himself . 
He no longer seemed to look or to think . 
Courfeyrac and others had accosted him two or three times , warning him of his peril , beseeching him to withdraw , but he did not hear them . 
When they were not speaking to him , his mouth moved as though he were replying to some one , and as soon as he was addressed , his lips became motionless and his eyes no longer had the appearance of being alive . 
Several hours before the barricade was attacked , he had assumed an attitude which he did not afterwards abandon , with both fists planted on his knees and his head thrust forward as though he were gazing over a precipice . 
Nothing had been able to move him from this attitude ; it did not seem as though his mind were in the barricade . 
When each had gone to take up his position for the combat , there remained in the tap-room where Javert was bound to the post , only a single insurgent with a naked sword , watching over Javert , and himself , Mabeuf . 
At the moment of the attack , at the detonation , the physical shock had reached him and had , as it were , awakened him ; he started up abruptly , crossed the room , and at the instant when Enjolras repeated his appeal : `` Does no one volunteer ? '' 
the old man was seen to make his appearance on the threshold of the wine-shop . 
His presence produced a sort of commotion in the different groups . 
A shout went up : -- `` It is the voter ! 
It is the member of the Convention ! 
It is the representative of the people ! '' 
It is probable that he did not hear them . 
He strode straight up to Enjolras , the insurgents withdrawing before him with a religious fear ; he tore the flag from Enjolras , who recoiled in amazement and then , since no one dared to stop or to assist him , this old man of eighty , with shaking head but firm foot , began slowly to ascend the staircase of paving-stones arranged in the barricade . 
This was so melancholy and so grand that all around him cried : `` Off with your hats ! '' 
At every step that he mounted , it was a frightful spectacle ; his white locks , his decrepit face , his lofty , bald , and wrinkled brow , his amazed and open mouth , his aged arm upholding the red banner , rose through the gloom and were enlarged in the bloody light of the torch , and the bystanders thought that they beheld the spectre of '93 emerging from the earth , with the flag of terror in his hand . 
When he had reached the last step , when this trembling and terrible phantom , erect on that pile of rubbish in the presence of twelve hundred invisible guns , drew himself up in the face of death and as though he were more powerful than it , the whole barricade assumed amid the darkness , a supernatural and colossal form . 
There ensued one of those silences which occur only in the presence of prodigies . 
In the midst of this silence , the old man waved the red flag and shouted : -- `` Long live the Revolution ! 
Long live the Republic ! 
Fraternity ! 
Equality ! 
and Death ! '' 
Those in the barricade heard a low and rapid whisper , like the murmur of a priest who is despatching a prayer in haste . 
It was probably the commissary of police who was making the legal summons at the other end of the street . 
Then the same piercing voice which had shouted : `` Who goes there ? '' 
shouted : -- `` Retire ! '' 
M. Mabeuf , pale , haggard , his eyes lighted up with the mournful flame of aberration , raised the flag above his head and repeated : -- `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
`` Fire ! '' 
said the voice . 
A second discharge , similar to the first , rained down upon the barricade . 
The old man fell on his knees , then rose again , dropped the flag and fell backwards on the pavement , like a log , at full length , with outstretched arms . 
Rivulets of blood flowed beneath him . 
His aged head , pale and sad , seemed to be gazing at the sky . 
One of those emotions which are superior to man , which make him forget even to defend himself , seized upon the insurgents , and they approached the body with respectful awe . 
`` What men these regicides were ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
Courfeyrac bent down to Enjolras ' ear : -- `` This is for yourself alone , I do not wish to dampen the enthusiasm . 
But this man was anything rather than a regicide . 
I knew him . 
His name was Father Mabeuf . 
I do not know what was the matter with him to-day . 
But he was a brave blockhead . 
Just look at his head . '' 
`` The head of a blockhead and the heart of a Brutus , '' replied Enjolras . 
Then he raised his voice : -- `` Citizens ! 
This is the example which the old give to the young . 
We hesitated , he came ! 
We were drawing back , he advanced ! 
This is what those who are trembling with age teach to those who tremble with fear ! 
This aged man is august in the eyes of his country . 
He has had a long life and a magnificent death ! 
Now , let us place the body under cover , that each one of us may defend this old man dead as he would his father living , and may his presence in our midst render the barricade impregnable ! '' 
A murmur of gloomy and energetic assent followed these words . 
Enjolras bent down , raised the old man 's head , and fierce as he was , he kissed him on the brow , then , throwing wide his arms , and handling this dead man with tender precaution , as though he feared to hurt it , he removed his coat , showed the bloody holes in it to all , and said : -- `` This is our flag now . '' 
GAVROCHE WOULD HAVE DONE BETTER TO ACCEPT ENJOLRAS ' CARBINE They threw a long black shawl of Widow Hucheloup 's over Father Mabeuf . 
Six men made a litter of their guns ; on this they laid the body , and bore it , with bared heads , with solemn slowness , to the large table in the tap-room . 
These men , wholly absorbed in the grave and sacred task in which they were engaged , thought no more of the perilous situation in which they stood . 
When the corpse passed near Javert , who was still impassive , Enjolras said to the spy : -- `` It will be your turn presently ! '' 
During all this time , Little Gavroche , who alone had not quitted his post , but had remained on guard , thought he espied some men stealthily approaching the barricade . 
All at once he shouted : -- `` Look out ! '' 
Courfeyrac , Enjolras , Jean Prouvaire , Combeferre , Joly , Bahorel , Bossuet , and all the rest ran tumultuously from the wine-shop . 
It was almost too late . 
They saw a glistening density of bayonets undulating above the barricade . 
Municipal guards of lofty stature were making their way in , some striding over the omnibus , others through the cut , thrusting before them the urchin , who retreated , but did not flee . 
The moment was critical . 
It was that first , redoubtable moment of inundation , when the stream rises to the level of the levee and when the water begins to filter through the fissures of dike . 
A second more and the barricade would have been taken . 
Bahorel dashed upon the first municipal guard who was entering , and killed him on the spot with a blow from his gun ; the second killed Bahorel with a blow from his bayonet . 
Another had already overthrown Courfeyrac , who was shouting : `` Follow me ! '' 
The largest of all , a sort of colossus , marched on Gavroche with his bayonet fixed . 
The urchin took in his arms Javert 's immense gun , levelled it resolutely at the giant , and fired . 
No discharge followed . 
Javert 's gun was not loaded . 
The municipal guard burst into a laugh and raised his bayonet at the child . 
Before the bayonet had touched Gavroche , the gun slipped from the soldier 's grasp , a bullet had struck the municipal guardsman in the centre of the forehead , and he fell over on his back . 
A second bullet struck the other guard , who had assaulted Courfeyrac in the breast , and laid him low on the pavement . 
This was the work of Marius , who had just entered the barricade . 
THE BARREL OF POWDER Marius , still concealed in the turn of the Rue Mondetour , had witnessed , shuddering and irresolute , the first phase of the combat . 
But he had not long been able to resist that mysterious and sovereign vertigo which may be designated as the call of the abyss . 
In the presence of the imminence of the peril , in the presence of the death of M. Mabeuf , that melancholy enigma , in the presence of Bahorel killed , and Courfeyrac shouting : `` Follow me ! '' 
of that child threatened , of his friends to succor or to avenge , all hesitation had vanished , and he had flung himself into the conflict , his two pistols in hand . 
With his first shot he had saved Gavroche , and with the second delivered Courfeyrac . 
Amid the sound of the shots , amid the cries of the assaulted guards , the assailants had climbed the entrenchment , on whose summit Municipal Guards , soldiers of the line and National Guards from the suburbs could now be seen , gun in hand , rearing themselves to more than half the height of their bodies . 
They already covered more than two-thirds of the barrier , but they did not leap into the enclosure , as though wavering in the fear of some trap . 
They gazed into the dark barricade as one would gaze into a lion 's den . 
The light of the torch illuminated only their bayonets , their bear-skin caps , and the upper part of their uneasy and angry faces . 
Marius had no longer any weapons ; he had flung away his discharged pistols after firing them ; but he had caught sight of the barrel of powder in the tap-room , near the door . 
As he turned half round , gazing in that direction , a soldier took aim at him . 
At the moment when the soldier was sighting Marius , a hand was laid on the muzzle of the gun and obstructed it . 
This was done by some one who had darted forward , -- the young workman in velvet trousers . 
The shot sped , traversed the hand and possibly , also , the workman , since he fell , but the ball did not strike Marius . 
All this , which was rather to be apprehended than seen through the smoke , Marius , who was entering the tap-room , hardly noticed . 
Still , he had , in a confused way , perceived that gun-barrel aimed at him , and the hand which had blocked it , and he had heard the discharge . 
But in moments like this , the things which one sees vacillate and are precipitated , and one pauses for nothing . 
One feels obscurely impelled towards more darkness still , and all is cloud . 
The insurgents , surprised but not terrified , had rallied . 
Enjolras had shouted : `` Wait ! 
Do n't fire at random ! '' 
In the first confusion , they might , in fact , wound each other . 
The majority of them had ascended to the window on the first story and to the attic windows , whence they commanded the assailants . 
The most determined , with Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , and Combeferre , had proudly placed themselves with their backs against the houses at the rear , unsheltered and facing the ranks of soldiers and guards who crowned the barricade . 
All this was accomplished without haste , with that strange and threatening gravity which precedes engagements . 
They took aim , point blank , on both sides : they were so close that they could talk together without raising their voices . 
When they had reached this point where the spark is on the brink of darting forth , an officer in a gorget extended his sword and said : -- `` Lay down your arms ! '' 
`` Fire ! '' 
replied Enjolras . 
The two discharges took place at the same moment , and all disappeared in smoke . 
An acrid and stifling smoke in which dying and wounded lay with weak , dull groans . 
When the smoke cleared away , the combatants on both sides could be seen to be thinned out , but still in the same positions , reloading in silence . 
All at once , a thundering voice was heard , shouting : -- `` Be off with you , or I 'll blow up the barricade ! '' 
All turned in the direction whence the voice proceeded . 
Marius had entered the tap-room , and had seized the barrel of powder , then he had taken advantage of the smoke , and the sort of obscure mist which filled the entrenched enclosure , to glide along the barricade as far as that cage of paving-stones where the torch was fixed . 
To tear it from the torch , to replace it by the barrel of powder , to thrust the pile of stones under the barrel , which was instantly staved in , with a sort of horrible obedience , -- all this had cost Marius but the time necessary to stoop and rise again ; and now all , National Guards , Municipal Guards , officers , soldiers , huddled at the other extremity of the barricade , gazed stupidly at him , as he stood with his foot on the stones , his torch in his hand , his haughty face illuminated by a fatal resolution , drooping the flame of the torch towards that redoubtable pile where they could make out the broken barrel of powder , and giving vent to that startling cry : -- `` Be off with you , or I 'll blow up the barricade ! '' 
Marius on that barricade after the octogenarian was the vision of the young revolution after the apparition of the old . 
`` Blow up the barricade ! '' 
said a sergeant , `` and yourself with it ! '' 
Marius retorted : `` And myself also . '' 
And he dropped the torch towards the barrel of powder . 
But there was no longer any one on the barrier . 
The assailants , abandoning their dead and wounded , flowed back pell-mell and in disorder towards the extremity of the street , and there were again lost in the night . 
It was a headlong flight . 
The barricade was free . 
END OF THE VERSES OF JEAN PROUVAIRE All flocked around Marius . 
Courfeyrac flung himself on his neck . 
`` Here you are ! '' 
`` What luck ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` You came in opportunely ! '' 
ejaculated Bossuet . 
`` If it had not been for you , I should have been dead ! '' 
began Courfeyrac again . 
`` If it had not been for you , I should have been gobbled up ! '' 
added Gavroche . 
Marius asked : -- `` Where is the chief ? '' 
`` You are he ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
Marius had had a furnace in his brain all day long ; now it was a whirlwind . 
This whirlwind which was within him , produced on him the effect of being outside of him and of bearing him away . 
It seemed to him that he was already at an immense distance from life . 
His two luminous months of joy and love , ending abruptly at that frightful precipice , Cosette lost to him , that barricade , M. Mabeuf getting himself killed for the Republic , himself the leader of the insurgents , -- all these things appeared to him like a tremendous nightmare . 
He was obliged to make a mental effort to recall the fact that all that surrounded him was real . 
Marius had already seen too much of life not to know that nothing is more imminent than the impossible , and that what it is always necessary to foresee is the unforeseen . 
He had looked on at his own drama as a piece which one does not understand . 
In the mists which enveloped his thoughts , he did not recognize Javert , who , bound to his post , had not so much as moved his head during the whole of the attack on the barricade , and who had gazed on the revolt seething around him with the resignation of a martyr and the majesty of a judge . 
Marius had not even seen him . 
In the meanwhile , the assailants did not stir , they could be heard marching and swarming through at the end of the street but they did not venture into it , either because they were awaiting orders or because they were awaiting reinforcements before hurling themselves afresh on this impregnable redoubt . 
The insurgents had posted sentinels , and some of them , who were medical students , set about caring for the wounded . 
They had thrown the tables out of the wine-shop , with the exception of the two tables reserved for lint and cartridges , and of the one on which lay Father Mabeuf ; they had added them to the barricade , and had replaced them in the tap-room with mattresses from the bed of the widow Hucheloup and her servants . 
On these mattresses they had laid the wounded . 
As for the three poor creatures who inhabited Corinthe , no one knew what had become of them . 
They were finally found , however , hidden in the cellar . 
A poignant emotion clouded the joy of the disencumbered barricade . 
The roll was called . 
One of the insurgents was missing . 
And who was it ? 
One of the dearest . 
One of the most valiant . 
Jean Prouvaire . 
He was sought among the wounded , he was not there . 
He was sought among the dead , he was not there . 
He was evidently a prisoner . 
Combeferre said to Enjolras : -- `` They have our friend ; we have their agent . 
Are you set on the death of that spy ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Enjolras ; `` but less so than on the life of Jean Prouvaire . '' 
This took place in the tap-room near Javert 's post . 
`` Well , '' resumed Combeferre , `` I am going to fasten my handkerchief to my cane , and go as a flag of truce , to offer to exchange our man for theirs . '' 
`` Listen , '' said Enjolras , laying his hand on Combeferre 's arm . 
At the end of the street there was a significant clash of arms . 
They heard a manly voice shout : -- `` Vive la France ! 
Long live France ! 
Long live the future ! '' 
They recognized the voice of Prouvaire . 
A flash passed , a report rang out . 
Silence fell again . 
`` They have killed him , '' exclaimed Combeferre . 
Enjolras glanced at Javert , and said to him : -- `` Your friends have just shot you . '' 
THE AGONY OF DEATH AFTER THE AGONY OF LIFE A peculiarity of this species of war is , that the attack of the barricades is almost always made from the front , and that the assailants generally abstain from turning the position , either because they fear ambushes , or because they are afraid of getting entangled in the tortuous streets . 
The insurgents ' whole attention had been directed , therefore , to the grand barricade , which was , evidently , the spot always menaced , and there the struggle would infallibly recommence . 
But Marius thought of the little barricade , and went thither . 
It was deserted and guarded only by the fire-pot which trembled between the paving-stones . 
Moreover , the Mondetour alley , and the branches of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie and the Rue du Cygne were profoundly calm . 
As Marius was withdrawing , after concluding his inspection , he heard his name pronounced feebly in the darkness . 
`` Monsieur Marius ! '' 
He started , for he recognized the voice which had called to him two hours before through the gate in the Rue Plumet . 
Only , the voice now seemed to be nothing more than a breath . 
He looked about him , but saw no one . 
Marius thought he had been mistaken , that it was an illusion added by his mind to the extraordinary realities which were clashing around him . 
He advanced a step , in order to quit the distant recess where the barricade lay . 
`` Monsieur Marius ! '' 
repeated the voice . 
This time he could not doubt that he had heard it distinctly ; he looked and saw nothing . 
`` At your feet , '' said the voice . 
He bent down , and saw in the darkness a form which was dragging itself towards him . 
It was crawling along the pavement . 
It was this that had spoken to him . 
The fire-pot allowed him to distinguish a blouse , torn trousers of coarse velvet , bare feet , and something which resembled a pool of blood . 
Marius indistinctly made out a pale head which was lifted towards him and which was saying to him : -- `` You do not recognize me ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Eponine . '' 
Marius bent hastily down . 
It was , in fact , that unhappy child . 
She was dressed in men 's clothes . 
`` How come you here ? 
What are you doing here ? '' 
`` I am dying , '' said she . 
There are words and incidents which arouse dejected beings . 
Marius cried out with a start : -- `` You are wounded ! 
Wait , I will carry you into the room ! 
They will attend to you there . 
Is it serious ? 
How must I take hold of you in order not to hurt you ? 
Where do you suffer ? 
Help ! 
My God ! 
But why did you come hither ? '' 
And he tried to pass his arm under her , in order to raise her . 
She uttered a feeble cry . 
`` Have I hurt you ? '' 
asked Marius . 
`` A little . '' 
`` But I only touched your hand . '' 
She raised her hand to Marius , and in the middle of that hand Marius saw a black hole . 
`` What is the matter with your hand ? '' 
said he . 
`` It is pierced . '' 
`` Pierced ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` What with ? '' 
`` A bullet . '' 
`` How ? '' 
`` Did you see a gun aimed at you ? '' 
`` Yes , and a hand stopping it . '' 
`` It was mine . '' 
Marius was seized with a shudder . 
`` What madness ! 
Poor child ! 
But so much the better , if that is all , it is nothing , let me carry you to a bed . 
They will dress your wound ; one does not die of a pierced hand . '' 
She murmured : -- `` The bullet traversed my hand , but it came out through my back . 
It is useless to remove me from this spot . 
I will tell you how you can care for me better than any surgeon . 
Sit down near me on this stone . '' 
He obeyed ; she laid her head on Marius ' knees , and , without looking at him , she said : -- `` Oh ! 
How good this is ! 
How comfortable this is ! 
There ; I no longer suffer . '' 
She remained silent for a moment , then she turned her face with an effort , and looked at Marius . 
`` Do you know what , Monsieur Marius ? 
It puzzled me because you entered that garden ; it was stupid , because it was I who showed you that house ; and then , I ought to have said to myself that a young man like you -- '' She paused , and overstepping the sombre transitions that undoubtedly existed in her mind , she resumed with a heartrending smile : -- `` You thought me ugly , did n't you ? '' 
She continued : -- `` You see , you are lost ! 
Now , no one can get out of the barricade . 
It was I who led you here , by the way ! 
You are going to die , I count upon that . 
And yet , when I saw them taking aim at you , I put my hand on the muzzle of the gun . 
How queer it is ! 
But it was because I wanted to die before you . 
When I received that bullet , I dragged myself here , no one saw me , no one picked me up , I was waiting for you , I said : ` So he is not coming ! ' 
Oh , if you only knew . 
I bit my blouse , I suffered so ! 
Now I am well . 
Do you remember the day I entered your chamber and when I looked at myself in your mirror , and the day when I came to you on the boulevard near the washerwomen ? 
How the birds sang ! 
That was a long time ago . 
You gave me a hundred sous , and I said to you : ` I do n't want your money . ' 
I hope you picked up your coin ? 
You are not rich . 
I did not think to tell you to pick it up . 
The sun was shining bright , and it was not cold . 
Do you remember , Monsieur Marius ? 
Oh ! 
How happy I am ! 
Every one is going to die . '' 
She had a mad , grave , and heart-breaking air . 
Her torn blouse disclosed her bare throat . 
As she talked , she pressed her pierced hand to her breast , where there was another hole , and whence there spurted from moment to moment a stream of blood , like a jet of wine from an open bung-hole . 
Marius gazed at this unfortunate creature with profound compassion . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she resumed , `` it is coming again , I am stifling ! '' 
She caught up her blouse and bit it , and her limbs stiffened on the pavement . 
At that moment the young cock 's crow executed by little Gavroche resounded through the barricade . 
The child had mounted a table to load his gun , and was singing gayly the song then so popular : -- `` En voyant Lafayette , `` On beholding Lafayette , Le gendarme repete : -- The gendarme repeats : -- Sauvons nous ! 
sauvons nous ! 
Let us flee ! 
let us flee ! 
sauvons nous ! '' 
let us flee ! 
Eponine raised herself and listened ; then she murmured : -- `` It is he . '' 
And turning to Marius : -- `` My brother is here . 
He must not see me . 
He would scold me . '' 
`` Your brother ? '' 
inquired Marius , who was meditating in the most bitter and sorrowful depths of his heart on the duties to the Thenardiers which his father had bequeathed to him ; `` who is your brother ? '' 
`` That little fellow . '' 
`` The one who is singing ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Marius made a movement . 
`` Oh ! 
do n't go away , '' said she , `` it will not be long now . '' 
She was sitting almost upright , but her voice was very low and broken by hiccoughs . 
At intervals , the death rattle interrupted her . 
She put her face as near that of Marius as possible . 
She added with a strange expression : -- `` Listen , I do not wish to play you a trick . 
I have a letter in my pocket for you . 
I was told to put it in the post . 
I kept it . 
I did not want to have it reach you . 
But perhaps you will be angry with me for it when we meet again presently ? 
Take your letter . '' 
She grasped Marius ' hand convulsively with her pierced hand , but she no longer seemed to feel her sufferings . 
She put Marius ' hand in the pocket of her blouse . 
There , in fact , Marius felt a paper . 
`` Take it , '' said she . 
Marius took the letter . 
She made a sign of satisfaction and contentment . 
`` Now , for my trouble , promise me -- '' And she stopped . 
`` What ? '' 
asked Marius . 
`` Promise me ! '' 
`` I promise . '' 
`` Promise to give me a kiss on my brow when I am dead . 
-- I shall feel it . '' 
She dropped her head again on Marius ' knees , and her eyelids closed . 
He thought the poor soul had departed . 
Eponine remained motionless . 
All at once , at the very moment when Marius fancied her asleep forever , she slowly opened her eyes in which appeared the sombre profundity of death , and said to him in a tone whose sweetness seemed already to proceed from another world : -- `` And by the way , Monsieur Marius , I believe that I was a little bit in love with you . '' 
She tried to smile once more and expired . 
GAVROCHE AS A PROFOUND CALCULATOR OF DISTANCES Marius kept his promise . 
He dropped a kiss on that livid brow , where the icy perspiration stood in beads . 
This was no infidelity to Cosette ; it was a gentle and pensive farewell to an unhappy soul . 
It was not without a tremor that he had taken the letter which Eponine had given him . 
He had immediately felt that it was an event of weight . 
He was impatient to read it . 
The heart of man is so constituted that the unhappy child had hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to think of unfolding this paper . 
He laid her gently on the ground , and went away . 
Something told him that he could not peruse that letter in the presence of that body . 
He drew near to a candle in the tap-room . 
It was a small note , folded and sealed with a woman 's elegant care . 
The address was in a woman 's hand and ran : -- `` To Monsieur , Monsieur Marius Pontmercy , at M. Courfeyrac 's , Rue de la Verrerie , No. 16 . '' 
He broke the seal and read : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Such was the innocence of their love that Marius was not even acquainted with Cosette 's handwriting . 
What had taken place may be related in a few words . 
Eponine had been the cause of everything . 
After the evening of the 3d of June she had cherished a double idea , to defeat the projects of her father and the ruffians on the house of the Rue Plumet , and to separate Marius and Cosette . 
She had exchanged rags with the first young scamp she came across who had thought it amusing to dress like a woman , while Eponine disguised herself like a man . 
It was she who had conveyed to Jean Valjean in the Champ de Mars the expressive warning : `` Leave your house . '' 
Jean Valjean had , in fact , returned home , and had said to Cosette : `` We set out this evening and we go to the Rue de l'Homme Arme with Toussaint . 
Next week , we shall be in London . '' 
Cosette , utterly overwhelmed by this unexpected blow , had hastily penned a couple of lines to Marius . 
But how was she to get the letter to the post ? 
She never went out alone , and Toussaint , surprised at such a commission , would certainly show the letter to M. Fauchelevent . 
In this dilemma , Cosette had caught sight through the fence of Eponine in man 's clothes , who now prowled incessantly around the garden . 
Cosette had called to `` this young workman '' and had handed him five francs and the letter , saying : `` Carry this letter immediately to its address . '' 
Eponine had put the letter in her pocket . 
The next day , on the 5th of June , she went to Courfeyrac 's quarters to inquire for Marius , not for the purpose of delivering the letter , but , -- a thing which every jealous and loving soul will comprehend , -- `` to see . '' 
There she had waited for Marius , or at least for Courfeyrac , still for the purpose of seeing . 
When Courfeyrac had told her : `` We are going to the barricades , '' an idea flashed through her mind , to fling herself into that death , as she would have done into any other , and to thrust Marius into it also . 
She had followed Courfeyrac , had made sure of the locality where the barricade was in process of construction ; and , quite certain , since Marius had received no warning , and since she had intercepted the letter , that he would go at dusk to his trysting place for every evening , she had betaken herself to the Rue Plumet , had there awaited Marius , and had sent him , in the name of his friends , the appeal which would , she thought , lead him to the barricade . 
She reckoned on Marius ' despair when he should fail to find Cosette ; she was not mistaken . 
She had returned to the Rue de la Chanvrerie herself . 
What she did there the reader has just seen . 
She died with the tragic joy of jealous hearts who drag the beloved being into their own death , and who say : `` No one shall have him ! '' 
Marius covered Cosette 's letter with kisses . 
So she loved him ! 
For one moment the idea occurred to him that he ought not to die now . 
Then he said to himself : `` She is going away . 
Her father is taking her to England , and my grandfather refuses his consent to the marriage . 
Nothing is changed in our fates . '' 
Dreamers like Marius are subject to supreme attacks of dejection , and desperate resolves are the result . 
The fatigue of living is insupportable ; death is sooner over with . 
Then he reflected that he had still two duties to fulfil : to inform Cosette of his death and send her a final farewell , and to save from the impending catastrophe which was in preparation , that poor child , Eponine 's brother and Thenardier 's son . 
He had a pocket-book about him ; the same one which had contained the note-book in which he had inscribed so many thoughts of love for Cosette . 
He tore out a leaf and wrote on it a few lines in pencil : -- `` Our marriage was impossible . 
I asked my grandfather , he refused ; I have no fortune , neither hast thou . 
I hastened to thee , thou wert no longer there . 
Thou knowest the promise that I gave thee , I shall keep it . 
I die . 
I love thee . 
When thou readest this , my soul will be near thee , and thou wilt smile . '' 
Having nothing wherewith to seal this letter , he contented himself with folding the paper in four , and added the address : -- `` To Mademoiselle Cosette Fauchelevent , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
Having folded the letter , he stood in thought for a moment , drew out his pocket-book again , opened it , and wrote , with the same pencil , these four lines on the first page : -- `` My name is Marius Pontmercy . 
Carry my body to my grandfather , M. Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 , in the Marais . '' 
He put his pocketbook back in his pocket , then he called Gavroche . 
The gamin , at the sound of Marius ' voice , ran up to him with his merry and devoted air . 
`` Will you do something for me ? '' 
`` Anything , '' said Gavroche . 
`` Good God ! 
if it had not been for you , I should have been done for . '' 
`` Do you see this letter ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Take it . 
Leave the barricade instantly '' -LRB- Gavroche began to scratch his ear uneasily -RRB- `` and to-morrow morning , you will deliver it at its address to Mademoiselle Cosette , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
The heroic child replied `` Well , but ! 
in the meanwhile the barricade will be taken , and I shall not be there . '' 
`` The barricade will not be attacked until daybreak , according to all appearances , and will not be taken before to-morrow noon . '' 
The fresh respite which the assailants were granting to the barricade had , in fact , been prolonged . 
It was one of those intermissions which frequently occur in nocturnal combats , which are always followed by an increase of rage . 
`` Well , '' said Gavroche , `` what if I were to go and carry your letter to-morrow ? '' 
`` It will be too late . 
The barricade will probably be blockaded , all the streets will be guarded , and you will not be able to get out . 
Go at once . '' 
Gavroche could think of no reply to this , and stood there in indecision , scratching his ear sadly . 
All at once , he took the letter with one of those birdlike movements which were common with him . 
`` All right , '' said he . 
And he started off at a run through Mondetour lane . 
An idea had occurred to Gavroche which had brought him to a decision , but he had not mentioned it for fear that Marius might offer some objection to it . 
This was the idea : -- `` It is barely midnight , the Rue de l'Homme Arme is not far off ; I will go and deliver the letter at once , and I shall get back in time . '' 
A DRINKER IS A BABBLER What are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrections of the soul ? 
Man is a depth still greater than the people . 
Jean Valjean at that very moment was the prey of a terrible upheaval . 
Every sort of gulf had opened again within him . 
He also was trembling , like Paris , on the brink of an obscure and formidable revolution . 
A few hours had sufficed to bring this about . 
His destiny and his conscience had suddenly been covered with gloom . 
Of him also , as well as of Paris , it might have been said : `` Two principles are face to face . 
The white angel and the black angel are about to seize each other on the bridge of the abyss . 
Which of the two will hurl the other over ? 
Who will carry the day ? '' 
On the evening preceding this same 5th of June , Jean Valjean , accompanied by Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
A change awaited him there . 
Cosette had not quitted the Rue Plumet without making an effort at resistance . 
For the first time since they had lived side by side , Cosette 's will and the will of Jean Valjean had proved to be distinct , and had been in opposition , at least , if they had not clashed . 
There had been objections on one side and inflexibility on the other . 
The abrupt advice : `` Leave your house , '' hurled at Jean Valjean by a stranger , had alarmed him to the extent of rendering him peremptory . 
He thought that he had been traced and followed . 
Cosette had been obliged to give way . 
Both had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme without opening their lips , and without uttering a word , each being absorbed in his own personal preoccupation ; Jean Valjean so uneasy that he did not notice Cosette 's sadness , Cosette so sad that she did not notice Jean Valjean 's uneasiness . 
Jean Valjean had taken Toussaint with him , a thing which he had never done in his previous absences . 
He perceived the possibility of not returning to the Rue Plumet , and he could neither leave Toussaint behind nor confide his secret to her . 
Besides , he felt that she was devoted and trustworthy . 
Treachery between master and servant begins in curiosity . 
Now Toussaint , as though she had been destined to be Jean Valjean 's servant , was not curious . 
She stammered in her peasant dialect of Barneville : `` I am made so ; I do my work ; the rest is no affair of mine . '' 
In this departure from the Rue Plumet , which had been almost a flight , Jean Valjean had carried away nothing but the little embalmed valise , baptized by Cosette `` the inseparable . '' 
Full trunks would have required porters , and porters are witnesses . 
A fiacre had been summoned to the door on the Rue de Babylone , and they had taken their departure . 
It was with difficulty that Toussaint had obtained permission to pack up a little linen and clothes and a few toilet articles . 
Cosette had taken only her portfolio and her blotting-book . 
Jean Valjean , with a view to augmenting the solitude and the mystery of this departure , had arranged to quit the pavilion of the Rue Plumet only at dusk , which had allowed Cosette time to write her note to Marius . 
They had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme after night had fully fallen . 
They had gone to bed in silence . 
The lodgings in the Rue de l'Homme Arme were situated on a back court , on the second floor , and were composed of two sleeping-rooms , a dining-room and a kitchen adjoining the dining-room , with a garret where there was a folding-bed , and which fell to Toussaint 's share . 
The dining-room was an antechamber as well , and separated the two bedrooms . 
The apartment was provided with all necessary utensils . 
People re-acquire confidence as foolishly as they lose it ; human nature is so constituted . 
Hardly had Jean Valjean reached the Rue de l'Homme Arme when his anxiety was lightened and by degrees dissipated . 
There are soothing spots which act in some sort mechanically on the mind . 
An obscure street , peaceable inhabitants . 
Jean Valjean experienced an indescribable contagion of tranquillity in that alley of ancient Paris , which is so narrow that it is barred against carriages by a transverse beam placed on two posts , which is deaf and dumb in the midst of the clamorous city , dimly lighted at mid-day , and is , so to speak , incapable of emotions between two rows of lofty houses centuries old , which hold their peace like ancients as they are . 
There was a touch of stagnant oblivion in that street . 
Jean Valjean drew his breath once more there . 
How could he be found there ? 
His first care was to place the inseparable beside him . 
He slept well . 
Night brings wisdom ; we may add , night soothes . 
On the following morning he awoke in a mood that was almost gay . 
He thought the dining-room charming , though it was hideous , furnished with an old round table , a long sideboard surmounted by a slanting mirror , a dilapidated arm-chair , and several plain chairs which were encumbered with Toussaint 's packages . 
In one of these packages Jean Valjean 's uniform of a National Guard was visible through a rent . 
As for Cosette , she had had Toussaint take some broth to her room , and did not make her appearance until evening . 
About five o'clock , Toussaint , who was going and coming and busying herself with the tiny establishment , set on the table a cold chicken , which Cosette , out of deference to her father , consented to glance at . 
That done , Cosette , under the pretext of an obstinate sick headache , had bade Jean Valjean good night and had shut herself up in her chamber . 
Jean Valjean had eaten a wing of the chicken with a good appetite , and with his elbows on the table , having gradually recovered his serenity , had regained possession of his sense of security . 
While he was discussing this modest dinner , he had , twice or thrice , noticed in a confused way , Toussaint 's stammering words as she said to him : `` Monsieur , there is something going on , they are fighting in Paris . '' 
But absorbed in a throng of inward calculations , he had paid no heed to it . 
To tell the truth , he had not heard her . 
He rose and began to pace from the door to the window and from the window to the door , growing ever more serene . 
With this calm , Cosette , his sole anxiety , recurred to his thoughts . 
Not that he was troubled by this headache , a little nervous crisis , a young girl 's fit of sulks , the cloud of a moment , there would be nothing left of it in a day or two ; but he meditated on the future , and , as was his habit , he thought of it with pleasure . 
After all , he saw no obstacle to their happy life resuming its course . 
At certain hours , everything seems impossible , at others everything appears easy ; Jean Valjean was in the midst of one of these good hours . 
They generally succeed the bad ones , as day follows night , by virtue of that law of succession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation of nature , and which superficial minds call antithesis . 
In this peaceful street where he had taken refuge , Jean Valjean got rid of all that had been troubling him for some time past . 
This very fact , that he had seen many shadows , made him begin to perceive a little azure . 
To have quitted the Rue Plumet without complications or incidents was one good step already accomplished . 
Perhaps it would be wise to go abroad , if only for a few months , and to set out for London . 
Well , they would go . 
What difference did it make to him whether he was in France or in England , provided he had Cosette beside him ? 
Cosette was his nation . 
Cosette sufficed for his happiness ; the idea that he , perhaps , did not suffice for Cosette 's happiness , that idea which had formerly been the cause of his fever and sleeplessness , did not even present itself to his mind . 
He was in a state of collapse from all his past sufferings , and he was fully entered on optimism . 
Cosette was by his side , she seemed to be his ; an optical illusion which every one has experienced . 
He arranged in his own mind , with all sorts of felicitous devices , his departure for England with Cosette , and he beheld his felicity reconstituted wherever he pleased , in the perspective of his revery . 
As he paced to and fro with long strides , his glance suddenly encountered something strange . 
In the inclined mirror facing him which surmounted the sideboard , he saw the four lines which follow : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Jean Valjean halted , perfectly haggard . 
Cosette on her arrival had placed her blotting-book on the sideboard in front of the mirror , and , utterly absorbed in her agony of grief , had forgotten it and left it there , without even observing that she had left it wide open , and open at precisely the page on which she had laid to dry the four lines which she had penned , and which she had given in charge of the young workman in the Rue Plumet . 
The writing had been printed off on the blotter . 
The mirror reflected the writing . 
The result was , what is called in geometry , the symmetrical image ; so that the writing , reversed on the blotter , was righted in the mirror and presented its natural appearance ; and Jean Valjean had beneath his eyes the letter written by Cosette to Marius on the preceding evening . 
It was simple and withering . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to the mirror . 
He read the four lines again , but he did not believe them . 
They produced on him the effect of appearing in a flash of lightning . 
It was a hallucination , it was impossible . 
It was not so . 
Little by little , his perceptions became more precise ; he looked at Cosette 's blotting-book , and the consciousness of the reality returned to him . 
He caught up the blotter and said : `` It comes from there . '' 
He feverishly examined the four lines imprinted on the blotter , the reversal of the letters converted into an odd scrawl , and he saw no sense in it . 
Then he said to himself : `` But this signifies nothing ; there is nothing written here . '' 
And he drew a long breath with inexpressible relief . 
Who has not experienced those foolish joys in horrible instants ? 
The soul does not surrender to despair until it has exhausted all illusions . 
He held the blotter in his hand and contemplated it in stupid delight , almost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been the dupe . 
All at once his eyes fell upon the mirror again , and again he beheld the vision . 
There were the four lines outlined with inexorable clearness . 
This time it was no mirage . 
The recurrence of a vision is a reality ; it was palpable , it was the writing restored in the mirror . 
He understood . 
Jean Valjean tottered , dropped the blotter , and fell into the old arm-chair beside the buffet , with drooping head , and glassy eyes , in utter bewilderment . 
He told himself that it was plain , that the light of the world had been eclipsed forever , and that Cosette had written that to some one . 
Then he heard his soul , which had become terrible once more , give vent to a dull roar in the gloom . 
Try then the effect of taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage ! 
Strange and sad to say , at that very moment , Marius had not yet received Cosette 's letter ; chance had treacherously carried it to Jean Valjean before delivering it to Marius . 
Up to that day , Jean Valjean had not been vanquished by trial . 
He had been subjected to fearful proofs ; no violence of bad fortune had been spared him ; the ferocity of fate , armed with all vindictiveness and all social scorn , had taken him for her prey and had raged against him . 
He had accepted every extremity when it had been necessary ; he had sacrificed his inviolability as a reformed man , had yielded up his liberty , risked his head , lost everything , suffered everything , and he had remained disinterested and stoical to such a point that he might have been thought to be absent from himself like a martyr . 
His conscience inured to every assault of destiny , might have appeared to be forever impregnable . 
Well , any one who had beheld his spiritual self would have been obliged to concede that it weakened at that moment . 
It was because , of all the tortures which he had undergone in the course of this long inquisition to which destiny had doomed him , this was the most terrible . 
Never had such pincers seized him hitherto . 
He felt the mysterious stirring of all his latent sensibilities . 
He felt the plucking at the strange chord . 
Alas ! 
the supreme trial , let us say rather , the only trial , is the loss of the beloved being . 
Poor old Jean Valjean certainly did not love Cosette otherwise than as a father ; but we have already remarked , above , that into this paternity the widowhood of his life had introduced all the shades of love ; he loved Cosette as his daughter , and he loved her as his mother , and he loved her as his sister ; and , as he had never had either a woman to love or a wife , as nature is a creditor who accepts no protest , that sentiment also , the most impossible to lose , was mingled with the rest , vague , ignorant , pure with the purity of blindness , unconscious , celestial , angelic , divine ; less like a sentiment than like an instinct , less like an instinct than like an imperceptible and invisible but real attraction ; and love , properly speaking , was , in his immense tenderness for Cosette , like the thread of gold in the mountain , concealed and virgin . 
Let the reader recall the situation of heart which we have already indicated . 
No marriage was possible between them ; not even that of souls ; and yet , it is certain that their destinies were wedded . 
With the exception of Cosette , that is to say , with the exception of a childhood , Jean Valjean had never , in the whole of his long life , known anything of that which may be loved . 
The passions and loves which succeed each other had not produced in him those successive green growths , tender green or dark green , which can be seen in foliage which passes through the winter and in men who pass fifty . 
In short , and we have insisted on it more than once , all this interior fusion , all this whole , of which the sum total was a lofty virtue , ended in rendering Jean Valjean a father to Cosette . 
A strange father , forged from the grandfather , the son , the brother , and the husband , that existed in Jean Valjean ; a father in whom there was included even a mother ; a father who loved Cosette and adored her , and who held that child as his light , his home , his family , his country , his paradise . 
Thus when he saw that the end had absolutely come , that she was escaping from him , that she was slipping from his hands , that she was gliding from him , like a cloud , like water , when he had before his eyes this crushing proof : `` another is the goal of her heart , another is the wish of her life ; there is a dearest one , I am no longer anything but her father , I no longer exist '' ; when he could no longer doubt , when he said to himself : `` She is going away from me ! '' 
the grief which he felt surpassed the bounds of possibility . 
To have done all that he had done for the purpose of ending like this ! 
And the very idea of being nothing ! 
Then , as we have just said , a quiver of revolt ran through him from head to foot . 
He felt , even in the very roots of his hair , the immense reawakening of egotism , and the I in this man 's abyss howled . 
There is such a thing as the sudden giving way of the inward subsoil . 
A despairing certainty does not make its way into a man without thrusting aside and breaking certain profound elements which , in some cases , are the very man himself . 
Grief , when it attains this shape , is a headlong flight of all the forces of the conscience . 
These are fatal crises . 
Few among us emerge from them still like ourselves and firm in duty . 
When the limit of endurance is overstepped , the most imperturbable virtue is disconcerted . 
Jean Valjean took the blotter again , and convinced himself afresh ; he remained bowed and as though petrified and with staring eyes , over those four unobjectionable lines ; and there arose within him such a cloud that one might have thought that everything in this soul was crumbling away . 
He examined this revelation , athwart the exaggerations of revery , with an apparent and terrifying calmness , for it is a fearful thing when a man 's calmness reaches the coldness of the statue . 
He measured the terrible step which his destiny had taken without his having a suspicion of the fact ; he recalled his fears of the preceding summer , so foolishly dissipated ; he recognized the precipice , it was still the same ; only , Jean Valjean was no longer on the brink , he was at the bottom of it . 
The unprecedented and heart-rending thing about it was that he had fallen without perceiving it . 
All the light of his life had departed , while he still fancied that he beheld the sun . 
His instinct did not hesitate . 
He put together certain circumstances , certain dates , certain blushes and certain pallors on Cosette 's part , and he said to himself : `` It is he . '' 
The divination of despair is a sort of mysterious bow which never misses its aim . 
He struck Marius with his first conjecture . 
He did not know the name , but he found the man instantly . 
He distinctly perceived , in the background of the implacable conjuration of his memories , the unknown prowler of the Luxembourg , that wretched seeker of love adventures , that idler of romance , that idiot , that coward , for it is cowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who have beside them a father who loves them . 
After he had thoroughly verified the fact that this young man was at the bottom of this situation , and that everything proceeded from that quarter , he , Jean Valjean , the regenerated man , the man who had so labored over his soul , the man who had made so many efforts to resolve all life , all misery , and all unhappiness into love , looked into his own breast and there beheld a spectre , Hate . 
Great griefs contain something of dejection . 
They discourage one with existence . 
The man into whom they enter feels something within him withdraw from him . 
In his youth , their visits are lugubrious ; later on they are sinister . 
Alas , if despair is a fearful thing when the blood is hot , when the hair is black , when the head is erect on the body like the flame on the torch , when the roll of destiny still retains its full thickness , when the heart , full of desirable love , still possesses beats which can be returned to it , when one has time for redress , when all women and all smiles and all the future and all the horizon are before one , when the force of life is complete , what is it in old age , when the years hasten on , growing ever paler , to that twilight hour when one begins to behold the stars of the tomb ? 
While he was meditating , Toussaint entered . 
Jean Valjean rose and asked her : -- `` In what quarter is it ? 
Do you know ? '' 
Toussaint was struck dumb , and could only answer him : -- `` What is it , sir ? '' 
Jean Valjean began again : `` Did you not tell me that just now that there is fighting going on ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , sir , '' replied Toussaint . 
`` It is in the direction of Saint-Merry . '' 
There is a mechanical movement which comes to us , unconsciously , from the most profound depths of our thought . 
It was , no doubt , under the impulse of a movement of this sort , and of which he was hardly conscious , that Jean Valjean , five minutes later , found himself in the street . 
Bareheaded , he sat upon the stone post at the door of his house . 
He seemed to be listening . 
Night had come . 
THE STREET URCHIN AN ENEMY OF LIGHT How long did he remain thus ? 
What was the ebb and flow of this tragic meditation ? 
Did he straighten up ? 
Did he remain bowed ? 
Had he been bent to breaking ? 
Could he still rise and regain his footing in his conscience upon something solid ? 
He probably would not have been able to tell himself . 
The street was deserted . 
A few uneasy bourgeois , who were rapidly returning home , hardly saw him . 
Each one for himself in times of peril . 
The lamp-lighter came as usual to light the lantern which was situated precisely opposite the door of No. 7 , and then went away . 
Jean Valjean would not have appeared like a living man to any one who had examined him in that shadow . 
He sat there on the post of his door , motionless as a form of ice . 
There is congealment in despair . 
The alarm bells and a vague and stormy uproar were audible . 
In the midst of all these convulsions of the bell mingled with the revolt , the clock of Saint-Paul struck eleven , gravely and without haste ; for the tocsin is man ; the hour is God . 
The passage of the hour produced no effect on Jean Valjean ; Jean Valjean did not stir . 
Still , at about that moment , a brusque report burst forth in the direction of the Halles , a second yet more violent followed ; it was probably that attack on the barricade in the Rue de la Chanvrerie which we have just seen repulsed by Marius . 
At this double discharge , whose fury seemed augmented by the stupor of the night , Jean Valjean started ; he rose , turning towards the quarter whence the noise proceeded ; then he fell back upon the post again , folded his arms , and his head slowly sank on his bosom again . 
He resumed his gloomy dialogue with himself . 
All at once , he raised his eyes ; some one was walking in the street , he heard steps near him . 
He looked , and by the light of the lanterns , in the direction of the street which ran into the Rue-aux-Archives , he perceived a young , livid , and beaming face . 
Gavroche had just arrived in the Rue l'Homme Arme . 
Gavroche was staring into the air , apparently in search of something . 
He saw Jean Valjean perfectly well but he took no notice of him . 
Gavroche after staring into the air , stared below ; he raised himself on tiptoe , and felt of the doors and windows of the ground floor ; they were all shut , bolted , and padlocked . 
After having authenticated the fronts of five or six barricaded houses in this manner , the urchin shrugged his shoulders , and took himself to task in these terms : -- `` Pardi ! '' 
Then he began to stare into the air again . 
Jean Valjean , who , an instant previously , in his then state of mind , would not have spoken to or even answered any one , felt irresistibly impelled to accost that child . 
`` What is the matter with you , my little fellow ? '' 
he said . 
`` The matter with me is that I am hungry , '' replied Gavroche frankly . 
And he added : `` Little fellow yourself . '' 
Jean Valjean fumbled in his fob and pulled out a five-franc piece . 
But Gavroche , who was of the wagtail species , and who skipped vivaciously from one gesture to another , had just picked up a stone . 
He had caught sight of the lantern . 
`` See here , '' said he , `` you still have your lanterns here . 
You are disobeying the regulations , my friend . 
This is disorderly . 
Smash that for me . '' 
And he flung the stone at the lantern , whose broken glass fell with such a clatter that the bourgeois in hiding behind their curtains in the opposite house cried : `` There is ` Ninety-three ' come again . '' 
The lantern oscillated violently , and went out . 
The street had suddenly become black . 
`` That 's right , old street , '' ejaculated Gavroche , `` put on your night-cap . '' 
And turning to Jean Valjean : -- `` What do you call that gigantic monument that you have there at the end of the street ? 
It 's the Archives , is n't it ? 
I must crumble up those big stupids of pillars a bit and make a nice barricade out of them . '' 
Jean Valjean stepped up to Gavroche . 
`` Poor creature , '' he said in a low tone , and speaking to himself , `` he is hungry . '' 
And he laid the hundred-sou piece in his hand . 
Gavroche raised his face , astonished at the size of this sou ; he stared at it in the darkness , and the whiteness of the big sou dazzled him . 
He knew five-franc pieces by hearsay ; their reputation was agreeable to him ; he was delighted to see one close to . 
He said : -- `` Let us contemplate the tiger . '' 
He gazed at it for several minutes in ecstasy ; then , turning to Jean Valjean , he held out the coin to him , and said majestically to him : -- `` Bourgeois , I prefer to smash lanterns . 
Take back your ferocious beast . 
You ca n't bribe me . 
That has got five claws ; but it does n't scratch me . '' 
`` Have you a mother ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche replied : -- `` More than you have , perhaps . '' 
`` Well , '' returned Jean Valjean , `` keep the money for your mother ! '' 
Gavroche was touched . 
Moreover , he had just noticed that the man who was addressing him had no hat , and this inspired him with confidence . 
`` Truly , '' said he , `` so it was n't to keep me from breaking the lanterns ? '' 
`` Break whatever you please . '' 
`` You 're a fine man , '' said Gavroche . 
And he put the five-franc piece into one of his pockets . 
His confidence having increased , he added : -- `` Do you belong in this street ? '' 
`` Yes , why ? '' 
`` Can you tell me where No. 7 is ? '' 
`` What do you want with No. 7 ? '' 
Here the child paused , he feared that he had said too much ; he thrust his nails energetically into his hair and contented himself with replying : -- `` Ah ! 
Here it is . '' 
An idea flashed through Jean Valjean 's mind . 
Anguish does have these gleams . 
He said to the lad : -- `` Are you the person who is bringing a letter that I am expecting ? '' 
`` You ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` You are not a woman . '' 
`` The letter is for Mademoiselle Cosette , is it not ? '' 
`` Cosette , '' muttered Gavroche . 
`` Yes , I believe that is the queer name . '' 
`` Well , '' resumed Jean Valjean , `` I am the person to whom you are to deliver the letter . 
Give it here . '' 
`` In that case , you must know that I was sent from the barricade . '' 
`` Of course , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche engulfed his hand in another of his pockets and drew out a paper folded in four . 
Then he made the military salute . 
`` Respect for despatches , '' said he . 
`` It comes from the Provisional Government . '' 
`` Give it to me , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Gavroche held the paper elevated above his head . 
`` Do n't go and fancy it 's a love letter . 
It is for a woman , but it 's for the people . 
We men fight and we respect the fair sex . 
We are not as they are in fine society , where there are lions who send chickens -LSB- 55 -RSB- to camels . '' 
-LSB- 55 -RSB- Love letters . 
`` Give it to me . '' 
`` After all , '' continued Gavroche , `` you have the air of an honest man . '' 
`` Give it to me quick . '' 
`` Catch hold of it . '' 
And he handed the paper to Jean Valjean . 
`` And make haste , Monsieur What 's - your-name , for Mamselle Cosette is waiting . '' 
Gavroche was satisfied with himself for having produced this remark . 
Jean Valjean began again : -- `` Is it to Saint-Merry that the answer is to be sent ? '' 
`` There you are making some of those bits of pastry vulgarly called brioches -LSB- blunders -RSB- . 
This letter comes from the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and I 'm going back there . 
Good evening , citizen . '' 
That said , Gavroche took himself off , or , to describe it more exactly , fluttered away in the direction whence he had come with a flight like that of an escaped bird . 
He plunged back into the gloom as though he made a hole in it , with the rigid rapidity of a projectile ; the alley of l'Homme Arme became silent and solitary once more ; in a twinkling , that strange child , who had about him something of the shadow and of the dream , had buried himself in the mists of the rows of black houses , and was lost there , like smoke in the dark ; and one might have thought that he had dissipated and vanished , had there not taken place , a few minutes after his disappearance , a startling shiver of glass , and had not the magnificent crash of a lantern rattling down on the pavement once more abruptly awakened the indignant bourgeois . 
It was Gavroche upon his way through the Rue du Chaume . 
WHILE COSETTE AND TOUSSAINT ARE ASLEEP Jean Valjean went into the house with Marius ' letter . 
He groped his way up the stairs , as pleased with the darkness as an owl who grips his prey , opened and shut his door softly , listened to see whether he could hear any noise , -- made sure that , to all appearances , Cosette and Toussaint were asleep , and plunged three or four matches into the bottle of the Fumade lighter before he could evoke a spark , so greatly did his hand tremble . 
What he had just done smacked of theft . 
At last the candle was lighted ; he leaned his elbows on the table , unfolded the paper , and read . 
In violent emotions , one does not read , one flings to the earth , so to speak , the paper which one holds , one clutches it like a victim , one crushes it , one digs into it the nails of one 's wrath , or of one 's joy ; one hastens to the end , one leaps to the beginning ; attention is at fever heat ; it takes up in the gross , as it were , the essential points ; it seizes on one point , and the rest disappears . 
In Marius ' note to Cosette , Jean Valjean saw only these words : -- `` I die . 
When thou readest this , my soul will be near thee . '' 
In the presence of these two lines , he was horribly dazzled ; he remained for a moment , crushed , as it were , by the change of emotion which was taking place within him , he stared at Marius ' note with a sort of intoxicated amazement , he had before his eyes that splendor , the death of a hated individual . 
He uttered a frightful cry of inward joy . 
So it was all over . 
The catastrophe had arrived sooner than he had dared to hope . 
The being who obstructed his destiny was disappearing . 
That man had taken himself off of his own accord , freely , willingly . 
This man was going to his death , and he , Jean Valjean , had had no hand in the matter , and it was through no fault of his . 
Perhaps , even , he is already dead . 
Here his fever entered into calculations . 
No , he is not dead yet . 
The letter had evidently been intended for Cosette to read on the following morning ; after the two discharges that were heard between eleven o'clock and midnight , nothing more has taken place ; the barricade will not be attacked seriously until daybreak ; but that makes no difference , from the moment when `` that man '' is concerned in this war , he is lost ; he is caught in the gearing . 
Jean Valjean felt himself delivered . 
So he was about to find himself alone with Cosette once more . 
The rivalry would cease ; the future was beginning again . 
He had but to keep this note in his pocket . 
Cosette would never know what had become of that man . 
All that there requires to be done is to let things take their own course . 
This man can not escape . 
If he is not already dead , it is certain that he is about to die . 
What good fortune ! 
Having said all this to himself , he became gloomy . 
Then he went down stairs and woke up the porter . 
About an hour later , Jean Valjean went out in the complete costume of a National Guard , and with his arms . 
The porter had easily found in the neighborhood the wherewithal to complete his equipment . 
He had a loaded gun and a cartridge-box filled with cartridges . 
He strode off in the direction of the markets . 
GAVROCHE 'S EXCESS OF ZEAL In the meantime , Gavroche had had an adventure . 
Gavroche , after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the Rue du Chaume , entered the Rue des Vielles-Haudriettes , and not seeing `` even a cat '' there , he thought the opportunity a good one to strike up all the song of which he was capable . 
His march , far from being retarded by his singing , was accelerated by it . 
He began to sow along the sleeping or terrified houses these incendiary couplets : -- `` L'oiseau medit dans les charmilles , Et pretend qu ` hier Atala Avec un Russe s ` en alla . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Mon ami Pierrot , tu babilles , Parce que l'autre jour Mila Cogna sa vitre et m ` appela , Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Les drolesses sont fort gentilles , Leur poison qui m ` ensorcela Griserait Monsieur Orfila . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` J'aime l'amour et les bisbilles , J'aime Agnes , j' aime Pamela , Lisa en m ` allumant se brula . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Jadis , quand je vis les mantilles De Suzette et de Zeila , Mon ame aleurs plis se mela , Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Amour , quand dans l'ombre ou tu brilles , Tu coiffes de roses Lola , Je me damnerais pour cela . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Jeanne a ton miroir tu t ` habilles ! 
Mon coeur un beau jour s ` envola . 
Je crois que c'est Jeanne qui l' a. Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Le soir , en sortant des quadrilles , Je montre aux etoiles Stella , Et je leur dis : ` Regardez-la . ' 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . '' 
-LSB- 56 -RSB- -LSB- 56 -RSB- `` The bird slanders in the elms , And pretends that yesterday , Atala Went off with a Russian , Where fair maids go . 
Lon la . 
My friend Pierrot , thou pratest , because Mila knocked at her pane the other day and called me . 
The jades are very charming , their poison which bewitched me would intoxicate Monsieur Orfila . 
I 'm fond of love and its bickerings , I love Agnes , I love Pamela , Lise burned herself in setting me aflame . 
In former days when I saw the mantillas of Suzette and of Zeila , my soul mingled with their folds . 
Love , when thou gleamest in the dark thou crownest Lola with roses , I would lose my soul for that . 
Jeanne , at thy mirror thou deckest thyself ! 
One fine day , my heart flew forth . 
I think that it is Jeanne who has it . 
At night , when I come from the quadrilles , I show Stella to the stars , and I say to them : `` Behold her . '' 
Where fair maids go , lon la . 
Gavroche , as he sang , was lavish of his pantomime . 
Gesture is the strong point of the refrain . 
His face , an inexhaustible repertory of masks , produced grimaces more convulsing and more fantastic than the rents of a cloth torn in a high gale . 
Unfortunately , as he was alone , and as it was night , this was neither seen nor even visible . 
Such wastes of riches do occur . 
All at once , he stopped short . 
`` Let us interrupt the romance , '' said he . 
His feline eye had just descried , in the recess of a carriage door , what is called in painting , an ensemble , that is to say , a person and a thing ; the thing was a hand-cart , the person was a man from Auvergene who was sleeping therein . 
The shafts of the cart rested on the pavement , and the Auvergnat 's head was supported against the front of the cart . 
His body was coiled up on this inclined plane and his feet touched the ground . 
Gavroche , with his experience of the things of this world , recognized a drunken man . 
He was some corner errand-man who had drunk too much and was sleeping too much . 
`` There now , '' thought Gavroche , `` that 's what the summer nights are good for . 
We 'll take the cart for the Republic , and leave the Auvergnat for the Monarchy . '' 
His mind had just been illuminated by this flash of light : -- `` How bully that cart would look on our barricade ! '' 
The Auvergnat was snoring . 
Gavroche gently tugged at the cart from behind , and at the Auvergnat from the front , that is to say , by the feet , and at the expiration of another minute the imperturbable Auvergnat was reposing flat on the pavement . 
The cart was free . 
Gavroche , habituated to facing the unexpected in all quarters , had everything about him . 
He fumbled in one of his pockets , and pulled from it a scrap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from some carpenter . 
He wrote : -- `` French Republic . '' 
`` Received thy cart . '' 
And he signed it : `` GAVROCHE . '' 
That done , he put the paper in the pocket of the still snoring Auvergnat 's velvet vest , seized the cart shafts in both hands , and set off in the direction of the Halles , pushing the cart before him at a hard gallop with a glorious and triumphant uproar . 
This was perilous . 
There was a post at the Royal Printing Establishment . 
Gavroche did not think of this . 
This post was occupied by the National Guards of the suburbs . 
The squad began to wake up , and heads were raised from camp beds . 
Two street lanterns broken in succession , that ditty sung at the top of the lungs . 
This was a great deal for those cowardly streets , which desire to go to sleep at sunset , and which put the extinguisher on their candles at such an early hour . 
For the last hour , that boy had been creating an uproar in that peaceable arrondissement , the uproar of a fly in a bottle . 
The sergeant of the banlieue lent an ear . 
He waited . 
He was a prudent man . 
The mad rattle of the cart , filled to overflowing the possible measure of waiting , and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance . 
`` There 's a whole band of them there ! '' 
said he , `` let us proceed gently . '' 
It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had emerged from its box and that it was stalking abroad through the quarter . 
And the sergeant ventured out of the post with cautious tread . 
All at once , Gavroche , pushing his cart in front of him , and at the very moment when he was about to turn into the Rue des Vielles-Haudriettes , found himself face to face with a uniform , a shako , a plume , and a gun . 
For the second time , he stopped short . 
`` Hullo , '' said he , `` it 's him . 
Good day , public order . '' 
Gavroche 's amazement was always brief and speedily thawed . 
`` Where are you going , you rascal ? '' 
shouted the sergeant . 
`` Citizen , '' retorted Gavroche , `` I have n't called you ` bourgeois ' yet . 
Why do you insult me ? '' 
`` Where are you going , you rogue ? '' 
`` Monsieur , '' retorted Gavroche , `` perhaps you were a man of wit yesterday , but you have degenerated this morning . '' 
`` I ask you where are you going , you villain ? '' 
Gavroche replied : -- `` You speak prettily . 
Really , no one would suppose you as old as you are . 
You ought to sell all your hair at a hundred francs apiece . 
That would yield you five hundred francs . '' 
`` Where are you going ? 
Where are you going ? 
Where are you going , bandit ? '' 
Gavroche retorted again : -- `` What villainous words ! 
You must wipe your mouth better the first time that they give you suck . '' 
The sergeant lowered his bayonet . 
`` Will you tell me where you are going , you wretch ? '' 
`` General , '' said Gavroche `` I 'm on my way to look for a doctor for my wife who is in labor . '' 
`` To arms ! '' 
shouted the sergeant . 
The master-stroke of strong men consists in saving themselves by the very means that have ruined them ; Gavroche took in the whole situation at a glance . 
It was the cart which had told against him , it was the cart 's place to protect him . 
At the moment when the sergeant was on the point of making his descent on Gavroche , the cart , converted into a projectile and launched with all the latter 's might , rolled down upon him furiously , and the sergeant , struck full in the stomach , tumbled over backwards into the gutter while his gun went off in the air . 
The men of the post had rushed out pell-mell at the sergeant 's shout ; the shot brought on a general random discharge , after which they reloaded their weapons and began again . 
This blind-man 's - buff musketry lasted for a quarter of an hour and killed several panes of glass . 
In the meanwhile , Gavroche , who had retraced his steps at full speed , halted five or six streets distant and seated himself , panting , on the stone post which forms the corner of the Enfants-Rouges . 
He listened . 
After panting for a few minutes , he turned in the direction where the fusillade was raging , lifted his left hand to a level with his nose and thrust it forward three times , as he slapped the back of his head with his right hand ; an imperious gesture in which Parisian street-urchindom has condensed French irony , and which is evidently efficacious , since it has already lasted half a century . 
This gayety was troubled by one bitter reflection . 
`` Yes , '' said he , `` I 'm splitting with laughter , I 'm twisting with delight , I abound in joy , but I 'm losing my way , I shall have to take a roundabout way . 
If I only reach the barricade in season ! '' 
Thereupon he set out again on a run . 
And as he ran : -- `` Ah , by the way , where was I ? '' 
said he . 
And he resumed his ditty , as he plunged rapidly through the streets , and this is what died away in the gloom : -- `` Mais il reste encore des bastilles , Et je vais mettre le hola Dans l'orde public que voila . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Quelqu'un veut-il jouer aux quilles ? 
Tout l'ancien monde s ` ecroula Quand la grosse boule roula . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Vieux bon peuple , a coups de bequilles , Cassons ce Louvre ou s ` etala La monarchie en falbala . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Nous en avons force les grilles , Le roi Charles-Dix ce jour la , Tenait mal et se decolla . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . '' 
-LSB- 57 -RSB- -LSB- 57 -RSB- But some prisons still remain , and I am going to put a stop to this sort of public order . 
Does any one wish to play at skittles ? 
The whole ancient world fell in ruin , when the big ball rolled . 
Good old folks , let us smash with our crutches that Louvre where the monarchy displayed itself in furbelows . 
We have forced its gates . 
On that day , King Charles X. did not stick well and came unglued . 
The post 's recourse to arms was not without result . 
The cart was conquered , the drunken man was taken prisoner . 
The first was put in the pound , the second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils of war as an accomplice . 
The public ministry of the day proved its indefatigable zeal in the defence of society , in this instance . 
Gavroche 's adventure , which has lingered as a tradition in the quarters of the Temple , is one of the most terrible souvenirs of the elderly bourgeois of the Marais , and is entitled in their memories : `` The nocturnal attack by the post of the Royal Printing Establishment . '' 
-LSB- The end of Volume IV . 
`` Saint Denis '' -RSB- VOLUME IV JEAN VALJEAN THE CHARYBDIS OF THE FAUBOURG SAINT ANTOINE AND THE SCYLLA OF THE FAUBOURG DU TEMPLE The two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladies can name do not belong to the period in which the action of this work is laid . 
These two barricades , both of them symbols , under two different aspects , of a redoubtable situation , sprang from the earth at the time of the fatal insurrection of June , 1848 , the greatest war of the streets that history has ever beheld . 
It sometimes happens that , even contrary to principles , even contrary to liberty , equality , and fraternity , even contrary to the universal vote , even contrary to the government , by all for all , from the depths of its anguish , of its discouragements and its destitutions , of its fevers , of its distresses , of its miasmas , of its ignorances , of its darkness , that great and despairing body , the rabble , protests against , and that the populace wages battle against , the people . 
Beggars attack the common right ; the ochlocracy rises against demos . 
These are melancholy days ; for there is always a certain amount of night even in this madness , there is suicide in this duel , and those words which are intended to be insults -- beggars , canaille , ochlocracy , populace -- exhibit , alas ! 
rather the fault of those who reign than the fault of those who suffer ; rather the fault of the privileged than the fault of the disinherited . 
For our own part , we never pronounce those words without pain and without respect , for when philosophy fathoms the facts to which they correspond , it often finds many a grandeur beside these miseries . 
Athens was an ochlocracy ; the beggars were the making of Holland ; the populace saved Rome more than once ; and the rabble followed Jesus Christ . 
There is no thinker who has not at times contemplated the magnificences of the lower classes . 
It was of this rabble that Saint Jerome was thinking , no doubt , and of all these poor people and all these vagabonds and all these miserable people whence sprang the apostles and the martyrs , when he uttered this mysterious saying : `` Fex urbis , lex orbis , '' -- the dregs of the city , the law of the earth . 
The exasperations of this crowd which suffers and bleeds , its violences contrary to all sense , directed against the principles which are its life , its masterful deeds against the right , are its popular coups d'etat and should be repressed . 
The man of probity sacrifices himself , and out of his very love for this crowd , he combats it . 
But how excusable he feels it even while holding out against it ! 
How he venerates it even while resisting it ! 
This is one of those rare moments when , while doing that which it is one 's duty to do , one feels something which disconcerts one , and which would dissuade one from proceeding further ; one persists , it is necessary , but conscience , though satisfied , is sad , and the accomplishment of duty is complicated with a pain at the heart . 
June , 1848 , let us hasten to say , was an exceptional fact , and almost impossible of classification , in the philosophy of history . 
All the words which we have just uttered , must be discarded , when it becomes a question of this extraordinary revolt , in which one feels the holy anxiety of toil claiming its rights . 
It was necessary to combat it , and this was a duty , for it attacked the republic . 
But what was June , 1848 , at bottom ? 
A revolt of the people against itself . 
Where the subject is not lost sight of , there is no digression ; may we , then , be permitted to arrest the reader 's attention for a moment on the two absolutely unique barricades of which we have just spoken and which characterized this insurrection . 
One blocked the entrance to the Faubourg Saint Antoine ; the other defended the approach to the Faubourg du Temple ; those before whom these two fearful masterpieces of civil war reared themselves beneath the brilliant blue sky of June , will never forget them . 
The Saint-Antoine barricade was tremendous ; it was three stories high , and seven hundred feet wide . 
It barred the vast opening of the faubourg , that is to say , three streets , from angle to angle ; ravined , jagged , cut up , divided , crenelated , with an immense rent , buttressed with piles that were bastions in themselves throwing out capes here and there , powerfully backed up by two great promontories of houses of the faubourg , it reared itself like a cyclopean dike at the end of the formidable place which had seen the 14th of July . 
Nineteen barricades were ranged , one behind the other , in the depths of the streets behind this principal barricade . 
At the very sight of it , one felt the agonizing suffering in the immense faubourg , which had reached that point of extremity when a distress may become a catastrophe . 
Of what was that barricade made ? 
Of the ruins of three six-story houses demolished expressly , said some . 
Of the prodigy of all wraths , said others . 
It wore the lamentable aspect of all constructions of hatred , ruin . 
It might be asked : Who built this ? 
It might also be said : Who destroyed this ? 
It was the improvisation of the ebullition . 
Hold ! 
take this door ! 
this grating ! 
this penthouse ! 
this chimney-piece ! 
this broken brazier ! 
this cracked pot ! 
Give all ! 
cast away all ! 
Push this roll , dig , dismantle , overturn , ruin everything ! 
It was the collaboration of the pavement , the block of stone , the beam , the bar of iron , the rag , the scrap , the broken pane , the unseated chair , the cabbage-stalk , the tatter , the rag , and the malediction . 
It was grand and it was petty . 
It was the abyss parodied on the public place by hubbub . 
The mass beside the atom ; the strip of ruined wall and the broken bowl , -- threatening fraternization of every sort of rubbish . 
Sisyphus had thrown his rock there and Job his potsherd . 
Terrible , in short . 
It was the acropolis of the barefooted . 
Overturned carts broke the uniformity of the slope ; an immense dray was spread out there crossways , its axle pointing heavenward , and seemed a scar on that tumultuous facade ; an omnibus hoisted gayly , by main force , to the very summit of the heap , as though the architects of this bit of savagery had wished to add a touch of the street urchin humor to their terror , presented its horseless , unharnessed pole to no one knows what horses of the air . 
This gigantic heap , the alluvium of the revolt , figured to the mind an Ossa on Pelion of all revolutions ; '93 on ' 89 , the 9th of Thermidor on the 10th of August , the 18th of Brumaire on the 11th of January , Vendemiaire on Prairial , 1848 on 1830 . 
The situation deserved the trouble and this barricade was worthy to figure on the very spot whence the Bastille had disappeared . 
If the ocean made dikes , it is thus that it would build . 
The fury of the flood was stamped upon this shapeless mass . 
What flood ? 
The crowd . 
One thought one beheld hubbub petrified . 
One thought one heard humming above this barricade as though there had been over their hive , enormous , dark bees of violent progress . 
Was it a thicket ? 
Was it a bacchanalia ? 
Was it a fortress ? 
Vertigo seemed to have constructed it with blows of its wings . 
There was something of the cess-pool in that redoubt and something Olympian in that confusion . 
One there beheld in a pell-mell full of despair , the rafters of roofs , bits of garret windows with their figured paper , window sashes with their glass planted there in the ruins awaiting the cannon , wrecks of chimneys , cupboards , tables , benches , howling topsyturveydom , and those thousand poverty-stricken things , the very refuse of the mendicant , which contain at the same time fury and nothingness . 
One would have said that it was the tatters of a people , rags of wood , of iron , of bronze , of stone , and that the Faubourg Saint Antoine had thrust it there at its door , with a colossal flourish of the broom making of its misery its barricade . 
Blocks resembling headsman 's blocks , dislocated chains , pieces of woodwork with brackets having the form of gibbets , horizontal wheels projecting from the rubbish , amalgamated with this edifice of anarchy the sombre figure of the old tortures endured by the people . 
The barricade Saint Antoine converted everything into a weapon ; everything that civil war could throw at the head of society proceeded thence ; it was not combat , it was a paroxysm ; the carbines which defended this redoubt , among which there were some blunderbusses , sent bits of earthenware bones , coat-buttons , even the casters from night-stands , dangerous projectiles on account of the brass . 
This barricade was furious ; it hurled to the clouds an inexpressible clamor ; at certain moments , when provoking the army , it was covered with throngs and tempest ; a tumultuous crowd of flaming heads crowned it ; a swarm filled it ; it had a thorny crest of guns , of sabres , of cudgels , of axes , of pikes and of bayonets ; a vast red flag flapped in the wind ; shouts of command , songs of attack , the roll of drums , the sobs of women and bursts of gloomy laughter from the starving were to be heard there . 
It was huge and living , and , like the back of an electric beast , there proceeded from it little flashes of lightning . 
The spirit of revolution covered with its cloud this summit where rumbled that voice of the people which resembles the voice of God ; a strange majesty was emitted by this titanic basket of rubbish . 
It was a heap of filth and it was Sinai . 
As we have said previously , it attacked in the name of the revolution -- what ? 
The revolution . 
It -- that barricade , chance , hazard , disorder , terror , misunderstanding , the unknown -- had facing it the Constituent Assembly , the sovereignty of the people , universal suffrage , the nation , the republic ; and it was the Carmagnole bidding defiance to the Marseillaise . 
Immense but heroic defiance , for the old faubourg is a hero . 
The faubourg and its redoubt lent each other assistance . 
The faubourg shouldered the redoubt , the redoubt took its stand under cover of the faubourg . 
The vast barricade spread out like a cliff against which the strategy of the African generals dashed itself . 
Its caverns , its excrescences , its warts , its gibbosities , grimaced , so to speak , and grinned beneath the smoke . 
The mitraille vanished in shapelessness ; the bombs plunged into it ; bullets only succeeded in making holes in it ; what was the use of cannonading chaos ? 
and the regiments , accustomed to the fiercest visions of war , gazed with uneasy eyes on that species of redoubt , a wild beast in its boar-like bristling and a mountain by its enormous size . 
A quarter of a league away , from the corner of the Rue du Temple which debouches on the boulevard near the Chateaud ` Eau , if one thrust one 's head bodily beyond the point formed by the front of the Dallemagne shop , one perceived in the distance , beyond the canal , in the street which mounts the slopes of Belleville at the culminating point of the rise , a strange wall reaching to the second story of the house fronts , a sort of hyphen between the houses on the right and the houses on the left , as though the street had folded back on itself its loftiest wall in order to close itself abruptly . 
This wall was built of paving-stones . 
It was straight , correct , cold , perpendicular , levelled with the square , laid out by rule and line . 
Cement was lacking , of course , but , as in the case of certain Roman walls , without interfering with its rigid architecture . 
The entablature was mathematically parallel with the base . 
From distance to distance , one could distinguish on the gray surface , almost invisible loopholes which resembled black threads . 
These loopholes were separated from each other by equal spaces . 
The street was deserted as far as the eye could reach . 
All windows and doors were closed . 
In the background rose this barrier , which made a blind thoroughfare of the street , a motionless and tranquil wall ; no one was visible , nothing was audible ; not a cry , not a sound , not a breath . 
A sepulchre . 
The dazzling sun of June inundated this terrible thing with light . 
It was the barricade of the Faubourg of the Temple . 
As soon as one arrived on the spot , and caught sight of it , it was impossible , even for the boldest , not to become thoughtful before this mysterious apparition . 
It was adjusted , jointed , imbricated , rectilinear , symmetrical and funereal . 
Science and gloom met there . 
One felt that the chief of this barricade was a geometrician or a spectre . 
One looked at it and spoke low . 
From time to time , if some soldier , an officer or representative of the people , chanced to traverse the deserted highway , a faint , sharp whistle was heard , and the passer-by fell dead or wounded , or , if he escaped the bullet , sometimes a biscaien was seen to ensconce itself in some closed shutter , in the interstice between two blocks of stone , or in the plaster of a wall . 
For the men in the barricade had made themselves two small cannons out of two cast-iron lengths of gas-pipe , plugged up at one end with tow and fire-clay . 
There was no waste of useless powder . 
Nearly every shot told . 
There were corpses here and there , and pools of blood on the pavement . 
I remember a white butterfly which went and came in the street . 
Summer does not abdicate . 
In the neighborhood , the spaces beneath the portes cocheres were encumbered with wounded . 
One felt oneself aimed at by some person whom one did not see , and one understood that guns were levelled at the whole length of the street . 
Massed behind the sort of sloping ridge which the vaulted canal forms at the entrance to the Faubourg du Temple , the soldiers of the attacking column , gravely and thoughtfully , watched this dismal redoubt , this immobility , this passivity , whence sprang death . 
Some crawled flat on their faces as far as the crest of the curve of the bridge , taking care that their shakos did not project beyond it . 
The valiant Colonel Monteynard admired this barricade with a shudder . 
-- `` How that is built ! '' 
he said to a Representative . 
`` Not one paving-stone projects beyond its neighbor . 
It is made of porcelain . '' 
-- At that moment , a bullet broke the cross on his breast , and he fell . 
`` The cowards ! '' 
people said . 
`` Let them show themselves . 
Let us see them ! 
They dare not ! 
They are hiding ! '' 
The barricade of the Faubourg du Temple , defended by eighty men , attacked by ten thousand , held out for three days . 
On the fourth , they did as at Zaatcha , as at Constantine , they pierced the houses , they came over the roofs , the barricade was taken . 
Not one of the eighty cowards thought of flight , all were killed there with the exception of the leader , Barthelemy , of whom we shall speak presently . 
The Saint-Antoine barricade was the tumult of thunders ; the barricade of the Temple was silence . 
The difference between these two redoubts was the difference between the formidable and the sinister . 
One seemed a maw ; the other a mask . 
Admitting that the gigantic and gloomy insurrection of June was composed of a wrath and of an enigma , one divined in the first barricade the dragon , and behind the second the sphinx . 
These two fortresses had been erected by two men named , the one , Cournet , the other , Barthelemy . 
Cournet made the Saint-Antoine barricade ; Barthelemy the barricade of the Temple . 
Each was the image of the man who had built it . 
Cournet was a man of lofty stature ; he had broad shoulders , a red face , a crushing fist , a bold heart , a loyal soul , a sincere and terrible eye . 
Intrepid , energetic , irascible , stormy ; the most cordial of men , the most formidable of combatants . 
War , strife , conflict , were the very air he breathed and put him in a good humor . 
He had been an officer in the navy , and , from his gestures and his voice , one divined that he sprang from the ocean , and that he came from the tempest ; he carried the hurricane on into battle . 
With the exception of the genius , there was in Cournet something of Danton , as , with the exception of the divinity , there was in Danton something of Hercules . 
Barthelemy , thin , feeble , pale , taciturn , was a sort of tragic street urchin , who , having had his ears boxed by a policeman , lay in wait for him , and killed him , and at seventeen was sent to the galleys . 
He came out and made this barricade . 
Later on , fatal circumstance , in London , proscribed by all , Barthelemy slew Cournet . 
It was a funereal duel . 
Some time afterwards , caught in the gearing of one of those mysterious adventures in which passion plays a part , a catastrophe in which French justice sees extenuating circumstances , and in which English justice sees only death , Barthelemy was hanged . 
The sombre social construction is so made that , thanks to material destitution , thanks to moral obscurity , that unhappy being who possessed an intelligence , certainly firm , possibly great , began in France with the galleys , and ended in England with the gallows . 
Barthelemy , on occasion , flew but one flag , the black flag . 
WHAT IS TO BE DONE IN THE ABYSS IF ONE DOES NOT CONVERSE Sixteen years count in the subterranean education of insurrection , and June , 1848 , knew a great deal more about it than June , 1832 . 
So the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was only an outline , and an embryo compared to the two colossal barricades which we have just sketched ; but it was formidable for that epoch . 
The insurgents under the eye of Enjolras , for Marius no longer looked after anything , had made good use of the night . 
The barricade had been not only repaired , but augmented . 
They had raised it two feet . 
Bars of iron planted in the pavement resembled lances in rest . 
All sorts of rubbish brought and added from all directions complicated the external confusion . 
The redoubt had been cleverly made over , into a wall on the inside and a thicket on the outside . 
The staircase of paving-stones which permitted one to mount it like the wall of a citadel had been reconstructed . 
The barricade had been put in order , the tap-room disencumbered , the kitchen appropriated for the ambulance , the dressing of the wounded completed , the powder scattered on the ground and on the tables had been gathered up , bullets run , cartridges manufactured , lint scraped , the fallen weapons re-distributed , the interior of the redoubt cleaned , the rubbish swept up , corpses removed . 
They laid the dead in a heap in the Mondetour lane , of which they were still the masters . 
The pavement was red for a long time at that spot . 
Among the dead there were four National Guardsmen of the suburbs . 
Enjolras had their uniforms laid aside . 
Enjolras had advised two hours of sleep . 
Advice from Enjolras was a command . 
Still , only three or four took advantage of it . 
Feuilly employed these two hours in engraving this inscription on the wall which faced the tavern : -- LONG LIVE THE PEOPLES ! 
These four words , hollowed out in the rough stone with a nail , could be still read on the wall in 1848 . 
The three women had profited by the respite of the night to vanish definitely ; which allowed the insurgents to breathe more freely . 
They had found means of taking refuge in some neighboring house . 
The greater part of the wounded were able , and wished , to fight still . 
On a litter of mattresses and trusses of straw in the kitchen , which had been converted into an ambulance , there were five men gravely wounded , two of whom were municipal guardsmen . 
The municipal guardsmen were attended to first . 
In the tap-room there remained only Mabeuf under his black cloth and Javert bound to his post . 
`` This is the hall of the dead , '' said Enjolras . 
In the interior of this hall , barely lighted by a candle at one end , the mortuary table being behind the post like a horizontal bar , a sort of vast , vague cross resulted from Javert erect and Mabeuf lying prone . 
The pole of the omnibus , although snapped off by the fusillade , was still sufficiently upright to admit of their fastening the flag to it . 
Enjolras , who possessed that quality of a leader , of always doing what he said , attached to this staff the bullet-ridden and bloody coat of the old man 's . 
No repast had been possible . 
There was neither bread nor meat . 
The fifty men in the barricade had speedily exhausted the scanty provisions of the wine-shop during the sixteen hours which they had passed there . 
At a given moment , every barricade inevitably becomes the raft of la Meduse . 
They were obliged to resign themselves to hunger . 
They had then reached the first hours of that Spartan day of the 6th of June when , in the barricade Saint-Merry , Jeanne , surrounded by the insurgents who demanded bread , replied to all combatants crying : `` Something to eat ! '' 
with : `` Why ? 
It is three o'clock ; at four we shall be dead . '' 
As they could no longer eat , Enjolras forbade them to drink . 
He interdicted wine , and portioned out the brandy . 
They had found in the cellar fifteen full bottles hermetically sealed . 
Enjolras and Combeferre examined them . 
Combeferre when he came up again said : -- `` It 's the old stock of Father Hucheloup , who began business as a grocer . '' 
-- `` It must be real wine , '' observed Bossuet . 
`` It 's lucky that Grantaire is asleep . 
If he were on foot , there would be a good deal of difficulty in saving those bottles . '' 
-- Enjolras , in spite of all murmurs , placed his veto on the fifteen bottles , and , in order that no one might touch them , he had them placed under the table on which Father Mabeuf was lying . 
About two o'clock in the morning , they reckoned up their strength . 
There were still thirty-seven of them . 
The day began to dawn . 
The torch , which had been replaced in its cavity in the pavement , had just been extinguished . 
The interior of the barricade , that species of tiny courtyard appropriated from the street , was bathed in shadows , and resembled , athwart the vague , twilight horror , the deck of a disabled ship . 
The combatants , as they went and came , moved about there like black forms . 
Above that terrible nesting-place of gloom the stories of the mute houses were lividly outlined ; at the very top , the chimneys stood palely out . 
The sky was of that charming , undecided hue , which may be white and may be blue . 
Birds flew about in it with cries of joy . 
The lofty house which formed the back of the barricade , being turned to the East , had upon its roof a rosy reflection . 
The morning breeze ruffled the gray hair on the head of the dead man at the third-story window . 
`` I am delighted that the torch has been extinguished , '' said Courfeyrac to Feuilly . 
`` That torch flickering in the wind annoyed me . 
It had the appearance of being afraid . 
The light of torches resembles the wisdom of cowards ; it gives a bad light because it trembles . '' 
Dawn awakens minds as it does the birds ; all began to talk . 
Joly , perceiving a cat prowling on a gutter , extracted philosophy from it . 
`` What is the cat ? '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` It is a corrective . 
The good God , having made the mouse , said : ` Hullo ! 
I have committed a blunder . ' 
And so he made the cat . 
The cat is the erratum of the mouse . 
The mouse , plus the cat , is the proof of creation revised and corrected . '' 
Combeferre , surrounded by students and artisans , was speaking of the dead , of Jean Prouvaire , of Bahorel , of Mabeuf , and even of Cabuc , and of Enjolras ' sad severity . 
He said : -- `` Harmodius and Aristogiton , Brutus , Chereas , Stephanus , Cromwell , Charlotte Corday , Sand , have all had their moment of agony when it was too late . 
Our hearts quiver so , and human life is such a mystery that , even in the case of a civic murder , even in a murder for liberation , if there be such a thing , the remorse for having struck a man surpasses the joy of having served the human race . '' 
And , such are the windings of the exchange of speech , that , a moment later , by a transition brought about through Jean Prouvaire 's verses , Combeferre was comparing the translators of the Georgics , Raux with Cournand , Cournand with Delille , pointing out the passages translated by Malfilatre , particularly the prodigies of Caesar 's death ; and at that word , Caesar , the conversation reverted to Brutus . 
`` Caesar , '' said Combeferre , `` fell justly . 
Cicero was severe towards Caesar , and he was right . 
That severity is not diatribe . 
When Zoilus insults Homer , when Maevius insults Virgil , when Vise insults Moliere , when Pope insults Shakspeare , when Frederic insults Voltaire , it is an old law of envy and hatred which is being carried out ; genius attracts insult , great men are always more or less barked at . 
But Zoilus and Cicero are two different persons . 
Cicero is an arbiter in thought , just as Brutus is an arbiter by the sword . 
For my own part , I blame that last justice , the blade ; but , antiquity admitted it . 
Caesar , the violator of the Rubicon , conferring , as though they came from him , the dignities which emanated from the people , not rising at the entrance of the senate , committed the acts of a king and almost of a tyrant , regia ac pene tyrannica . 
He was a great man ; so much the worse , or so much the better ; the lesson is but the more exalted . 
His twenty-three wounds touch me less than the spitting in the face of Jesus Christ . 
Caesar is stabbed by the senators ; Christ is cuffed by lackeys . 
One feels the God through the greater outrage . '' 
Bossuet , who towered above the interlocutors from the summit of a heap of paving-stones , exclaimed , rifle in hand : -- `` Oh Cydathenaeum , Oh Myrrhinus , Oh Probalinthus , Oh graces of the AEantides ! 
Oh ! 
Who will grant me to pronounce the verses of Homer like a Greek of Laurium or of Edapteon ? '' 
LIGHT AND SHADOW Enjolras had been to make a reconnaissance . 
He had made his way out through Mondetour lane , gliding along close to the houses . 
The insurgents , we will remark , were full of hope . 
The manner in which they had repulsed the attack of the preceding night had caused them to almost disdain in advance the attack at dawn . 
They waited for it with a smile . 
They had no more doubt as to their success than as to their cause . 
Moreover , succor was , evidently , on the way to them . 
They reckoned on it . 
With that facility of triumphant prophecy which is one of the sources of strength in the French combatant , they divided the day which was at hand into three distinct phases . 
At six o'clock in the morning a regiment `` which had been labored with , '' would turn ; at noon , the insurrection of all Paris ; at sunset , revolution . 
They heard the alarm bell of Saint-Merry , which had not been silent for an instant since the night before ; a proof that the other barricade , the great one , Jeanne 's , still held out . 
All these hopes were exchanged between the different groups in a sort of gay and formidable whisper which resembled the warlike hum of a hive of bees . 
Enjolras reappeared . 
He returned from his sombre eagle flight into outer darkness . 
He listened for a moment to all this joy with folded arms , and one hand on his mouth . 
Then , fresh and rosy in the growing whiteness of the dawn , he said : `` The whole army of Paris is to strike . 
A third of the army is bearing down upon the barricades in which you now are . 
There is the National Guard in addition . 
I have picked out the shakos of the fifth of the line , and the standard-bearers of the sixth legion . 
In one hour you will be attacked . 
As for the populace , it was seething yesterday , to-day it is not stirring . 
There is nothing to expect ; nothing to hope for . 
Neither from a faubourg nor from a regiment . 
You are abandoned . '' 
These words fell upon the buzzing of the groups , and produced on them the effect caused on a swarm of bees by the first drops of a storm . 
A moment of indescribable silence ensued , in which death might have been heard flitting by . 
This moment was brief . 
A voice from the obscurest depths of the groups shouted to Enjolras : `` So be it . 
Let us raise the barricade to a height of twenty feet , and let us all remain in it . 
Citizens , let us offer the protests of corpses . 
Let us show that , if the people abandon the republicans , the republicans do not abandon the people . '' 
These words freed the thought of all from the painful cloud of individual anxieties . 
It was hailed with an enthusiastic acclamation . 
No one ever has known the name of the man who spoke thus ; he was some unknown blouse-wearer , a stranger , a man forgotten , a passing hero , that great anonymous , always mingled in human crises and in social geneses who , at a given moment , utters in a supreme fashion the decisive word , and who vanishes into the shadows after having represented for a minute , in a lightning flash , the people and God . 
This inexorable resolution so thoroughly impregnated the air of the 6th of June , 1832 , that , almost at the very same hour , on the barricade Saint-Merry , the insurgents were raising that clamor which has become a matter of history and which has been consigned to the documents in the case : -- `` What matters it whether they come to our assistance or not ? 
Let us get ourselves killed here , to the very last man . '' 
As the reader sees , the two barricades , though materially isolated , were in communication with each other . 
MINUS FIVE , PLUS ONE After the man who decreed the `` protest of corpses '' had spoken , and had given this formula of their common soul , there issued from all mouths a strangely satisfied and terrible cry , funereal in sense and triumphant in tone : `` Long live death ! 
Let us all remain here ! '' 
`` Why all ? '' 
said Enjolras . 
`` All ! 
All ! '' 
Enjolras resumed : `` The position is good ; the barricade is fine . 
Thirty men are enough . 
Why sacrifice forty ? '' 
They replied : `` Because not one will go away . '' 
`` Citizens , '' cried Enjolras , and there was an almost irritated vibration in his voice , `` this republic is not rich enough in men to indulge in useless expenditure of them . 
Vain-glory is waste . 
If the duty of some is to depart , that duty should be fulfilled like any other . '' 
Enjolras , the man-principle , had over his co-religionists that sort of omnipotent power which emanates from the absolute . 
Still , great as was this omnipotence , a murmur arose . 
A leader to the very finger-tips , Enjolras , seeing that they murmured , insisted . 
He resumed haughtily : `` Let those who are afraid of not numbering more than thirty say so . '' 
The murmurs redoubled . 
`` Besides , '' observed a voice in one group , `` it is easy enough to talk about leaving . 
The barricade is hemmed in . '' 
`` Not on the side of the Halles , '' said Enjolras . 
`` The Rue Mondetour is free , and through the Rue des Precheurs one can reach the Marche des Innocents . '' 
`` And there , '' went on another voice , `` you would be captured . 
You would fall in with some grand guard of the line or the suburbs ; they will spy a man passing in blouse and cap . 
` Whence come you ? ' 
` Do n't you belong to the barricade ? ' 
And they will look at your hands . 
You smell of powder . 
Shot . '' 
Enjolras , without making any reply , touched Combeferre 's shoulder , and the two entered the tap-room . 
They emerged thence a moment later . 
Enjolras held in his outstretched hands the four uniforms which he had laid aside . 
Combeferre followed , carrying the shoulder-belts and the shakos . 
`` With this uniform , '' said Enjolras , `` you can mingle with the ranks and escape ; here is enough for four . '' 
And he flung on the ground , deprived of its pavement , the four uniforms . 
No wavering took place in his stoical audience . 
Combeferre took the word . 
`` Come , said he , `` you must have a little pity . 
Do you know what the question is here ? 
It is a question of women . 
See here . 
Are there women or are there not ? 
Are there children or are there not ? 
Are there mothers , yes or no , who rock cradles with their foot and who have a lot of little ones around them ? 
Let that man of you who has never beheld a nurse 's breast raise his hand . 
Ah ! 
you want to get yourselves killed , so do I -- I , who am speaking to you ; but I do not want to feel the phantoms of women wreathing their arms around me . 
Die , if you will , but do n't make others die . 
Suicides like that which is on the brink of accomplishment here are sublime ; but suicide is narrow , and does not admit of extension ; and as soon as it touches your neighbors , suicide is murder . 
Think of the little blond heads ; think of the white locks . 
Listen , Enjolras has just told me that he saw at the corner of the Rue du Cygne a lighted casement , a candle in a poor window , on the fifth floor , and on the pane the quivering shadow of the head of an old woman , who had the air of having spent the night in watching . 
Perhaps she is the mother of some one of you . 
Well , let that man go , and make haste , to say to his mother : ` Here I am , mother ! ' 
Let him feel at ease , the task here will be performed all the same . 
When one supports one 's relatives by one 's toil , one has not the right to sacrifice one 's self . 
That is deserting one 's family . 
And those who have daughters ! 
what are you thinking of ? 
You get yourselves killed , you are dead , that is well . 
And tomorrow ? 
Young girls without bread -- that is a terrible thing . 
Man begs , woman sells . 
Ah ! 
those charming and gracious beings , so gracious and so sweet , who have bonnets of flowers , who fill the house with purity , who sing and prattle , who are like a living perfume , who prove the existence of angels in heaven by the purity of virgins on earth , that Jeanne , that Lise , that Mimi , those adorable and honest creatures who are your blessings and your pride , ah ! 
good God , they will suffer hunger ! 
What do you want me to say to you ? 
There is a market for human flesh ; and it is not with your shadowy hands , shuddering around them , that you will prevent them from entering it ! 
Think of the street , think of the pavement covered with passers-by , think of the shops past which women go and come with necks all bare , and through the mire . 
These women , too , were pure once . 
Think of your sisters , those of you who have them . 
Misery , prostitution , the police , Saint-Lazare -- that is what those beautiful , delicate girls , those fragile marvels of modesty , gentleness and loveliness , fresher than lilacs in the month of May , will come to . 
Ah ! 
you have got yourselves killed ! 
You are no longer on hand ! 
That is well ; you have wished to release the people from Royalty , and you deliver over your daughters to the police . 
Friends , have a care , have mercy . 
Women , unhappy women , we are not in the habit of bestowing much thought on them . 
We trust to the women not having received a man 's education , we prevent their reading , we prevent their thinking , we prevent their occupying themselves with politics ; will you prevent them from going to the dead-house this evening , and recognizing your bodies ? 
Let us see , those who have families must be tractable , and shake hands with us and take themselves off , and leave us here alone to attend to this affair . 
I know well that courage is required to leave , that it is hard ; but the harder it is , the more meritorious . 
You say : ` I have a gun , I am at the barricade ; so much the worse , I shall remain there . ' 
So much the worse is easily said . 
My friends , there is a morrow ; you will not be here to-morrow , but your families will ; and what sufferings ! 
See , here is a pretty , healthy child , with cheeks like an apple , who babbles , prattles , chatters , who laughs , who smells sweet beneath your kiss , -- and do you know what becomes of him when he is abandoned ? 
I have seen one , a very small creature , no taller than that . 
His father was dead . 
Poor people had taken him in out of charity , but they had bread only for themselves . 
The child was always hungry . 
It was winter . 
He did not cry . 
You could see him approach the stove , in which there was never any fire , and whose pipe , you know , was of mastic and yellow clay . 
His breathing was hoarse , his face livid , his limbs flaccid , his belly prominent . 
He said nothing . 
If you spoke to him , he did not answer . 
He is dead . 
He was taken to the Necker Hospital , where I saw him . 
I was house-surgeon in that hospital . 
Now , if there are any fathers among you , fathers whose happiness it is to stroll on Sundays holding their child 's tiny hand in their robust hand , let each one of those fathers imagine that this child is his own . 
That poor brat , I remember , and I seem to see him now , when he lay nude on the dissecting table , how his ribs stood out on his skin like the graves beneath the grass in a cemetery . 
A sort of mud was found in his stomach . 
There were ashes in his teeth . 
Come , let us examine ourselves conscientiously and take counsel with our heart . 
Statistics show that the mortality among abandoned children is fifty-five per cent . 
I repeat , it is a question of women , it concerns mothers , it concerns young girls , it concerns little children . 
Who is talking to you of yourselves ? 
We know well what you are ; we know well that you are all brave , parbleu ! 
we know well that you all have in your souls the joy and the glory of giving your life for the great cause ; we know well that you feel yourselves elected to die usefully and magnificently , and that each one of you clings to his share in the triumph . 
Very well . 
But you are not alone in this world . 
There are other beings of whom you must think . 
You must not be egoists . '' 
All dropped their heads with a gloomy air . 
Strange contradictions of the human heart at its most sublime moments . 
Combeferre , who spoke thus , was not an orphan . 
He recalled the mothers of other men , and forgot his own . 
He was about to get himself killed . 
He was `` an egoist . '' 
Marius , fasting , fevered , having emerged in succession from all hope , and having been stranded in grief , the most sombre of shipwrecks , and saturated with violent emotions and conscious that the end was near , had plunged deeper and deeper into that visionary stupor which always precedes the fatal hour voluntarily accepted . 
A physiologist might have studied in him the growing symptoms of that febrile absorption known to , and classified by , science , and which is to suffering what voluptuousness is to pleasure . 
Despair , also , has its ecstasy . 
Marius had reached this point . 
He looked on at everything as from without ; as we have said , things which passed before him seemed far away ; he made out the whole , but did not perceive the details . 
He beheld men going and coming as through a flame . 
He heard voices speaking as at the bottom of an abyss . 
But this moved him . 
There was in this scene a point which pierced and roused even him . 
He had but one idea now , to die ; and he did not wish to be turned aside from it , but he reflected , in his gloomy somnambulism , that while destroying himself , he was not prohibited from saving some one else . 
He raised his voice . 
`` Enjolras and Combeferre are right , '' said he ; `` no unnecessary sacrifice . 
I join them , and you must make haste . 
Combeferre has said convincing things to you . 
There are some among you who have families , mothers , sisters , wives , children . 
Let such leave the ranks . '' 
No one stirred . 
`` Married men and the supporters of families , step out of the ranks ! '' 
repeated Marius . 
His authority was great . 
Enjolras was certainly the head of the barricade , but Marius was its savior . 
`` I order it , '' cried Enjolras . 
`` I entreat you , '' said Marius . 
Then , touched by Combeferre 's words , shaken by Enjolras ' order , touched by Marius ' entreaty , these heroic men began to denounce each other . 
-- `` It is true , '' said one young man to a full grown man , `` you are the father of a family . 
Go . '' 
-- `` It is your duty rather , '' retorted the man , `` you have two sisters whom you maintain . '' 
-- And an unprecedented controversy broke forth . 
Each struggled to determine which should not allow himself to be placed at the door of the tomb . 
`` Make haste , '' said Courfeyrac , `` in another quarter of an hour it will be too late . '' 
`` Citizens , '' pursued Enjolras , `` this is the Republic , and universal suffrage reigns . 
Do you yourselves designate those who are to go . '' 
They obeyed . 
After the expiration of a few minutes , five were unanimously selected and stepped out of the ranks . 
`` There are five of them ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
There were only four uniforms . 
`` Well , '' began the five , `` one must stay behind . '' 
And then a struggle arose as to who should remain , and who should find reasons for the others not remaining . 
The generous quarrel began afresh . 
`` You have a wife who loves you . '' 
-- `` You have your aged mother . '' 
-- '' You have neither father nor mother , and what is to become of your three little brothers ? '' 
-- `` You are the father of five children . '' 
-- `` You have a right to live , you are only seventeen , it is too early for you to die . '' 
These great revolutionary barricades were assembling points for heroism . 
The improbable was simple there . 
These men did not astonish each other . 
`` Be quick , '' repeated Courfeyrac . 
Men shouted to Marius from the groups : `` Do you designate who is to remain . '' 
`` Yes , '' said the five , `` choose . 
We will obey you . '' 
Marius did not believe that he was capable of another emotion . 
Still , at this idea , that of choosing a man for death , his blood rushed back to his heart . 
He would have turned pale , had it been possible for him to become any paler . 
He advanced towards the five , who smiled upon him , and each , with his eyes full of that grand flame which one beholds in the depths of history hovering over Thermopylae , cried to him : `` Me ! 
me ! 
me ! '' 
And Marius stupidly counted them ; there were still five of them ! 
Then his glance dropped to the four uniforms . 
At that moment , a fifth uniform fell , as if from heaven , upon the other four . 
The fifth man was saved . 
Marius raised his eyes and recognized M. Fauchelevent . 
Jean Valjean had just entered the barricade . 
He had arrived by way of Mondetour lane , whither by dint of inquiries made , or by instinct , or chance . 
Thanks to his dress of a National Guardsman , he had made his way without difficulty . 
The sentinel stationed by the insurgents in the Rue Mondetour had no occasion to give the alarm for a single National Guardsman , and he had allowed the latter to entangle himself in the street , saying to himself : `` Probably it is a reinforcement , in any case it is a prisoner . '' 
The moment was too grave to admit of the sentinel abandoning his duty and his post of observation . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean entered the redoubt , no one had noticed him , all eyes being fixed on the five chosen men and the four uniforms . 
Jean Valjean also had seen and heard , and he had silently removed his coat and flung it on the pile with the rest . 
The emotion aroused was indescribable . 
`` Who is this man ? '' 
demanded Bossuet . 
`` He is a man who saves others , '' replied Combeferre . 
Marius added in a grave voice : `` I know him . '' 
This guarantee satisfied every one . 
Enjolras turned to Jean Valjean . 
`` Welcome , citizen . '' 
And he added : `` You know that we are about to die . '' 
Jean Valjean , without replying , helped the insurgent whom he was saving to don his uniform . 
THE HORIZON WHICH ONE BEHOLDS FROM THE SUMMIT OF A BARRICADE The situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place , had as result and culminating point Enjolras ' supreme melancholy . 
Enjolras bore within him the plenitude of the revolution ; he was incomplete , however , so far as the absolute can be so ; he had too much of Saint-Just about him , and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots ; still , his mind , in the society of the Friends of the A B C , had ended by undergoing a certain polarization from Combeferre 's ideas ; for some time past , he had been gradually emerging from the narrow form of dogma , and had allowed himself to incline to the broadening influence of progress , and he had come to accept , as a definitive and magnificent evolution , the transformation of the great French Republic , into the immense human republic . 
As far as the immediate means were concerned , a violent situation being given , he wished to be violent ; on that point , he never varied ; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable school which is summed up in the words : `` Eighty-three . '' 
Enjolras was standing erect on the staircase of paving-stones , one elbow resting on the stock of his gun . 
He was engaged in thought ; he quivered , as at the passage of prophetic breaths ; places where death is have these effects of tripods . 
A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes , which were filled with an inward look . 
All at once he threw back his head , his blond locks fell back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made of stars , they were like the mane of a startled lion in the flaming of an halo , and Enjolras cried : `` Citizens , do you picture the future to yourselves ? 
The streets of cities inundated with light , green branches on the thresholds , nations sisters , men just , old men blessing children , the past loving the present , thinkers entirely at liberty , believers on terms of full equality , for religion heaven , God the direct priest , human conscience become an altar , no more hatreds , the fraternity of the workshop and the school , for sole penalty and recompense fame , work for all , right for all , peace over all , no more bloodshed , no more wars , happy mothers ! 
To conquer matter is the first step ; to realize the ideal is the second . 
Reflect on what progress has already accomplished . 
Formerly , the first human races beheld with terror the hydra pass before their eyes , breathing on the waters , the dragon which vomited flame , the griffin who was the monster of the air , and who flew with the wings of an eagle and the talons of a tiger ; fearful beasts which were above man . 
Man , nevertheless , spread his snares , consecrated by intelligence , and finally conquered these monsters . 
We have vanquished the hydra , and it is called the locomotive ; we are on the point of vanquishing the griffin , we already grasp it , and it is called the balloon . 
On the day when this Promethean task shall be accomplished , and when man shall have definitely harnessed to his will the triple Chimaera of antiquity , the hydra , the dragon and the griffin , he will be the master of water , fire , and of air , and he will be for the rest of animated creation that which the ancient gods formerly were to him . 
Courage , and onward ! 
Citizens , whither are we going ? 
To science made government , to the force of things become the sole public force , to the natural law , having in itself its sanction and its penalty and promulgating itself by evidence , to a dawn of truth corresponding to a dawn of day . 
We are advancing to the union of peoples ; we are advancing to the unity of man . 
No more fictions ; no more parasites . 
The real governed by the true , that is the goal . 
Civilization will hold its assizes at the summit of Europe , and , later on , at the centre of continents , in a grand parliament of the intelligence . 
Something similar has already been seen . 
The amphictyons had two sittings a year , one at Delphos the seat of the gods , the other at Thermopylae , the place of heroes . 
Europe will have her amphictyons ; the globe will have its amphictyons . 
France bears this sublime future in her breast . 
This is the gestation of the nineteenth century . 
That which Greece sketched out is worthy of being finished by France . 
Listen to me , you , Feuilly , valiant artisan , man of the people . 
I revere you . 
Yes , you clearly behold the future , yes , you are right . 
You had neither father nor mother , Feuilly ; you adopted humanity for your mother and right for your father . 
You are about to die , that is to say to triumph , here . 
Citizens , whatever happens to-day , through our defeat as well as through our victory , it is a revolution that we are about to create . 
As conflagrations light up a whole city , so revolutions illuminate the whole human race . 
And what is the revolution that we shall cause ? 
I have just told you , the Revolution of the True . 
From a political point of view , there is but a single principle ; the sovereignty of man over himself . 
This sovereignty of myself over myself is called Liberty . 
Where two or three of these sovereignties are combined , the state begins . 
But in that association there is no abdication . 
Each sovereignty concedes a certain quantity of itself , for the purpose of forming the common right . 
This quantity is the same for all of us . 
This identity of concession which each makes to all , is called Equality . 
Common right is nothing else than the protection of all beaming on the right of each . 
This protection of all over each is called Fraternity . 
The point of intersection of all these assembled sovereignties is called society . 
This intersection being a junction , this point is a knot . 
Hence what is called the social bond . 
Some say social contract ; which is the same thing , the word contract being etymologically formed with the idea of a bond . 
Let us come to an understanding about equality ; for , if liberty is the summit , equality is the base . 
Equality , citizens , is not wholly a surface vegetation , a society of great blades of grass and tiny oaks ; a proximity of jealousies which render each other null and void ; legally speaking , it is all aptitudes possessed of the same opportunity ; politically , it is all votes possessed of the same weight ; religiously , it is all consciences possessed of the same right . 
Equality has an organ : gratuitous and obligatory instruction . 
The right to the alphabet , that is where the beginning must be made . 
The primary school imposed on all , the secondary school offered to all , that is the law . 
From an identical school , an identical society will spring . 
Yes , instruction ! 
light ! 
light ! 
everything comes from light , and to it everything returns . 
Citizens , the nineteenth century is great , but the twentieth century will be happy . 
Then , there will be nothing more like the history of old , we shall no longer , as to-day , have to fear a conquest , an invasion , a usurpation , a rivalry of nations , arms in hand , an interruption of civilization depending on a marriage of kings , on a birth in hereditary tyrannies , a partition of peoples by a congress , a dismemberment because of the failure of a dynasty , a combat of two religions meeting face to face , like two bucks in the dark , on the bridge of the infinite ; we shall no longer have to fear famine , farming out , prostitution arising from distress , misery from the failure of work and the scaffold and the sword , and battles and the ruffianism of chance in the forest of events . 
One might almost say : There will be no more events . 
We shall be happy . 
The human race will accomplish its law , as the terrestrial globe accomplishes its law ; harmony will be re-established between the soul and the star ; the soul will gravitate around the truth , as the planet around the light . 
Friends , the present hour in which I am addressing you , is a gloomy hour ; but these are terrible purchases of the future . 
A revolution is a toll . 
Oh ! 
the human race will be delivered , raised up , consoled ! 
We affirm it on this barrier . 
Whence should proceed that cry of love , if not from the heights of sacrifice ? 
Oh my brothers , this is the point of junction , of those who think and of those who suffer ; this barricade is not made of paving-stones , nor of joists , nor of bits of iron ; it is made of two heaps , a heap of ideas , and a heap of woes . 
Here misery meets the ideal . 
The day embraces the night , and says to it : ` I am about to die , and thou shalt be born again with me . ' 
From the embrace of all desolations faith leaps forth . 
Sufferings bring hither their agony and ideas their immortality . 
This agony and this immortality are about to join and constitute our death . 
Brothers , he who dies here dies in the radiance of the future , and we are entering a tomb all flooded with the dawn . '' 
Enjolras paused rather than became silent ; his lips continued to move silently , as though he were talking to himself , which caused them all to gaze attentively at him , in the endeavor to hear more . 
There was no applause ; but they whispered together for a long time . 
Speech being a breath , the rustling of intelligences resembles the rustling of leaves . 
MARIUS HAGGARD , JAVERT LACONIC Let us narrate what was passing in Marius ' thoughts . 
Let the reader recall the state of his soul . 
We have just recalled it , everything was a vision to him now . 
His judgment was disturbed . 
Marius , let us insist on this point , was under the shadow of the great , dark wings which are spread over those in the death agony . 
He felt that he had entered the tomb , it seemed to him that he was already on the other side of the wall , and he no longer beheld the faces of the living except with the eyes of one dead . 
How did M. Fauchelevent come there ? 
Why was he there ? 
What had he come there to do ? 
Marius did not address all these questions to himself . 
Besides , since our despair has this peculiarity , that it envelops others as well as ourselves , it seemed logical to him that all the world should come thither to die . 
Only , he thought of Cosette with a pang at his heart . 
However , M. Fauchelevent did not speak to him , did not look at him , and had not even the air of hearing him , when Marius raised his voice to say : `` I know him . '' 
As far as Marius was concerned , this attitude of M. Fauchelevent was comforting , and , if such a word can be used for such impressions , we should say that it pleased him . 
He had always felt the absolute impossibility of addressing that enigmatical man , who was , in his eyes , both equivocal and imposing . 
Moreover , it had been a long time since he had seen him ; and this still further augmented the impossibility for Marius ' timid and reserved nature . 
The five chosen men left the barricade by way of Mondetour lane ; they bore a perfect resemblance to members of the National Guard . 
One of them wept as he took his leave . 
Before setting out , they embraced those who remained . 
When the five men sent back to life had taken their departure , Enjolras thought of the man who had been condemned to death . 
He entered the tap-room . 
Javert , still bound to the post , was engaged in meditation . 
`` Do you want anything ? '' 
Enjolras asked him . 
`` Javert replied : `` When are you going to kill me ? '' 
`` Wait . 
We need all our cartridges just at present . '' 
`` Then give me a drink , '' said Javert . 
Enjolras himself offered him a glass of water , and , as Javert was pinioned , he helped him to drink . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
inquired Enjolras . 
`` I am uncomfortable against this post , '' replied Javert . 
`` You are not tender to have left me to pass the night here . 
Bind me as you please , but you surely might lay me out on a table like that other man . '' 
And with a motion of the head , he indicated the body of M. Mabeuf . 
There was , as the reader will remember , a long , broad table at the end of the room , on which they had been running bullets and making cartridges . 
All the cartridges having been made , and all the powder used , this table was free . 
At Enjolras ' command , four insurgents unbound Javert from the post . 
While they were loosing him , a fifth held a bayonet against his breast . 
Leaving his arms tied behind his back , they placed about his feet a slender but stout whip-cord , as is done to men on the point of mounting the scaffold , which allowed him to take steps about fifteen inches in length , and made him walk to the table at the end of the room , where they laid him down , closely bound about the middle of the body . 
By way of further security , and by means of a rope fastened to his neck , they added to the system of ligatures which rendered every attempt at escape impossible , that sort of bond which is called in prisons a martingale , which , starting at the neck , forks on the stomach , and meets the hands , after passing between the legs . 
While they were binding Javert , a man standing on the threshold was surveying him with singular attention . 
The shadow cast by this man made Javert turn his head . 
He raised his eyes , and recognized Jean Valjean . 
He did not even start , but dropped his lids proudly and confined himself to the remark : `` It is perfectly simple . '' 
THE SITUATION BECOMES AGGRAVATED The daylight was increasing rapidly . 
Not a window was opened , not a door stood ajar ; it was the dawn but not the awaking . 
The end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , opposite the barricade , had been evacuated by the troops , as we have stated it seemed to be free , and presented itself to passers-by with a sinister tranquillity . 
The Rue Saint-Denis was as dumb as the avenue of Sphinxes at Thebes . 
Not a living being in the cross-roads , which gleamed white in the light of the sun . 
Nothing is so mournful as this light in deserted streets . 
Nothing was to be seen , but there was something to be heard . 
A mysterious movement was going on at a certain distance . 
It was evident that the critical moment was approaching . 
As on the previous evening , the sentinels had come in ; but this time all had come . 
The barricade was stronger than on the occasion of the first attack . 
Since the departure of the five , they had increased its height still further . 
On the advice of the sentinel who had examined the region of the Halles , Enjolras , for fear of a surprise in the rear , came to a serious decision . 
He had the small gut of the Mondetour lane , which had been left open up to that time , barricaded . 
For this purpose , they tore up the pavement for the length of several houses more . 
In this manner , the barricade , walled on three streets , in front on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , to the left on the Rues du Cygne and de la Petite Truanderie , to the right on the Rue Mondetour , was really almost impregnable ; it is true that they were fatally hemmed in there . 
It had three fronts , but no exit . 
-- `` A fortress but a rat hole too , '' said Courfeyrac with a laugh . 
Enjolras had about thirty paving-stones `` torn up in excess , '' said Bossuet , piled up near the door of the wine-shop . 
The silence was now so profound in the quarter whence the attack must needs come , that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle . 
An allowance of brandy was doled out to each . 
Nothing is more curious than a barricade preparing for an assault . 
Each man selects his place as though at the theatre . 
They jostle , and elbow and crowd each other . 
There are some who make stalls of paving-stones . 
Here is a corner of the wall which is in the way , it is removed ; here is a redan which may afford protection , they take shelter behind it . 
Left-handed men are precious ; they take the places that are inconvenient to the rest . 
Many arrange to fight in a sitting posture . 
They wish to be at ease to kill , and to die comfortably . 
In the sad war of June , 1848 , an insurgent who was a formidable marksman , and who was firing from the top of a terrace upon a roof , had a reclining-chair brought there for his use ; a charge of grape-shot found him out there . 
As soon as the leader has given the order to clear the decks for action , all disorderly movements cease ; there is no more pulling from one another ; there are no more coteries ; no more asides , there is no more holding aloof ; everything in their spirits converges in , and changes into , a waiting for the assailants . 
A barricade before the arrival of danger is chaos ; in danger , it is discipline itself . 
Peril produces order . 
As soon as Enjolras had seized his double-barrelled rifle , and had placed himself in a sort of embrasure which he had reserved for himself , all the rest held their peace . 
A series of faint , sharp noises resounded confusedly along the wall of paving-stones . 
It was the men cocking their guns . 
Moreover , their attitudes were prouder , more confident than ever ; the excess of sacrifice strengthens ; they no longer cherished any hope , but they had despair , despair , -- the last weapon , which sometimes gives victory ; Virgil has said so . 
Supreme resources spring from extreme resolutions . 
To embark in death is sometimes the means of escaping a shipwreck ; and the lid of the coffin becomes a plank of safety . 
As on the preceding evening , the attention of all was directed , we might almost say leaned upon , the end of the street , now lighted up and visible . 
They had not long to wait . 
A stir began distinctly in the Saint-Leu quarter , but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack . 
A clashing of chains , the uneasy jolting of a mass , the click of brass skipping along the pavement , a sort of solemn uproar , announced that some sinister construction of iron was approaching . 
There arose a tremor in the bosoms of these peaceful old streets , pierced and built for the fertile circulation of interests and ideas , and which are not made for the horrible rumble of the wheels of war . 
The fixity of eye in all the combatants upon the extremity of the street became ferocious . 
A cannon made its appearance . 
Artillery-men were pushing the piece ; it was in firing trim ; the fore-carriage had been detached ; two upheld the gun-carriage , four were at the wheels ; others followed with the caisson . 
They could see the smoke of the burning lint-stock . 
`` Fire ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The whole barricade fired , the report was terrible ; an avalanche of smoke covered and effaced both cannon and men ; after a few seconds , the cloud dispersed , and the cannon and men re-appeared ; the gun-crew had just finished rolling it slowly , correctly , without haste , into position facing the barricade . 
Not one of them had been struck . 
Then the captain of the piece , bearing down upon the breech in order to raise the muzzle , began to point the cannon with the gravity of an astronomer levelling a telescope . 
`` Bravo for the cannoneers ! '' 
cried Bossuet . 
And the whole barricade clapped their hands . 
A moment later , squarely planted in the very middle of the street , astride of the gutter , the piece was ready for action . 
A formidable pair of jaws yawned on the barricade . 
`` Come , merrily now ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` That 's the brutal part of it . 
After the fillip on the nose , the blow from the fist . 
The army is reaching out its big paw to us . 
The barricade is going to be severely shaken up . 
The fusillade tries , the cannon takes . '' 
`` It is a piece of eight , new model , brass , '' added Combeferre . 
`` Those pieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts of tin to one hundred of brass is exceeded . 
The excess of tin renders them too tender . 
Then it comes to pass that they have caves and chambers when looked at from the vent hole . 
In order to obviate this danger , and to render it possible to force the charge , it may become necessary to return to the process of the fourteenth century , hooping , and to encircle the piece on the outside with a series of unwelded steel bands , from the breech to the trunnions . 
In the meantime , they remedy this defect as best they may ; they manage to discover where the holes are located in the vent of a cannon , by means of a searcher . 
But there is a better method , with Gribeauval 's movable star . '' 
`` In the sixteenth century , '' remarked Bossuet , `` they used to rifle cannon . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` that augments the projectile force , but diminishes the accuracy of the firing . 
In firing at short range , the trajectory is not as rigid as could be desired , the parabola is exaggerated , the line of the projectile is no longer sufficiently rectilinear to allow of its striking intervening objects , which is , nevertheless , a necessity of battle , the importance of which increases with the proximity of the enemy and the precipitation of the discharge . 
This defect of the tension of the curve of the projectile in the rifled cannon of the sixteenth century arose from the smallness of the charge ; small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by the ballistic necessities , such , for instance , as the preservation of the gun-carriage . 
In short , that despot , the cannon , can not do all that it desires ; force is a great weakness . 
A cannon-ball only travels six hundred leagues an hour ; light travels seventy thousand leagues a second . 
Such is the superiority of Jesus Christ over Napoleon . '' 
`` Reload your guns , '' said Enjolras . 
How was the casing of the barricade going to behave under the cannon-balls ? 
Would they effect a breach ? 
That was the question . 
While the insurgents were reloading their guns , the artillery-men were loading the cannon . 
The anxiety in the redoubt was profound . 
The shot sped the report burst forth . 
`` Present ! '' 
shouted a joyous voice . 
And Gavroche flung himself into the barricade just as the ball dashed against it . 
He came from the direction of the Rue du Cygne , and he had nimbly climbed over the auxiliary barricade which fronted on the labyrinth of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Gavroche produced a greater sensation in the barricade than the cannon-ball . 
The ball buried itself in the mass of rubbish . 
At the most there was an omnibus wheel broken , and the old Anceau cart was demolished . 
On seeing this , the barricade burst into a laugh . 
`` Go on ! '' 
shouted Bossuet to the artillerists . 
THE ARTILLERY-MEN COMPEL PEOPLE TO TAKE THEM SERIOUSLY Thet flocked round Gavroche . 
But he had no time to tell anything . 
Marius drew him aside with a shudder . 
`` What are you doing here ? '' 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said the child , `` what are you doing here yourself ? '' 
And he stared at Marius intently with his epic effrontery . 
His eyes grew larger with the proud light within them . 
It was with an accent of severity that Marius continued : `` Who told you to come back ? 
Did you deliver my letter at the address ? '' 
Gavroche was not without some compunctions in the matter of that letter . 
In his haste to return to the barricade , he had got rid of it rather than delivered it . 
He was forced to acknowledge to himself that he had confided it rather lightly to that stranger whose face he had not been able to make out . 
It is true that the man was bareheaded , but that was not sufficient . 
In short , he had been administering to himself little inward remonstrances and he feared Marius ' reproaches . 
In order to extricate himself from the predicament , he took the simplest course ; he lied abominably . 
`` Citizen , I delivered the letter to the porter . 
The lady was asleep . 
She will have the letter when she wakes up . 
Marius had had two objects in sending that letter : to bid farewell to Cosette and to save Gavroche . 
He was obliged to content himself with the half of his desire . 
The despatch of his letter and the presence of M. Fauchelevent in the barricade , was a coincidence which occurred to him . 
He pointed out M. Fauchelevent to Gavroche . 
`` Do you know that man ? '' 
`` No , '' said Gavroche . 
Gavroche had , in fact , as we have just mentioned , seen Jean Valjean only at night . 
The troubled and unhealthy conjectures which had outlined themselves in Marius ' mind were dissipated . 
Did he know M. Fauchelevent 's opinions ? 
Perhaps M. Fauchelevent was a republican . 
Hence his very natural presence in this combat . 
In the meanwhile , Gavroche was shouting , at the other end of the barricade : `` My gun ! '' 
Courfeyrac had it returned to him . 
Gavroche warned `` his comrades '' as he called them , that the barricade was blocked . 
He had had great difficulty in reaching it . 
A battalion of the line whose arms were piled in the Rue de la Petite Truanderie was on the watch on the side of the Rue du Cygne ; on the opposite side , the municipal guard occupied the Rue des Precheurs . 
The bulk of the army was facing them in front . 
This information given , Gavroche added : `` I authorize you to hit 'em a tremendous whack . '' 
Meanwhile , Enjolras was straining his ears and watching at his embrasure . 
The assailants , dissatisfied , no doubt , with their shot , had not repeated it . 
A company of infantry of the line had come up and occupied the end of the street behind the piece of ordnance . 
The soldiers were tearing up the pavement and constructing with the stones a small , low wall , a sort of side-work not more than eighteen inches high , and facing the barricade . 
In the angle at the left of this epaulement , there was visible the head of the column of a battalion from the suburbs massed in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
Enjolras , on the watch , thought he distinguished the peculiar sound which is produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from the caissons , and he saw the commander of the piece change the elevation and incline the mouth of the cannon slightly to the left . 
Then the cannoneers began to load the piece . 
The chief seized the lint-stock himself and lowered it to the vent . 
`` Down with your heads , hug the wall ! '' 
shouted Enjolras , `` and all on your knees along the barricade ! '' 
The insurgents who were straggling in front of the wine-shop , and who had quitted their posts of combat on Gavroche 's arrival , rushed pell-mell towards the barricade ; but before Enjolras ' order could be executed , the discharge took place with the terrifying rattle of a round of grape-shot . 
This is what it was , in fact . 
The charge had been aimed at the cut in the redoubt , and had there rebounded from the wall ; and this terrible rebound had produced two dead and three wounded . 
If this were continued , the barricade was no longer tenable . 
The grape-shot made its way in . 
A murmur of consternation arose . 
`` Let us prevent the second discharge , '' said Enjolras . 
And , lowering his rifle , he took aim at the captain of the gun , who , at that moment , was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifying and definitely fixing its pointing . 
The captain of the piece was a handsome sergeant of artillery , very young , blond , with a very gentle face , and the intelligent air peculiar to that predestined and redoubtable weapon which , by dint of perfecting itself in horror , must end in killing war . 
Combeferre , who was standing beside Enjolras , scrutinized this young man . 
`` What a pity ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` What hideous things these butcheries are ! 
Come , when there are no more kings , there will be no more war . 
Enjolras , you are taking aim at that sergeant , you are not looking at him . 
Fancy , he is a charming young man ; he is intrepid ; it is evident that he is thoughtful ; those young artillery-men are very well educated ; he has a father , a mother , a family ; he is probably in love ; he is not more than five and twenty at the most ; he might be your brother . '' 
`` He is , '' said Enjolras . 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` he is mine too . 
Well , let us not kill him . '' 
`` Let me alone . 
It must be done . '' 
And a tear trickled slowly down Enjolras ' marble cheek . 
At the same moment , he pressed the trigger of his rifle . 
The flame leaped forth . 
The artillery-man turned round twice , his arms extended in front of him , his head uplifted , as though for breath , then he fell with his side on the gun , and lay there motionless . 
They could see his back , from the centre of which there flowed directly a stream of blood . 
The ball had traversed his breast from side to side . 
He was dead . 
He had to be carried away and replaced by another . 
Several minutes were thus gained , in fact . 
EMPLOYMENT OF THE OLD TALENTS OF A POACHER AND THAT INFALLIBLE MARKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 1796 Opinions were exchanged in the barricade . 
The firing from the gun was about to begin again . 
Against that grape-shot , they could not hold out a quarter of an hour longer . 
It was absolutely necessary to deaden the blows . 
Enjolras issued this command : `` We must place a mattress there . '' 
`` We have none , '' said Combeferre , `` the wounded are lying on them . '' 
Jean Valjean , who was seated apart on a stone post , at the corner of the tavern , with his gun between his knees , had , up to that moment , taken no part in anything that was going on . 
He did not appear to hear the combatants saying around him : `` Here is a gun that is doing nothing . '' 
At the order issued by Enjolras , he rose . 
It will be remembered that , on the arrival of the rabble in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , an old woman , foreseeing the bullets , had placed her mattress in front of her window . 
This window , an attic window , was on the roof of a six-story house situated a little beyond the barricade . 
The mattress , placed cross-wise , supported at the bottom on two poles for drying linen , was upheld at the top by two ropes , which , at that distance , looked like two threads , and which were attached to two nails planted in the window frames . 
These ropes were distinctly visible , like hairs , against the sky . 
`` Can some one lend me a double-barrelled rifle ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
Enjolras , who had just re-loaded his , handed it to him . 
Jean Valjean took aim at the attic window and fired . 
One of the mattress ropes was cut . 
The mattress now hung by one thread only . 
Jean Valjean fired the second charge . 
The second rope lashed the panes of the attic window . 
The mattress slipped between the two poles and fell into the street . 
The barricade applauded . 
All voices cried : `` Here is a mattress ! '' 
`` Yes , '' said Combeferre , `` but who will go and fetch it ? '' 
The mattress had , in fact , fallen outside the barricade , between besiegers and besieged . 
Now , the death of the sergeant of artillery having exasperated the troop , the soldiers had , for several minutes , been lying flat on their stomachs behind the line of paving-stones which they had erected , and , in order to supply the forced silence of the piece , which was quiet while its service was in course of reorganization , they had opened fire on the barricade . 
The insurgents did not reply to this musketry , in order to spare their ammunition The fusillade broke against the barricade ; but the street , which it filled , was terrible . 
Jean Valjean stepped out of the cut , entered the street , traversed the storm of bullets , walked up to the mattress , hoisted it upon his back , and returned to the barricade . 
He placed the mattress in the cut with his own hands . 
He fixed it there against the wall in such a manner that the artillery-men should not see it . 
That done , they awaited the next discharge of grape-shot . 
It was not long in coming . 
The cannon vomited forth its package of buck-shot with a roar . 
But there was no rebound . 
The effect which they had foreseen had been attained . 
The barricade was saved . 
`` Citizen , '' said Enjolras to Jean Valjean , `` the Republic thanks you . '' 
Bossuet admired and laughed . 
He exclaimed : `` It is immoral that a mattress should have so much power . 
Triumph of that which yields over that which strikes with lightning . 
But never mind , glory to the mattress which annuls a cannon ! '' 
DAWN At that moment , Cosette awoke . 
Her chamber was narrow , neat , unobtrusive , with a long sash-window , facing the East on the back court-yard of the house . 
Cosette knew nothing of what was going on in Paris . 
She had not been there on the preceding evening , and she had already retired to her chamber when Toussaint had said : `` It appears that there is a row . '' 
Cosette had slept only a few hours , but soundly . 
She had had sweet dreams , which possibly arose from the fact that her little bed was very white . 
Some one , who was Marius , had appeared to her in the light . 
She awoke with the sun in her eyes , which , at first , produced on her the effect of being a continuation of her dream . 
Her first thought on emerging from this dream was a smiling one . 
Cosette felt herself thoroughly reassured . 
Like Jean Valjean , she had , a few hours previously , passed through that reaction of the soul which absolutely will not hear of unhappiness . 
She began to cherish hope , with all her might , without knowing why . 
Then she felt a pang at her heart . 
It was three days since she had seen Marius . 
But she said to herself that he must have received her letter , that he knew where she was , and that he was so clever that he would find means of reaching her . 
-- And that certainly to-day , and perhaps that very morning . 
-- It was broad daylight , but the rays of light were very horizontal ; she thought that it was very early , but that she must rise , nevertheless , in order to receive Marius . 
She felt that she could not live without Marius , and that , consequently , that was sufficient and that Marius would come . 
No objection was valid . 
All this was certain . 
It was monstrous enough already to have suffered for three days . 
Marius absent three days , this was horrible on the part of the good God . 
Now , this cruel teasing from on high had been gone through with . 
Marius was about to arrive , and he would bring good news . 
Youth is made thus ; it quickly dries its eyes ; it finds sorrow useless and does not accept it . 
Youth is the smile of the future in the presence of an unknown quantity , which is itself . 
It is natural to it to be happy . 
It seems as though its respiration were made of hope . 
Moreover , Cosette could not remember what Marius had said to her on the subject of this absence which was to last only one day , and what explanation of it he had given her . 
Every one has noticed with what nimbleness a coin which one has dropped on the ground rolls away and hides , and with what art it renders itself undiscoverable . 
There are thoughts which play us the same trick ; they nestle away in a corner of our brain ; that is the end of them ; they are lost ; it is impossible to lay the memory on them . 
Cosette was somewhat vexed at the useless little effort made by her memory . 
She told herself , that it was very naughty and very wicked of her , to have forgotten the words uttered by Marius . 
She sprang out of bed and accomplished the two ablutions of soul and body , her prayers and her toilet . 
One may , in a case of exigency , introduce the reader into a nuptial chamber , not into a virginal chamber . 
Verse would hardly venture it , prose must not . 
It is the interior of a flower that is not yet unfolded , it is whiteness in the dark , it is the private cell of a closed lily , which must not be gazed upon by man so long as the sun has not gazed upon it . 
Woman in the bud is sacred . 
That innocent bud which opens , that adorable half-nudity which is afraid of itself , that white foot which takes refuge in a slipper , that throat which veils itself before a mirror as though a mirror were an eye , that chemise which makes haste to rise up and conceal the shoulder for a creaking bit of furniture or a passing vehicle , those cords tied , those clasps fastened , those laces drawn , those tremors , those shivers of cold and modesty , that exquisite affright in every movement , that almost winged uneasiness where there is no cause for alarm , the successive phases of dressing , as charming as the clouds of dawn , -- it is not fitting that all this should be narrated , and it is too much to have even called attention to it . 
The eye of man must be more religious in the presence of the rising of a young girl than in the presence of the rising of a star . 
The possibility of hurting should inspire an augmentation of respect . 
The down on the peach , the bloom on the plum , the radiated crystal of the snow , the wing of the butterfly powdered with feathers , are coarse compared to that chastity which does not even know that it is chaste . 
The young girl is only the flash of a dream , and is not yet a statue . 
Her bed-chamber is hidden in the sombre part of the ideal . 
The indiscreet touch of a glance brutalizes this vague penumbra . 
Here , contemplation is profanation . 
We shall , therefore , show nothing of that sweet little flutter of Cosette 's rising . 
An oriental tale relates how the rose was made white by God , but that Adam looked upon her when she was unfolding , and she was ashamed and turned crimson . 
We are of the number who fall speechless in the presence of young girls and flowers , since we think them worthy of veneration . 
Cosette dressed herself very hastily , combed and dressed her hair , which was a very simple matter in those days , when women did not swell out their curls and bands with cushions and puffs , and did not put crinoline in their locks . 
Then she opened the window and cast her eyes around her in every direction , hoping to descry some bit of the street , an angle of the house , an edge of pavement , so that she might be able to watch for Marius there . 
But no view of the outside was to be had . 
The back court was surrounded by tolerably high walls , and the outlook was only on several gardens . 
Cosette pronounced these gardens hideous : for the first time in her life , she found flowers ugly . 
The smallest scrap of the gutter of the street would have met her wishes better . 
She decided to gaze at the sky , as though she thought that Marius might come from that quarter . 
All at once , she burst into tears . 
Not that this was fickleness of soul ; but hopes cut in twain by dejection -- that was her case . 
She had a confused consciousness of something horrible . 
Thoughts were rife in the air , in fact . 
She told herself that she was not sure of anything , that to withdraw herself from sight was to be lost ; and the idea that Marius could return to her from heaven appeared to her no longer charming but mournful . 
Then , as is the nature of these clouds , calm returned to her , and hope and a sort of unconscious smile , which yet indicated trust in God . 
Every one in the house was still asleep . 
A country-like silence reigned . 
Not a shutter had been opened . 
The porter 's lodge was closed . 
Toussaint had not risen , and Cosette , naturally , thought that her father was asleep . 
She must have suffered much , and she must have still been suffering greatly , for she said to herself , that her father had been unkind ; but she counted on Marius . 
The eclipse of such a light was decidedly impossible . 
Now and then , she heard sharp shocks in the distance , and she said : `` It is odd that people should be opening and shutting their carriage gates so early . '' 
They were the reports of the cannon battering the barricade . 
A few feet below Cosette 's window , in the ancient and perfectly black cornice of the wall , there was a martin 's nest ; the curve of this nest formed a little projection beyond the cornice , so that from above it was possible to look into this little paradise . 
The mother was there , spreading her wings like a fan over her brood ; the father fluttered about , flew away , then came back , bearing in his beak food and kisses . 
The dawning day gilded this happy thing , the great law , `` Multiply , '' lay there smiling and august , and that sweet mystery unfolded in the glory of the morning . 
Cosette , with her hair in the sunlight , her soul absorbed in chimeras , illuminated by love within and by the dawn without , bent over mechanically , and almost without daring to avow to herself that she was thinking at the same time of Marius , began to gaze at these birds , at this family , at that male and female , that mother and her little ones , with the profound trouble which a nest produces on a virgin . 
THE SHOT WHICH MISSES NOTHING AND KILLS NO ONE The assailants ' fire continued . 
Musketry and grape-shot alternated , but without committing great ravages , to tell the truth . 
The top alone of the Corinthe facade suffered ; the window on the first floor , and the attic window in the roof , riddled with buck-shot and biscaiens , were slowly losing their shape . 
The combatants who had been posted there had been obliged to withdraw . 
However , this is according to the tactics of barricades ; to fire for a long while , in order to exhaust the insurgents ' ammunition , if they commit the mistake of replying . 
When it is perceived , from the slackening of their fire , that they have no more powder and ball , the assault is made . 
Enjolras had not fallen into this trap ; the barricade did not reply . 
At every discharge by platoons , Gavroche puffed out his cheek with his tongue , a sign of supreme disdain . 
`` Good for you , '' said he , `` rip up the cloth . 
We want some lint . '' 
Courfeyrac called the grape-shot to order for the little effect which it produced , and said to the cannon : `` You are growing diffuse , my good fellow . '' 
One gets puzzled in battle , as at a ball . 
It is probable that this silence on the part of the redoubt began to render the besiegers uneasy , and to make them fear some unexpected incident , and that they felt the necessity of getting a clear view behind that heap of paving-stones , and of knowing what was going on behind that impassable wall which received blows without retorting . 
The insurgents suddenly perceived a helmet glittering in the sun on a neighboring roof . 
A fireman had placed his back against a tall chimney , and seemed to be acting as sentinel . 
His glance fell directly down into the barricade . 
`` There 's an embarrassing watcher , '' said Enjolras . 
Jean Valjean had returned Enjolras ' rifle , but he had his own gun . 
Without saying a word , he took aim at the fireman , and , a second later , the helmet , smashed by a bullet , rattled noisily into the street . 
The terrified soldier made haste to disappear . 
A second observer took his place . 
This one was an officer . 
Jean Valjean , who had re-loaded his gun , took aim at the newcomer and sent the officer 's casque to join the soldier 's . 
The officer did not persist , and retired speedily . 
This time the warning was understood . 
No one made his appearance thereafter on that roof ; and the idea of spying on the barricade was abandoned . 
`` Why did you not kill the man ? '' 
Bossuet asked Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean made no reply . 
DISORDER A PARTISAN OF ORDER Bossuet muttered in Combeferre 's ear : `` He did not answer my question . '' 
`` He is a man who does good by gun-shots , '' said Combeferre . 
Those who have preserved some memory of this already distant epoch know that the National Guard from the suburbs was valiant against insurrections . 
It was particularly zealous and intrepid in the days of June , 1832 . 
A certain good dram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or la Cunette , whose `` establishment '' had been closed by the riots , became leonine at the sight of his deserted dance-hall , and got himself killed to preserve the order represented by a tea-garden . 
In that bourgeois and heroic time , in the presence of ideas which had their knights , interests had their paladins . 
The prosiness of the originators detracted nothing from the bravery of the movement . 
The diminution of a pile of crowns made bankers sing the Marseillaise . 
They shed their blood lyrically for the counting-house ; and they defended the shop , that immense diminutive of the fatherland , with Lacedaemonian enthusiasm . 
At bottom , we will observe , there was nothing in all this that was not extremely serious . 
It was social elements entering into strife , while awaiting the day when they should enter into equilibrium . 
Another sign of the times was the anarchy mingled with governmentalism -LSB- the barbarous name of the correct party -RSB- . 
People were for order in combination with lack of discipline . 
The drum suddenly beat capricious calls , at the command of such or such a Colonel of the National Guard ; such and such a captain went into action through inspiration ; such and such National Guardsmen fought , `` for an idea , '' and on their own account . 
At critical moments , on `` days '' they took counsel less of their leaders than of their instincts . 
There existed in the army of order , veritable guerilleros , some of the sword , like Fannicot , others of the pen , like Henri Fonfrede . 
Civilization , unfortunately , represented at this epoch rather by an aggregation of interests than by a group of principles , was or thought itself , in peril ; it set up the cry of alarm ; each , constituting himself a centre , defended it , succored it , and protected it with his own head ; and the first comer took it upon himself to save society . 
Zeal sometimes proceeded to extermination . 
A platoon of the National Guard would constitute itself on its own authority a private council of war , and judge and execute a captured insurgent in five minutes . 
It was an improvisation of this sort that had slain Jean Prouvaire . 
Fierce Lynch law , with which no one party had any right to reproach the rest , for it has been applied by the Republic in America , as well as by the monarchy in Europe . 
This Lynch law was complicated with mistakes . 
On one day of rioting , a young poet , named Paul Aime Garnier , was pursued in the Place Royale , with a bayonet at his loins , and only escaped by taking refuge under the porte-cochere of No. 6 . 
They shouted : -- `` There 's another of those Saint-Simonians ! '' 
and they wanted to kill him . 
Now , he had under his arm a volume of the memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon . 
A National Guard had read the words Saint-Simon on the book , and had shouted : `` Death ! '' 
On the 6th of June , 1832 , a company of the National Guards from the suburbs , commanded by the Captain Fannicot , above mentioned , had itself decimated in the Rue de la Chanvrerie out of caprice and its own good pleasure . 
This fact , singular though it may seem , was proved at the judicial investigation opened in consequence of the insurrection of 1832 . 
Captain Fannicot , a bold and impatient bourgeois , a sort of condottiere of the order of those whom we have just characterized , a fanatical and intractable governmentalist , could not resist the temptation to fire prematurely , and the ambition of capturing the barricade alone and unaided , that is to say , with his company . 
Exasperated by the successive apparition of the red flag and the old coat which he took for the black flag , he loudly blamed the generals and chiefs of the corps , who were holding council and did not think that the moment for the decisive assault had arrived , and who were allowing `` the insurrection to fry in its own fat , '' to use the celebrated expression of one of them . 
For his part , he thought the barricade ripe , and as that which is ripe ought to fall , he made the attempt . 
He commanded men as resolute as himself , `` raging fellows , '' as a witness said . 
His company , the same which had shot Jean Prouvaire the poet , was the first of the battalion posted at the angle of the street . 
At the moment when they were least expecting it , the captain launched his men against the barricade . 
This movement , executed with more good will than strategy , cost the Fannicot company dear . 
Before it had traversed two thirds of the street it was received by a general discharge from the barricade . 
Four , the most audacious , who were running on in front , were mown down point-blank at the very foot of the redoubt , and this courageous throng of National Guards , very brave men but lacking in military tenacity , were forced to fall back , after some hesitation , leaving fifteen corpses on the pavement . 
This momentary hesitation gave the insurgents time to re-load their weapons , and a second and very destructive discharge struck the company before it could regain the corner of the street , its shelter . 
A moment more , and it was caught between two fires , and it received the volley from the battery piece which , not having received the order , had not discontinued its firing . 
The intrepid and imprudent Fannicot was one of the dead from this grape-shot . 
He was killed by the cannon , that is to say , by order . 
This attack , which was more furious than serious , irritated Enjolras . 
-- `` The fools ! '' 
said he . 
`` They are getting their own men killed and they are using up our ammunition for nothing . '' 
Enjolras spoke like the real general of insurrection which he was . 
Insurrection and repression do not fight with equal weapons . 
Insurrection , which is speedily exhausted , has only a certain number of shots to fire and a certain number of combatants to expend . 
An empty cartridge-box , a man killed , can not be replaced . 
As repression has the army , it does not count its men , and , as it has Vincennes , it does not count its shots . 
Repression has as many regiments as the barricade has men , and as many arsenals as the barricade has cartridge-boxes . 
Thus they are struggles of one against a hundred , which always end in crushing the barricade ; unless the revolution , uprising suddenly , flings into the balance its flaming archangel 's sword . 
This does happen sometimes . 
Then everything rises , the pavements begin to seethe , popular redoubts abound . 
Paris quivers supremely , the quid divinum is given forth , a 10th of August is in the air , a 29th of July is in the air , a wonderful light appears , the yawning maw of force draws back , and the army , that lion , sees before it , erect and tranquil , that prophet , France . 
PASSING GLEAMS In the chaos of sentiments and passions which defend a barricade , there is a little of everything ; there is bravery , there is youth , honor , enthusiasm , the ideal , conviction , the rage of the gambler , and , above all , intermittences of hope . 
One of these intermittences , one of these vague quivers of hope suddenly traversed the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie at the moment when it was least expected . 
`` Listen , '' suddenly cried Enjolras , who was still on the watch , `` it seems to me that Paris is waking up . '' 
It is certain that , on the morning of the 6th of June , the insurrection broke out afresh for an hour or two , to a certain extent . 
The obstinacy of the alarm peal of Saint-Merry reanimated some fancies . 
Barricades were begun in the Rue du Poirier and the Rue des Gravilliers . 
In front of the Porte Saint-Martin , a young man , armed with a rifle , attacked alone a squadron of cavalry . 
In plain sight , on the open boulevard , he placed one knee on the ground , shouldered his weapon , fired , killed the commander of the squadron , and turned away , saying : `` There 's another who will do us no more harm . '' 
He was put to the sword . 
In the Rue Saint-Denis , a woman fired on the National Guard from behind a lowered blind . 
The slats of the blind could be seen to tremble at every shot . 
A child fourteen years of age was arrested in the Rue de la Cossonerie , with his pockets full of cartridges . 
Many posts were attacked . 
At the entrance to the Rue Bertin-Poiree , a very lively and utterly unexpected fusillade welcomed a regiment of cuirrassiers , at whose head marched Marshal General Cavaignac de Barague . 
In the Rue Planche-Mibray , they threw old pieces of pottery and household utensils down on the soldiers from the roofs ; a bad sign ; and when this matter was reported to Marshal Soult , Napoleon 's old lieutenant grew thoughtful , as he recalled Suchet 's saying at Saragossa : `` We are lost when the old women empty their pots de chambre on our heads . '' 
These general symptoms which presented themselves at the moment when it was thought that the uprising had been rendered local , this fever of wrath , these sparks which flew hither and thither above those deep masses of combustibles which are called the faubourgs of Paris , -- all this , taken together , disturbed the military chiefs . 
They made haste to stamp out these beginnings of conflagration . 
They delayed the attack on the barricades Maubuee , de la Chanvrerie and Saint-Merry until these sparks had been extinguished , in order that they might have to deal with the barricades only and be able to finish them at one blow . 
Columns were thrown into the streets where there was fermentation , sweeping the large , sounding the small , right and left , now slowly and cautiously , now at full charge . 
The troops broke in the doors of houses whence shots had been fired ; at the same time , manoeuvres by the cavalry dispersed the groups on the boulevards . 
This repression was not effected without some commotion , and without that tumultuous uproar peculiar to collisions between the army and the people . 
This was what Enjolras had caught in the intervals of the cannonade and the musketry . 
Moreover , he had seen wounded men passing the end of the street in litters , and he said to Courfeyrac : -- `` Those wounded do not come from us . '' 
Their hope did not last long ; the gleam was quickly eclipsed . 
In less than half an hour , what was in the air vanished , it was a flash of lightning unaccompanied by thunder , and the insurgents felt that sort of leaden cope , which the indifference of the people casts over obstinate and deserted men , fall over them once more . 
The general movement , which seemed to have assumed a vague outline , had miscarried ; and the attention of the minister of war and the strategy of the generals could now be concentrated on the three or four barricades which still remained standing . 
The sun was mounting above the horizon . 
An insurgent hailed Enjolras . 
`` We are hungry here . 
Are we really going to die like this , without anything to eat ? '' 
Enjolras , who was still leaning on his elbows at his embrasure , made an affirmative sign with his head , but without taking his eyes from the end of the street . 
WHEREIN WILL APPEAR THE NAME OF ENJOLRAS ' MISTRESS Courfeyrac , seated on a paving-stone beside Enjolras , continued to insult the cannon , and each time that that gloomy cloud of projectiles which is called grape-shot passed overhead with its terrible sound he assailed it with a burst of irony . 
`` You are wearing out your lungs , poor , brutal , old fellow , you pain me , you are wasting your row . 
That 's not thunder , it 's a cough . '' 
And the bystanders laughed . 
Courfeyrac and Bossuet , whose brave good humor increased with the peril , like Madame Scarron , replaced nourishment with pleasantry , and , as wine was lacking , they poured out gayety to all . 
`` I admire Enjolras , '' said Bossuet . 
`` His impassive temerity astounds me . 
He lives alone , which renders him a little sad , perhaps ; Enjolras complains of his greatness , which binds him to widowhood . 
The rest of us have mistresses , more or less , who make us crazy , that is to say , brave . 
When a man is as much in love as a tiger , the least that he can do is to fight like a lion . 
That is one way of taking our revenge for the capers that mesdames our grisettes play on us . 
Roland gets himself killed for Angelique ; all our heroism comes from our women . 
A man without a woman is a pistol without a trigger ; it is the woman that sets the man off . 
Well , Enjolras has no woman . 
He is not in love , and yet he manages to be intrepid . 
It is a thing unheard of that a man should be as cold as ice and as bold as fire . '' 
Enjolras did not appear to be listening , but had any one been near him , that person would have heard him mutter in a low voice : `` Patria . '' 
Bossuet was still laughing when Courfeyrac exclaimed : `` News ! '' 
And assuming the tone of an usher making an announcement , he added : `` My name is Eight-Pounder . '' 
In fact , a new personage had entered on the scene . 
This was a second piece of ordnance . 
The artillery-men rapidly performed their manoeuvres in force and placed this second piece in line with the first . 
This outlined the catastrophe . 
A few minutes later , the two pieces , rapidly served , were firing point-blank at the redoubt ; the platoon firing of the line and of the soldiers from the suburbs sustained the artillery . 
Another cannonade was audible at some distance . 
At the same time that the two guns were furiously attacking the redoubt from the Rue de la Chanvrerie , two other cannons , trained one from the Rue Saint-Denis , the other from the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher , were riddling the Saint-Merry barricade . 
The four cannons echoed each other mournfully . 
The barking of these sombre dogs of war replied to each other . 
One of the two pieces which was now battering the barricade on the Rue de la Chanvrerie was firing grape-shot , the other balls . 
The piece which was firing balls was pointed a little high , and the aim was calculated so that the ball struck the extreme edge of the upper crest of the barricade , and crumbled the stone down upon the insurgents , mingled with bursts of grape-shot . 
The object of this mode of firing was to drive the insurgents from the summit of the redoubt , and to compel them to gather close in the interior , that is to say , this announced the assault . 
The combatants once driven from the crest of the barricade by balls , and from the windows of the cabaret by grape-shot , the attacking columns could venture into the street without being picked off , perhaps , even , without being seen , could briskly and suddenly scale the redoubt , as on the preceding evening , and , who knows ? 
take it by surprise . 
`` It is absolutely necessary that the inconvenience of those guns should be diminished , '' said Enjolras , and he shouted : `` Fire on the artillery-men ! '' 
All were ready . 
The barricade , which had long been silent , poured forth a desperate fire ; seven or eight discharges followed , with a sort of rage and joy ; the street was filled with blinding smoke , and , at the end of a few minutes , athwart this mist all streaked with flame , two thirds of the gunners could be distinguished lying beneath the wheels of the cannons . 
Those who were left standing continued to serve the pieces with severe tranquillity , but the fire had slackened . 
`` Things are going well now , '' said Bossuet to Enjolras . 
`` Success . '' 
Enjolras shook his head and replied : `` Another quarter of an hour of this success , and there will not be any cartridges left in the barricade . '' 
It appears that Gavroche overheard this remark . 
GAVROCHE OUTSIDE Courfeyrac suddenly caught sight of some one at the base of the barricade , outside in the street , amid the bullets . 
Gavroche had taken a bottle basket from the wine-shop , had made his way out through the cut , and was quietly engaged in emptying the full cartridge-boxes of the National Guardsmen who had been killed on the slope of the redoubt , into his basket . 
`` What are you doing there ? '' 
asked Courfeyrac . 
Gavroche raised his face : -- `` I 'm filling my basket , citizen . '' 
`` Do n't you see the grape-shot ? '' 
Gavroche replied : `` Well , it is raining . 
What then ? '' 
Courfeyrac shouted : -- `` Come in ! '' 
`` Instanter , '' said Gavroche . 
And with a single bound he plunged into the street . 
It will be remembered that Fannicot 's company had left behind it a trail of bodies . 
Twenty corpses lay scattered here and there on the pavement , through the whole length of the street . 
Twenty cartouches for Gavroche meant a provision of cartridges for the barricade . 
The smoke in the street was like a fog . 
Whoever has beheld a cloud which has fallen into a mountain gorge between two peaked escarpments can imagine this smoke rendered denser and thicker by two gloomy rows of lofty houses . 
It rose gradually and was incessantly renewed ; hence a twilight which made even the broad daylight turn pale . 
The combatants could hardly see each other from one end of the street to the other , short as it was . 
This obscurity , which had probably been desired and calculated on by the commanders who were to direct the assault on the barricade , was useful to Gavroche . 
Beneath the folds of this veil of smoke , and thanks to his small size , he could advance tolerably far into the street without being seen . 
He rifled the first seven or eight cartridge-boxes without much danger . 
He crawled flat on his belly , galloped on all fours , took his basket in his teeth , twisted , glided , undulated , wound from one dead body to another , and emptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens a nut . 
They did not dare to shout to him to return from the barricade , which was quite near , for fear of attracting attention to him . 
On one body , that of a corporal , he found a powder-flask . 
`` For thirst , '' said he , putting it in his pocket . 
By dint of advancing , he reached a point where the fog of the fusillade became transparent . 
So that the sharpshooters of the line ranged on the outlook behind their paving-stone dike and the sharpshooters of the banlieue massed at the corner of the street suddenly pointed out to each other something moving through the smoke . 
At the moment when Gavroche was relieving a sergeant , who was lying near a stone door-post , of his cartridges , a bullet struck the body . 
`` Fichtre ! '' 
ejaculated Gavroche . 
`` They are killing my dead men for me . '' 
A second bullet struck a spark from the pavement beside him . 
-- A third overturned his basket . 
Gavroche looked and saw that this came from the men of the banlieue . 
He sprang to his feet , stood erect , with his hair flying in the wind , his hands on his hips , his eyes fixed on the National Guardsmen who were firing , and sang : `` On est laid a Nanterre , `` Men are ugly at Nanterre , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Et bete a Palaiseau , And dull at Palaiseau , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
Then he picked up his basket , replaced the cartridges which had fallen from it , without missing a single one , and , advancing towards the fusillade , set about plundering another cartridge-box . 
There a fourth bullet missed him , again . 
Gavroche sang : `` Je ne suis pas notaire , `` I am not a notary , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Je suis un petit oiseau , I 'm a little bird , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
A fifth bullet only succeeded in drawing from him a third couplet . 
`` Joie est mon caractere , `` Joy is my character , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Misere est mon trousseau , Misery is my trousseau , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
Thus it went on for some time . 
It was a charming and terrible sight . 
Gavroche , though shot at , was teasing the fusillade . 
He had the air of being greatly diverted . 
It was the sparrow pecking at the sportsmen . 
To each discharge he retorted with a couplet . 
They aimed at him constantly , and always missed him . 
The National Guardsmen and the soldiers laughed as they took aim at him . 
He lay down , sprang to his feet , hid in the corner of a doorway , then made a bound , disappeared , re-appeared , scampered away , returned , replied to the grape-shot with his thumb at his nose , and , all the while , went on pillaging the cartouches , emptying the cartridge-boxes , and filling his basket . 
The insurgents , panting with anxiety , followed him with their eyes . 
The barricade trembled ; he sang . 
He was not a child , he was not a man ; he was a strange gamin-fairy . 
He might have been called the invulnerable dwarf of the fray . 
The bullets flew after him , he was more nimble than they . 
He played a fearful game of hide and seek with death ; every time that the flat-nosed face of the spectre approached , the urchin administered to it a fillip . 
One bullet , however , better aimed or more treacherous than the rest , finally struck the will-o ' - the-wisp of a child . 
Gavroche was seen to stagger , then he sank to the earth . 
The whole barricade gave vent to a cry ; but there was something of Antaeus in that pygmy ; for the gamin to touch the pavement is the same as for the giant to touch the earth ; Gavroche had fallen only to rise again ; he remained in a sitting posture , a long thread of blood streaked his face , he raised both arms in the air , glanced in the direction whence the shot had come , and began to sing : `` Je suis tombe par terre , `` I have fallen to the earth , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Le nez dans le ruisseau , With my nose in the gutter , C'est la faute a ... '' 'T is the fault of ... '' He did not finish . 
A second bullet from the same marksman stopped him short . 
This time he fell face downward on the pavement , and moved no more . 
This grand little soul had taken its flight . 
HOW FROM A BROTHER ONE BECOMES A FATHER At that same moment , in the garden of the Luxembourg , -- for the gaze of the drama must be everywhere present , -- two children were holding each other by the hand . 
One might have been seven years old , the other five . 
The rain having soaked them , they were walking along the paths on the sunny side ; the elder was leading the younger ; they were pale and ragged ; they had the air of wild birds . 
The smaller of them said : `` I am very hungry . '' 
The elder , who was already somewhat of a protector , was leading his brother with his left hand and in his right he carried a small stick . 
They were alone in the garden . 
The garden was deserted , the gates had been closed by order of the police , on account of the insurrection . 
The troops who had been bivouacking there had departed for the exigencies of combat . 
How did those children come there ? 
Perhaps they had escaped from some guard-house which stood ajar ; perhaps there was in the vicinity , at the Barriere d'Enfer ; or on the Esplanade de l'Observatoire , or in the neighboring carrefour , dominated by the pediment on which could be read : Invenerunt parvulum pannis involutum , some mountebank 's booth from which they had fled ; perhaps they had , on the preceding evening , escaped the eye of the inspectors of the garden at the hour of closing , and had passed the night in some one of those sentry-boxes where people read the papers ? 
The fact is , they were stray lambs and they seemed free . 
To be astray and to seem free is to be lost . 
These poor little creatures were , in fact , lost . 
These two children were the same over whom Gavroche had been put to some trouble , as the reader will recollect . 
Children of the Thenardiers , leased out to Magnon , attributed to M. Gillenormand , and now leaves fallen from all these rootless branches , and swept over the ground by the wind . 
Their clothing , which had been clean in Magnon 's day , and which had served her as a prospectus with M. Gillenormand , had been converted into rags . 
Henceforth these beings belonged to the statistics as `` Abandoned children , '' whom the police take note of , collect , mislay and find again on the pavements of Paris . 
It required the disturbance of a day like that to account for these miserable little creatures being in that garden . 
If the superintendents had caught sight of them , they would have driven such rags forth . 
Poor little things do not enter public gardens ; still , people should reflect that , as children , they have a right to flowers . 
These children were there , thanks to the locked gates . 
They were there contrary to the regulations . 
They had slipped into the garden and there they remained . 
Closed gates do not dismiss the inspectors , oversight is supposed to continue , but it grows slack and reposes ; and the inspectors , moved by the public anxiety and more occupied with the outside than the inside , no longer glanced into the garden , and had not seen the two delinquents . 
It had rained the night before , and even a little in the morning . 
But in June , showers do not count for much . 
An hour after a storm , it can hardly be seen that the beautiful blonde day has wept . 
The earth , in summer , is as quickly dried as the cheek of a child . 
At that period of the solstice , the light of full noonday is , so to speak , poignant . 
It takes everything . 
It applies itself to the earth , and superposes itself with a sort of suction . 
One would say that the sun was thirsty . 
A shower is but a glass of water ; a rainstorm is instantly drunk up . 
In the morning everything was dripping , in the afternoon everything is powdered over . 
Nothing is so worthy of admiration as foliage washed by the rain and wiped by the rays of sunlight ; it is warm freshness . 
The gardens and meadows , having water at their roots , and sun in their flowers , become perfuming-pans of incense , and smoke with all their odors at once . 
Everything smiles , sings and offers itself . 
One feels gently intoxicated . 
The springtime is a provisional paradise , the sun helps man to have patience . 
There are beings who demand nothing further ; mortals , who , having the azure of heaven , say : `` It is enough ! '' 
dreamers absorbed in the wonderful , dipping into the idolatry of nature , indifferent to good and evil , contemplators of cosmos and radiantly forgetful of man , who do not understand how people can occupy themselves with the hunger of these , and the thirst of those , with the nudity of the poor in winter , with the lymphatic curvature of the little spinal column , with the pallet , the attic , the dungeon , and the rags of shivering young girls , when they can dream beneath the trees ; peaceful and terrible spirits they , and pitilessly satisfied . 
Strange to say , the infinite suffices them . 
That great need of man , the finite , which admits of embrace , they ignore . 
The finite which admits of progress and sublime toil , they do not think about . 
The indefinite , which is born from the human and divine combination of the infinite and the finite , escapes them . 
Provided that they are face to face with immensity , they smile . 
Joy never , ecstasy forever . 
Their life lies in surrendering their personality in contemplation . 
The history of humanity is for them only a detailed plan . 
All is not there ; the true All remains without ; what is the use of busying oneself over that detail , man ? 
Man suffers , that is quite possible ; but look at Aldebaran rising ! 
The mother has no more milk , the new-born babe is dying . 
I know nothing about that , but just look at this wonderful rosette which a slice of wood-cells of the pine presents under the microscope ! 
Compare the most beautiful Mechlin lace to that if you can ! 
These thinkers forget to love . 
The zodiac thrives with them to such a point that it prevents their seeing the weeping child . 
God eclipses their souls . 
This is a family of minds which are , at once , great and petty . 
Horace was one of them ; so was Goethe . 
La Fontaine perhaps ; magnificent egoists of the infinite , tranquil spectators of sorrow , who do not behold Nero if the weather be fair , for whom the sun conceals the funeral pile , who would look on at an execution by the guillotine in the search for an effect of light , who hear neither the cry nor the sob , nor the death rattle , nor the alarm peal , for whom everything is well , since there is a month of May , who , so long as there are clouds of purple and gold above their heads , declare themselves content , and who are determined to be happy until the radiance of the stars and the songs of the birds are exhausted . 
These are dark radiances . 
They have no suspicion that they are to be pitied . 
Certainly they are so . 
He who does not weep does not see . 
They are to be admired and pitied , as one would both pity and admire a being at once night and day , without eyes beneath his lashes but with a star on his brow . 
The indifference of these thinkers , is , according to some , a superior philosophy . 
That may be ; but in this superiority there is some infirmity . 
One may be immortal and yet limp : witness Vulcan . 
One may be more than man and less than man . 
There is incomplete immensity in nature . 
Who knows whether the sun is not a blind man ? 
But then , what ? 
In whom can we trust ? 
Solem quis dicere falsum audeat ? 
Who shall dare to say that the sun is false ? 
Thus certain geniuses , themselves , certain Very-Lofty mortals , man-stars , may be mistaken ? 
That which is on high at the summit , at the crest , at the zenith , that which sends down so much light on the earth , sees but little , sees badly , sees not at all ? 
Is not this a desperate state of things ? 
No . 
But what is there , then , above the sun ? 
The god . 
On the 6th of June , 1832 , about eleven o'clock in the morning , the Luxembourg , solitary and depopulated , was charming . 
The quincunxes and flower-beds shed forth balm and dazzling beauty into the sunlight . 
The branches , wild with the brilliant glow of midday , seemed endeavoring to embrace . 
In the sycamores there was an uproar of linnets , sparrows triumphed , woodpeckers climbed along the chestnut trees , administering little pecks on the bark . 
The flower-beds accepted the legitimate royalty of the lilies ; the most august of perfumes is that which emanates from whiteness . 
The peppery odor of the carnations was perceptible . 
The old crows of Marie de Medici were amorous in the tall trees . 
The sun gilded , empurpled , set fire to and lighted up the tulips , which are nothing but all the varieties of flame made into flowers . 
All around the banks of tulips the bees , the sparks of these flame-flowers , hummed . 
All was grace and gayety , even the impending rain ; this relapse , by which the lilies of the valley and the honeysuckles were destined to profit , had nothing disturbing about it ; the swallows indulged in the charming threat of flying low . 
He who was there aspired to happiness ; life smelled good ; all nature exhaled candor , help , assistance , paternity , caress , dawn . 
The thoughts which fell from heaven were as sweet as the tiny hand of a baby when one kisses it . 
The statues under the trees , white and nude , had robes of shadow pierced with light ; these goddesses were all tattered with sunlight ; rays hung from them on all sides . 
Around the great fountain , the earth was already dried up to the point of being burnt . 
There was sufficient breeze to raise little insurrections of dust here and there . 
A few yellow leaves , left over from the autumn , chased each other merrily , and seemed to be playing tricks on each other . 
This abundance of light had something indescribably reassuring about it . 
Life , sap , heat , odors overflowed ; one was conscious , beneath creation , of the enormous size of the source ; in all these breaths permeated with love , in this interchange of reverberations and reflections , in this marvellous expenditure of rays , in this infinite outpouring of liquid gold , one felt the prodigality of the inexhaustible ; and , behind this splendor as behind a curtain of flame , one caught a glimpse of God , that millionaire of stars . 
Thanks to the sand , there was not a speck of mud ; thanks to the rain , there was not a grain of ashes . 
The clumps of blossoms had just been bathed ; every sort of velvet , satin , gold and varnish , which springs from the earth in the form of flowers , was irreproachable . 
This magnificence was cleanly . 
The grand silence of happy nature filled the garden . 
A celestial silence that is compatible with a thousand sorts of music , the cooing of nests , the buzzing of swarms , the flutterings of the breeze . 
All the harmony of the season was complete in one gracious whole ; the entrances and exits of spring took place in proper order ; the lilacs ended ; the jasmines began ; some flowers were tardy , some insects in advance of their time ; the van-guard of the red June butterflies fraternized with the rear-guard of the white butterflies of May . 
The plantain trees were getting their new skins . 
The breeze hollowed out undulations in the magnificent enormity of the chestnut-trees . 
It was splendid . 
A veteran from the neighboring barracks , who was gazing through the fence , said : `` Here is the Spring presenting arms and in full uniform . '' 
All nature was breakfasting ; creation was at table ; this was its hour ; the great blue cloth was spread in the sky , and the great green cloth on earth ; the sun lighted it all up brilliantly . 
God was serving the universal repast . 
Each creature had his pasture or his mess . 
The ring-dove found his hemp-seed , the chaffinch found his millet , the goldfinch found chickweed , the red-breast found worms , the green finch found flies , the fly found infusoriae , the bee found flowers . 
They ate each other somewhat , it is true , which is the misery of evil mixed with good ; but not a beast of them all had an empty stomach . 
The two little abandoned creatures had arrived in the vicinity of the grand fountain , and , rather bewildered by all this light , they tried to hide themselves , the instinct of the poor and the weak in the presence of even impersonal magnificence ; and they kept behind the swans ' hutch . 
Here and there , at intervals , when the wind blew , shouts , clamor , a sort of tumultuous death rattle , which was the firing , and dull blows , which were discharges of cannon , struck the ear confusedly . 
Smoke hung over the roofs in the direction of the Halles . 
A bell , which had the air of an appeal , was ringing in the distance . 
These children did not appear to notice these noises . 
The little one repeated from time to time : `` I am hungry . '' 
Almost at the same instant with the children , another couple approached the great basin . 
They consisted of a goodman , about fifty years of age , who was leading by the hand a little fellow of six . 
No doubt , a father and his son . 
The little man of six had a big brioche . 
At that epoch , certain houses abutting on the river , in the Rues Madame and d'Enfer , had keys to the Luxembourg garden , of which the lodgers enjoyed the use when the gates were shut , a privilege which was suppressed later on . 
This father and son came from one of these houses , no doubt . 
The two poor little creatures watched `` that gentleman '' approaching , and hid themselves a little more thoroughly . 
He was a bourgeois . 
The same person , perhaps , whom Marius had one day heard , through his love fever , near the same grand basin , counselling his son `` to avoid excesses . '' 
He had an affable and haughty air , and a mouth which was always smiling , since it did not shut . 
This mechanical smile , produced by too much jaw and too little skin , shows the teeth rather than the soul . 
The child , with his brioche , which he had bitten into but had not finished eating , seemed satiated . 
The child was dressed as a National Guardsman , owing to the insurrection , and the father had remained clad as a bourgeois out of prudence . 
Father and son halted near the fountain where two swans were sporting . 
This bourgeois appeared to cherish a special admiration for the swans . 
He resembled them in this sense , that he walked like them . 
For the moment , the swans were swimming , which is their principal talent , and they were superb . 
If the two poor little beings had listened and if they had been of an age to understand , they might have gathered the words of this grave man . 
The father was saying to his son : `` The sage lives content with little . 
Look at me , my son . 
I do not love pomp . 
I am never seen in clothes decked with gold lace and stones ; I leave that false splendor to badly organized souls . '' 
Here the deep shouts which proceeded from the direction of the Halles burst out with fresh force of bell and uproar . 
`` What is that ? '' 
inquired the child . 
The father replied : `` It is the Saturnalia . '' 
All at once , he caught sight of the two little ragged boys behind the green swan-hutch . 
`` There is the beginning , '' said he . 
And , after a pause , he added : `` Anarchy is entering this garden . '' 
In the meanwhile , his son took a bite of his brioche , spit it out , and , suddenly burst out crying . 
`` What are you crying about ? '' 
demanded his father . 
`` I am not hungry any more , '' said the child . 
The father 's smile became more accentuated . 
`` One does not need to be hungry in order to eat a cake . '' 
`` My cake tires me . 
It is stale . '' 
`` Do n't you want any more of it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
The father pointed to the swans . 
`` Throw it to those palmipeds . '' 
The child hesitated . 
A person may not want any more of his cake ; but that is no reason for giving it away . 
The father went on : `` Be humane . 
You must have compassion on animals . '' 
And , taking the cake from his son , he flung it into the basin . 
The cake fell very near the edge . 
The swans were far away , in the centre of the basin , and busy with some prey . 
They had seen neither the bourgeois nor the brioche . 
The bourgeois , feeling that the cake was in danger of being wasted , and moved by this useless shipwreck , entered upon a telegraphic agitation , which finally attracted the attention of the swans . 
They perceived something floating , steered for the edge like ships , as they are , and slowly directed their course toward the brioche , with the stupid majesty which befits white creatures . 
`` The swans -LSB- cygnes -RSB- understand signs -LSB- signes -RSB- , '' said the bourgeois , delighted to make a jest . 
At that moment , the distant tumult of the city underwent another sudden increase . 
This time it was sinister . 
There are some gusts of wind which speak more distinctly than others . 
The one which was blowing at that moment brought clearly defined drum-beats , clamors , platoon firing , and the dismal replies of the tocsin and the cannon . 
This coincided with a black cloud which suddenly veiled the sun . 
The swans had not yet reached the brioche . 
`` Let us return home , '' said the father , `` they are attacking the Tuileries . '' 
He grasped his son 's hand again . 
Then he continued : `` From the Tuileries to the Luxembourg , there is but the distance which separates Royalty from the peerage ; that is not far . 
Shots will soon rain down . '' 
He glanced at the cloud . 
`` Perhaps it is rain itself that is about to shower down ; the sky is joining in ; the younger branch is condemned . 
Let us return home quickly . '' 
`` I should like to see the swans eat the brioche , '' said the child . 
The father replied : `` That would be imprudent . '' 
And he led his little bourgeois away . 
The son , regretting the swans , turned his head back toward the basin until a corner of the quincunxes concealed it from him . 
In the meanwhile , the two little waifs had approached the brioche at the same time as the swans . 
It was floating on the water . 
The smaller of them stared at the cake , the elder gazed after the retreating bourgeois . 
Father and son entered the labyrinth of walks which leads to the grand flight of steps near the clump of trees on the side of the Rue Madame . 
As soon as they had disappeared from view , the elder child hastily flung himself flat on his stomach on the rounding curb of the basin , and clinging to it with his left hand , and leaning over the water , on the verge of falling in , he stretched out his right hand with his stick towards the cake . 
The swans , perceiving the enemy , made haste , and in so doing , they produced an effect of their breasts which was of service to the little fisher ; the water flowed back before the swans , and one of these gentle concentric undulations softly floated the brioche towards the child 's wand . 
Just as the swans came up , the stick touched the cake . 
The child gave it a brisk rap , drew in the brioche , frightened away the swans , seized the cake , and sprang to his feet . 
The cake was wet ; but they were hungry and thirsty . 
The elder broke the cake into two portions , a large one and a small one , took the small one for himself , gave the large one to his brother , and said to him : `` Ram that into your muzzle . '' 
MORTUUS PATER FILIUM MORITURUM EXPECTAT Marius dashed out of the barricade , Combeferre followed him . 
But he was too late . 
Gavroche was dead . 
Combeferre brought back the basket of cartridges ; Marius bore the child . 
`` Alas ! '' 
he thought , `` that which the father had done for his father , he was requiting to the son ; only , Thenardier had brought back his father alive ; he was bringing back the child dead . '' 
When Marius re-entered the redoubt with Gavroche in his arms , his face , like the child , was inundated with blood . 
At the moment when he had stooped to lift Gavroche , a bullet had grazed his head ; he had not noticed it . 
Courfeyrac untied his cravat and with it bandaged Marius ' brow . 
They laid Gavroche on the same table with Mabeuf , and spread over the two corpses the black shawl . 
There was enough of it for both the old man and the child . 
Combeferre distributed the cartridges from the basket which he had brought in . 
This gave each man fifteen rounds to fire . 
Jean Valjean was still in the same place , motionless on his stone post . 
When Combeferre offered him his fifteen cartridges , he shook his head . 
`` Here 's a rare eccentric , '' said Combeferre in a low voice to Enjolras . 
`` He finds a way of not fighting in this barricade . '' 
`` Which does not prevent him from defending it , '' responded Enjolras . 
`` Heroism has its originals , '' resumed Combeferre . 
And Courfeyrac , who had overheard , added : `` He is another sort from Father Mabeuf . '' 
One thing which must be noted is , that the fire which was battering the barricade hardly disturbed the interior . 
Those who have never traversed the whirlwind of this sort of war can form no idea of the singular moments of tranquillity mingled with these convulsions . 
Men go and come , they talk , they jest , they lounge . 
Some one whom we know heard a combatant say to him in the midst of the grape-shot : `` We are here as at a bachelor breakfast . '' 
The redoubt of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , we repeat , seemed very calm within . 
All mutations and all phases had been , or were about to be , exhausted . 
The position , from critical , had become menacing , and , from menacing , was probably about to become desperate . 
In proportion as the situation grew gloomy , the glow of heroism empurpled the barricade more and more . 
Enjolras , who was grave , dominated it , in the attitude of a young Spartan sacrificing his naked sword to the sombre genius , Epidotas . 
Combeferre , wearing an apron , was dressing the wounds : Bossuet and Feuilly were making cartridges with the powder-flask picked up by Gavroche on the dead corporal , and Bossuet said to Feuilly : `` We are soon to take the diligence for another planet '' ; Courfeyrac was disposing and arranging on some paving-stones which he had reserved for himself near Enjolras , a complete arsenal , his sword-cane , his gun , two holster pistols , and a cudgel , with the care of a young girl setting a small dunkerque in order . 
Jean Valjean stared silently at the wall opposite him . 
An artisan was fastening Mother Hucheloup 's big straw hat on his head with a string , `` for fear of sun-stroke , '' as he said . 
The young men from the Cougourde d'Aix were chatting merrily among themselves , as though eager to speak patois for the last time . 
Joly , who had taken Widow Hucheloup 's mirror from the wall , was examining his tongue in it . 
Some combatants , having discovered a few crusts of rather mouldy bread , in a drawer , were eagerly devouring them . 
Marius was disturbed with regard to what his father was about to say to him . 
THE VULTURE BECOME PREY We must insist upon one psychological fact peculiar to barricades . 
Nothing which is characteristic of that surprising war of the streets should be omitted . 
Whatever may have been the singular inward tranquillity which we have just mentioned , the barricade , for those who are inside it , remains , none the less , a vision . 
There is something of the apocalypse in civil war , all the mists of the unknown are commingled with fierce flashes , revolutions are sphinxes , and any one who has passed through a barricade thinks he has traversed a dream . 
The feelings to which one is subject in these places we have pointed out in the case of Marius , and we shall see the consequences ; they are both more and less than life . 
On emerging from a barricade , one no longer knows what one has seen there . 
One has been terrible , but one knows it not . 
One has been surrounded with conflicting ideas which had human faces ; one 's head has been in the light of the future . 
There were corpses lying prone there , and phantoms standing erect . 
The hours were colossal and seemed hours of eternity . 
One has lived in death . 
Shadows have passed by . 
What were they ? 
One has beheld hands on which there was blood ; there was a deafening horror ; there was also a frightful silence ; there were open mouths which shouted , and other open mouths which held their peace ; one was in the midst of smoke , of night , perhaps . 
One fancied that one had touched the sinister ooze of unknown depths ; one stares at something red on one 's finger nails . 
One no longer remembers anything . 
Let us return to the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
All at once , between two discharges , the distant sound of a clock striking the hour became audible . 
`` It is midday , '' said Combeferre . 
The twelve strokes had not finished striking when Enjolras sprang to his feet , and from the summit of the barricade hurled this thundering shout : `` Carry stones up into the houses ; line the windowsills and the roofs with them . 
Half the men to their guns , the other half to the paving-stones . 
There is not a minute to be lost . '' 
A squad of sappers and miners , axe on shoulder , had just made their appearance in battle array at the end of the street . 
This could only be the head of a column ; and of what column ? 
The attacking column , evidently ; the sappers charged with the demolition of the barricade must always precede the soldiers who are to scale it . 
They were , evidently , on the brink of that moment which M. Clermont-Tonnerre , in 1822 , called `` the tug of war . '' 
Enjolras ' order was executed with the correct haste which is peculiar to ships and barricades , the only two scenes of combat where escape is impossible . 
In less than a minute , two thirds of the stones which Enjolras had had piled up at the door of Corinthe had been carried up to the first floor and the attic , and before a second minute had elapsed , these stones , artistically set one upon the other , walled up the sash-window on the first floor and the windows in the roof to half their height . 
A few loop-holes carefully planned by Feuilly , the principal architect , allowed of the passage of the gun-barrels . 
This armament of the windows could be effected all the more easily since the firing of grape-shot had ceased . 
The two cannons were now discharging ball against the centre of the barrier in order to make a hole there , and , if possible , a breach for the assault . 
When the stones destined to the final defence were in place , Enjolras had the bottles which he had set under the table where Mabeuf lay , carried to the first floor . 
`` Who is to drink that ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
`` They , '' replied Enjolras . 
Then they barricaded the window below , and held in readiness the iron cross-bars which served to secure the door of the wine-shop at night . 
The fortress was complete . 
The barricade was the rampart , the wine-shop was the dungeon . 
With the stones which remained they stopped up the outlet . 
As the defenders of a barricade are always obliged to be sparing of their ammunition , and as the assailants know this , the assailants combine their arrangements with a sort of irritating leisure , expose themselves to fire prematurely , though in appearance more than in reality , and take their ease . 
The preparations for attack are always made with a certain methodical deliberation ; after which , the lightning strikes . 
This deliberation permitted Enjolras to take a review of everything and to perfect everything . 
He felt that , since such men were to die , their death ought to be a masterpiece . 
He said to Marius : `` We are the two leaders . 
I will give the last orders inside . 
Do you remain outside and observe . '' 
Marius posted himself on the lookout upon the crest of the barricade . 
Enjolras had the door of the kitchen , which was the ambulance , as the reader will remember , nailed up . 
`` No splashing of the wounded , '' he said . 
He issued his final orders in the tap-room in a curt , but profoundly tranquil tone ; Feuilly listened and replied in the name of all . 
`` On the first floor , hold your axes in readiness to cut the staircase . 
Have you them ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Feuilly . 
`` How many ? '' 
`` Two axes and a pole-axe . '' 
`` That is good . 
There are now twenty-six combatants of us on foot . 
How many guns are there ? '' 
`` Thirty-four . '' 
`` Eight too many . 
Keep those eight guns loaded like the rest and at hand . 
Swords and pistols in your belts . 
Twenty men to the barricade . 
Six ambushed in the attic windows , and at the window on the first floor to fire on the assailants through the loop-holes in the stones . 
Let not a single worker remain inactive here . 
Presently , when the drum beats the assault , let the twenty below stairs rush to the barricade . 
The first to arrive will have the best places . '' 
These arrangements made , he turned to Javert and said : `` I am not forgetting you . '' 
And , laying a pistol on the table , he added : `` The last man to leave this room will smash the skull of this spy . '' 
`` Here ? '' 
inquired a voice . 
`` No , let us not mix their corpses with our own . 
The little barricade of the Mondetour lane can be scaled . 
It is only four feet high . 
The man is well pinioned . 
He shall be taken thither and put to death . '' 
There was some one who was more impassive at that moment than Enjolras , it was Javert . 
Here Jean Valjean made his appearance . 
He had been lost among the group of insurgents . 
He stepped forth and said to Enjolras : `` You are the commander ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You thanked me a while ago . '' 
`` In the name of the Republic . 
The barricade has two saviors , Marius Pontmercy and yourself . '' 
`` Do you think that I deserve a recompense ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
`` Well , I request one . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I may blow that man 's brains out . '' 
Javert raised his head , saw Jean Valjean , made an almost imperceptible movement , and said : `` That is just . '' 
As for Enjolras , he had begun to re-load his rifle ; he cut his eyes about him : `` No objections . '' 
And he turned to Jean Valjean : `` Take the spy . '' 
Jean Valjean did , in fact , take possession of Javert , by seating himself on the end of the table . 
He seized the pistol , and a faint click announced that he had cocked it . 
Almost at the same moment , a blast of trumpets became audible . 
`` Take care ! '' 
shouted Marius from the top of the barricade . 
Javert began to laugh with that noiseless laugh which was peculiar to him , and gazing intently at the insurgents , he said to them : `` You are in no better case than I am . '' 
`` All out ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The insurgents poured out tumultuously , and , as they went , received in the back , -- may we be permitted the expression , -- this sally of Javert 's : `` We shall meet again shortly ! '' 
JEAN VALJEAN TAKES HIS REVENGE When Jean Valjean was left alone with Javert , he untied the rope which fastened the prisoner across the middle of the body , and the knot of which was under the table . 
After this he made him a sign to rise . 
Javert obeyed with that indefinable smile in which the supremacy of enchained authority is condensed . 
Jean Valjean took Javert by the martingale , as one would take a beast of burden by the breast-band , and , dragging the latter after him , emerged from the wine-shop slowly , because Javert , with his impeded limbs , could take only very short steps . 
Jean Valjean had the pistol in his hand . 
In this manner they crossed the inner trapezium of the barricade . 
The insurgents , all intent on the attack , which was imminent , had their backs turned to these two . 
Marius alone , stationed on one side , at the extreme left of the barricade , saw them pass . 
This group of victim and executioner was illuminated by the sepulchral light which he bore in his own soul . 
Jean Valjean with some difficulty , but without relaxing his hold for a single instant , made Javert , pinioned as he was , scale the little entrenchment in the Mondetour lane . 
When they had crossed this barrier , they found themselves alone in the lane . 
No one saw them . 
Among the heap they could distinguish a livid face , streaming hair , a pierced hand and the half nude breast of a woman . 
It was Eponine . 
The corner of the houses hid them from the insurgents . 
The corpses carried away from the barricade formed a terrible pile a few paces distant . 
Javert gazed askance at this body , and , profoundly calm , said in a low tone : `` It strikes me that I know that girl . '' 
Then he turned to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean thrust the pistol under his arm and fixed on Javert a look which it required no words to interpret : `` Javert , it is I. '' Javert replied : `` Take your revenge . '' 
Jean Valjean drew from his pocket a knife , and opened it . 
`` A clasp-knife ! '' 
exclaimed Javert , `` you are right . 
That suits you better . '' 
Jean Valjean cut the martingale which Javert had about his neck , then he cut the cords on his wrists , then , stooping down , he cut the cord on his feet ; and , straightening himself up , he said to him : `` You are free . '' 
Javert was not easily astonished . 
Still , master of himself though he was , he could not repress a start . 
He remained open-mouthed and motionless . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` I do not think that I shall escape from this place . 
But if , by chance , I do , I live , under the name of Fauchelevent , in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
Javert snarled like a tiger , which made him half open one corner of his mouth , and he muttered between his teeth : `` Have a care . '' 
`` Go , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Javert began again : `` Thou saidst Fauchelevent , Rue de l'Homme Arme ? '' 
`` Number 7 . '' 
Javert repeated in a low voice : -- `` Number 7 . '' 
He buttoned up his coat once more , resumed the military stiffness between his shoulders , made a half turn , folded his arms and , supporting his chin on one of his hands , he set out in the direction of the Halles . 
Jean Valjean followed him with his eyes : A few minutes later , Javert turned round and shouted to Jean Valjean : `` You annoy me . 
Kill me , rather . '' 
Javert himself did not notice that he no longer addressed Jean Valjean as `` thou . '' 
`` Be off with you , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Javert retreated slowly . 
A moment later he turned the corner of the Rue des Precheurs . 
When Javert had disappeared , Jean Valjean fired his pistol in the air . 
Then he returned to the barricade and said : `` It is done . '' 
In the meanwhile , this is what had taken place . 
Marius , more intent on the outside than on the interior , had not , up to that time , taken a good look at the pinioned spy in the dark background of the tap-room . 
When he beheld him in broad daylight , striding over the barricade in order to proceed to his death , he recognized him . 
Something suddenly recurred to his mind . 
He recalled the inspector of the Rue de Pontoise , and the two pistols which the latter had handed to him and which he , Marius , had used in this very barricade , and not only did he recall his face , but his name as well . 
This recollection was misty and troubled , however , like all his ideas . 
It was not an affirmation that he made , but a question which he put to himself : `` Is not that the inspector of police who told me that his name was Javert ? '' 
Perhaps there was still time to intervene in behalf of that man . 
But , in the first place , he must know whether this was Javert . 
Marius called to Enjolras , who had just stationed himself at the other extremity of the barricade : `` Enjolras ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` What is the name of yonder man ? '' 
`` What man ? '' 
`` The police agent . 
Do you know his name ? '' 
`` Of course . 
He told us . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Marius sprang to his feet . 
At that moment , they heard the report of the pistol . 
Jean Valjean re-appeared and cried : `` It is done . '' 
A gloomy chill traversed Marius ' heart . 
THE DEAD ARE IN THE RIGHT AND THE LIVING ARE NOT IN THE WRONG The death agony of the barricade was about to begin . 
Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment ; a thousand mysterious crashes in the air , the breath of armed masses set in movement in the streets which were not visible , the intermittent gallop of cavalry , the heavy shock of artillery on the march , the firing by squads , and the cannonades crossing each other in the labyrinth of Paris , the smokes of battle mounting all gilded above the roofs , indescribable and vaguely terrible cries , lightnings of menace everywhere , the tocsin of Saint-Merry , which now had the accents of a sob , the mildness of the weather , the splendor of the sky filled with sun and clouds , the beauty of the day , and the alarming silence of the houses . 
For , since the preceding evening , the two rows of houses in the Rue de la Chanvrerie had become two walls ; ferocious walls , doors closed , windows closed , shutters closed . 
In those days , so different from those in which we live , when the hour was come , when the people wished to put an end to a situation , which had lasted too long , with a charter granted or with a legal country , when universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere , when the city consented to the tearing up of the pavements , when insurrection made the bourgeoisie smile by whispering its password in its ear , then the inhabitant , thoroughly penetrated with the revolt , so to speak , was the auxiliary of the combatant , and the house fraternized with the improvised fortress which rested on it . 
When the situation was not ripe , when the insurrection was not decidedly admitted , when the masses disowned the movement , all was over with the combatants , the city was changed into a desert around the revolt , souls grew chilled , refuges were nailed up , and the street turned into a defile to help the army to take the barricade . 
A people can not be forced , through surprise , to walk more quickly than it chooses . 
Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand ! 
A people does not let itself go at random . 
Then it abandons the insurrection to itself . 
The insurgents become noxious , infected with the plague . 
A house is an escarpment , a door is a refusal , a facade is a wall . 
This wall hears , sees and will not . 
It might open and save you . 
No . 
This wall is a judge . 
It gazes at you and condemns you . 
What dismal things are closed houses . 
They seem dead , they are living . 
Life which is , as it were , suspended there , persists there . 
No one has gone out of them for four and twenty hours , but no one is missing from them . 
In the interior of that rock , people go and come , go to bed and rise again ; they are a family party there ; there they eat and drink ; they are afraid , a terrible thing ! 
Fear excuses this fearful lack of hospitality ; terror is mixed with it , an extenuating circumstance . 
Sometimes , even , and this has been actually seen , fear turns to passion ; fright may change into fury , as prudence does into rage ; hence this wise saying : `` The enraged moderates . '' 
There are outbursts of supreme terror , whence springs wrath like a mournful smoke . 
-- `` What do these people want ? 
What have they come there to do ? 
Let them get out of the scrape . 
So much the worse for them . 
It is their fault . 
They are only getting what they deserve . 
It does not concern us . 
Here is our poor street all riddled with balls . 
They are a pack of rascals . 
Above all things , do n't open the door . '' 
-- And the house assumes the air of a tomb . 
The insurgent is in the death-throes in front of that house ; he sees the grape-shot and naked swords drawing near ; if he cries , he knows that they are listening to him , and that no one will come ; there stand walls which might protect him , there are men who might save him ; and these walls have ears of flesh , and these men have bowels of stone . 
Whom shall he reproach ? 
No one and every one . 
The incomplete times in which we live . 
It is always at its own risk and peril that Utopia is converted into revolution , and from philosophical protest becomes an armed protest , and from Minerva turns to Pallas . 
The Utopia which grows impatient and becomes revolt knows what awaits it ; it almost always comes too soon . 
Then it becomes resigned , and stoically accepts catastrophe in lieu of triumph . 
It serves those who deny it without complaint , even excusing them , and even disculpates them , and its magnanimity consists in consenting to abandonment . 
It is indomitable in the face of obstacles and gentle towards ingratitude . 
Is this ingratitude , however ? 
Yes , from the point of view of the human race . 
No , from the point of view of the individual . 
Progress is man 's mode of existence . 
The general life of the human race is called Progress , the collective stride of the human race is called Progress . 
Progress advances ; it makes the great human and terrestrial journey towards the celestial and the divine ; it has its halting places where it rallies the laggard troop , it has its stations where it meditates , in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled on its horizon , it has its nights when it sleeps ; and it is one of the poignant anxieties of the thinker that he sees the shadow resting on the human soul , and that he gropes in darkness without being able to awaken that slumbering Progress . 
`` God is dead , perhaps , '' said Gerard de Nerval one day to the writer of these lines , confounding progress with God , and taking the interruption of movement for the death of Being . 
He who despairs is in the wrong . 
Progress infallibly awakes , and , in short , we may say that it marches on , even when it is asleep , for it has increased in size . 
When we behold it erect once more , we find it taller . 
To be always peaceful does not depend on progress any more than it does on the stream ; erect no barriers , cast in no boulders ; obstacles make water froth and humanity boil . 
Hence arise troubles ; but after these troubles , we recognize the fact that ground has been gained . 
Until order , which is nothing else than universal peace , has been established , until harmony and unity reign , progress will have revolutions as its halting-places . 
What , then , is progress ? 
We have just enunciated it ; the permanent life of the peoples . 
Now , it sometimes happens , that the momentary life of individuals offers resistance to the eternal life of the human race . 
Let us admit without bitterness , that the individual has his distinct interests , and can , without forfeiture , stipulate for his interest , and defend it ; the present has its pardonable dose of egotism ; momentary life has its rights , and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly to the future . 
The generation which is passing in its turn over the earth , is not forced to abridge it for the sake of the generations , its equal , after all , who will have their turn later on . 
-- `` I exist , '' murmurs that some one whose name is All . 
`` I am young and in love , I am old and I wish to repose , I am the father of a family , I toil , I prosper , I am successful in business , I have houses to lease , I have money in the government funds , I am happy , I have a wife and children , I have all this , I desire to live , leave me in peace . '' 
-- Hence , at certain hours , a profound cold broods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race . 
Utopia , moreover , we must admit , quits its radiant sphere when it makes war . 
It , the truth of to-morrow , borrows its mode of procedure , battle , from the lie of yesterday . 
It , the future , behaves like the past . 
It , pure idea , becomes a deed of violence . 
It complicates its heroism with a violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer ; a violence of occasion and expedient , contrary to principle , and for which it is fatally punished . 
The Utopia , insurrection , fights with the old military code in its fist ; it shoots spies , it executes traitors ; it suppresses living beings and flings them into unknown darkness . 
It makes use of death , a serious matter . 
It seems as though Utopia had no longer any faith in radiance , its irresistible and incorruptible force . 
It strikes with the sword . 
Now , no sword is simple . 
Every blade has two edges ; he who wounds with the one is wounded with the other . 
Having made this reservation , and made it with all severity , it is impossible for us not to admire , whether they succeed or not , those the glorious combatants of the future , the confessors of Utopia . 
Even when they miscarry , they are worthy of veneration ; and it is , perhaps , in failure , that they possess the most majesty . 
Victory , when it is in accord with progress , merits the applause of the people ; but a heroic defeat merits their tender compassion . 
The one is magnificent , the other sublime . 
For our own part , we prefer martyrdom to success . 
John Brown is greater than Washington , and Pisacane is greater than Garibaldi . 
It certainly is necessary that some one should take the part of the vanquished . 
We are unjust towards these great men who attempt the future , when they fail . 
Revolutionists are accused of sowing fear abroad . 
Every barricade seems a crime . 
Their theories are incriminated , their aim suspected , their ulterior motive is feared , their conscience denounced . 
They are reproached with raising , erecting , and heaping up , against the reigning social state , a mass of miseries , of griefs , of iniquities , of wrongs , of despairs , and of tearing from the lowest depths blocks of shadow in order therein to embattle themselves and to combat . 
People shout to them : `` You are tearing up the pavements of hell ! '' 
They might reply : `` That is because our barricade is made of good intentions . '' 
The best thing , assuredly , is the pacific solution . 
In short , let us agree that when we behold the pavement , we think of the bear , and it is a good will which renders society uneasy . 
But it depends on society to save itself , it is to its own good will that we make our appeal . 
No violent remedy is necessary . 
To study evil amiably , to prove its existence , then to cure it . 
It is to this that we invite it . 
However that may be , even when fallen , above all when fallen , these men , who at every point of the universe , with their eyes fixed on France , are striving for the grand work with the inflexible logic of the ideal , are august ; they give their life a free offering to progress ; they accomplish the will of providence ; they perform a religious act . 
At the appointed hour , with as much disinterestedness as an actor who answers to his cue , in obedience to the divine stage-manager , they enter the tomb . 
And this hopeless combat , this stoical disappearance they accept in order to bring about the supreme and universal consequences , the magnificent and irresistibly human movement begun on the 14th of July , 1789 ; these soldiers are priests . 
The French revolution is an act of God . 
Moreover , there are , and it is proper to add this distinction to the distinctions already pointed out in another chapter , -- there are accepted revolutions , revolutions which are called revolutions ; there are refused revolutions , which are called riots . 
An insurrection which breaks out , is an idea which is passing its examination before the people . 
If the people lets fall a black ball , the idea is dried fruit ; the insurrection is a mere skirmish . 
Waging war at every summons and every time that Utopia desires it , is not the thing for the peoples . 
Nations have not always and at every hour the temperament of heroes and martyrs . 
They are positive . 
A priori , insurrection is repugnant to them , in the first place , because it often results in a catastrophe , in the second place , because it always has an abstraction as its point of departure . 
Because , and this is a noble thing , it is always for the ideal , and for the ideal alone , that those who sacrifice themselves do thus sacrifice themselves . 
An insurrection is an enthusiasm . 
Enthusiasm may wax wroth ; hence the appeal to arms . 
But every insurrection , which aims at a government or a regime , aims higher . 
Thus , for instance , and we insist upon it , what the chiefs of the insurrection of 1832 , and , in particular , the young enthusiasts of the Rue de la Chanvrerie were combating , was not precisely Louis Philippe . 
The majority of them , when talking freely , did justice to this king who stood midway between monarchy and revolution ; no one hated him . 
But they attacked the younger branch of the divine right in Louis Philippe as they had attacked its elder branch in Charles X. ; and that which they wished to overturn in overturning royalty in France , was , as we have explained , the usurpation of man over man , and of privilege over right in the entire universe . 
Paris without a king has as result the world without despots . 
This is the manner in which they reasoned . 
Their aim was distant no doubt , vague perhaps , and it retreated in the face of their efforts ; but it was great . 
Thus it is . 
And we sacrifice ourselves for these visions , which are almost always illusions for the sacrificed , but illusions with which , after all , the whole of human certainty is mingled . 
We throw ourselves into these tragic affairs and become intoxicated with that which we are about to do . 
Who knows ? 
We may succeed . 
We are few in number , we have a whole army arrayed against us ; but we are defending right , the natural law , the sovereignty of each one over himself from which no abdication is possible , justice and truth , and in case of need , we die like the three hundred Spartans . 
We do not think of Don Quixote but of Leonidas . 
And we march straight before us , and once pledged , we do not draw back , and we rush onwards with head held low , cherishing as our hope an unprecedented victory , revolution completed , progress set free again , the aggrandizement of the human race , universal deliverance ; and in the event of the worst , Thermopylae . 
These passages of arms for the sake of progress often suffer shipwreck , and we have just explained why . 
The crowd is restive in the presence of the impulses of paladins . 
Heavy masses , the multitudes which are fragile because of their very weight , fear adventures ; and there is a touch of adventure in the ideal . 
Moreover , and we must not forget this , interests which are not very friendly to the ideal and the sentimental are in the way . 
Sometimes the stomach paralyzes the heart . 
The grandeur and beauty of France lies in this , that she takes less from the stomach than other nations : she more easily knots the rope about her loins . 
She is the first awake , the last asleep . 
She marches forwards . 
She is a seeker . 
This arises from the fact that she is an artist . 
The ideal is nothing but the culminating point of logic , the same as the beautiful is nothing but the summit of the true . 
Artistic peoples are also consistent peoples . 
To love beauty is to see the light . 
That is why the torch of Europe , that is to say of civilization , was first borne by Greece , who passed it on to Italy , who handed it on to France . 
Divine , illuminating nations of scouts ! 
Vitaelampada tradunt . 
It is an admirable thing that the poetry of a people is the element of its progress . 
The amount of civilization is measured by the quantity of imagination . 
Only , a civilizing people should remain a manly people . 
Corinth , yes ; Sybaris , no . 
Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself a bastard . 
He must be neither a dilettante nor a virtuoso : but he must be artistic . 
In the matter of civilization , he must not refine , but he must sublime . 
On this condition , one gives to the human race the pattern of the ideal . 
The modern ideal has its type in art , and its means is science . 
It is through science that it will realize that august vision of the poets , the socially beautiful . 
Eden will be reconstructed by A+B . 
At the point which civilization has now reached , the exact is a necessary element of the splendid , and the artistic sentiment is not only served , but completed by the scientific organ ; dreams must be calculated . 
Art , which is the conqueror , should have for support science , which is the walker ; the solidity of the creature which is ridden is of importance . 
The modern spirit is the genius of Greece with the genius of India as its vehicle ; Alexander on the elephant . 
Races which are petrified in dogma or demoralized by lucre are unfit to guide civilization . 
Genuflection before the idol or before money wastes away the muscles which walk and the will which advances . 
Hieratic or mercantile absorption lessens a people 's power of radiance , lowers its horizon by lowering its level , and deprives it of that intelligence , at once both human and divine of the universal goal , which makes missionaries of nations . 
Babylon has no ideal ; Carthage has no ideal . 
Athens and Rome have and keep , throughout all the nocturnal darkness of the centuries , halos of civilization . 
France is in the same quality of race as Greece and Italy . 
She is Athenian in the matter of beauty , and Roman in her greatness . 
Moreover , she is good . 
She gives herself . 
Oftener than is the case with other races , is she in the humor for self-devotion and sacrifice . 
Only , this humor seizes upon her , and again abandons her . 
And therein lies the great peril for those who run when she desires only to walk , or who walk on when she desires to halt . 
France has her relapses into materialism , and , at certain instants , the ideas which obstruct that sublime brain have no longer anything which recalls French greatness and are of the dimensions of a Missouri or a South Carolina . 
What is to be done in such a case ? 
The giantess plays at being a dwarf ; immense France has her freaks of pettiness . 
That is all . 
To this there is nothing to say . 
Peoples , like planets , possess the right to an eclipse . 
And all is well , provided that the light returns and that the eclipse does not degenerate into night . 
Dawn and resurrection are synonymous . 
The reappearance of the light is identical with the persistence of the I. Let us state these facts calmly . 
Death on the barricade or the tomb in exile , is an acceptable occasion for devotion . 
The real name of devotion is disinterestedness . 
Let the abandoned allow themselves to be abandoned , let the exiled allow themselves to be exiled , and let us confine ourselves to entreating great nations not to retreat too far , when they do retreat . 
One must not push too far in descent under pretext of a return to reason . 
Matter exists , the minute exists , interest exists , the stomach exists ; but the stomach must not be the sole wisdom . 
The life of the moment has its rights , we admit , but permanent life has its rights also . 
Alas ! 
the fact that one is mounted does not preclude a fall . 
This can be seen in history more frequently than is desirable : A nation is great , it tastes the ideal , then it bites the mire , and finds it good ; and if it be asked how it happens that it has abandoned Socrates for Falstaff , it replies : `` Because I love statesmen . '' 
One word more before returning to our subject , the conflict . 
A battle like the one which we are engaged in describing is nothing else than a convulsion towards the ideal . 
Progress trammelled is sickly , and is subject to these tragic epilepsies . 
With that malady of progress , civil war , we have been obliged to come in contact in our passage . 
This is one of the fatal phases , at once act and entr ` acte of that drama whose pivot is a social condemnation , and whose veritable title is Progress . 
Progress ! 
The cry to which we frequently give utterance is our whole thought ; and , at the point of this drama which we have now reached , the idea which it contains having still more than one trial to undergo , it is , perhaps , permitted to us , if not to lift the veil from it , to at least allow its light to shine through . 
The book which the reader has under his eye at this moment is , from one end to the other , as a whole and in detail , whatever may be its intermittences , exceptions and faults , the march from evil to good , from the unjust to the just , from night to day , from appetite to conscience , from rottenness to life , from hell to heaven , from nothingness to God . 
Point of departure : matter ; point of arrival : the soul . 
The hydra at the beginning , the angel at the end . 
THE HEROES All at once , the drum beat the charge . 
The attack was a hurricane . 
On the evening before , in the darkness , the barricade had been approached silently , as by a boa . 
Now , in broad daylight , in that widening street , surprise was decidedly impossible , rude force had , moreover , been unmasked , the cannon had begun the roar , the army hurled itself on the barricade . 
Fury now became skill . 
A powerful detachment of infantry of the line , broken at regular intervals , by the National Guard and the Municipal Guard on foot , and supported by serried masses which could be heard though not seen , debauched into the street at a run , with drums beating , trumpets braying , bayonets levelled , the sappers at their head , and , imperturbable under the projectiles , charged straight for the barricade with the weight of a brazen beam against a wall . 
The wall held firm . 
The insurgents fired impetuously . 
The barricade once scaled had a mane of lightning flashes . 
The assault was so furious , that for one moment , it was inundated with assailants ; but it shook off the soldiers as the lion shakes off the dogs , and it was only covered with besiegers as the cliff is covered with foam , to re-appear , a moment later , beetling , black and formidable . 
The column , forced to retreat , remained massed in the street , unprotected but terrible , and replied to the redoubt with a terrible discharge of musketry . 
Any one who has seen fireworks will recall the sheaf formed of interlacing lightnings which is called a bouquet . 
Let the reader picture to himself this bouquet , no longer vertical but horizontal , bearing a bullet , buck-shot or a biscaien at the tip of each one of its jets of flame , and picking off dead men one after another from its clusters of lightning . 
The barricade was underneath it . 
On both sides , the resolution was equal . 
The bravery exhibited there was almost barbarous and was complicated with a sort of heroic ferocity which began by the sacrifice of self . 
This was the epoch when a National Guardsman fought like a Zouave . 
The troop wished to make an end of it , insurrection was desirous of fighting . 
The acceptance of the death agony in the flower of youth and in the flush of health turns intrepidity into frenzy . 
In this fray , each one underwent the broadening growth of the death hour . 
The street was strewn with corpses . 
The barricade had Enjolras at one of its extremities and Marius at the other . 
Enjolras , who carried the whole barricade in his head , reserved and sheltered himself ; three soldiers fell , one after the other , under his embrasure , without having even seen him ; Marius fought unprotected . 
He made himself a target . 
He stood with more than half his body above the breastworks . 
There is no more violent prodigal than the avaricious man who takes the bit in his teeth ; there is no man more terrible in action than a dreamer . 
Marius was formidable and pensive . 
In battle he was as in a dream . 
One would have pronounced him a phantom engaged in firing a gun . 
The insurgents ' cartridges were giving out ; but not their sarcasms . 
In this whirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood , they laughed . 
Courfeyrac was bare-headed . 
`` What have you done with your hat ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
Courfeyrac replied : `` They have finally taken it away from me with cannon-balls . '' 
Or they uttered haughty comments . 
`` Can any one understand , '' exclaimed Feuilly bitterly , `` those men , -- -LSB- and he cited names , well-known names , even celebrated names , some belonging to the old army -RSB- -- who had promised to join us , and taken an oath to aid us , and who had pledged their honor to it , and who are our generals , and who abandon us ! '' 
And Combeferre restricted himself to replying with a grave smile . 
`` There are people who observe the rules of honor as one observes the stars , from a great distance . '' 
The interior of the barricade was so strewn with torn cartridges that one would have said that there had been a snowstorm . 
The assailants had numbers in their favor ; the insurgents had position . 
They were at the top of a wall , and they thundered point-blank upon the soldiers tripping over the dead and wounded and entangled in the escarpment . 
This barricade , constructed as it was and admirably buttressed , was really one of those situations where a handful of men hold a legion in check . 
Nevertheless , the attacking column , constantly recruited and enlarged under the shower of bullets , drew inexorably nearer , and now , little by little , step by step , but surely , the army closed in around the barricade as the vice grasps the wine-press . 
One assault followed another . 
The horror of the situation kept increasing . 
Then there burst forth on that heap of paving-stones , in that Rue de la Chanvrerie , a battle worthy of a wall of Troy . 
These haggard , ragged , exhausted men , who had had nothing to eat for four and twenty hours , who had not slept , who had but a few more rounds to fire , who were fumbling in their pockets which had been emptied of cartridges , nearly all of whom were wounded , with head or arm bandaged with black and blood-stained linen , with holes in their clothes from which the blood trickled , and who were hardly armed with poor guns and notched swords , became Titans . 
The barricade was ten times attacked , approached , assailed , scaled , and never captured . 
In order to form an idea of this struggle , it is necessary to imagine fire set to a throng of terrible courages , and then to gaze at the conflagration . 
It was not a combat , it was the interior of a furnace ; there mouths breathed the flame ; there countenances were extraordinary . 
The human form seemed impossible there , the combatants flamed forth there , and it was formidable to behold the going and coming in that red glow of those salamanders of the fray . 
The successive and simultaneous scenes of this grand slaughter we renounce all attempts at depicting . 
The epic alone has the right to fill twelve thousand verses with a battle . 
One would have pronounced this that hell of Brahmanism , the most redoubtable of the seventeen abysses , which the Veda calls the Forest of Swords . 
They fought hand to hand , foot to foot , with pistol shots , with blows of the sword , with their fists , at a distance , close at hand , from above , from below , from everywhere , from the roofs of the houses , from the windows of the wine-shop , from the cellar windows , whither some had crawled . 
They were one against sixty . 
The facade of Corinthe , half demolished , was hideous . 
The window , tattooed with grape-shot , had lost glass and frame and was nothing now but a shapeless hole , tumultuously blocked with paving-stones . 
Bossuet was killed ; Feuilly was killed ; Courfeyrac was killed ; Combeferre , transfixed by three blows from a bayonet in the breast at the moment when he was lifting up a wounded soldier , had only time to cast a glance to heaven when he expired . 
Marius , still fighting , was so riddled with wounds , particularly in the head , that his countenance disappeared beneath the blood , and one would have said that his face was covered with a red kerchief . 
Enjolras alone was not struck . 
When he had no longer any weapon , he reached out his hands to right and left and an insurgent thrust some arm or other into his fist . 
All he had left was the stumps of four swords ; one more than Francois I. at Marignan . 
Homer says : `` Diomedes cuts the throat of Axylus , son of Teuthranis , who dwelt in happy Arisba ; Euryalus , son of Mecistaeus , exterminates Dresos and Opheltios , Esepius , and that Pedasus whom the naiad Abarbarea bore to the blameless Bucolion ; Ulysses overthrows Pidytes of Percosius ; Antilochus , Ablerus ; Polypaetes , Astyalus ; Polydamas , Otos , of Cyllene ; and Teucer , Aretaon . 
Meganthios dies under the blows of Euripylus ' pike . 
Agamemnon , king of the heroes , flings to earth Elatos , born in the rocky city which is laved by the sounding river Satnois . '' 
In our old poems of exploits , Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantibore with a cobbler 's shoulder-stick of fire , and the latter defends himself by stoning the hero with towers which he plucks up by the roots . 
Our ancient mural frescoes show us the two Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon , armed , emblazoned and crested in war-like guise , on horseback and approaching each other , their battle-axes in hand , masked with iron , gloved with iron , booted with iron , the one caparisoned in ermine , the other draped in azure : Bretagne with his lion between the two horns of his crown , Bourbon helmeted with a monster fleur de lys on his visor . 
But , in order to be superb , it is not necessary to wear , like Yvon , the ducal morion , to have in the fist , like Esplandian , a living flame , or , like Phyles , father of Polydamas , to have brought back from Ephyra a good suit of mail , a present from the king of men , Euphetes ; it suffices to give one 's life for a conviction or a loyalty . 
This ingenuous little soldier , yesterday a peasant of Bauce or Limousin , who prowls with his clasp-knife by his side , around the children 's nurses in the Luxembourg garden , this pale young student bent over a piece of anatomy or a book , a blond youth who shaves his beard with scissors , -- take both of them , breathe upon them with a breath of duty , place them face to face in the Carrefour Boucherat or in the blind alley Planche-Mibray , and let the one fight for his flag , and the other for his ideal , and let both of them imagine that they are fighting for their country ; the struggle will be colossal ; and the shadow which this raw recruit and this sawbones in conflict will produce in that grand epic field where humanity is striving , will equal the shadow cast by Megaryon , King of Lycia , tiger-filled , crushing in his embrace the immense body of Ajax , equal to the gods . 
FOOT TO FOOT When there were no longer any of the leaders left alive , except Enjolras and Marius at the two extremities of the barricade , the centre , which had so long sustained Courfeyrac , Joly , Bossuet , Feuilly and Combeferre , gave way . 
The cannon , though it had not effected a practicable breach , had made a rather large hollow in the middle of the redoubt ; there , the summit of the wall had disappeared before the balls , and had crumbled away ; and the rubbish which had fallen , now inside , now outside , had , as it accumulated , formed two piles in the nature of slopes on the two sides of the barrier , one on the inside , the other on the outside . 
The exterior slope presented an inclined plane to the attack . 
A final assault was there attempted , and this assault succeeded . 
The mass bristling with bayonets and hurled forward at a run , came up with irresistible force , and the serried front of battle of the attacking column made its appearance through the smoke on the crest of the battlements . 
This time , it was decisive . 
The group of insurgents who were defending the centre retreated in confusion . 
Then the gloomy love of life awoke once more in some of them . 
Many , finding themselves under the muzzles of this forest of guns , did not wish to die . 
This is a moment when the instinct of self-preservation emits howls , when the beast re-appears in men . 
They were hemmed in by the lofty , six-story house which formed the background of their redoubt . 
This house might prove their salvation . 
The building was barricaded , and walled , as it were , from top to bottom . 
Before the troops of the line had reached the interior of the redoubt , there was time for a door to open and shut , the space of a flash of lightning was sufficient for that , and the door of that house , suddenly opened a crack and closed again instantly , was life for these despairing men . 
Behind this house , there were streets , possible flight , space . 
They set to knocking at that door with the butts of their guns , and with kicks , shouting , calling , entreating , wringing their hands . 
No one opened . 
From the little window on the third floor , the head of the dead man gazed down upon them . 
But Enjolras and Marius , and the seven or eight rallied about them , sprang forward and protected them . 
Enjolras had shouted to the soldiers : `` Do n't advance ! '' 
and as an officer had not obeyed , Enjolras had killed the officer . 
He was now in the little inner court of the redoubt , with his back planted against the Corinthe building , a sword in one hand , a rifle in the other , holding open the door of the wine-shop which he barred against assailants . 
He shouted to the desperate men : -- `` There is but one door open ; this one . '' 
-- And shielding them with his body , and facing an entire battalion alone , he made them pass in behind him . 
All precipitated themselves thither . 
Enjolras , executing with his rifle , which he now used like a cane , what single-stick players call a `` covered rose '' round his head , levelled the bayonets around and in front of him , and was the last to enter ; and then ensued a horrible moment , when the soldiers tried to make their way in , and the insurgents strove to bar them out . 
The door was slammed with such violence , that , as it fell back into its frame , it showed the five fingers of a soldier who had been clinging to it , cut off and glued to the post . 
Marius remained outside . 
A shot had just broken his collar bone , he felt that he was fainting and falling . 
At that moment , with eyes already shut , he felt the shock of a vigorous hand seizing him , and the swoon in which his senses vanished , hardly allowed him time for the thought , mingled with a last memory of Cosette : -- `` I am taken prisoner . 
I shall be shot . '' 
Enjolras , not seeing Marius among those who had taken refuge in the wine-shop , had the same idea . 
But they had reached a moment when each man has not the time to meditate on his own death . 
Enjolras fixed the bar across the door , and bolted it , and double-locked it with key and chain , while those outside were battering furiously at it , the soldiers with the butts of their muskets , the sappers with their axes . 
The assailants were grouped about that door . 
The siege of the wine-shop was now beginning . 
The soldiers , we will observe , were full of wrath . 
The death of the artillery-sergeant had enraged them , and then , a still more melancholy circumstance . 
during the few hours which had preceded the attack , it had been reported among them that the insurgents were mutilating their prisoners , and that there was the headless body of a soldier in the wine-shop . 
This sort of fatal rumor is the usual accompaniment of civil wars , and it was a false report of this kind which , later on , produced the catastrophe of the Rue Transnonain . 
When the door was barricaded , Enjolras said to the others : `` Let us sell our lives dearly . '' 
Then he approached the table on which lay Mabeuf and Gavroche . 
Beneath the black cloth two straight and rigid forms were visible , one large , the other small , and the two faces were vaguely outlined beneath the cold folds of the shroud . 
A hand projected from beneath the winding sheet and hung near the floor . 
It was that of the old man . 
Enjolras bent down and kissed that venerable hand , just as he had kissed his brow on the preceding evening . 
These were the only two kisses which he had bestowed in the course of his life . 
Let us abridge the tale . 
The barricade had fought like a gate of Thebes ; the wine-shop fought like a house of Saragossa . 
These resistances are dogged . 
No quarter . 
No flag of truce possible . 
Men are willing to die , provided their opponent will kill them . 
When Suchet says : -- `` Capitulate , '' -- Palafox replies : `` After the war with cannon , the war with knives . '' 
Nothing was lacking in the capture by assault of the Hucheloup wine-shop ; neither paving-stones raining from the windows and the roof on the besiegers and exasperating the soldiers by crushing them horribly , nor shots fired from the attic-windows and the cellar , nor the fury of attack , nor , finally , when the door yielded , the frenzied madness of extermination . 
The assailants , rushing into the wine-shop , their feet entangled in the panels of the door which had been beaten in and flung on the ground , found not a single combatant there . 
The spiral staircase , hewn asunder with the axe , lay in the middle of the tap-room , a few wounded men were just breathing their last , every one who was not killed was on the first floor , and from there , through the hole in the ceiling , which had formed the entrance of the stairs , a terrific fire burst forth . 
It was the last of their cartridges . 
When they were exhausted , when these formidable men on the point of death had no longer either powder or ball , each grasped in his hands two of the bottles which Enjolras had reserved , and of which we have spoken , and held the scaling party in check with these frightfully fragile clubs . 
They were bottles of aquafortis . 
We relate these gloomy incidents of carnage as they occurred . 
The besieged man , alas ! 
converts everything into a weapon . 
Greek fire did not disgrace Archimedes , boiling pitch did not disgrace Bayard . 
All war is a thing of terror , and there is no choice in it . 
The musketry of the besiegers , though confined and embarrassed by being directed from below upwards , was deadly . 
The rim of the hole in the ceiling was speedily surrounded by heads of the slain , whence dripped long , red and smoking streams , the uproar was indescribable ; a close and burning smoke almost produced night over this combat . 
Words are lacking to express horror when it has reached this pitch . 
There were no longer men in this conflict , which was now infernal . 
They were no longer giants matched with colossi . 
It resembled Milton and Dante rather than Homer . 
Demons attacked , spectres resisted . 
It was heroism become monstrous . 
ORESTES FASTING AND PYLADES DRUNK At length , by dint of mounting on each other 's backs , aiding themselves with the skeleton of the staircase , climbing up the walls , clinging to the ceiling , slashing away at the very brink of the trap-door , the last one who offered resistance , a score of assailants , soldiers , National Guardsmen , municipal guardsmen , in utter confusion , the majority disfigured by wounds in the face during that redoubtable ascent , blinded by blood , furious , rendered savage , made an irruption into the apartment on the first floor . 
There they found only one man still on his feet , Enjolras . 
Without cartridges , without sword , he had nothing in his hand now but the barrel of his gun whose stock he had broken over the head of those who were entering . 
He had placed the billiard table between his assailants and himself ; he had retreated into the corner of the room , and there , with haughty eye , and head borne high , with this stump of a weapon in his hand , he was still so alarming as to speedily create an empty space around him . 
A cry arose : `` He is the leader ! 
It was he who slew the artillery-man . 
It is well that he has placed himself there . 
Let him remain there . 
Let us shoot him down on the spot . '' 
`` Shoot me , '' said Enjolras . 
And flinging away his bit of gun-barrel , and folding his arms , he offered his breast . 
The audacity of a fine death always affects men . 
As soon as Enjolras folded his arms and accepted his end , the din of strife ceased in the room , and this chaos suddenly stilled into a sort of sepulchral solemnity . 
The menacing majesty of Enjolras disarmed and motionless , appeared to oppress this tumult , and this young man , haughty , bloody , and charming , who alone had not a wound , who was as indifferent as an invulnerable being , seemed , by the authority of his tranquil glance , to constrain this sinister rabble to kill him respectfully . 
His beauty , at that moment augmented by his pride , was resplendent , and he was fresh and rosy after the fearful four and twenty hours which had just elapsed , as though he could no more be fatigued than wounded . 
It was of him , possibly , that a witness spoke afterwards , before the council of war : `` There was an insurgent whom I heard called Apollo . '' 
A National Guardsman who had taken aim at Enjolras , lowered his gun , saying : `` It seems to me that I am about to shoot a flower . '' 
Twelve men formed into a squad in the corner opposite Enjolras , and silently made ready their guns . 
Then a sergeant shouted : `` Take aim ! '' 
An officer intervened . 
`` Wait . '' 
And addressing Enjolras : `` Do you wish to have your eyes bandaged ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Was it you who killed the artillery sergeant ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Grantaire had waked up a few moments before . 
Grantaire , it will be remembered , had been asleep ever since the preceding evening in the upper room of the wine-shop , seated on a chair and leaning on the table . 
He realized in its fullest sense the old metaphor of `` dead drunk . '' 
The hideous potion of absinthe-porter and alcohol had thrown him into a lethargy . 
His table being small , and not suitable for the barricade , he had been left in possession of it . 
He was still in the same posture , with his breast bent over the table , his head lying flat on his arms , surrounded by glasses , beer-jugs and bottles . 
His was the overwhelming slumber of the torpid bear and the satiated leech . 
Nothing had had any effect upon it , neither the fusillade , nor the cannon-balls , nor the grape-shot which had made its way through the window into the room where he was . 
Nor the tremendous uproar of the assault . 
He merely replied to the cannonade , now and then , by a snore . 
He seemed to be waiting there for a bullet which should spare him the trouble of waking . 
Many corpses were strewn around him ; and , at the first glance , there was nothing to distinguish him from those profound sleepers of death . 
Noise does not rouse a drunken man ; silence awakens him . 
The fall of everything around him only augmented Grantaire 's prostration ; the crumbling of all things was his lullaby . 
The sort of halt which the tumult underwent in the presence of Enjolras was a shock to this heavy slumber . 
It had the effect of a carriage going at full speed , which suddenly comes to a dead stop . 
The persons dozing within it wake up . 
Grantaire rose to his feet with a start , stretched out his arms , rubbed his eyes , stared , yawned , and understood . 
A fit of drunkenness reaching its end resembles a curtain which is torn away . 
One beholds , at a single glance and as a whole , all that it has concealed . 
All suddenly presents itself to the memory ; and the drunkard who has known nothing of what has been taking place during the last twenty-four hours , has no sooner opened his eyes than he is perfectly informed . 
Ideas recur to him with abrupt lucidity ; the obliteration of intoxication , a sort of steam which has obscured the brain , is dissipated , and makes way for the clear and sharply outlined importunity of realities . 
Relegated , as he was , to one corner , and sheltered behind the billiard-table , the soldiers whose eyes were fixed on Enjolras , had not even noticed Grantaire , and the sergeant was preparing to repeat his order : `` Take aim ! '' 
when all at once , they heard a strong voice shout beside them : `` Long live the Republic ! 
I 'm one of them . '' 
Grantaire had risen . 
The immense gleam of the whole combat which he had missed , and in which he had had no part , appeared in the brilliant glance of the transfigured drunken man . 
He repeated : `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
crossed the room with a firm stride and placed himself in front of the guns beside Enjolras . 
`` Finish both of us at one blow , '' said he . 
And turning gently to Enjolras , he said to him : `` Do you permit it ? '' 
Enjolras pressed his hand with a smile . 
This smile was not ended when the report resounded . 
Enjolras , pierced by eight bullets , remained leaning against the wall , as though the balls had nailed him there . 
Only , his head was bowed . 
Grantaire fell at his feet , as though struck by a thunderbolt . 
A few moments later , the soldiers dislodged the last remaining insurgents , who had taken refuge at the top of the house . 
They fired into the attic through a wooden lattice . 
They fought under the very roof . 
They flung bodies , some of them still alive , out through the windows . 
Two light-infantrymen , who tried to lift the shattered omnibus , were slain by two shots fired from the attic . 
A man in a blouse was flung down from it , with a bayonet wound in the abdomen , and breathed his last on the ground . 
A soldier and an insurgent slipped together on the sloping slates of the roof , and , as they would not release each other , they fell , clasped in a ferocious embrace . 
A similar conflict went on in the cellar . 
Shouts , shots , a fierce trampling . 
Then silence . 
The barricade was captured . 
The soldiers began to search the houses round about , and to pursue the fugitives . 
PRISONER Marius was , in fact , a prisoner . 
The hand which had seized him from behind and whose grasp he had felt at the moment of his fall and his loss of consciousness was that of Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had taken no other part in the combat than to expose himself in it . 
Had it not been for him , no one , in that supreme phase of agony , would have thought of the wounded . 
Thanks to him , everywhere present in the carnage , like a providence , those who fell were picked up , transported to the tap-room , and cared for . 
In the intervals , he reappeared on the barricade . 
But nothing which could resemble a blow , an attack or even personal defence proceeded from his hands . 
He held his peace and lent succor . 
Moreover he had received only a few scratches . 
The bullets would have none of him . 
If suicide formed part of what he had meditated on coming to this sepulchre , to that spot , he had not succeeded . 
But we doubt whether he had thought of suicide , an irreligious act . 
Jean Valjean , in the thick cloud of the combat , did not appear to see Marius ; the truth is , that he never took his eyes from the latter . 
When a shot laid Marius low , Jean Valjean leaped forward with the agility of a tiger , fell upon him as on his prey , and bore him off . 
The whirlwind of the attack was , at that moment , so violently concentrated upon Enjolras and upon the door of the wine-shop , that no one saw Jean Valjean sustaining the fainting Marius in his arms , traverse the unpaved field of the barricade and disappear behind the angle of the Corinthe building . 
The reader will recall this angle which formed a sort of cape on the street ; it afforded shelter from the bullets , the grape-shot , and all eyes , and a few square feet of space . 
There is sometimes a chamber which does not burn in the midst of a conflagration , and in the midst of raging seas , beyond a promontory or at the extremity of a blind alley of shoals , a tranquil nook . 
It was in this sort of fold in the interior trapezium of the barricade , that Eponine had breathed her last . 
There Jean Valjean halted , let Marius slide to the ground , placed his back against the wall , and cast his eyes about him . 
The situation was alarming . 
For an instant , for two or three perhaps , this bit of wall was a shelter , but how was he to escape from this massacre ? 
He recalled the anguish which he had suffered in the Rue Polonceau eight years before , and in what manner he had contrived to make his escape ; it was difficult then , to-day it was impossible . 
He had before him that deaf and implacable house , six stories in height , which appeared to be inhabited only by a dead man leaning out of his window ; he had on his right the rather low barricade , which shut off the Rue de la Petite Truanderie ; to pass this obstacle seemed easy , but beyond the crest of the barrier a line of bayonets was visible . 
The troops of the line were posted on the watch behind that barricade . 
It was evident , that to pass the barricade was to go in quest of the fire of the platoon , and that any head which should run the risk of lifting itself above the top of that wall of stones would serve as a target for sixty shots . 
On his left he had the field of battle . 
Death lurked round the corner of that wall . 
What was to be done ? 
Only a bird could have extricated itself from this predicament . 
And it was necessary to decide on the instant , to devise some expedient , to come to some decision . 
Fighting was going on a few paces away ; fortunately , all were raging around a single point , the door of the wine-shop ; but if it should occur to one soldier , to one single soldier , to turn the corner of the house , or to attack him on the flank , all was over . 
Jean Valjean gazed at the house facing him , he gazed at the barricade at one side of him , then he looked at the ground , with the violence of the last extremity , bewildered , and as though he would have liked to pierce a hole there with his eyes . 
By dint of staring , something vaguely striking in such an agony began to assume form and outline at his feet , as though it had been a power of glance which made the thing desired unfold . 
A few paces distant he perceived , at the base of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded and watched on the exterior , beneath a disordered mass of paving-stones which partly concealed it , an iron grating , placed flat and on a level with the soil . 
This grating , made of stout , transverse bars , was about two feet square . 
The frame of paving-stones which supported it had been torn up , and it was , as it were , unfastened . 
Through the bars a view could be had of a dark aperture , something like the flue of a chimney , or the pipe of a cistern . 
Jean Valjean darted forward . 
His old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination . 
To thrust aside the stones , to raise the grating , to lift Marius , who was as inert as a dead body , upon his shoulders , to descend , with this burden on his loins , and with the aid of his elbows and knees into that sort of well , fortunately not very deep , to let the heavy trap , upon which the loosened stones rolled down afresh , fall into its place behind him , to gain his footing on a flagged surface three metres below the surface , -- all this was executed like that which one does in dreams , with the strength of a giant and the rapidity of an eagle ; this took only a few minutes . 
Jean Valjean found himself with Marius , who was still unconscious , in a sort of long , subterranean corridor . 
There reigned profound peace , absolute silence , night . 
The impression which he had formerly experienced when falling from the wall into the convent recurred to him . 
Only , what he was carrying to-day was not Cosette ; it was Marius . 
He could barely hear the formidable tumult in the wine-shop , taken by assault , like a vague murmur overhead . 
THE LAND IMPOVERISHED BY THE SEA Paris casts twenty-five millions yearly into the water . 
And this without metaphor . 
How , and in what manner ? 
Day and night . 
With what object ? 
With no object . 
With what intention ? 
With no intention . 
Why ? 
For no reason . 
By means of what organ ? 
By means of its intestine . 
What is its intestine ? 
The sewer . 
Twenty-five millions is the most moderate approximative figure which the valuations of special science have set upon it . 
Science , after having long groped about , now knows that the most fecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure . 
The Chinese , let us confess it to our shame , knew it before us . 
Not a Chinese peasant -- it is Eckberg who says this , -- goes to town without bringing back with him , at the two extremities of his bamboo pole , two full buckets of what we designate as filth . 
Thanks to human dung , the earth in China is still as young as in the days of Abraham . 
Chinese wheat yields a hundred fold of the seed . 
There is no guano comparable in fertility with the detritus of a capital . 
A great city is the most mighty of dung-makers . 
Certain success would attend the experiment of employing the city to manure the plain . 
If our gold is manure , our manure , on the other hand , is gold . 
What is done with this golden manure ? 
It is swept into the abyss . 
Fleets of vessels are despatched , at great expense , to collect the dung of petrels and penguins at the South Pole , and the incalculable element of opulence which we have on hand , we send to the sea . 
All the human and animal manure which the world wastes , restored to the land instead of being cast into the water , would suffice to nourish the world . 
Those heaps of filth at the gate-posts , those tumbrils of mud which jolt through the street by night , those terrible casks of the street department , those fetid drippings of subterranean mire , which the pavements hide from you , -- do you know what they are ? 
They are the meadow in flower , the green grass , wild thyme , thyme and sage , they are game , they are cattle , they are the satisfied bellows of great oxen in the evening , they are perfumed hay , they are golden wheat , they are the bread on your table , they are the warm blood in your veins , they are health , they are joy , they are life . 
This is the will of that mysterious creation which is transformation on earth and transfiguration in heaven . 
Restore this to the great crucible ; your abundance will flow forth from it . 
The nutrition of the plains furnishes the nourishment of men . 
You have it in your power to lose this wealth , and to consider me ridiculous to boot . 
This will form the master-piece of your ignorance . 
Statisticians have calculated that France alone makes a deposit of half a milliard every year , in the Atlantic , through the mouths of her rivers . 
Note this : with five hundred millions we could pay one quarter of the expenses of our budget . 
The cleverness of man is such that he prefers to get rid of these five hundred millions in the gutter . 
It is the very substance of the people that is carried off , here drop by drop , there wave after wave , the wretched outpour of our sewers into the rivers , and the gigantic collection of our rivers into the ocean . 
Every hiccough of our sewers costs us a thousand francs . 
From this spring two results , the land impoverished , and the water tainted . 
Hunger arising from the furrow , and disease from the stream . 
It is notorious , for example , that at the present hour , the Thames is poisoning London . 
So far as Paris is concerned , it has become indispensable of late , to transport the mouths of the sewers down stream , below the last bridge . 
A double tubular apparatus , provided with valves and sluices , sucking up and driving back , a system of elementary drainage , simple as the lungs of a man , and which is already in full working order in many communities in England , would suffice to conduct the pure water of the fields into our cities , and to send back to the fields the rich water of the cities , and this easy exchange , the simplest in the world , would retain among us the five hundred millions now thrown away . 
People are thinking of other things . 
The process actually in use does evil , with the intention of doing good . 
The intention is good , the result is melancholy . 
Thinking to purge the city , the population is blanched like plants raised in cellars . 
A sewer is a mistake . 
When drainage , everywhere , with its double function , restoring what it takes , shall have replaced the sewer , which is a simple impoverishing washing , then , this being combined with the data of a now social economy , the product of the earth will be increased tenfold , and the problem of misery will be singularly lightened . 
Add the suppression of parasitism , and it will be solved . 
In the meanwhile , the public wealth flows away to the river , and leakage takes place . 
Leakage is the word . 
Europe is being ruined in this manner by exhaustion . 
As for France , we have just cited its figures . 
Now , Paris contains one twenty-fifth of the total population of France , and Parisian guano being the richest of all , we understate the truth when we value the loss on the part of Paris at twenty-five millions in the half milliard which France annually rejects . 
These twenty-five millions , employed in assistance and enjoyment , would double the splendor of Paris . 
The city spends them in sewers . 
So that we may say that Paris 's great prodigality , its wonderful festival , its Beaujon folly , its orgy , its stream of gold from full hands , its pomp , its luxury , its magnificence , is its sewer system . 
It is in this manner that , in the blindness of a poor political economy , we drown and allow to float down stream and to be lost in the gulfs the well-being of all . 
There should be nets at Saint-Cloud for the public fortune . 
Economically considered , the matter can be summed up thus : Paris is a spendthrift . 
Paris , that model city , that patron of well-arranged capitals , of which every nation strives to possess a copy , that metropolis of the ideal , that august country of the initiative , of impulse and of effort , that centre and that dwelling of minds , that nation-city , that hive of the future , that marvellous combination of Babylon and Corinth , would make a peasant of the Fo-Kian shrug his shoulders , from the point of view which we have just indicated . 
Imitate Paris and you will ruin yourselves . 
Moreover , and particularly in this immemorial and senseless waste , Paris is itself an imitator . 
These surprising exhibitions of stupidity are not novel ; this is no young folly . 
The ancients did like the moderns . 
`` The sewers of Rome , '' says Liebig , `` have absorbed all the well-being of the Roman peasant . '' 
When the Campagna of Rome was ruined by the Roman sewer , Rome exhausted Italy , and when she had put Italy in her sewer , she poured in Sicily , then Sardinia , then Africa . 
The sewer of Rome has engulfed the world . 
This cess-pool offered its engulfment to the city and the universe . 
Urbi et orbi . 
Eternal city , unfathomable sewer . 
Rome sets the example for these things as well as for others . 
Paris follows this example with all the stupidity peculiar to intelligent towns . 
For the requirements of the operation upon the subject of which we have just explained our views , Paris has beneath it another Paris ; a Paris of sewers ; which has its streets , its cross-roads , its squares , its blind-alleys , its arteries , and its circulation , which is of mire and minus the human form . 
For nothing must be flattered , not even a great people ; where there is everything there is also ignominy by the side of sublimity ; and , if Paris contains Athens , the city of light , Tyre , the city of might , Sparta , the city of virtue , Nineveh , the city of marvels , it also contains Lutetia , the city of mud . 
However , the stamp of its power is there also , and the Titanic sink of Paris realizes , among monuments , that strange ideal realized in humanity by some men like Macchiavelli , Bacon and Mirabeau , grandiose vileness . 
The sub-soil of Paris , if the eye could penetrate its surface , would present the aspect of a colossal madrepore . 
A sponge has no more partitions and ducts than the mound of earth for a circuit of six leagues round about , on which rests the great and ancient city . 
Not to mention its catacombs , which are a separate cellar , not to mention the inextricable trellis-work of gas pipes , without reckoning the vast tubular system for the distribution of fresh water which ends in the pillar fountains , the sewers alone form a tremendous , shadowy net-work under the two banks ; a labyrinth which has its slope for its guiding thread . 
There appears , in the humid mist , the rat which seems the product to which Paris has given birth . 
ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE SEWER Let the reader imagine Paris lifted off like a cover , the subterranean net-work of sewers , from a bird 's eye view , will outline on the banks a species of large branch grafted on the river . 
On the right bank , the belt sewer will form the trunk of this branch , the secondary ducts will form the branches , and those without exit the twigs . 
This figure is but a summary one and half exact , the right angle , which is the customary angle of this species of subterranean ramifications , being very rare in vegetation . 
A more accurate image of this strange geometrical plan can be formed by supposing that one is viewing some eccentric oriental alphabet , as intricate as a thicket , against a background of shadows , and the misshapen letters should be welded one to another in apparent confusion , and as at haphazard , now by their angles , again by their extremities . 
Sinks and sewers played a great part in the Middle Ages , in the Lower Empire and in the Orient of old . 
The masses regarded these beds of decomposition , these monstrous cradles of death , with a fear that was almost religious . 
The vermin ditch of Benares is no less conducive to giddiness than the lions ' ditch of Babylon . 
Teglath-Phalasar , according to the rabbinical books , swore by the sink of Nineveh . 
It was from the sewer of Munster that John of Leyden produced his false moon , and it was from the cess-pool of Kekscheb that oriental menalchme , Mokanna , the veiled prophet of Khorassan , caused his false sun to emerge . 
The history of men is reflected in the history of sewers . 
The Germoniae -LSB- 58 -RSB- narrated Rome . 
The sewer of Paris has been an ancient and formidable thing . 
It has been a sepulchre , it has served as an asylum . 
Crime , intelligence , social protest , liberty of conscience , thought , theft , all that human laws persecute or have persecuted , is hidden in that hole ; the maillotins in the fourteenth century , the tire-laine of the fifteenth , the Huguenots in the sixteenth , Morin 's illuminated in the seventeenth , the chauffeurs -LSB- brigands -RSB- in the eighteenth . 
A hundred years ago , the nocturnal blow of the dagger emerged thence , the pickpocket in danger slipped thither ; the forest had its cave , Paris had its sewer . 
Vagrancy , that Gallic picareria , accepted the sewer as the adjunct of the Cour des Miracles , and at evening , it returned thither , fierce and sly , through the Maubuee outlet , as into a bed-chamber . 
-LSB- 58 -RSB- Steps on the Aventine Hill , leading to the Tiber , to which the bodies of executed criminals were dragged by hooks to be thrown into the Tiber . 
It was quite natural , that those who had the blind-alley Vide-Gousset , -LSB- Empty-Pocket -RSB- or the Rue Coupe-Gorge -LSB- Cut-Throat -RSB- , for the scene of their daily labor , should have for their domicile by night the culvert of the Chemin-Vert , or the catch basin of Hurepoix . 
Hence a throng of souvenirs . 
All sorts of phantoms haunt these long , solitary corridors ; everywhere is putrescence and miasma ; here and there are breathing-holes , where Villon within converses with Rabelais without . 
The sewer in ancient Paris is the rendezvous of all exhaustions and of all attempts . 
Political economy therein spies a detritus , social philosophy there beholds a residuum . 
The sewer is the conscience of the city . 
Everything there converges and confronts everything else . 
In that livid spot there are shades , but there are no longer any secrets . 
Each thing bears its true form , or at least , its definitive form . 
The mass of filth has this in its favor , that it is not a liar . 
Ingenuousness has taken refuge there . 
The mask of Basil is to be found there , but one beholds its cardboard and its strings and the inside as well as the outside , and it is accentuated by honest mud . 
Scapin 's false nose is its next-door neighbor . 
All the uncleannesses of civilization , once past their use , fall into this trench of truth , where the immense social sliding ends . 
They are there engulfed , but they display themselves there . 
This mixture is a confession . 
There , no more false appearances , no plastering over is possible , filth removes its shirt , absolute denudation puts to the rout all illusions and mirages , there is nothing more except what really exists , presenting the sinister form of that which is coming to an end . 
There , the bottom of a bottle indicates drunkenness , a basket-handle tells a tale of domesticity ; there the core of an apple which has entertained literary opinions becomes an apple-core once more ; the effigy on the big sou becomes frankly covered with verdigris , Caiphas ' spittle meets Falstaff 's puking , the louis-d'or which comes from the gaming-house jostles the nail whence hangs the rope 's end of the suicide . 
a livid foetus rolls along , enveloped in the spangles which danced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday , a cap which has pronounced judgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which was formerly Margoton 's petticoat ; it is more than fraternization , it is equivalent to addressing each other as thou . 
All which was formerly rouged , is washed free . 
The last veil is torn away . 
A sewer is a cynic . 
It tells everything . 
The sincerity of foulness pleases us , and rests the soul . 
When one has passed one 's time in enduring upon earth the spectacle of the great airs which reasons of state , the oath , political sagacity , human justice , professional probity , the austerities of situation , incorruptible robes all assume , it solaces one to enter a sewer and to behold the mire which befits it . 
This is instructive at the same time . 
We have just said that history passes through the sewer . 
The Saint-Barthelemys filter through there , drop by drop , between the paving-stones . 
Great public assassinations , political and religious butcheries , traverse this underground passage of civilization , and thrust their corpses there . 
For the eye of the thinker , all historic murderers are to be found there , in that hideous penumbra , on their knees , with a scrap of their winding-sheet for an apron , dismally sponging out their work . 
Louis XI . 
is there with Tristan , Francois I. with Duprat , Charles IX . 
is there with his mother , Richelieu is there with Louis XIII. , Louvois is there , Letellier is there , Hebert and Maillard are there , scratching the stones , and trying to make the traces of their actions disappear . 
Beneath these vaults one hears the brooms of spectres . 
One there breathes the enormous fetidness of social catastrophes . 
One beholds reddish reflections in the corners . 
There flows a terrible stream , in which bloody hands have been washed . 
The social observer should enter these shadows . 
They form a part of his laboratory . 
Philosophy is the microscope of the thought . 
Everything desires to flee from it , but nothing escapes it . 
Tergiversation is useless . 
What side of oneself does one display in evasions ? 
the shameful side . 
Philosophy pursues with its glance , probes the evil , and does not permit it to escape into nothingness . 
In the obliteration of things which disappear , in the watching of things which vanish , it recognizes all . 
It reconstructs the purple from the rag , and the woman from the scrap of her dress . 
From the cess-pool , it re-constitutes the city ; from mud , it reconstructs manners ; from the potsherd it infers the amphora or the jug . 
By the imprint of a finger-nail on a piece of parchment , it recognizes the difference which separates the Jewry of the Judengasse from the Jewry of the Ghetto . 
It re-discovers in what remains that which has been , good , evil , the true , the blood-stain of the palace , the ink-blot of the cavern , the drop of sweat from the brothel , trials undergone , temptations welcomed , orgies cast forth , the turn which characters have taken as they became abased , the trace of prostitution in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable , and on the vesture of the porters of Rome the mark of Messalina 's elbowing . 
BRUNESEAU The sewer of Paris in the Middle Ages was legendary . 
In the sixteenth century , Henri II . 
attempted a bore , which failed . 
Not a hundred years ago , the cess-pool , Mercier attests the fact , was abandoned to itself , and fared as best it might . 
Such was this ancient Paris , delivered over to quarrels , to indecision , and to gropings . 
It was tolerably stupid for a long time . 
Later on , '89 showed how understanding comes to cities . 
But in the good , old times , the capital had not much head . 
It did not know how to manage its own affairs either morally or materially , and could not sweep out filth any better than it could abuses . 
Everything presented an obstacle , everything raised a question . 
The sewer , for example , was refractory to every itinerary . 
One could no more find one 's bearings in the sewer than one could understand one 's position in the city ; above the unintelligible , below the inextricable ; beneath the confusion of tongues there reigned the confusion of caverns ; Daedalus backed up Babel . 
Sometimes the Paris sewer took a notion to overflow , as though this misunderstood Nile were suddenly seized with a fit of rage . 
There occurred , infamous to relate , inundations of the sewer . 
At times , that stomach of civilization digested badly , the cess-pool flowed back into the throat of the city , and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth . 
These resemblances of the sewer to remorse had their good points ; they were warnings ; very badly accepted , however ; the city waxed indignant at the audacity of its mire , and did not admit that the filth should return . 
Drive it out better . 
The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians of the age of eighty . 
The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des Victoires , where stands the statue of Louis XIV. ; it entered the Rue Saint-Honore by the two mouths to the sewer in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Saint-Florentin through the Saint-Florentin sewer , the Rue Pierre-a-Poisson through the sewer de la Sonnerie , the Rue Popincourt , through the sewer of the Chemin-Vert , the Rue de la Roquette , through the sewer of the Rue de Lappe ; it covered the drain of the Rue des Champs-Elysees to the height of thirty-five centimetres ; and , to the South , through the vent of the Seine , performing its functions in inverse sense , it penetrated the Rue Mazarine , the Rue de l'Echaude , and the Rue des Marais , where it stopped at a distance of one hundred and nine metres , a few paces distant from the house in which Racine had lived , respecting , in the seventeenth century , the poet more than the King . 
It attained its maximum depth in the Rue Saint-Pierre , where it rose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of the water-spout , and its maximum length in the Rue Saint-Sabin , where it spread out over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres in length . 
At the beginning of this century , the sewer of Paris was still a mysterious place . 
Mud can never enjoy a good fame ; but in this case its evil renown reached the verge of the terrible . 
Paris knew , in a confused way , that she had under her a terrible cavern . 
People talked of it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in which swarmed centipedes fifteen long feet in length , and which might have served Behemoth for a bathtub . 
The great boots of the sewermen never ventured further than certain well-known points . 
We were then very near the epoch when the scavenger 's carts , from the summit of which Sainte-Foix fraternized with the Marquis de Crequi , discharged their loads directly into the sewer . 
As for cleaning out , -- that function was entrusted to the pouring rains which encumbered rather than swept away . 
Rome left some poetry to her sewer , and called it the Gemoniae ; Paris insulted hers , and entitled it the Polypus-Hole . 
Science and superstition were in accord , in horror . 
The Polypus hole was no less repugnant to hygiene than to legend . 
The goblin was developed under the fetid covering of the Mouffetard sewer ; the corpses of the Marmousets had been cast into the sewer de la Barillerie ; Fagon attributed the redoubtable malignant fever of 1685 to the great hiatus of the sewer of the Marais , which remained yawning until 1833 in the Rue Saint-Louis , almost opposite the sign of the Gallant Messenger . 
The mouth of the sewer of the Rue de la Mortellerie was celebrated for the pestilences which had their source there ; with its grating of iron , with points simulating a row of teeth , it was like a dragon 's maw in that fatal street , breathing forth hell upon men . 
The popular imagination seasoned the sombre Parisian sink with some indescribably hideous intermixture of the infinite . 
The sewer had no bottom . 
The sewer was the lower world . 
The idea of exploring these leprous regions did not even occur to the police . 
To try that unknown thing , to cast the plummet into that shadow , to set out on a voyage of discovery in that abyss -- who would have dared ? 
It was alarming . 
Nevertheless , some one did present himself . 
The cess-pool had its Christopher Columbus . 
One day , in 1805 , during one of the rare apparitions which the Emperor made in Paris , the Minister of the Interior , some Decres or Cretet or other , came to the master 's intimate levee . 
In the Carrousel there was audible the clanking of swords of all those extraordinary soldiers of the great Republic , and of the great Empire ; then Napoleon 's door was blocked with heroes ; men from the Rhine , from the Escaut , from the Adige , and from the Nile ; companions of Joubert , of Desaix , of Marceau , of Hoche , of Kleber ; the aerostiers of Fleurus , the grenadiers of Mayence , the pontoon-builders of Genoa , hussars whom the Pyramids had looked down upon , artillerists whom Junot 's cannon-ball had spattered with mud , cuirassiers who had taken by assault the fleet lying at anchor in the Zuyderzee ; some had followed Bonaparte upon the bridge of Lodi , others had accompanied Murat in the trenches of Mantua , others had preceded Lannes in the hollow road of Montebello . 
The whole army of that day was present there , in the court-yard of the Tuileries , represented by a squadron or a platoon , and guarding Napoleon in repose ; and that was the splendid epoch when the grand army had Marengo behind it and Austerlitz before it . 
-- `` Sire , '' said the Minister of the Interior to Napoleon , `` yesterday I saw the most intrepid man in your Empire . '' 
-- `` What man is that ? '' 
said the Emperor brusquely , `` and what has he done ? '' 
-- `` He wants to do something , Sire . '' 
-- `` What is it ? '' 
-- `` To visit the sewers of Paris . '' 
This man existed and his name was Bruneseau . 
The visit took place . 
It was a formidable campaign ; a nocturnal battle against pestilence and suffocation . 
It was , at the same time , a voyage of discovery . 
One of the survivors of this expedition , an intelligent workingman , who was very young at the time , related curious details with regard to it , several years ago , which Bruneseau thought himself obliged to omit in his report to the prefect of police , as unworthy of official style . 
The processes of disinfection were , at that epoch , extremely rudimentary . 
Hardly had Bruneseau crossed the first articulations of that subterranean network , when eight laborers out of the twenty refused to go any further . 
The operation was complicated ; the visit entailed the necessity of cleaning ; hence it was necessary to cleanse and at the same time , to proceed ; to note the entrances of water , to count the gratings and the vents , to lay out in detail the branches , to indicate the currents at the point where they parted , to define the respective bounds of the divers basins , to sound the small sewers grafted on the principal sewer , to measure the height under the key-stone of each drain , and the width , at the spring of the vaults as well as at the bottom , in order to determine the arrangements with regard to the level of each water-entrance , either of the bottom of the arch , or on the soil of the street . 
They advanced with toil . 
The lanterns pined away in the foul atmosphere . 
From time to time , a fainting sewerman was carried out . 
At certain points , there were precipices . 
The soil had given away , the pavement had crumbled , the sewer had changed into a bottomless well ; they found nothing solid ; a man disappeared suddenly ; they had great difficulty in getting him out again . 
On the advice of Fourcroy , they lighted large cages filled with tow steeped in resin , from time to time , in spots which had been sufficiently disinfected . 
In some places , the wall was covered with misshapen fungi , -- one would have said tumors ; the very stone seemed diseased within this unbreathable atmosphere . 
Bruneseau , in his exploration , proceeded down hill . 
At the point of separation of the two water-conduits of the Grand-Hurleur , he deciphered upon a projecting stone the date of 1550 ; this stone indicated the limits where Philibert Delorme , charged by Henri II . 
with visiting the subterranean drains of Paris , had halted . 
This stone was the mark of the sixteenth century on the sewer ; Bruneseau found the handiwork of the seventeenth century once more in the Ponceau drain of the old Rue Vielle-du-Temple , vaulted between 1600 and 1650 ; and the handiwork of the eighteenth in the western section of the collecting canal , walled and vaulted in 1740 . 
These two vaults , especially the less ancient , that of 1740 , were more cracked and decrepit than the masonry of the belt sewer , which dated from 1412 , an epoch when the brook of fresh water of Menilmontant was elevated to the dignity of the Grand Sewer of Paris , an advancement analogous to that of a peasant who should become first valet de chambre to the King ; something like Gros-Jean transformed into Lebel . 
Here and there , particularly beneath the Court-House , they thought they recognized the hollows of ancient dungeons , excavated in the very sewer itself . 
Hideous in-pace . 
An iron neck-collar was hanging in one of these cells . 
They walled them all up . 
Some of their finds were singular ; among others , the skeleton of an ourang-outan , who had disappeared from the Jardin des Plantes in 1800 , a disappearance probably connected with the famous and indisputable apparition of the devil in the Rue des Bernardins , in the last year of the eighteenth century . 
The poor devil had ended by drowning himself in the sewer . 
Beneath this long , arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion , a perfectly preserved rag-picker 's basket excited the admiration of all connoisseurs . 
Everywhere , the mire , which the sewermen came to handle with intrepidity , abounded in precious objects , jewels of gold and silver , precious stones , coins . 
If a giant had filtered this cesspool , he would have had the riches of centuries in his lair . 
At the point where the two branches of the Rue du Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoye separate , they picked up a singular Huguenot medal in copper , bearing on one side the pig hooded with a cardinal 's hat , and on the other , a wolf with a tiara on his head . 
The most surprising rencounter was at the entrance to the Grand Sewer . 
This entrance had formerly been closed by a grating of which nothing but the hinges remained . 
From one of these hinges hung a dirty and shapeless rag which , arrested there in its passage , no doubt , had floated there in the darkness and finished its process of being torn apart . 
Bruneseau held his lantern close to this rag and examined it . 
It was of very fine batiste , and in one of the corners , less frayed than the rest , they made out a heraldic coronet and embroidered above these seven letters : LAVBESP . 
The crown was the coronet of a Marquis , and the seven letters signified Laubespine . 
They recognized the fact , that what they had before their eyes was a morsel of the shroud of Marat . 
Marat in his youth had had amorous intrigues . 
This was when he was a member of the household of the Comte d'Artois , in the capacity of physician to the Stables . 
From these love affairs , historically proved , with a great lady , he had retained this sheet . 
As a waif or a souvenir . 
At his death , as this was the only linen of any fineness which he had in his house , they buried him in it . 
Some old women had shrouded him for the tomb in that swaddling-band in which the tragic Friend of the people had enjoyed voluptuousness . 
Bruneseau passed on . 
They left that rag where it hung ; they did not put the finishing touch to it . 
Did this arise from scorn or from respect ? 
Marat deserved both . 
And then , destiny was there sufficiently stamped to make them hesitate to touch it . 
Besides , the things of the sepulchre must be left in the spot which they select . 
In short , the relic was a strange one . 
A Marquise had slept in it ; Marat had rotted in it ; it had traversed the Pantheon to end with the rats of the sewer . 
This chamber rag , of which Watteau would formerly have joyfully sketched every fold , had ended in becoming worthy of the fixed gaze of Dante . 
The whole visit to the subterranean stream of filth of Paris lasted seven years , from 1805 to 1812 . 
As he proceeded , Bruneseau drew , directed , and completed considerable works ; in 1808 he lowered the arch of the Ponceau , and , everywhere creating new lines , he pushed the sewer , in 1809 , under the Rue Saint-Denis as far as the fountain of the Innocents ; in 1810 , under the Rue Froidmanteau and under the Salpetriere ; in 1811 under the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Peres , under the Rue du Mail , under the Rue de l'Echarpe , under the Place Royale ; in 1812 , under the Rue de la Paix , and under the Chaussee d'Antin . 
At the same time , he had the whole net-work disinfected and rendered healthful . 
In the second year of his work , Bruneseau engaged the assistance of his son-in-law Nargaud . 
It was thus that , at the beginning of the century , ancient society cleansed its double bottom , and performed the toilet of its sewer . 
There was that much clean , at all events . 
Tortuous , cracked , unpaved , full of fissures , intersected by gullies , jolted by eccentric elbows , mounting and descending illogically , fetid , wild , fierce , submerged in obscurity , with cicatrices on its pavements and scars on its walls , terrible , -- such was , retrospectively viewed , the antique sewer of Paris . 
Ramifications in every direction , crossings , of trenches , branches , goose-feet , stars , as in military mines , coecum , blind alleys , vaults lined with saltpetre , pestiferous pools , scabby sweats , on the walls , drops dripping from the ceilings , darkness ; nothing could equal the horror of this old , waste crypt , the digestive apparatus of Babylon , a cavern , ditch , gulf pierced with streets , a titanic mole-burrow , where the mind seems to behold that enormous blind mole , the past , prowling through the shadows , in the filth which has been splendor . 
This , we repeat , was the sewer of the past . 
PRESENT PROGRESS To-day the sewer is clean , cold , straight , correct . 
It almost realizes the ideal of what is understood in England by the word `` respectable . '' 
It is proper and grayish ; laid out by rule and line ; one might almost say as though it came out of a bandbox . 
It resembles a tradesman who has become a councillor of state . 
One can almost see distinctly there . 
The mire there comports itself with decency . 
At first , one might readily mistake it for one of those subterranean corridors , which were so common in former days , and so useful in flights of monarchs and princes , in those good old times , `` when the people loved their kings . '' 
The present sewer is a beautiful sewer ; the pure style reigns there ; the classical rectilinear alexandrine which , driven out of poetry , appears to have taken refuge in architecture , seems mingled with all the stones of that long , dark and whitish vault ; each outlet is an arcade ; the Rue de Rivoli serves as pattern even in the sewer . 
However , if the geometrical line is in place anywhere , it is certainly in the drainage trench of a great city . 
There , everything should be subordinated to the shortest road . 
The sewer has , nowadays , assumed a certain official aspect . 
The very police reports , of which it sometimes forms the subject , no longer are wanting in respect towards it . 
The words which characterize it in administrative language are sonorous and dignified . 
What used to be called a gut is now called a gallery ; what used to be called a hole is now called a surveying orifice . 
Villon would no longer meet with his ancient temporary provisional lodging . 
This net-work of cellars has its immemorial population of prowlers , rodents , swarming in greater numbers than ever ; from time to time , an aged and veteran rat risks his head at the window of the sewer and surveys the Parisians ; but even these vermin grow tame , so satisfied are they with their subterranean palace . 
The cesspool no longer retains anything of its primitive ferocity . 
The rain , which in former days soiled the sewer , now washes it . 
Nevertheless , do not trust yourself too much to it . 
Miasmas still inhabit it . 
It is more hypocritical than irreproachable . 
The prefecture of police and the commission of health have done their best . 
But , in spite of all the processes of disinfection , it exhales , a vague , suspicious odor like Tartuffe after confession . 
Let us confess , that , taking it all in all , this sweeping is a homage which the sewer pays to civilization , and as , from this point of view , Tartuffe 's conscience is a progress over the Augean stables , it is certain that the sewers of Paris have been improved . 
It is more than progress ; it is transmutation . 
Between the ancient and the present sewer there is a revolution . 
What has effected this revolution ? 
The man whom all the world forgets , and whom we have mentioned , Bruneseau . 
FUTURE PROGRESS The excavation of the sewer of Paris has been no slight task . 
The last ten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a termination , any more than they have been able to finish Paris . 
The sewer , in fact , receives all the counter-shocks of the growth of Paris . 
Within the bosom of the earth , it is a sort of mysterious polyp with a thousand antennae , which expands below as the city expands above . 
Every time that the city cuts a street , the sewer stretches out an arm . 
The old monarchy had constructed only twenty-three thousand three hundred metres of sewers ; that was where Paris stood in this respect on the first of January , 1806 . 
Beginning with this epoch , of which we shall shortly speak , the work was usefully and energetically resumed and prosecuted ; Napoleon built -- the figures are curious -- four thousand eight hundred and four metres ; Louis XVIII. , five thousand seven hundred and nine ; Charles X. , ten thousand eight hundred and thirty-six ; Louis-Philippe , eighty-nine thousand and twenty ; the Republic of 1848 , twenty-three thousand three hundred and eighty-one ; the present government , seventy thousand five hundred ; in all , at the present time , two hundred and twenty-six thousand six hundred and ten metres ; sixty leagues of sewers ; the enormous entrails of Paris . 
An obscure ramification ever at work ; a construction which is immense and ignored . 
As the reader sees , the subterranean labyrinth of Paris is to-day more than ten times what it was at the beginning of the century . 
It is difficult to form any idea of all the perseverance and the efforts which have been required to bring this cess-pool to the point of relative perfection in which it now is . 
It was with great difficulty that the ancient monarchical provostship and , during the last ten years of the eighteenth century , the revolutionary mayoralty , had succeeded in perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to 1806 . 
All sorts of obstacles hindered this operation , some peculiar to the soil , others inherent in the very prejudices of the laborious population of Paris . 
Paris is built upon a soil which is singularly rebellious to the pick , the hoe , the bore , and to human manipulation . 
There is nothing more difficult to pierce and to penetrate than the geological formation upon which is superposed the marvellous historical formation called Paris ; as soon as work in any form whatsoever is begun and adventures upon this stretch of alluvium , subterranean resistances abound . 
There are liquid clays , springs , hard rocks , and those soft and deep quagmires which special science calls moutardes . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- The pick advances laboriously through the calcareous layers alternating with very slender threads of clay , and schistose beds in plates incrusted with oyster-shells , the contemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans . 
Sometimes a rivulet suddenly bursts through a vault that has been begun , and inundates the laborers ; or a layer of marl is laid bare , and rolls down with the fury of a cataract , breaking the stoutest supporting beams like glass . 
Quite recently , at Villette , when it became necessary to pass the collecting sewer under the Saint-Martin canal without interrupting navigation or emptying the canal , a fissure appeared in the basin of the canal , water suddenly became abundant in the subterranean tunnel , which was beyond the power of the pumping engines ; it was necessary to send a diver to explore the fissure which had been made in the narrow entrance of the grand basin , and it was not without great difficulty that it was stopped up . 
Elsewhere near the Seine , and even at a considerable distance from the river , as for instance , at Belleville , Grand-Rue and Lumiere Passage , quicksands are encountered in which one sticks fast , and in which a man sinks visibly . 
Add suffocation by miasmas , burial by slides , and sudden crumbling of the earth . 
Add the typhus , with which the workmen become slowly impregnated . 
In our own day , after having excavated the gallery of Clichy , with a banquette to receive the principal water-conduit of Ourcq , a piece of work which was executed in a trench ten metres deep ; after having , in the midst of land-slides , and with the aid of excavations often putrid , and of shoring up , vaulted the Bievre from the Boulevard de l'Hopital , as far as the Seine ; after having , in order to deliver Paris from the floods of Montmartre and in order to provide an outlet for that river-like pool nine hectares in extent , which crouched near the Barriere des Martyrs , after having , let us state , constructed the line of sewers from the Barriere Blanche to the road of Aubervilliers , in four months , working day and night , at a depth of eleven metres ; after having -- a thing heretofore unseen -- made a subterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec , without a trench , six metres below the surface , the superintendent , Monnot , died . 
After having vaulted three thousand metres of sewer in all quarters of the city , from the Rue Traversiere-Saint-Antoine to the Rue de l'Ourcine , after having freed the Carrefour Censier-Mouffetard from inundations of rain by means of the branch of the Arbalete , after having built the Saint-Georges sewer , on rock and concrete in the fluid sands , after having directed the formidable lowering of the flooring of the vault timber in the Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth branch , Duleau the engineer died . 
There are no bulletins for such acts of bravery as these , which are more useful , nevertheless , than the brutal slaughter of the field of battle . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- Mustards . 
The sewers of Paris in 1832 were far from being what they are to-day . 
Bruneseau had given the impulse , but the cholera was required to bring about the vast reconstruction which took place later on . 
It is surprising to say , for example , that in 1821 , a part of the belt sewer , called the Grand Canal , as in Venice , still stood stagnating uncovered to the sky , in the Rue des Gourdes . 
It was only in 1821 that the city of Paris found in its pocket the two hundred and sixty-thousand eighty francs and six centimes required for covering this mass of filth . 
The three absorbing wells , of the Combat , the Cunette , and Saint-Mande , with their discharging mouths , their apparatus , their cesspools , and their depuratory branches , only date from 1836 . 
The intestinal sewer of Paris has been made over anew , and , as we have said , it has been extended more than tenfold within the last quarter of a century . 
Thirty years ago , at the epoch of the insurrection of the 5th and 6th of June , it was still , in many localities , nearly the same ancient sewer . 
A very great number of streets which are now convex were then sunken causeways . 
At the end of a slope , where the tributaries of a street or cross-roads ended , there were often to be seen large , square gratings with heavy bars , whose iron , polished by the footsteps of the throng , gleamed dangerous and slippery for vehicles , and caused horses to fall . 
The official language of the Roads and Bridges gave to these gratings the expressive name of Cassis . 
-LSB- 60 -RSB- -LSB- 60 -RSB- From casser , to break : break-necks . 
In 1832 , in a number of streets , in the Rue de l'Etoile , the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue du Temple , the Rue Vielle-duTemple , the Rue Notre-Dame de Nazareth , the Rue Folie-Mericourt , the Quai aux Fleurs , the Rue du Petit-Muse , the Rue du Normandie , the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches , the Rue des Marais , the Faubourg Saint-Martin , the Rue Notre Dame des-Victoires , the Faubourg Montmartre , the Rue Grange-Bateliere , in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Jacob , the Rue de Tournon , the ancient gothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw . 
It consisted of enormous voids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stone posts , with monumental effrontery . 
Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in 1663 ; five thousand three hundred fathoms . 
After Bruneseau , on the 1st of January , 1832 , it had forty thousand three hundred metres . 
Between 1806 and 1831 , there had been built , on an average , seven hundred and fifty metres annually , afterwards eight and even ten thousand metres of galleries were constructed every year , in masonry , of small stones , with hydraulic mortar which hardens under water , on a cement foundation . 
At two hundred francs the metre , the sixty leagues of Paris ' sewers of the present day represent forty-eight millions . 
In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at the beginning , grave problems of public hygiene are connected with that immense question : the sewers of Paris . 
Paris is the centre of two sheets , a sheet of water and a sheet of air . 
The sheet of water , lying at a tolerably great depth underground , but already sounded by two bores , is furnished by the layer of green clay situated between the chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone ; this layer may be represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference ; a multitude of rivers and brooks ooze there ; one drinks the Seine , the Marne , the Yonne , the Oise , the Aisne , the Cher , the Vienne and the Loire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle . 
The sheet of water is healthy , it comes from heaven in the first place and next from the earth ; the sheet of air is unhealthy , it comes from the sewer . 
All the miasms of the cess-pool are mingled with the breath of the city ; hence this bad breath . 
The air taken from above a dung-heap , as has been scientifically proved , is purer than the air taken from above Paris . 
In a given time , with the aid of progress , mechanisms become perfected , and as light increases , the sheet of water will be employed to purify the sheet of air ; that is to say , to wash the sewer . 
The reader knows , that by `` washing the sewer '' we mean : the restitution of the filth to the earth ; the return to the soil of dung and of manure to the fields . 
Through this simple act , the entire social community will experience a diminution of misery and an augmentation of health . 
At the present hour , the radiation of diseases from Paris extends to fifty leagues around the Louvre , taken as the hub of this pestilential wheel . 
We might say that , for ten centuries , the cess-pool has been the disease of Paris . 
The sewer is the blemish which Paris has in her blood . 
The popular instinct has never been deceived in it . 
The occupation of sewermen was formerly almost as perilous , and almost as repugnant to the people , as the occupation of knacker , which was so long held in horror and handed over to the executioner . 
High wages were necessary to induce a mason to disappear in that fetid mine ; the ladder of the cess-pool cleaner hesitated to plunge into it ; it was said , in proverbial form : `` to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave ; '' and all sorts of hideous legends , as we have said , covered this colossal sink with terror ; a dread sink-hole which bears the traces of the revolutions of the globe as of the revolutions of man , and where are to be found vestiges of all cataclysms from the shells of the Deluge to the rag of Marat . 
THE SEWER AND ITS SURPRISES It was in the sewers of Paris that Jean Valjean found himself . 
Still another resemblance between Paris and the sea . 
As in the ocean , the diver may disappear there . 
The transition was an unheard-of one . 
In the very heart of the city , Jean Valjean had escaped from the city , and , in the twinkling of an eye , in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it , he had passed from broad daylight to complete obscurity , from midday to midnight , from tumult to silence , from the whirlwind of thunders to the stagnation of the tomb , and , by a vicissitude far more tremendous even than that of the Rue Polonceau , from the most extreme peril to the most absolute obscurity . 
An abrupt fall into a cavern ; a disappearance into the secret trap-door of Paris ; to quit that street where death was on every side , for that sort of sepulchre where there was life , was a strange instant . 
He remained for several seconds as though bewildered ; listening , stupefied . 
The waste-trap of safety had suddenly yawned beneath him . 
Celestial goodness had , in a manner , captured him by treachery . 
Adorable ambuscades of providence ! 
Only , the wounded man did not stir , and Jean Valjean did not know whether that which he was carrying in that grave was a living being or a dead corpse . 
His first sensation was one of blindness . 
All of a sudden , he could see nothing . 
It seemed to him too , that , in one instant , he had become deaf . 
He no longer heard anything . 
The frantic storm of murder which had been let loose a few feet above his head did not reach him , thanks to the thickness of the earth which separated him from it , as we have said , otherwise than faintly and indistinctly , and like a rumbling , in the depths . 
He felt that the ground was solid under his feet ; that was all ; but that was enough . 
He extended one arm and then the other , touched the walls on both sides , and perceived that the passage was narrow ; he slipped , and thus perceived that the pavement was wet . 
He cautiously put forward one foot , fearing a hole , a sink , some gulf ; he discovered that the paving continued . 
A gust of fetidness informed him of the place in which he stood . 
After the lapse of a few minutes , he was no longer blind . 
A little light fell through the man-hole through which he had descended , and his eyes became accustomed to this cavern . 
He began to distinguish something . 
The passage in which he had burrowed -- no other word can better express the situation -- was walled in behind him . 
It was one of those blind alleys , which the special jargon terms branches . 
In front of him there was another wall , a wall like night . 
The light of the air-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjean stood , and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp walls of the sewer . 
Beyond , the opaqueness was massive ; to penetrate thither seemed horrible , an entrance into it appeared like an engulfment . 
A man could , however , plunge into that wall of fog and it was necessary so to do . 
