family feeling spoke there , ' Bazarov commented coolly . 
` I 've noticed how obstinately it sticks to people . 
A man 's ready to give up everything and break with every prejudice ; but to admit that his brother , for instance , who steals handkerchiefs , is a thief -- that 's too much for him . 
And when one comes to think of it : my brother , mine -- and no genius ... that 's an idea no one can swallow . ' 
` It was a simple sense of justice spoke in me and not in the least family feeling , ' retorted Arkady passionately . 
` But since that 's a sense you do n't understand , since you have n't that sensation , you ca n't judge of it . ' 
` In other words , Arkady Kirsanov is too exalted for my comprehension . 
I bow down before him and say no more . ' 
` Do n't , please , Yevgeny ; we shall really quarrel at last . ' 
` Ah , Arkady ! 
do me a kindness . 
I entreat you , let us quarrel for once in earnest ... ' ` But then perhaps we should end by ... ' ` Fighting ? ' 
put in Bazarov . 
` Well ? 
Here , on the hay , in these idyllic surroundings , far from the world and the eyes of men , it would n't matter . 
But you 'd be no match for me . 
I 'll have you by the throat in a minute . ' 
Bazarov spread out his long , cruel fingers ... . 
Arkady turned round and prepared , as though in jest , to resist ... . 
But his friend 's face struck him as so vindictive -- there was such menace in grim earnest in the smile that distorted his lips , and in his glittering eyes , that he felt instinctively afraid . 
` Ah ! 
so this is where you have got to ! ' 
the voice of Vassily Ivanovitch was heard saying at that instant , and the old army-doctor appeared before the young men , garbed in a home-made linen pea-jacket , with a straw hat , also home-made , on his head . 
` I 've been looking everywhere for you ... . 
Well , you 've picked out a capital place , and you 're excellently employed . 
Lying on the `` earth , gazing up to heaven . '' 
Do you know , there 's a special significance in that ? ' ' 
I never gaze up to heaven except when I want to sneeze , ' growled Bazarov , and turning to Arkady he added in an undertone . 
` Pity he interrupted us . ' 
` Come , hush ! ' 
whispered Arkady , and he secretly squeezed his friend 's hand . 
But no friendship can long stand such shocks . ' 
I look at you , my youthful friends , ' Vassily Ivanovitch was saying meantime , shaking his head , and leaning his folded arms on a rather cunningly bent stick of his own carving , with a Turk 's figure for a top , -- ' I look , and I can not refrain from admiration . 
You have so much strength , such youth and bloom , such abilities , such talents ! 
Positively , a Castor and Pollux ! ' 
` Get along with you -- going off into mythology ! ' 
commented Bazarov . 
` You can see at once that he was a great Latinist in his day ! 
Why , I seem to remember , you gained the silver medal for Latin prose -- did n't you ? ' 
` The Dioscuri , the Dioscuri ! ' 
repeated Vassily Ivanovitch . 
` Come , shut up , father ; do n't show off . ' 
` Once in a way it 's surely permissible , ' murmured the old man . 
` However , I have not been seeking for you , gentlemen , to pay you compliments ; but with the object , in the first place , of announcing to you that we shall soon be dining ; and secondly , I wanted to prepare you , Yevgeny ... . 
You are a sensible man , you know the world , and you know what women are , and consequently you will excuse ... . 
Your mother wished to have a Te Deum sung on the occasion of your arrival . 
You must not imagine that I am inviting you to attend this thanksgiving -- it is over indeed now ; but Father Alexey ... ' ` The village parson ? ' 
` Well , yes , the priest ; he ... is to dine ... with us ... . 
I did not anticipate this , and did not even approve of it ... but it somehow came about ... he did not understand me ... . 
And , well ... Arina Vlasyevna ... Besides , he 's a worthy , reasonable man . ' 
` He wo n't eat my share at dinner , I suppose ? ' 
queried Bazarov . 
Vassily Ivanovitch laughed . 
` How you talk ! ' 
` Well , that 's all I ask . 
I 'm ready to sit down to table with any man . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch set his hat straight . ' 
I was certain before I spoke , ' he said , ` that you were above any kind of prejudice . 
Here am I , an old man at sixty-two , and I have none . ' 
-LRB- Vassily Ivanovitch did not dare to confess that he had himself desired the thanksgiving service . 
He was no less religious than his wife . -RRB- 
` And Father Alexey very much wanted to make your acquaintance . 
You will like him , you 'll see . 
He 's no objection even to cards , and he sometimes -- but this is between ourselves ... positively smokes a pipe . ' 
` All right . 
We 'll have a round of whist after dinner , and I 'll clean him out . ' 
` He ! 
he ! 
he ! 
We shall see ! 
That remains to be seen . ' ' 
I know you 're an old hand , ' said Bazarov , with a peculiar emphasis . 
Vassily Ivanovitch 's bronzed cheeks were suffused with an uneasy flush . 
` For shame , Yevgeny ... . 
Let bygones be bygones . 
Well , I 'm ready to acknowledge before this gentleman I had that passion in my youth ; and I have paid for it too ! 
How hot it is , though ! 
Let me sit down with you . 
I sha n't be in your way , I hope ? ' 
` Oh , not at all , ' answered Arkady . 
Vassily Ivanovitch lowered himself , sighing , into the hay . 
` Your present quarters remind me , my dear sirs , ' he began , ` of my military bivouacking existence , the ambulance halts , somewhere like this under a haystack , and even for that we were thankful . ' 
He sighed . ' 
I had many , many experiences in my life . 
For example , if you will allow me , I will tell you a curious episode of the plague in Bessarabia . ' 
` For which you got the Vladimir cross ? ' 
put in Bazarov . 
` We know , we know ... . 
By the way , why is it you 're not wearing it ? ' 
` Why , I told you that I have no prejudices , ' muttered Vassily Ivanovitch -LRB- he had only the evening before had the red ribbon unpicked off his coat -RRB- , and he proceeded to relate the episode of the plague . 
` Why , he 's fallen asleep , ' he whispered all at once to Arkady , pointing to Yevgeny , and winking good-naturedly . 
` Yevgeny ! 
get up , ' he went on aloud . 
` Let 's go in to dinner . ' 
Father Alexey , a good-looking stout man with thick , carefully-combed hair , with an embroidered girdle round his lilac silk cassock , appeared to be a man of much tact and adaptability . 
He made haste to be the first to offer his hand to Arkady and Bazarov , as though understanding beforehand that they did not want his blessing , and he behaved himself in general without constraint . 
He neither derogated from his own dignity , nor gave offence to others ; he vouchsafed a passing smile at the seminary Latin , and stood up for his bishop ; drank two small glasses of wine , but refused a third ; accepted a cigar from Arkady , but did not proceed to smoke it , saying he would take it home with him . 
The only thing not quite agreeable about him was a way he had of constantly raising his hand with care and deliberation to catch the flies on his face , sometimes succeeding in smashing them . 
He took his seat at the green table , expressing his satisfaction at so doing in measured terms , and ended by winning from Bazarov two roubles and a half in paper money ; they had no idea of even reckoning in silver in the house of Arina Vlasyevna ... . 
She was sitting , as before , near her son -LRB- she did not play cards -RRB- , her cheek , as before , propped on her little fist ; she only got up to order some new dainty to be served . 
She was afraid to caress Bazarov , and he gave her no encouragement , he did not invite her caresses ; and besides , Vassily Ivanovitch had advised her not to ` worry ' him too much . 
` Young men are not fond of that sort of thing , ' he declared to her . 
-LRB- It 's needless to say what the dinner was like that day ; Timofeitch in person had galloped off at early dawn for beef ; the bailiff had gone off in another direction for turbot , gremille , and crayfish ; for mushrooms alone forty-two farthings had been paid the peasant women in copper -RRB- ; but Arina Vlasyevna 's eyes , bent steadfastly on Bazarov , did not express only devotion and tenderness ; in them was to be seen sorrow also , mingled with awe and curiosity ; there was to be seen too a sort of humble reproachfulness . 
Bazarov , however , was not in a humour to analyse the exact expression of his mother 's eyes ; he seldom turned to her , and then only with some short question . 
Once he asked her for her hand ` for luck ' ; she gently laid her soft , little hand on his rough , broad palm . 
` Well , ' she asked , after waiting a little , ` has it been any use ? ' 
` Worse luck than ever , ' he answered , with a careless laugh . 
` He plays too rashly , ' pronounced Father Alexey , as it were compassionately , and he stroked his beard . 
` Napoleon 's rule , good Father , Napoleon 's rule , ' put in Vassily Ivanovitch , leading an ace . 
` It brought him to St. Helena , though , ' observed Father Alexey , as he trumped the ace . 
` Would n't you like some currant tea , Enyusha ? ' 
inquired Arina Vlasyevna . 
Bazarov merely shrugged his shoulders . 
` No ! ' 
he said to Arkady the next day . 
I 'm off from here to-morrow . 
I 'm bored ; I want to work , but I ca n't work here . 
I will come to your place again ; I 've left all my apparatus there too . 
In your house one can at any rate shut oneself up . 
While here my father repeats to me , `` My study is at your disposal -- nobody shall interfere with you , '' and all the time he himself is never a yard away . 
And I 'm ashamed somehow to shut myself away from him . 
It 's the same thing too with mother . 
I hear her sighing the other side of the wall , and if one goes in to her , one 's nothing to say to her . ' 
` She will be very much grieved , ' observed Arkady , ` and so will he . ' ' 
I shall come back again to them . ' 
` When ? ' 
` Why , when on my way to Petersburg . ' ' 
I feel sorry for your mother particularly . ' 
` Why 's that ? 
Has she won your heart with strawberries , or what ? ' 
Arkady dropped his eyes . 
` You do n't understand your mother , Yevgeny . 
She 's not only a very good woman , she 's very clever really . 
This morning she talked to me for half-an-hour , and so sensibly , interestingly . ' ' 
I suppose she was expatiating upon me all the while ? ' 
` We did n't talk only about you . ' 
` Perhaps ; lookers-on see most . 
If a woman can keep up half-an-hour 's conversation , it 's always a hopeful sign . 
But I 'm going , all the same . ' 
` It wo n't be very easy for you to break it to them . 
They are always making plans for what we are to do in a fortnight 's time . ' 
` No ; it wo n't be easy . 
Some demon drove me to tease my father to-day ; he had one of his rent-paying peasants flogged the other day , and quite right too -- yes , yes , you need n't look at me in such horror -- he did quite right , because he 's an awful thief and drunkard ; only my father had no idea that I , as they say , was cognisant of the facts . 
He was greatly perturbed , and now I shall have to upset him more than ever ... . 
Never mind ! 
Never say die ! 
He 'll get over it ! ' 
Bazarov said , ` Never mind ' ; but the whole day passed before he could make up his mind to inform Vassily Ivanovitch of his intentions . 
At last , when he was just saying good-night to him in the study , he observed , with a feigned yawn -- ` Oh ... I was almost forgetting to tell you ... . 
Send to Fedot 's for our horses to-morrow . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch was dumbfounded . 
` Is Mr. Kirsanov leaving us , then ? ' 
` Yes ; and I 'm going with him . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch positively reeled . 
` You are going ? ' 
` Yes ... I must . 
Make the arrangements about the horses , please . ' 
` Very good ... ' faltered the old man ; ` to Fedot 's ... very good ... only ... only ... . 
How is it ? ' ' 
I must go to stay with him for a little time . 
I will come back again later . ' 
` Ah ! 
For a little time ... very good . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch drew out his handkerchief , and , blowing his nose , doubled up almost to the ground . 
` Well ... everything shall be done . 
I had thought you were to be with us ... a little longer . 
Three days ... . 
After three years , it 's rather little ; rather little , Yevgeny ! ' 
` But , I tell you , I 'm coming back directly . 
It 's necessary for me to go . ' 
` Necessary ... . 
Well ! 
Duty before everything . 
So the horses shall be in readiness . 
Very good . 
Arina and I , of course , did not anticipate this . 
She has just begged some flowers from a neighbour ; she meant to decorate the room for you . ' 
-LRB- Vassily Ivanovitch did not even mention that every morning almost at dawn he took counsel with Timofeitch , standing with his bare feet in his slippers , and pulling out with trembling fingers one dog 's - eared rouble note after another , charged him with various purchases , with special reference to good things to eat , and to red wine , which , as far as he could observe , the young men liked extremely . -RRB- 
` Liberty ... is the great thing ; that 's my rule ... . 
I do n't want to hamper you ... not ... ' He suddenly ceased , and made for the door . 
` We shall soon see each other again , father , really . ' 
But Vassily Ivanovitch , without turning round , merely waved his hand and was gone . 
When he got back to his bedroom he found his wife in bed , and began to say his prayers in a whisper , so as not to wake her up . 
She woke , however . 
` Is that you , Vassily Ivanovitch ? ' 
she asked . 
` Yes , mother . ' 
` Have you come from Enyusha ? 
Do you know , I 'm afraid of his not being comfortable on that sofa . 
I told Anfisushka to put him on your travelling mattress and the new pillows ; I should have given him our feather-bed , but I seem to remember he does n't like too soft a bed ... ' ` Never mind , mother ; do n't worry yourself . 
He 's all right . 
Lord , have mercy on me , a sinner , ' he went on with his prayer in a low voice . 
Vassily Ivanovitch was sorry for his old wife ; he did not mean to tell her over night what a sorrow there was in store for her . 
Bazarov and Arkady set off the next day . 
From early morning all was dejection in the house ; Anfisushka let the tray slip out of her hands ; even Fedka was bewildered , and was reduced to taking off his boots . 
Vassily Ivanitch was more fussy than ever ; he was obviously trying to put a good face on it , talked loudly , and stamped with his feet , but his face looked haggard , and his eyes were continually avoiding his son . 
Arina Vlasyevna was crying quietly ; she was utterly crushed , and could not have controlled herself at all if her husband had not spent two whole hours early in the morning exhorting her . 
When Bazarov , after repeated promises to come back certainly not later than in a month 's time , tore himself at last from the embraces detaining him , and took his seat in the coach ; when the horses had started , the bell was ringing , and the wheels were turning round , and when it was no longer any good to look after them , and the dust had settled , and Timofeitch , all bent and tottering as he walked , had crept back to his little room ; when the old people were left alone in their little house , which seemed suddenly to have grown shrunken and decrepit too , Vassily Ivanovitch , after a few more moments of hearty waving of his handkerchief on the steps , sank into a chair , and his head dropped on to his breast . 
` He has cast us off ; he has forsaken us , ' he faltered ; ` forsaken us ; he was dull with us . 
Alone , alone ! ' 
he repeated several times . 
Then Arina Vlasyevna went up to him , and , leaning her grey head against his grey head , said , ` There 's no help for it , Vasya ! 
A son is a separate piece cut off . 
He 's like the falcon that flies home and flies away at his pleasure ; while you and I are like funguses in the hollow of a tree , we sit side by side , and do n't move from our place . 
Only I am left you unchanged for ever , as you for me . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch took his hands from his face and clasped his wife , his friend , as warmly as he had never clasped in youth ; she comforted him in his grief . 
In silence , only rarely exchanging a few insignificant words , our friends travelled as far as Fedot 's . 
Bazarov was not altogether pleased with himself . 
Arkady was displeased with him . 
He was feeling , too , that causeless melancholy which is only known to very young people . 
The coachman changed the horses , and getting up on to the box , inquired , ` To the right or to the left ? ' 
Arkady started . 
The road to the right led to the town , and from there home ; the road to the left led to Madame Odintsov 's . 
He looked at Bazarov . 
` Yevgeny , ' he queried ; ` to the left ? ' 
Bazarov turned away . 
` What folly is this ? ' 
he muttered . ' 
I know it 's folly , ' answered Arkady ... ` But what does that matter ? 
It 's not the first time . ' 
Bazarov pulled his cap down over his brows . 
` As you choose , ' he said at last . 
` Turn to the left , ' shouted Arkady . 
The coach rolled away in the direction of Nikolskoe . 
But having resolved on the folly , the friends were even more obstinately silent than before , and seemed positively ill-humoured . 
Directly the steward met them on the steps of Madame Odintsov 's house , the friends could perceive that they had acted injudiciously in giving way so suddenly to a passing impulse . 
They were obviously not expected . 
They sat rather a long while , looking rather foolish , in the drawing-room . 
Madame Odintsov came in to them at last . 
She greeted them with her customary politeness , but was surprised at their hasty return ; and , so far as could be judged from the deliberation of her gestures and words , she was not over pleased at it . 
They made haste to announce that they had only called on their road , and must go on farther , to the town , within four hours . 
She confined herself to a light exclamation , begged Arkady to remember her to his father , and sent for her aunt . 
The princess appeared very sleepy , which gave her wrinkled old face an even more ill-natured expression . 
Katya was not well ; she did not leave her room . 
Arkady suddenly realised that he was at least as anxious to see Katya as Anna Sergyevna herself . 
The four hours were spent in insignificant discussion of one thing and another ; Anna Sergyevna both listened and spoke without a smile . 
It was only quite at parting that her former friendliness seemed , as it were , to revive . ' 
I have an attack of spleen just now , ' she said ; ` but you must not pay attention to that , and come again -- I say this to both of you -- before long . ' 
Both Bazarov and Arkady responded with a silent bow , took their seats in the coach , and without stopping again anywhere , went straight home to Maryino , where they arrived safely on the evening of the following day . 
During the whole course of the journey neither one nor the other even mentioned the name of Madame Odintsov ; Bazarov , in particular , scarcely opened his mouth , and kept staring in a side direction away from the road , with a kind of exasperated intensity . 
At Maryino every one was exceedingly delighted to see them . 
The prolonged absence of his son had begun to make Nikolai Petrovitch uneasy ; he uttered a cry of joy , and bounced about on the sofa , dangling his legs , when Fenitchka ran to him with sparkling eyes , and informed him of the arrival of the ` young gentlemen ' ; even Pavel Petrovitch was conscious of some degree of agreeable excitement , and smiled condescendingly as he shook hands with the returned wanderers . 
Talk , questions followed ; Arkady talked most , especially at supper , which was prolonged long after midnight . 
Nikolai Petrovitch ordered up some bottles of porter which had only just been sent from Moscow , and partook of the festive beverage till his cheeks were crimson , and he kept laughing in a half-childish , half-nervous little chuckle . 
Even the servants were infected by the general gaiety . 
Dunyasha ran up and down like one possessed , and was continually slamming doors ; while Piotr was , at three o'clock in the morning , still attempting to strum a Cossack waltz on the guitar . 
The strings gave forth a sweet and plaintive sound in the still air ; but with the exception of a small preliminary flourish , nothing came of the cultured valet 's efforts ; nature had given him no more musical talent than all the rest of the world . 
But meanwhile things were not going over harmoniously at Maryino , and poor Nikolai Petrovitch was having a bad time of it . 
Difficulties on the farm sprang up every day -- senseless , distressing difficulties . 
The troubles with the hired labourers had become insupportable . 
Some asked for their wages to be settled , or for an increase of wages , while others made off with the wages they had received in advance ; the horses fell sick ; the harness fell to pieces as though it were burnt ; the work was carelessly done ; a threshing machine that had been ordered from Moscow turned out to be useless from its great weight , another was ruined the first time it was used ; half the cattle sheds were burnt down through an old blind woman on the farm going in windy weather with a burning brand to fumigate her cow ... the old woman , it is true , maintained that the whole mischief could be traced to the master 's plan of introducing newfangled cheeses and milk-products . 
The overseer suddenly turned lazy , and began to grow fat , as every Russian grows fat when he gets a snug berth . 
When he caught sight of Nikolai Petrovitch in the distance , he would fling a stick at a passing pig , or threaten a half-naked urchin , to show his zeal , but the rest of the time he was generally asleep . 
The peasants who had been put on the rent system did not bring their money at the time due , and stole the forest-timber ; almost every night the keepers caught peasants ' horses in the meadows of the ` farm , ' and sometimes forcibly bore them off . 
Nikolai Petrovitch would fix a money fine for damages , but the matter usually ended after the horses had been kept a day or two on the master 's forage by their returning to their owners . 
To crown all , the peasants began quarrelling among themselves ; brothers asked for a division of property , their wives could not get on together in one house ; all of a sudden the squabble , as though at a given signal , came to a head , and at once the whole village came running to the counting-house steps , crawling to the master often drunken and with battered face , demanding justice and judgment ; then arose an uproar and clamour , the shrill wailing of the women mixed with the curses of the men . 
Then one had to examine the contending parties , and shout oneself hoarse , knowing all the while that one could never anyway arrive at a just decision ... . 
There were not hands enough for the harvest ; a neighbouring small owner , with the most benevolent countenance , contracted to supply him with reapers for a commission of two roubles an acre , and cheated him in the most shameless fashion ; his peasant women demanded unheard-of sums , and the corn meanwhile went to waste ; and here they were not getting on with the mowing , and there the Council of Guardians threatened and demanded prompt payment , in full , of interest due ... ' I can do nothing ! ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch cried more than once in despair . ' 
I ca n't flog them myself ; and as for calling in the police captain , my principles do n't allow of it , while you can do nothing with them without the fear of punishment ! ' ' 
Du calme , du calme , ' Pavel Petrovitch would remark upon this , but even he hummed to himself , knitted his brows , and tugged at his moustache . 
Bazarov held aloof from these matters , and indeed as a guest it was not for him to meddle in other people 's business . 
The day after his arrival at Maryino , he set to work on his frogs , his infusoria , and his chemical experiments , and was for ever busy with them . 
Arkady , on the contrary , thought it his duty , if not to help his father , at least to make a show of being ready to help him . 
He gave him a patient hearing , and once offered him some advice , not with any idea of its being acted upon , but to show his interest . 
Farming details did not arouse any aversion in him ; he used even to dream with pleasure of work on the land , but at this time his brain was swarming with other ideas . 
Arkady , to his own astonishment , thought incessantly of Nikolskoe ; in former days he would simply have shrugged his shoulders if any one had told him that he could ever feel dull under the same roof as Bazarov -- and that roof his father 's ! 
but he actually was dull and longed to get away . 
He tried going long walks till he was tired , but that was no use . 
In conversation with his father one day , he found out that Nikolai Petrovitch had in his possession rather interesting letters , written by Madame Odintsov 's mother to his wife , and he gave him no rest till he got hold of the letters , for which Nikolai Petrovitch had to rummage in twenty drawers and boxes . 
Having gained possession of these half-crumbling papers , Arkady felt , as it were , soothed , just as though he had caught a glimpse of the goal towards which he ought now to go . ' 
I mean that for both of you , ' he was constantly whispering -- she had added that herself ! 
` I 'll go , I 'll go , hang it all ! ' 
But he recalled the last visit , the cold reception , and his former embarrassment , and timidity got the better of him . 
The ` go-ahead ' feeling of youth , the secret desire to try his luck , to prove his powers in solitude , without the protection of any one whatever , gained the day at last . 
Before ten days had passed after his return to Maryino , on the pretext of studying the working of the Sunday schools , he galloped off to the town again , and from there to Nikolskoe . 
Urging the driver on without intermission , he flew along , like a young officer riding to battle ; and he felt both frightened and light-hearted , and was breathless with impatience . 
` The great thing is -- one must n't think , ' he kept repeating to himself . 
His driver happened to be a lad of spirit ; he halted before every public house , saying , ' A drink or not a drink ? ' 
but , to make up for it , when he had drunk he did not spare his horses . 
At last the lofty roof of the familiar house came in sight ... ` What am I to do ? ' 
flashed through Arkady 's head . 
` Well , there 's no turning back now ! ' 
The three horses galloped in unison ; the driver whooped and whistled at them . 
And now the bridge was groaning under the hoofs and wheels , and now the avenue of lopped pines seemed running to meet them ... . 
There was a glimpse of a woman 's pink dress against the dark green , a young face from under the light fringe of a parasol ... . 
He recognised Katya , and she recognised him . 
Arkady told the driver to stop the galloping horses , leaped out of the carriage , and went up to her . 
` It 's you ! ' 
she cried , gradually flushing all over ; ` let us go to my sister , she 's here in the garden ; she will be pleased to see you . ' 
Katya led Arkady into the garden . 
His meeting with her struck him as a particularly happy omen ; he was delighted to see her , as though she were of his own kindred . 
Everything had happened so splendidly ; no steward , no formal announcement . 
At a turn in the path he caught sight of Anna Sergyevna . 
She was standing with her back to him . 
Hearing footsteps , she turned slowly round . 
Arkady felt confused again , but the first words she uttered soothed him at once . 
` Welcome back , runaway ! ' 
she said in her even , caressing voice , and came to meet him , smiling and frowning to keep the sun and wind out of her eyes . 
` Where did you pick him up , Katya ? ' ' 
I have brought you something , Anna Sergyevna , ' he began , ` which you certainly do n't expect . ' 
` You have brought yourself ; that 's better than anything . ' 
Having seen Arkady off with ironical compassion , and given him to understand that he was not in the least deceived as to the real object of his journey , Bazarov shut himself up in complete solitude ; he was overtaken by a fever for work . 
He did not dispute now with Pavel Petrovitch , especially as the latter assumed an excessively aristocratic demeanour in his presence , and expressed his opinions more in inarticulate sounds than in words . 
Only on one occasion Pavel Petrovitch fell into a controversy with the nihilist on the subject of the question then much discussed of the rights of the nobles of the Baltic province ; but suddenly he stopped of his own accord , remarking with chilly politeness , ` However , we can not understand one another ; I , at least , have not the honour of understanding you . ' ' 
I should think not ! ' 
cried Bazarov . ' 
A man 's capable of understanding anything -- how the æther vibrates , and what 's going on in the sun -- but how any other man can blow his nose differently from him , that he 's incapable of understanding . ' 
` What , is that an epigram ? ' 
observed Pavel Petrovitch inquiringly , and he walked away . 
However , he sometimes asked permission to be present at Bazarov 's experiments , and once even placed his perfumed face , washed with the very best soap , near the microscope to see how a transparent infusoria swallowed a green speck , and busily munched it with two very rapid sort of clappers which were in its throat . 
Nikolai Petrovitch visited Bazarov much oftener than his brother ; he would have come every day , as he expressed it , to ` study , ' if his worries on the farm had not taken off his attention . 
He did not hinder the young man in his scientific researches ; he used to sit down somewhere in a corner of the room and look on attentively , occasionally permitting himself a discreet question . 
During dinner and supper-time he used to try to turn the conversation upon physics , geology , or chemistry , seeing that all other topics , even agriculture , to say nothing of politics , might lead , if not to collisions , at least to mutual unpleasantness . 
Nikolai Petrovitch surmised that his brother 's dislike for Bazarov was no less . 
An unimportant incident , among many others , confirmed his surmises . 
The cholera began to make its appearance in some places in the neighbourhood , and even ` carried off ' two persons from Maryino itself . 
In the night Pavel Petrovitch happened to have rather severe symptoms . 
He was in pain till the morning , but did not have recourse to Bazarov 's skill . 
And when he met him the following day , in reply to his question , ` Why he had not sent for him ? ' 
answered , still quite pale , but scrupulously brushed and shaved , ` Why , I seem to recollect you said yourself you did n't believe in medicine . ' 
So the days went by . 
Bazarov went on obstinately and grimly working ... and meanwhile there was in Nikolai Petrovitch 's house one creature to whom , if he did not open his heart , he at least was glad to talk ... . 
That creature was Fenitchka . 
He used to meet her for the most part early in the morning , in the garden , or the farmyard ; he never used to go to her room to see her , and she had only once been to his door to inquire -- ought she to let Mitya have his bath or not ? 
It was not only that she confided in him , that she was not afraid of him -- she was positively freer and more at her ease in her behaviour with him than with Nikolai Petrovitch himself . 
It is hard to say how it came about ; perhaps it was because she unconsciously felt the absence in Bazarov of all gentility , of all that superiority which at once attracts and overawes . 
In her eyes he was both an excellent doctor and a simple man . 
She looked after her baby without constraint in his presence ; and once when she was suddenly attacked with giddiness and headache -- she took a spoonful of medicine from his hand . 
Before Nikolai Petrovitch she kept , as it were , at a distance from Bazarov ; she acted in this way not from hypocrisy , but from a kind of feeling of propriety . 
Pavel Petrovitch she was more afraid of than ever ; for some time he had begun to watch her , and would suddenly make his appearance , as though he sprang out of the earth behind her back , in his English suit , with his immovable vigilant face , and his hands in his pockets . 
` It 's like a bucket of cold water on one , ' Fenitchka complained to Dunyasha , and the latter sighed in response , and thought of another ` heartless ' man . 
Bazarov , without the least suspicion of the fact , had become the cruel tyrant of her heart . 
Fenitchka liked Bazarov ; but he liked her too . 
His face was positively transformed when he talked to her ; it took a bright , almost kind expression , and his habitual nonchalance was replaced by a sort of jesting attentiveness . 
Fenitchka was growing prettier every day . 
There is a time in the life of young women when they suddenly begin to expand and blossom like summer roses ; this time had come for Fenitchka . 
Dressed in a delicate white dress , she seemed herself slighter and whiter ; she was not tanned by the sun ; but the heat , from which she could not shield herself , spread a slight flush over her cheeks and ears , and , shedding a soft indolence over her whole body , was reflected in a dreamy languor in her pretty eyes . 
She was almost unable to work ; her hands seem to fall naturally into her lap . 
She scarcely walked at all , and was constantly sighing and complaining with comic helplessness . 
` You should go oftener to bathe , ' Nikolai Petrovitch told her . 
He had made a large bath covered in with an awning in one of his ponds which had not yet quite disappeared . 
` Oh , Nikolai Petrovitch ! 
But by the time one gets to the pond , one 's utterly dead , and , coming back , one 's dead again . 
You see , there 's no shade in the garden . ' 
` That 's true , there 's no shade , ' replied Nikolai Petrovitch , rubbing his forehead . 
One day at seven o'clock in the morning Bazarov , returning from a walk , came upon Fenitchka in the lilac arbour , which was long past flowering , but was still thick and green . 
She was sitting on the garden seat , and had as usual thrown a white kerchief over her head ; near her lay a whole heap of red and white roses still wet with dew . 
He said good morning to her . 
` Ah ! 
Yevgeny Vassilyitch ! ' 
she said , and lifted the edge of her kerchief a little to look at him , in doing which her arm was left bare to the elbow . 
` What are you doing here ? ' 
said Bazarov , sitting down beside her . 
` Are you making a nosegay ? ' 
` Yes , for the table at lunch . 
Nikolai Petrovitch likes it . ' 
` But it 's a long while yet to lunch time . 
What a heap of flowers ! ' ' 
I gathered them now , for it will be hot then , and one ca n't go out . 
One can only just breathe now . 
I feel quite weak with the heat . 
I 'm really afraid whether I 'm not going to be ill . ' 
` What an idea ! 
Let me feel your pulse . ' 
Bazarov took her hand , felt for the evenly-beating pulse , but did not even begin to count its throbs . 
` You 'll live a hundred years ! ' 
he said , dropping her hand . 
` Ah , God forbid ! ' 
she cried . 
` Why ? 
Do n't you want a long life ? ' 
` Well , but a hundred years ! 
There was an old woman near us eighty-five years old -- and what a martyr she was ! 
Dirty and deaf and bent and coughing all the time ; nothing but a burden to herself . 
That 's a dreadful life ! ' 
` So it 's better to be young ? ' 
` Well , is n't it ? ' 
` But why is it better ? 
Tell me ! ' 
` How can you ask why ? 
Why , here I now , while I 'm young , I can do everything -- go and come and carry , and need n't ask any one for anything ... . 
What can be better ? ' 
` And to me it 's all the same whether I 'm young or old . ' 
` How do you mean -- it 's all the same ? 
It 's not possible what you say . ' 
` Well , judge for yourself , Fedosya Nikolaevna , what good is my youth to me . 
I live alone , a poor lonely creature ... ' ` That always depends on you . ' 
` It does n't at all depend on me ! 
At least , some one ought to take pity on me . ' 
Fenitchka gave a sidelong look at Bazarov , but said nothing . 
` What 's this book you have ? ' 
she asked after a short pause . 
` That ? 
That 's a scientific book , very difficult . ' 
` And are you still studying ? 
And do n't you find it dull ? 
You know everything already I should say . ' 
` It seems not everything . 
You try to read a little . ' 
` But I do n't understand anything here . 
Is it Russian ? ' 
asked Fenitchka , taking the heavily bound book in both hands . 
` How thick it is ! ' 
` Yes , it 's Russian . ' 
` All the same , I sha n't understand anything . ' 
` Well , I did n't give it you for you to understand it . 
I wanted to look at you while you were reading . 
When you read , the end of your little nose moves so nicely . ' 
Fenitchka , who had set to work to spell out in a low voice the article on ` Creosote ' she had chanced upon , laughed and threw down the book ... it slipped from the seat on to the ground . 
` Nonsense ! ' ' 
I like it too when you laugh , ' observed Bazarov . ' 
I like it when you talk . 
It 's just like a little brook babbling . ' 
Fenitchka turned her head away . 
` What a person you are to talk ! ' 
she commented , picking the flowers over with her finger . 
` And how can you care to listen to me ? 
You have talked with such clever ladies . ' 
` Ah , Fedosya Nikolaevna ! 
believe me ; all the clever ladies in the world are not worth your little elbow . ' 
` Come , there 's another invention ! ' 
murmured Fenitchka , clasping her hands . 
Bazarov picked the book up from the ground . 
` That 's a medical book ; why do you throw it away ? ' 
` Medical ? ' 
repeated Fenitchka , and she turned to him again . 
` Do you know , ever since you gave me those drops -- do you remember ? 
-- Mitya has slept so well ! 
I really ca n't think how to thank you ; you are so good , really . ' 
` But you have to pay doctors , ' observed Bazarov with a smile . 
` Doctors , you know yourself , are grasping people . ' 
Fenitchka raised her eyes , which seemed still darker from the whitish reflection cast on the upper part of her face , and looked at Bazarov . 
She did not know whether he was joking or not . 
` If you please , we shall be delighted ... . 
I must ask Nikolai Petrovitch ... ' ` Why , do you think I want money ? ' 
Bazarov interposed . 
` No ; I do n't want money from you . ' 
` What then ? ' 
asked Fenitchka . 
` What ? ' 
repeated Bazarov . 
` Guess ! ' ' 
A likely person I am to guess ! ' 
` Well , I will tell you ; I want ... one of those roses . ' 
Fenitchka laughed again , and even clapped her hands , so amusing Bazarov 's request seemed to her . 
She laughed , and at the same time felt flattered . 
Bazarov was looking intently at her . 
` By all means , ' she said at last ; and , bending down to the seat , she began picking over the roses . 
` Which will you have -- a red one or a white one ? ' 
` Red , and not too large . ' 
She sat up again . 
` Here , take it , ' she said , but at once drew back her outstretched hand , and , biting her lips , looked towards the entrance of the arbour , then listened . 
` What is it ? ' 
asked Bazarov . 
` Nikolai Petrovitch ? ' 
` No ... Mr. Kirsanov has gone to the fields ... besides , I 'm not afraid of him ... but Pavel Petrovitch ... I fancied ... ' ` What ? ' ' 
I fancied he was coming here . 
No ... it was no one . 
Take it . ' 
Fenitchka gave Bazarov the rose . 
` On what grounds are you afraid of Pavel Petrovitch ? ' 
` He always scares me . 
And I know you do n't like him . 
Do you remember , you always used to quarrel with him ? 
I do n't know what your quarrel was about , but I can see you turn him about like this and like that . ' 
Fenitchka showed with her hands how in her opinion Bazarov turned Pavel Petrovitch about . 
Bazarov smiled . 
` But if he gave me a beating , ' he asked , ` would you stand up for me ? ' 
` How could I stand up for you ? 
but no , no one will get the better of you . ' 
` Do you think so ? 
But I know a hand which could overcome me if it liked . ' 
` What hand ? ' 
` Why , do n't you know , really ? 
Smell , how delicious this rose smells you gave me . ' 
Fenitchka stretched her little neck forward , and put her face close to the flower ... . 
The kerchief slipped from her head on to her shoulders ; her soft mass of dark , shining , slightly ruffled hair was visible . 
` Wait a minute ; I want to smell it with you , ' said Bazarov . 
He bent down and kissed her vigorously on her parted lips . 
She started , pushed him back with both her hands on his breast , but pushed feebly , and he was able to renew and prolong his kiss . 
A dry cough was heard behind the lilac bushes . 
Fenitchka instantly moved away to the other end of the seat . 
Pavel Petrovitch showed himself , made a slight bow , and saying with a sort of malicious mournfulness , ` You are here , ' he retreated . 
Fenitchka at once gathered up all her roses and went out of the arbour . 
` It was wrong of you , Yevgeny Vassilyevitch , ' she whispered as she went . 
There was a note of genuine reproach in her whisper . 
Bazarov remembered another recent scene , and he felt both shame and contemptuous annoyance . 
But he shook his head directly , ironically congratulated himself ` on his final assumption of the part of the gay Lothario , ' and went off to his own room . 
Pavel Petrovitch went out of the garden , and made his way with deliberate steps to the copse . 
He stayed there rather a long while ; and when he returned to lunch , Nikolai Petrovitch inquired anxiously whether he were quite well -- his face looked so gloomy . 
` You know , I sometimes suffer with my liver , ' Pavel Petrovitch answered tranquilly . 
Two hours later he knocked at Bazarov 's door . ' 
I must apologise for hindering you in your scientific pursuits , ' he began , seating himself on a chair in the window , and leaning with both hands on a handsome walking-stick with an ivory knob -LRB- he usually walked without a stick -RRB- , ` but I am constrained to beg you to spare me five minutes of your time ... no more . ' 
` All my time is at your disposal , ' answered Bazarov , over whose face there passed a quick change of expression directly Pavel Petrovitch crossed the threshold . 
` Five minutes will be enough for me . 
I have come to put a single question to you . ' ' 
A question ? 
What is it about ? ' ' 
I will tell you , if you will kindly hear me out . 
