` Well , Piotr , not in sight yet ? ' 
was the question asked on May the 20th , 1859 , by a gentleman of a little over forty , in a dusty coat and checked trousers , who came out without his hat on to the low steps of the posting station at S -- . 
He was addressing his servant , a chubby young fellow , with whitish down on his chin , and little , lack-lustre eyes . 
The servant , in whom everything -- the turquoise ring in his ear , the streaky hair plastered with grease , and the civility of his movements -- indicated a man of the new , improved generation , glanced with an air of indulgence along the road , and made answer : ` No , sir ; not in sight . ' 
` Not in sight ? ' 
repeated his master . 
` No , sir , ' responded the man a second time . 
His master sighed , and sat down on a little bench . 
We will introduce him to the reader while he sits , his feet tucked under him , gazing thoughtfully round . 
His name was Nikolai Petrovitch Kirsanov . 
He had , twelve miles from the posting station , a fine property of two hundred souls , or , as he expressed it -- since he had arranged the division of his land with the peasants , and started ' a farm ' -- of nearly five thousand acres . 
His father , a general in the army , who served in 1812 , a coarse , half-educated , but not ill-natured man , a typical Russian , had been in harness all his life , first in command of a brigade , and then of a division , and lived constantly in the provinces , where , by virtue of his rank , he played a fairly important part . 
Nikolai Petrovitch was born in the south of Russia like his elder brother , Pavel , of whom more hereafter . 
He was educated at home till he was fourteen , surrounded by cheap tutors , free-and-easy but toadying adjutants , and all the usual regimental and staff set . 
His mother , one of the Kolyazin family , as a girl called Agathe , but as a general 's wife Agathokleya Kuzminishna Kirsanov , was one of those military ladies who take their full share of the duties and dignities of office . 
She wore gorgeous caps and rustling silk dresses ; in church she was the first to advance to the cross ; she talked a great deal in a loud voice , let her children kiss her hand in the morning , and gave them her blessing at night -- in fact , she got everything out of life she could . 
Nikolai Petrovitch , as a general 's son -- though so far from being distinguished by courage that he even deserved to be called ' a funk ' -- was intended , like his brother Pavel , to enter the army ; but he broke his leg on the very day when the news of his commission came , and , after being two months in bed , retained a slight limp to the end of his days . 
His father gave him up as a bad job , and let him go into the civil service . 
He took him to Petersburg directly he was eighteen , and placed him in the university . 
His brother happened about the same time to be made an officer in the Guards . 
The young men started living together in one set of rooms , under the remote supervision of a cousin on their mother 's side , Ilya Kolyazin , an official of high rank . 
Their father returned to his division and his wife , and only rarely sent his sons large sheets of grey paper , scrawled over in a bold clerkly hand . 
At the bottom of these sheets stood in letters , enclosed carefully in scroll-work , the words , ` Piotr Kirsanov , General-Major . ' 
In 1835 Nikolai Petrovitch left the university , a graduate , and in the same year General Kirsanov was put on to the retired list after an unsuccessful review , and came to Petersburg with his wife to live . 
He was about to take a house in the Tavrichesky Gardens , and had joined the English club , but he died suddenly of an apoplectic fit . 
Agathokleya Kuzminishna soon followed him ; she could not accustom herself to a dull life in the capital ; she was consumed by the ennui of existence away from the regiment . 
Meanwhile Nikolai Petrovitch had already , in his parents ' lifetime and to their no slight chagrin , had time to fall in love with the daughter of his landlord , a petty official , Prepolovensky . 
She was a pretty and , as it is called , ` advanced ' girl ; she used to read the serious articles in the ` Science ' column of the journals . 
He married her directly the term of mourning was over ; and leaving the civil service in which his father had by favour procured him a post , was perfectly blissful with his Masha , first in a country villa near the Lyesny Institute , afterwards in town in a pretty little flat with a clean staircase and a draughty drawing-room , and then in the country , where he settled finally , and where in a short time a son , Arkady , was born to him . 
The young couple lived very happily and peacefully ; they were scarcely ever apart ; they read together , sang and played duets together on the piano ; she tended her flowers and looked after the poultry-yard ; he sometimes went hunting , and busied himself with the estate , while Arkady grew and grew in the same happy and peaceful way . 
Ten years passed like a dream . 
In 1847 Kirsanov 's wife died . 
He almost succumbed to this blow ; in a few weeks his hair was grey ; he was getting ready to go abroad , if possible to distract his mind ... but then came the year 1848 . 
He returned unwillingly to the country , and , after a rather prolonged period of inactivity , began to take an interest in improvements in the management of his land . 
In 1855 he brought his son to the university ; he spent three winters with him in Petersburg , hardly going out anywhere , and trying to make acquaintance with Arkady 's young companions . 
The last winter he had not been able to go , and here we have him in the May of 1859 , already quite grey , stoutish , and rather bent , waiting for his son , who had just taken his degree , as once he had taken it himself . 
The servant , from a feeling of propriety , and perhaps , too , not anxious to remain under the master 's eye , had gone to the gate , and was smoking a pipe . 
Nikolai Petrovitch bent his head , and began staring at the crumbling steps ; a big mottled fowl walked sedately towards him , treading firmly with its great yellow legs ; a muddy cat gave him an unfriendly look , twisting herself coyly round the railing . 
The sun was scorching ; from the half-dark passage of the posting station came an odour of hot rye-bread . 
Nikolai Petrovitch fell to dreaming . 
` My son ... a graduate ... Arkasha ... ' were the ideas that continually came round again and again in his head ; he tried to think of something else , and again the same thoughts returned . 
He remembered his dead wife ... ` She did not live to see it ! ' 
he murmured sadly . 
A plump , dark-blue pigeon flew into the road , and hurriedly went to drink in a puddle near the well . 
Nikolai Petrovitch began looking at it , but his ear had already caught the sound of approaching wheels . 
` It sounds as if they 're coming sir , ' announced the servant , popping in from the gateway . 
Nikolai Petrovitch jumped up , and bent his eyes on the road . 
A carriage appeared with three posting-horses harnessed abreast ; in the carriage he caught a glimpse of the blue band of a student 's cap , the familiar outline of a dear face . 
` Arkasha ! 
Arkasha ! ' 
cried Kirsanov , and he ran waving his hands ... . 
A few instants later , his lips were pressed to the beardless , dusty , sunburnt-cheek of the youthful graduate . 
` Let me shake myself first , daddy , ' said Arkady , in a voice tired from travelling , but boyish and clear as a bell , as he gaily responded to his father 's caresses ; ' I am covering you with dust . ' 
` Never mind , never mind , ' repeated Nikolai Petrovitch , smiling tenderly , and twice he struck the collar of his son 's cloak and his own greatcoat with his hand . 
` Let me have a look at you ; let me have a look at you , ' he added , moving back from him , but immediately he went with hurried steps towards the yard of the station , calling , ` This way , this way ; and horses at once . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch seemed far more excited than his son ; he seemed a little confused , a little timid . 
Arkady stopped him . 
` Daddy , ' he said , ` let me introduce you to my great friend , Bazarov , about whom I have so often written to you . 
He has been so good as to promise to stay with us . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch went back quickly , and going up to a tall man in a long , loose , rough coat with tassels , who had only just got out of the carriage , he warmly pressed the ungloved red hand , which the latter did not at once hold out to him . ' 
I am heartily glad , ' he began , ` and very grateful for your kind intention of visiting us ... . 
Let me know your name , and your father 's . ' 
` Yevgeny Vassilyev , ' answered Bazarov , in a lazy but manly voice ; and turning back the collar of his rough coat , he showed Nikolai Petrovitch his whole face . 
It was long and lean , with a broad forehead , a nose flat at the base and sharper at the end , large greenish eyes , and drooping whiskers of a sandy colour ; it was lighted up by a tranquil smile , and showed self-confidence and intelligence . ' 
I hope , dear Yevgeny Vassilyitch , you wo n't be dull with us , ' continued Nikolai Petrovitch . 
Bazarov 's thin lips moved just perceptibly , though he made no reply , but merely took off his cap . 
His long , thick hair did not hide the prominent bumps on his head . 
` Then , Arkady , ' Nikolai Petrovitch began again , turning to his son , ` shall the horses be put to at once ? 
or would you like to rest ? ' 
` We will rest at home , daddy ; tell them to harness the horses . ' 
` At once , at once , ' his father assented . 
` Hey , Piotr , do you hear ? 
Get things ready , my good boy ; look sharp . ' 
Piotr , who as a modernised servant had not kissed the young master 's hand , but only bowed to him from a distance , again vanished through the gateway . ' 
I came here with the carriage , but there are three horses for your coach too , ' said Nikolai Petrovitch fussily , while Arkady drank some water from an iron dipper brought him by the woman in charge of the station , and Bazarov began smoking a pipe and went up to the driver , who was taking out the horses ; ` there are only two seats in the carriage , and I do n't know how your friend ' ... ` He will go in the coach , ' interposed Arkady in an undertone . 
` You must not stand on ceremony with him , please . 
He 's a splendid fellow , so simple -- you will see . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch 's coachman brought the horses round . 
` Come , hurry up , bushy beard ! ' 
said Bazarov , addressing the driver . 
` Do you hear , Mityuha , ' put in another driver , standing by with his hands thrust behind him into the opening of his sheepskin coat , ` what the gentleman called you ? 
It 's a bushy beard you are too . ' 
Mityuha only gave a jog to his hat and pulled the reins off the heated shaft-horse . 
` Look sharp , look sharp , lads , lend a hand , ' cried Nikolai Petrovitch ; ` there 'll be something to drink our health with ! ' 
In a few minutes the horses were harnessed ; the father and son were installed in the carriage ; Piotr climbed up on to the box ; Bazarov jumped into the coach , and nestled his head down into the leather cushion ; and both the vehicles rolled away . 
` So here you are , a graduate at last , and come home again , ' said Nikolai Petrovitch , touching Arkady now on the shoulder , now on the knee . 
` At last ! ' 
` And how is uncle ? 
quite well ? ' 
asked Arkady , who , in spite of the genuine , almost childish delight filling his heart , wanted as soon as possible to turn the conversation from the emotional into a commonplace channel . 
` Quite well . 
He was thinking of coming with me to meet you , but for some reason or other he gave up the idea . ' 
` And how long have you been waiting for me ? ' 
inquired Arkady . 
` Oh , about five hours . ' 
` Dear old dad ! ' 
Arkady turned round quickly to his father , and gave him a sounding kiss on the cheek . 
Nikolai Petrovitch gave vent to a low chuckle . ' 
I have got such a capital horse for you ! ' 
he began . 
` You will see . 
And your room has been fresh papered . ' 
` And is there a room for Bazarov ? ' 
` We will find one for him too . ' 
` Please , dad , make much of him . 
I ca n't tell you how I prize his friendship . ' 
` Have you made friends with him lately ? ' 
` Yes , quite lately . ' 
` Ah , that 's how it is I did not see him last winter . 
What does he study ? ' 
` His chief subject is natural science . 
But he knows everything . 
Next year he wants to take his doctor 's degree . ' 
` Ah ! 
he 's in the medical faculty , ' observed Nikolai Petrovitch , and he was silent for a little . 
` Piotr , ' he went on , stretching out his hand , ` are n't those our peasants driving along ? ' 
Piotr looked where his master was pointing . 
Some carts harnessed with unbridled horses were moving rapidly along a narrow by-road . 
In each cart there were one or two peasants in sheepskin coats , unbuttoned . 
` Yes , sir , ' replied Piotr . 
` Where are they going , -- to the town ? ' 
` To the town , I suppose . 
To the gin-shop , ' he added contemptuously , turning slightly towards the coachman , as though he would appeal to him . 
But the latter did not stir a muscle ; he was a man of the old stamp , and did not share the modern views of the younger generation . ' 
I have had a lot of bother with the peasants this year , ' pursued Nikolai Petrovitch , turning to his son . 
` They wo n't pay their rent . 
What is one to do ? ' 
` But do you like your hired labourers ? ' 
` Yes , ' said Nikolai Petrovitch between his teeth . 
` They 're being set against me , that 's the mischief ; and they do n't do their best . 
They spoil the tools . 
But they have tilled the land pretty fairly . 
When things have settled down a bit , it will be all right . 
Do you take an interest in farming now ? ' 
` You 've no shade ; that 's a pity , ' remarked Arkady , without answering the last question . ' 
I have had a great awning put up on the north side over the balcony , ' observed Nikolai Petrovitch ; ` now we can have dinner even in the open air . ' 
` It 'll be rather too like a summer villa ... . 
Still , that 's all nonsense . 
What air though here ! 
How delicious it smells ! 
Really I fancy there 's nowhere such fragrance in the world as in the meadows here ! 
And the sky too . ' 
Arkady suddenly stopped short , cast a stealthy look behind him , and said no more . 
` Of course , ' observed Nikolai Petrovitch , ` you were born here , and so everything is bound to strike you in a special -- ' ` Come , dad , that makes no difference where a man is born . ' 
` Still -- ' ` No ; it makes absolutely no difference . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch gave a sidelong glance at his son , and the carriage went on a half-a-mile further before the conversation was renewed between them . ' 
I do n't recollect whether I wrote to you , ' began Nikolai Petrovitch , ` your old nurse , Yegorovna , is dead . ' 
` Really ? 
Poor thing ! 
Is Prokofitch still living ? ' 
` Yes , and not a bit changed . 
As grumbling as ever . 
In fact , you wo n't find many changes at Maryino . ' 
` Have you still the same bailiff ? ' 
` Well , to be sure there is a change there . 
I decided not to keep about me any freed serfs , who have been house servants , or , at least , not to intrust them with duties of any responsibility . ' 
-LRB- Arkady glanced towards Piotr . -RRB- ' 
Il est libre , en effet , ' observed Nikolai Petrovitch in an undertone ; ` but , you see , he 's only a valet . 
Now I have a bailiff , a townsman ; he seems a practical fellow . 
I pay him two hundred and fifty roubles a year . 
But , ' added Nikolai Petrovitch , rubbing his forehead and eyebrows with his hand , which was always an indication with him of inward embarrassment , ' I told you just now that you would not find changes at Maryino ... . 
That 's not quite correct . 
I think it my duty to prepare you , though ... ' He hesitated for an instant , and then went on in French . ' 
A severe moralist would regard my openness , as improper ; but , in the first place , it ca n't be concealed , and secondly , you are aware I have always had peculiar ideas as regards the relation of father and son . 
Though , of course , you would be right in blaming me . 
At my age ... . 
In short ... that ... that girl , about whom you have probably heard already ... ' ` Fenitchka ? ' 
asked Arkady easily . 
Nikolai Petrovitch blushed . 
` Do n't mention her name aloud , please ... . 
Well ... she is living with me now . 
I have installed her in the house ... there were two little rooms there . 
But that can all be changed . ' 
` Goodness , daddy , what for ? ' 
` Your friend is going to stay with us ... it would be awkward ... ' ` Please do n't be uneasy on Bazarov 's account . 
He 's above all that . ' 
` Well , but you too , ' added Nikolai Petrovitch . 
` The little lodge is so horrid -- that 's the worst of it . ' 
` Goodness , dad , ' interposed Arkady , ` it 's as if you were apologising ; I wonder you 're not ashamed . ' 
` Of course , I ought to be ashamed , ' answered Nikolai Petrovitch , flushing more and more . 
` Nonsense , dad , nonsense ; please do n't ! ' 
Arkady smiled affectionately . 
` What a thing to apologise for ! ' 
he thought to himself , and his heart was filled with a feeling of condescending tenderness for his kind , soft-hearted father , mixed with a sense of secret superiority . 
` Please , stop , ' he repeated once more , instinctively revelling in a consciousness of his own advanced and emancipated condition . 
Nikolai Petrovitch glanced at him from under the fingers of the hand with which he was still rubbing his forehead , and there was a pang in his heart ... . 
But at once he blamed himself for it . 
` Here are our meadows at last , ' he said after a long silence . 
` And that in front is our forest , is n't it ? ' 
asked Arkady . 
` Yes . 
Only I have sold the timber . 
This year they will cut it down . ' 
` Why did you sell it ? ' 
` The money was needed ; besides , that land is to go to the peasants . ' 
` Who do n't pay you their rent ? ' 
` That 's their affair ; besides , they will pay it some day . ' ' 
I am sorry about the forest , ' observed Arkady , and he began to look about him . 
The country through which they were driving could not be called picturesque . 
Fields upon fields stretched all along to the very horizon , now sloping gently upwards , then dropping down again ; in some places woods were to be seen , and winding ravines , planted with low , scanty bushes , recalling vividly the representation of them on the old-fashioned maps of the times of Catherine . 
They came upon little streams too with hollow banks ; and tiny lakes with narrow dykes ; and little villages , with low hovels under dark and often tumble-down roofs , and slanting barns with walls woven of brushwood and gaping doorways beside neglected threshing-floors ; and churches , some brick-built , with stucco peeling off in patches , others wooden , with crosses fallen askew , and overgrown grave-yards . 
Slowly Arkady 's heart sunk . 
To complete the picture , the peasants they met were all in tatters and on the sorriest little nags ; the willows , with their trunks stripped of bark , and broken branches , stood like ragged beggars along the roadside ; cows lean and shaggy and looking pinched up by hunger , were greedily tearing at the grass along the ditches . 
They looked as though they had just been snatched out of the murderous clutches of some threatening monster ; and the piteous state of the weak , starved beasts in the midst of the lovely spring day , called up , like a white phantom , the endless , comfortless winter with its storms , and frosts , and snows ... ` No , ' thought Arkady , ` this is not a rich country ; it does not impress one by plenty or industry ; it ca n't , it ca n't go on like this , reforms are absolutely necessary ... but how is one to carry them out , how is one to begin ? ' 
Such were Arkady 's reflections ; ... but even as he reflected , the spring regained its sway . 
All around was golden green , all -- trees , bushes , grass -- shone and stirred gently in wide waves under the soft breath of the warm wind ; from all sides flooded the endless trilling music of the larks ; the peewits were calling as they hovered over the low-lying meadows , or noiselessly ran over the tussocks of grass ; the rooks strutted among the half-grown short spring-corn , standing out black against its tender green ; they disappeared in the already whitening rye , only from time to time their heads peeped out amid its grey waves . 
Arkady gazed and gazed , and his reflections grew slowly fainter and passed away ... . 
He flung off his cloak and turned to his father , with a face so bright and boyish , that the latter gave him another hug . 
` We 're not far off now , ' remarked Nikolai Petrovitch ; ` we have only to get up this hill , and the house will be in sight . 
We shall get on together splendidly , Arkasha ; you shall help me in farming the estate , if only it is n't a bore to you . 
We must draw close to one another now , and learn to know each other thoroughly , must n't we ! ' 
` Of course , ' said Arkady ; ` but what an exquisite day it is to-day ! ' 
` To welcome you , my dear boy . 
Yes , it 's spring in its full loveliness . 
Though I agree with Pushkin -- do you remember in Yevgeny Onyegin -- ` To me how sad thy coming is , Spring , spring , sweet time of love ! 
What ... ' ` Arkady ! ' 
called Bazarov 's voice from the coach , ` send me a match ; I 've nothing to light my pipe with . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch stopped , while Arkady , who had begun listening to him with some surprise , though with sympathy too , made haste to pull a silver matchbox out of his pocket , and sent it to Bazarov by Piotr . 
` Will you have a cigar ? ' 
shouted Bazarov again . 
` Thanks , ' answered Arkady . 
Piotr returned to the carriage , and handed him with the match-box a thick black cigar , which Arkady began to smoke promptly , diffusing about him such a strong and pungent odour of cheap tobacco , that Nikolai Petrovitch , who had never been a smoker from his youth up , was forced to turn away his head , as imperceptibly as he could for fear of wounding his son . 
A quarter of an hour later , the two carriages drew up before the steps of a new wooden house , painted grey , with a red iron roof . 
This was Maryino , also known as New-Wick , or , as the peasants had nicknamed it , Poverty Farm . 
No crowd of house-serfs ran out on to the steps to meet the gentlemen ; a little girl of twelve years old made her appearance alone . 
After her there came out of the house a young lad , very like Piotr , dressed in a coat of grey livery , with white armorial buttons , the servant of Pavel Petrovitch Kirsanov . 
Without speaking , he opened the door of the carriage , and unbuttoned the apron of the coach . 
Nikolai Petrovitch with his son and Bazarov walked through a dark and almost empty hall , from behind the door of which they caught a glimpse of a young woman 's face , into a drawing-room furnished in the most modern style . 
` Here we are at home , ' said Nikolai Petrovitch , taking off his cap , and shaking back his hair . 
` That 's the great thing ; now we must have supper and rest . ' ' 
A meal would not come amiss , certainly , ' observed Bazarov , stretching , and he dropped on to a sofa . 
` Yes , yes , let us have supper , supper directly . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch with no apparent reason stamped his foot . 
` And here just at the right moment comes Prokofitch . ' 
A man about sixty entered , white-haired , thin , and swarthy , in a cinnamon-coloured dress-coat with brass buttons , and a pink neckerchief . 
He smirked , went up to kiss Arkady 's hand , and bowing to the guest retreated to the door , and put his hands behind him . 
` Here he is , Prokofitch , ' began Nikolai Petrovitch ; ` he 's come back to us at last ... . 
Well , how do you think him looking ? ' 
` As well as could be , ' said the old man , and was grinning again , but he quickly knitted his bushy brows . 
` You wish supper to be served ? ' 
he said impressively . 
` Yes , yes , please . 
But wo n't you like to go to your room first , Yevgeny Vassilyitch ? ' 
` No , thanks ; I do n't care about it . 
Only give orders for my little box to be taken there , and this garment , too , ' he added , taking off his frieze overcoat . 
` Certainly . 
Prokofitch , take the gentleman 's coat . ' 
-LRB- Prokofitch , with an air of perplexity , picked up Bazarov 's ` garment ' in both hands , and holding it high above his head , retreated on tiptoe . -RRB- 
` And you , Arkady , are you going to your room for a minute ? ' 
` Yes , I must wash , ' answered Arkady , and was just moving towards the door , but at that instant there came into the drawing-room a man of medium height , dressed in a dark English suit , a fashionable low cravat , and kid shoes , Pavel Petrovitch Kirsanov . 
He looked about forty-five : his close-cropped , grey hair shone with a dark lustre , like new silver ; his face , yellow but free from wrinkles , was exceptionally regular and pure in line , as though carved by a light and delicate chisel , and showed traces of remarkable beauty ; specially fine were his clear , black , almond-shaped eyes . 
The whole person of Arkady 's uncle , with its aristocratic elegance , had preserved the gracefulness of youth and that air of striving upwards , away from earth , which for the most part is lost after the twenties are past . 
Pavel Petrovitch took out of his trouser pocket his exquisite hand with its long tapering pink nails , a hand which seemed still more exquisite from the snowy whiteness of the cuff , buttoned with a single , big opal , and gave it to his nephew . 
After a preliminary handshake in the European style , he kissed him thrice after the Russian fashion , that is to say , he touched his cheek three times with his perfumed moustaches , and said , ` Welcome . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch presented him to Bazarov ; Pavel Petrovitch greeted him with a slight inclination of his supple figure , and a slight smile , but he did not give him his hand , and even put it back into his pocket . ' 
I had begun to think you were not coming to-day , ' he began in a musical voice , with a genial swing and shrug of the shoulders , as he showed his splendid white teeth . 
` Did anything happen on the road . ' 
` Nothing happened , ' answered Arkady ; ` we were rather slow . 
But we 're as hungry as wolves now . 
Hurry up Prokofitch , dad ; and I 'll be back directly . ' 
` Stay , I 'm coming with you , ' cried Bazarov , pulling himself up suddenly from the sofa . 
Both the young men went out . 
` Who is he ? ' 
asked Pavel Petrovitch . ' 
A friend of Arkasha 's ; according to him , a very clever fellow . ' 
` Is he going to stay with us ? ' 
` Yes . ' 
` That unkempt creature ? ' 
` Why , yes . ' 
Pavel Petrovitch drummed with his finger tips on the table . ' 
I fancy Arkady s ` est dégourdi , ' he remarked . 
` I 'm glad he has come back . ' 
At supper there was little conversation . 
Bazarov especially said nothing , but he ate a great deal . 
Nikolai Petrovitch related various incidents in what he called his career as a farmer , talked about the impending government measures , about committees , deputations , the necessity of introducing machinery , etc. . 
Pavel Petrovitch paced slowly up and down the dining-room -LRB- he never ate supper -RRB- , sometimes sipping at a wineglass of red wine , and less often uttering some remark or rather exclamation , of the nature of ` Ah ! 
aha ! 
hm ! ' 
Arkady told some news from Petersburg , but he was conscious of a little awkwardness , that awkwardness , which usually overtakes a youth when he has just ceased to be a child , and has come back to a place where they are accustomed to regard him and treat him as a child . 
He made his sentences quite unnecessarily long , avoided the word ` daddy , ' and even sometimes replaced it by the word ` father , ' mumbled , it is true , between his teeth ; with an exaggerated carelessness he poured into his glass far more wine than he really wanted , and drank it all off . 
Prokofitch did not take his eyes off him , and kept chewing his lips . 
After supper they all separated at once . 
` Your uncle 's a queer fish , ' Bazarov said to Arkady , as he sat in his dressing-gown by his bedside , smoking a short pipe . 
` Only fancy such style in the country ! 
His nails , his nails -- you ought to send them to an exhibition ! ' 
` Why of course , you do n't know , ' replied Arkady . 
` He was a great swell in his own day , you know . 
I will tell you his story one day . 
He was very handsome , you know , used to turn all the women 's heads . ' 
` Oh , that 's it , is it ? 
So he keeps it up in memory of the past . 
It 's a pity there 's no one for him to fascinate here though . 
I kept staring at his exquisite collars . 
They 're like marble , and his chin 's shaved simply to perfection . 
Come , Arkady Nikolaitch , is n't that ridiculous ? ' 
` Perhaps it is ; but he 's a splendid man , really . ' 
` An antique survival ! 
But your father 's a capital fellow . 
He wastes his time reading poetry , and does n't know much about farming , but he 's a good-hearted fellow . ' 
` My father 's a man in a thousand . ' 
` Did you notice how shy and nervous he is ? ' 
Arkady shook his head as though he himself were not shy and nervous . 
` It 's something astonishing , ' pursued Bazarov , ` these old idealists , they develop their nervous systems till they break down ... so balance is lost . 
But good-night . 
In my room there 's an English washstand , but the door wo n't fasten . 
Anyway that ought to be encouraged -- an English washstand stands for progress ! ' 
Bazarov went away , and a sense of great happiness came over Arkady . 
Sweet it is to fall asleep in one 's own home , in the familiar bed , under the quilt worked by loving hands , perhaps a dear nurse 's hands , those kind , tender , untiring hands . 
Arkady remembered Yegorovna , and sighed and wished her peace in heaven ... . 
For himself he made no prayer . 
Both he and Bazarov were soon asleep , but others in the house were awake long after . 
His son 's return had agitated Nikolai Petrovitch . 
He lay down in bed , but did not put out the candles , and his head propped on his hand , he fell into long reveries . 
His brother was sitting long after midnight in his study , in a wide armchair before the fireplace , on which there smouldered some faintly glowing embers . 
Pavel Petrovitch was not undressed , only some red Chinese slippers had replaced the kid shoes on his feet . 
He held in his hand the last number of Galignani , but he was not reading ; he gazed fixedly into the grate , where a bluish flame flickered , dying down , then flaring up again ... . 
God knows where his thoughts were rambling , but they were not rambling in the past only ; the expression of his face was concentrated and surly , which is not the way when a man is absorbed solely in recollections . 
In a small back room there sat , on a large chest , a young woman in a blue dressing jacket with a white kerchief thrown over her dark hair , Fenitchka . 
She was half listening , half dozing , and often looked across towards the open door through which a child 's cradle was visible , and the regular breathing of a sleeping baby could be heard . 
The next morning Bazarov woke up earlier than any one and went out of the house . 
` Oh , my ! ' 
he thought , looking about him , ` the little place is n't much to boast of ! ' 
When Nikolai Petrovitch had divided the land with his peasants , he had had to build his new manor-house on four acres of perfectly flat and barren land . 
He had built a house , offices , and farm buildings , laid out a garden , dug a pond , and sunk two wells ; but the young trees had not done well , very little water had collected in the pond , and that in the wells tasted brackish . 
Only one arbour of lilac and acacia had grown fairly well ; they sometimes had tea and dinner in it . 
In a few minutes Bazarov had traversed all the little paths of the garden ; he went into the cattle-yard and the stable , routed out two farm-boys , with whom he made friends at once , and set off with them to a small swamp about a mile from the house to look for frogs . 
` What do you want frogs for , sir ? ' 
one of the boys asked him . 
` I 'll tell you what for , ' answered Bazarov , who possessed the special faculty of inspiring confidence in people of a lower class , though he never tried to win them , and behaved very casually with them ; ' I shall cut the frog open , and see what 's going on in his inside , and then , as you and I are much the same as frogs , only that we walk on legs , I shall know what 's going on inside us too . ' 
` And what do you want to know that for ? ' 
` So as not to make a mistake , if you 're taken ill , and I have to cure you . ' 
` Are you a doctor then ? ' 
` Yes . ' 
` Vaska , do you hear , the gentleman says you and I are the same as frogs , that 's funny ! ' 
` I 'm afraid of frogs , ' observed Vaska , a boy of seven , with a head as white as flax , and bare feet , dressed in a grey smock with a stand-up collar . 
` What is there to be afraid of ? 
Do they bite ? ' 
` There , paddle into the water , philosophers , ' said Bazarov . 
Meanwhile Nikolai Petrovitch too had waked up , and gone in to see Arkady , whom he found dressed . 
The father and son went out on to the terrace under the shelter of the awning ; near the balustrade , on the table , among great bunches of lilacs , the samovar was already boiling . 
A little girl came up , the same who had been the first to meet them at the steps on their arrival the evening before . 
In a shrill voice she said -- ` Fedosya Nikolaevna is not quite well , she can not come ; she gave orders to ask you , will you please to pour out tea yourself , or should she send Dunyasha ? ' ' 
I will pour out myself , myself , ' interposed Nikolai Petrovitch hurriedly . 
` Arkady , how do you take your tea , with cream , or with lemon ? ' 
` With cream , ' answered Arkady ; and after a brief silence , he uttered interrogatively , ` Daddy ? ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch in confusion looked at his son . 
` Well ? ' 
he said . 
Arkady dropped his eyes . 
` Forgive me , dad , if my question seems unsuitable to you , ' he began , ` but you yourself , by your openness yesterday , encourage me to be open ... you will not be angry ... ? ' 
` Go on . ' 
` You give me confidence to ask you ... . 
Is n't the reason , Fen ... is n't the reason she will not come here to pour out tea , because I 'm here ? ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch turned slightly away . 
` Perhaps , ' he said , at last , ` she supposes ... she is ashamed . ' 
Arkady turned a rapid glance on his father . 
` She has no need to be ashamed . 
In the first place , you are aware of my views ' -LRB- it was very sweet to Arkady to utter that word -RRB- ; ` and secondly , could I be willing to hamper your life , your habits in the least thing ? 
Besides , I am sure you could not make a bad choice ; if you have allowed her to live under the same roof with you , she must be worthy of it ; in any case , a son can not judge his father , -- least of all , I , and least of all such a father who , like you , has never hampered my liberty in anything . ' 
Arkady 's voice had been shaky at the beginning ; he felt himself magnanimous , though at the same time he realised he was delivering something of the nature of a lecture to his father ; but the sound of one 's own voice has a powerful effect on any man , and Arkady brought out his last words resolutely , even with emphasis . 
` Thanks , Arkasha , ' said Nikolai Petrovitch thickly , and his fingers again strayed over his eyebrows and forehead . 
` Your suppositions are just in fact . 
Of course , if this girl had not deserved ... . 
It is not a frivolous caprice . 
It 's not easy for me to talk to you about this ; but you will understand that it is difficult for her to come here , in your presence , especially the first day of your return . ' 
` In that case I will go to her , ' cried Arkady , with a fresh rush of magnanimous feeling , and he jumped up from his seat . ' 
I will explain to her that she has no need to be ashamed before me . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch too got up . 
` Arkady , ' he began , ` be so good ... how can ... there ... I have not told you yet ... ' But Arkady did not listen to him , and ran off the terrace . 
Nikolai Petrovitch looked after him , and sank into his chair overcome by confusion . 
His heart began to throb . 
Did he at that moment realise the inevitable strangeness of the future relations between him and his son ? 
Was he conscious that Arkady would perhaps have shown him more respect if he had never touched on this subject at all ? 
Did he reproach himself for weakness ? 
-- it is hard to say ; all these feelings were within him , but in the state of sensations -- and vague sensations -- while the flush did not leave his face , and his heart throbbed . 
There was the sound of hurrying footsteps , and Arkady came on to the terrace . 
` We have made friends , dad ! ' 
he cried , with an expression of a kind of affectionate and good-natured triumph on his face . 
` Fedosya Nikolaevna is not quite well to-day really , and she will come a little later . 
But why did n't you tell me I had a brother ? 
I should have kissed him last night , as I have kissed him just now . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch tried to articulate something , tried to get up and open his arms . 
Arkady flung himself on his neck . 
` What 's this ? 
embracing again ? ' 
sounded the voice of Pavel Petrovitch behind them . 
Father and son were equally rejoiced at his appearance at that instant ; there are positions , genuinely affecting , from which one longs to escape as soon as possible . 
` Why should you be surprised at that ? ' 
said Nikolai Petrovitch gaily . 
` Think what ages I have been waiting for Arkasha . 
I 've not had time to get a good look at him since yesterday . ' 
` I 'm not at all surprised , ' observed Pavel Petrovitch ; ' I feel not indisposed to be embracing him myself . ' 
Arkady went up to his uncle , and again felt his cheeks caressed by his perfumed moustache . 
Pavel Petrovitch sat down to the table . 
He wore an elegant morning suit in the English style , and a gay little fez on his head . 
This fez and the carelessly tied little cravat carried a suggestion of the freedom of country life , but the stiff collars of his shirt -- not white , it is true , but striped , as is correct in morning dress -- stood up as inexorably as ever against his well-shaved chin . 
` Where 's your new friend ? ' 
he asked Arkady . 
` He 's not in the house ; he usually gets up early and goes off somewhere . 
The great thing is , we must n't pay any attention to him ; he does n't like ceremony . ' 
` Yes , that 's obvious . ' 
Pavel Petrovitch began deliberately spreading butter on his bread . 
` Is he going to stay long with us ? ' 
` Perhaps . 
He came here on the way to his father 's . ' 
` And where does his father live ? ' 
` In our province , sixty-four miles from here . 
He has a small property there . 
He was formerly an army doctor . ' 
` Tut , tut , tut ! 
To be sure , I kept asking myself , `` Where have I heard that name , Bazarov ? '' 
Nikolai , do you remember , in our father 's division there was a surgeon Bazarov ? ' ' 
I believe there was . ' 
` Yes , yes , to be sure . 
So that surgeon was his father . 
Hm ! ' 
Pavel Petrovitch pulled his moustaches . 
` Well , and what is Mr. Bazarov himself ? ' 
he asked , deliberately . 
` What is Bazarov ? ' 
Arkady smiled . 
` Would you like me , uncle , to tell you what he really is ? ' 
` If you will be so good , nephew . ' 
` He 's a nihilist . ' 
` Eh ? ' 
inquired Nikolai Petrovitch , while Pavel Petrovitch lilted a knife in the air with a small piece of butter on its tip , and remained motionless . 
` He 's a nihilist , ' repeated Arkady . ' 
A nihilist , ' said Nikolai Petrovitch . 
` That 's from the Latin , nihil , nothing , as far as I can judge ; the word must mean a man who ... who accepts nothing ? ' 
` Say , `` who respects nothing , '' ' put in Pavel Petrovitch , and he set to work on the butter again . 
` Who regards everything from the critical point of view , ' observed Arkady . 
` Is n't that just the same thing ? ' 
inquired Pavel Petrovitch . 
` No , it 's not the same thing . 
A nihilist is a man who does not bow down before any authority , who does not take any principle on faith , whatever reverence that principle may be enshrined in . ' 
` Well , and is that good ? ' 
interrupted Pavel Petrovitch . 
` That depends , uncle . 
Some people it will do good to , but some people will suffer for it . ' 
` Indeed . 
Well , I see it 's not in our line . 
We are old-fashioned people ; we imagine that without principles , taken as you say on faith , there 's no taking a step , no breathing . 
Vous avez changé tout cela . 
God give you good health and the rank of a general , while we will be content to look on and admire , worthy ... what was it ? ' 
` Nihilists , ' Arkady said , speaking very distinctly . 
` Yes . 
There used to be Hegelists , and now there are nihilists . 
We shall see how you will exist in void , in vacuum ; and now ring , please , brother Nikolai Petrovitch ; it 's time I had my cocoa . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch rang the bell and called , ` Dunyasha ! ' 
But instead of Dunyasha , Fenitchka herself came on to the terrace . 
She was a young woman about three-and-twenty , with a white soft skin , dark hair and eyes , red , childishly-pouting lips , and little delicate hands . 
She wore a neat print dress ; a new blue kerchief lay lightly on her plump shoulders . 
She carried a large cup of cocoa , and setting it down before Pavel Petrovitch , she was overwhelmed with confusion : the hot blood rushed in a wave of crimson over the delicate skin of her pretty face . 
She dropped her eyes , and stood at the table , leaning a little on the very tips of her fingers . 
It seemed as though she were ashamed of having come in , and at the same time felt that she had a right to come . 
Pavel Petrovitch knitted his brows severely , while Nikolai Petrovitch looked embarrassed . 
` Good morning , Fenitchka , ' he muttered through his teeth . 
` Good morning , ' she replied in a voice not loud but resonant , and with a sidelong glance at Arkady , who gave her a friendly smile , she went gently away . 
She walked with a slightly rolling gait , but even that suited her . 
For some minutes silence reigned on the terrace . 
Pavel Petrovitch sipped his cocoa ; suddenly he raised his head . 
` Here is Sir Nihilist coming towards us , ' he said in an undertone . 
Bazarov was in fact approaching through the garden , stepping over the flower-beds . 
His linen coat and trousers were besmeared with mud ; clinging marsh weed was twined round the crown of his old round hat ; in his right hand he held a small bag ; in the bag something alive was moving . 
He quickly drew near the terrace , and said with a nod , ` Good morning , gentlemen ; sorry I was late for tea ; I 'll be back directly ; I must just put these captives away . ' 
` What have you there -- leeches ? ' 
asked Pavel Petrovitch . 
` No , frogs . ' 
` Do you eat them -- or keep them ? ' 
` For experiment , ' said Bazarov indifferently , and he went off into the house . 
` So he 's going to cut them up , ' observed Pavel Petrovitch . 
` He has no faith in principles , but he has faith in frogs . ' 
Arkady looked compassionately at his uncle ; Nikolai Petrovitch shrugged his shoulders stealthily . 
Pavel Petrovitch himself felt that his epigram was unsuccessful , and began to talk about husbandry and the new bailiff , who had come to him the evening before to complain that a labourer , Foma , ` was deboshed , ' and quite unmanageable . 
` He 's such an Æsop , ' he said among other things ; ` in all places he has protested himself a worthless fellow ; he 's not a man to keep his place ; he 'll walk off in a huff like a fool . ' 
Bazarov came back , sat down to the table , and began hastily drinking tea . 
The two brothers looked at him in silence , while Arkady stealthily watched first his father and then his uncle . 
` Did you walk far from here ? ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch asked at last . 
` Where you 've a little swamp near the aspen wood . 
I started some half-dozen snipe ; you might slaughter them ; Arkady . ' 
` Are n't you a sportsman then ? ' 
` No . ' 
` Is your special study physics ? ' 
Pavel Petrovitch in his turn inquired . 
` Physics , yes ; and natural science in general . ' 
` They say the Teutons of late have had great success in that line . ' 
` Yes ; the Germans are our teachers in it , ' Bazarov answered carelessly . 
The word Teutons instead of Germans , Pavel Petrovitch had used with ironical intention ; none noticed it however . 
` Have you such a high opinion of the Germans ? ' 
said Pavel Petrovitch , with exaggerated courtesy . 
He was beginning to feel a secret irritation . 
His aristocratic nature was revolted by Bazarov 's absolute nonchalance . 
This surgeon 's son was not only not overawed , he even gave abrupt and indifferent answers , and in the tone of his voice there was something churlish , almost insolent . 
` The scientific men there are a clever lot . ' 
` Ah , ah . 
To be sure , of Russian scientific men you have not such a flattering opinion , I dare say ? ' 
` That is very likely . ' 
` That 's very praiseworthy self-abnegation , ' Pavel Petrovitch declared , drawing himself up , and throwing his head back . 
` But how is this ? 
