she said in a velvet-like voice that trembled from the fulness of sound , and quietly patted his face with her hand , `` stay close to me , my dear child ! '' 
There was something particularly sweet and soft in her caresses , something altogether new to Foma , and he stared into the old woman 's eyes with curiosity and expectation on his face . 
This old woman led him into a new world , hitherto unknown to him . 
The very first day , having put him to bed , she seated herself by his side , and , bending over the child , asked him : `` Shall I tell you a story , Fomushka ? '' 
And after that Foma always fell asleep amid the velvet-like sounds of the old woman 's voice , which painted before him a magic life . 
Giants defeating monsters , wise princesses , fools who turned out to be wise -- troops of new and wonderful people were passing before the boy 's bewitched imagination , and his soul was nourished by the wholesome beauty of the national creative power . 
Inexhaustible were the treasures of the memory and the fantasy of this old woman , who oftentimes , in slumber , appeared to the boy -- now like the witch of the fairy-tales -- only a kind and amiable old witch -- now like the beautiful , all-wise Vasilisa . 
His eyes wide open , holding his breath , the boy looked into the darkness that filled his chamber and watched it as it slowly trembled in the light of the little lamp that was burning before the image . 
And Foma filled this darkness with wonderful pictures of fairy-tale life . 
Silent , yet living shadows , were creeping over the walls and across the floor ; it was both pleasant and terrible to him to watch their life ; to deal out unto them forms and colours , and , having endowed them with life , instantly to destroy them all with a single twinkle of the eyelashes . 
Something new appeared in his dark eyes , something more childish and naive , less grave ; the loneliness and the darkness , awaking in him a painful feeling of expectation , stirred his curiosity , compelled him to go out to the dark corner and see what was hidden there beyond the thick veils of darkness . 
He went and found nothing , but he lost no hope of finding it out . 
He feared his father and respected him . 
Ignat 's enormous size , his harsh , trumpet-like voice , his bearded face , his gray-haired head , his powerful , long arms and his flashing eyes -- all these gave to Ignat the resemblance of the fairy-tale robbers . 
Foma shuddered whenever he heard his voice or his heavy , firm steps ; but when the father , smiling kind-heartedly , and talking playfully in a loud voice , took him upon his knees or threw him high up in the air with his big hands the boy 's fear vanished . 
Once , when the boy was about eight years old , he asked his father , who had returned from a long journey : `` Papa , where were you ? '' 
`` On the Volga . '' 
`` Were you robbing there ? '' 
asked Foma , softly . 
`` Wha-at ? '' 
Ignat drawled out , and his eyebrows contracted . 
`` Are n't you a robber , papa ? 
I know it , '' said Foma , winking his eyes slyly , satisfied that he had already read the secret of his father 's life . 
`` I am a merchant ! '' 
said Ignat , sternly , but after a moment 's thought he smiled kind-heartedly and added : `` And you are a little fool ! 
I deal in corn , I run a line of steamers . 
Have you seen the ` Yermak ' ? 
Well , that is my steamer . 
And yours , too . '' 
`` It is a very big one , '' said Foma with a sigh . 
`` Well , I 'll buy you a small one while you are small yourself . 
Shall I ? '' 
`` Very well , '' Foma assented , but after a thoughtful silence he again drawled out regretfully : `` But I thought you were a robber or a giant . '' 
`` I tell you I am a merchant ! '' 
repeated Ignat , insinuatingly , and there was something discontented and almost timorous in his glance at the disenchanted face of his son . 
`` Like Grandpa Fedor , the Kalatch baker ? '' 
asked Foma , having thought awhile . 
`` Well , yes , like him . 
Only I am richer than he . 
I have more money than Fedor . '' 
`` Have you much money ? '' 
`` Well , some people have still more . '' 
`` How many barrels do you have ? '' 
`` Of what ? '' 
`` Of money , I mean . '' 
`` Fool ! 
Is money counted by the barrel ? '' 
`` How else ? '' 
exclaimed Foma , enthusiastically , and , turning his face toward his father , began to tell him quickly : `` Maksimka , the robber , came once to a certain town and filled up twelve barrels with money belonging to some rich man there . 
And he took different silverware and robbed a church . 
And cut up a man with his sword and threw him down the steeple because he tried to sound an alarm . '' 
`` Did your aunt tell you that ? '' 
asked Ignat admiring his son 's enthusiasm . 
`` Yes ! 
Why ? '' 
`` Nothing ! '' 
said Ignat , laughing . 
`` So you thought your father was a robber . '' 
`` And perhaps you were a robber long ago ? '' 
Foma again returned to his theme , and it was evident on his face that he would be very glad to hear an affirmative answer . 
`` I was never a robber . 
Let that end it . '' 
`` Never ? '' 
`` I tell you I was not ! 
What a queer little boy you are ! 
Is it good to be a robber ? 
They are all sinners , the robbers . 
They do n't believe in God -- they rob churches . 
They are all cursed in the churches . 
Yes . 
Look here , my son , you 'll have to start to study soon . 
It is time ; you 'll soon be nine years old . 
Start with the help of God . 
You 'll study during the winter and in spring I 'll take you along with me on the Volga . '' 
`` Will I go to school ? '' 
asked Foma , timidly . 
`` First you 'll study at home with auntie . '' 
Soon after the boy would sit down near the table in the morning and , fingering the Slavonic alphabet , repeat after his aunt : `` Az , Buky , Vedy . '' 
When they reached `` bra , vra , gra , dra '' for a long time the boy could not read these syllables without laughter . 
Foma succeeded easily in gaining knowledge , almost without any effort , and soon he was reading the first psalm of the first section of the psalter : `` Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly . '' 
`` That 's it , my darling ! 
So , Fomushka , that 's right ! '' 
chimed in his aunt with emotion , enraptured by his progress . 
`` You 're a fine fellow , Foma ! '' 
Ignat would approvingly say when informed of his son 's progress . 
`` We 'll go to Astrakhan for fish in the spring , and toward autumn I 'll send you to school ! '' 
The boy 's life rolled onward , like a ball downhill . 
Being his teacher , his aunt was his playmate as well . 
Luba Mayakin used to come , and when with them , the old woman readily became one of them . 
They played at `` hide and seek '' and `` blind man 's buff ; '' the children were pleased and amused at seeing Anfisa , her eyes covered with a handkerchief , her arms outstretched , walking about the room carefully , and yet striking against chairs and tables , or looking for them in each and every commodious corner , saying : `` Eh , little rascals . 
Eh , rogues . 
Where have they hidden themselves ? 
Eh ? '' 
And the sun shone cheerfully and playfully upon the old worn-out body , which yet retained a youthful soul , and upon the old life , that was adorning , according to its strength and abilities , the life-path of two children . 
Ignat used to go to the Exchange early in the morning and sometimes stayed away until evening ; in the evening he used to go to the town council or visiting or elsewhere . 
Sometimes he returned home intoxicated . 
At first Foma , on such occasions , ran from him and hid himself , then he became accustomed to it , and learned that his father was better when drunk than sober : he was kinder and plainer and was somewhat comical . 
If it happened at night , the boy was usually awakened by his trumpet-like voice : `` Anfisa ! 
Dear sister ! 
Let me in to my son ; let me in to my successor ! '' 
And auntie answered him in a crying and reproachful voice : `` Go on . 
You better go to sleep , you cursed devil ! 
Drunk again , eh ? 
You are gray already ? '' 
`` Anfisa ! 
May I see my son , with one eye ? '' 
Foma knew that Anfisa would not let him in , and he again fell asleep in spite of the noise of their voices . 
But when Ignat came home intoxicated during the day he immediately seized his son with his enormous paws and carried him about the rooms , asking him with an intoxicated , happy laughter : `` Fomka ! 
What do you wish ? 
Speak ! 
Presents ? 
Playthings ? 
Ask ! 
Because you must know there 's nothing in this world that I would n't buy for you . 
I have a million ! 
Ha , ha , ha ! 
And I 'll have still more ! 
Understand ? 
All 's yours ! 
Ha , ha ! '' 
And suddenly his enthusiasm was extinguished like a candle put out by a violent puff of the wind . 
His flushed face began to shake , his eyes , burning red , filled with tears , and his lips expanded into a sad and frightened smile . 
`` Anfisa , in case he should die , what am I to do then ? '' 
And immediately after these words he was seized with fury . 
`` I 'd burn everything ! '' 
he roared , staring wildly into some dark corner of the room . 
`` I 'd destroy everything ! 
I 'd blow it up with dynamite ! '' 
`` Enough , you ugly brute ! 
Do you wish to frighten the child ? 
Or do you want him to take sick ? '' 
interposed Anfisa , and that was sufficient for Ignat to rush off hastily , muttering : `` Well , well , well ! 
I am going , I am going , but do n't cry ! 
Do n't make any noise . 
Do n't frighten him . '' 
And when Foma was somewhat sick , his father , casting everything aside , did not leave the house for a moment , but bothered his sister and his son with stupid questions and advice ; gloomy , sighing , and with fear in his eyes , he walked about the house quite out of sorts . 
`` Why do you vex the Lord ? '' 
said Anfisa . 
`` Beware , your grumblings will reach Him , and He will punish you for your complaints against His graces . '' 
`` Eh , sister ! '' 
sighed Ignat . 
`` And if it should happen ? 
My entire life is crumbling away ! 
Wherefore have I lived ? 
No one knows . '' 
Similar scenes and the striking transitions of his father from one mood to another frightened the child at first , but he soon became accustomed to all this , and when he noticed through the window that his father , on coming home , was hardly able to get out of the sledge , Foma said indifferently : `` Auntie , papa came home drunk again . '' 
... . 
Spring came , and , fulfilling his promise , Ignat took his son along on one of his steamers , and here a new life , abounding in impressions , was opened before Foma 's eyes . 
The beautiful and mighty `` Yermak , '' Gordyeeff 's steam tow-boat , was rapidly floating down the current , and on each side the shores of the powerful and beautiful Volga were slowly moving past him -- the left side , all bathed in sunshine , stretching itself to the very end of the sky like a pompous carpet of verdure ; the right shore , its high banks overgrown with woods , swung skyward , sinking in stern repose . 
The broad-bosomed river stretched itself majestically between the shores ; noiselessly , solemnly and slowly flowed its waters , conscious of their invincible power ; the mountainous shore is reflected in the water in a black shadow , while on the left side it is adorned with gold and with verdant velvet by a border of sand and the wide meadows . 
Here and there villages appear on mountain and on meadow , the sun shines bright on the window-panes of the huts and on the yellow roofs of straw , the church crosses sparkle amid the verdure of the trees , gray wind-mill wings revolve lazily in the air , smoke from the factory chimney rises skyward in thick , black curling clouds . 
Crowds of children in blue , red or white shirts , standing on the banks , shouted loudly at the sight of the steamer , which had disturbed the quiet of the river , and from under the steamer 's wheels the cheerful waves are rushing toward the feet of the children and splash against the bank . 
Now a crowd of children , seated in a boat , rowed toward the middle of the river to rock there on the waves as in a cradle . 
Trees stood out above the water ; sometimes many of them are drowned in the overflow of the banks , and these stand in the water like islands . 
From the shore a melancholy song is heard : `` Oh , o-o-o , once more ! '' 
The steamer passes many rafts , splashing them with waves . 
The beams are in continual motion under the blows of the waves ; the men on the rafts in blue shirts , staggering , look at the steamer and laugh and shout something . 
The big , beautiful vessel goes sidewise on the river ; the yellow scantlings with which it is loaded sparkle like gold and are dimly reflected in the muddy , vernal water . 
A passenger steamer comes from the opposite side and whistles -- the resounding echo of the whistle loses itself in the woods , in the gorges of the mountainous bank , and dies away there . 
In the middle of the river the waves stirred up by the two vessels strike against one another and splash against the steamers ' sides , and the vessels are rocked upon the water . 
On the slope of the mountainous bank are verdant carpets of winter corn , brown strips of fallow ground and black strips of ground tilled for spring corn . 
Birds , like little dots , soar over them , and are clearly seen in the blue canopy of the sky ; nearby a flock is grazing ; in the distance they look like children 's toys ; the small figure of the shepherd stands leaning on a staff , and looks at the river . 
The glare of the water -- freedom and liberty are everywhere , the meadows are cheerfully verdant and the blue sky is tenderly clear ; a restrained power is felt in the quiet motion of the water ; above it the generous May sun is shining , the air is filled with the exquisite odour of fir trees and of fresh foliage . 
And the banks keep on meeting them , caressing the eyes and the soul with their beauty , as new pictures constantly unfold themselves . 
Everything surrounding them bears the stamp of some kind of tardiness : all -- nature as well as men -- live there clumsily , lazily ; but in that laziness there is an odd gracefulness , and it seems as though beyond the laziness a colossal power were concealed ; an invincible power , but as yet deprived of consciousness , as yet without any definite desires and aims . 
And the absence of consciousness in this half-slumbering life throws shades of sadness over all the beautiful slope . 
Submissive patience , silent hope for something new and more inspiriting are heard even in the cry of the cuckoo , wafted to the river by the wind from the shore . 
The melancholy songs sound as though imploring someone for help . 
And at times there is in them a ring of despair . 
The river answers the songs with sighs . 
And the tree-tops shake , lost in meditation . 
Silence . 
Foma spent all day long on the captain 's bridge beside his father . 
Without uttering a word , he stared wide-eyed at the endless panorama of the banks , and it seemed to him he was moving along a broad silver path in those wonderful kingdoms inhabited by the sorcerers and giants of his familiar fairy-tales . 
At times he would load his father with questions about everything that passed before them . 
Ignat answered him willingly and concisely , but the boy was not pleased with his answers ; they contained nothing interesting and intelligible to him , and he did not hear what he longed to hear . 
Once he told his father with a sigh : `` Auntie Anfisa knows better than you . '' 
`` What does she know ? '' 
asked Ignat , smiling . 
`` Everything , '' replied the boy , convincedly . 
No wonderful kingdom appeared before him . 
But often cities appeared on the banks of the river , just such cities as the one where Foma lived . 
Some of them were larger , some smaller , but the people , and the houses , and the churches -- all were the same as in his own city . 
Foma examined them in company with his father , but was still unsatisfied and returned to the steamer gloomy and fatigued . 
`` Tomorrow we shall be in Astrakhan , '' said Ignat one day . 
`` And is it just the same as the other cities ? '' 
`` Of course . 
How else should it be ? '' 
`` And what is beyond Astrakhan ? '' 
`` The sea . 
The Caspian Sea it is called . '' 
`` And what is there ? '' 
`` Fishes , queer fellow ! 
What else can there be in the water ? '' 
`` There 's the city Kitezh standing in the water . '' 
`` That 's a different thing ! 
That 's Kitezh . 
Only righteous people live there . '' 
`` And are there no righteous cities on the sea ? '' 
`` No , '' said Ignat , and , after a moment 's silence , added : `` The sea water is bitter and nobody can drink it . '' 
`` And is there more land beyond the sea ? '' 
`` Certainly , the sea must have an end . 
It is like a cup . '' 
`` And are there cities there too ? '' 
`` Again cities . 
Of course ! 
Only that land is not ours , it belongs to Persia . 
Did you see the Persians selling pistachio-nuts and apricots in the market ? '' 
`` Yes , I saw them , '' replied Foma , and became pensive . 
One day he asked his father : `` Is there much more land left ? '' 
`` The earth is very big , my dear ! 
If you should go on foot , you could n't go around it even in ten years . '' 
Ignat talked for a long time with his son about the size of the earth , and said at length : `` And yet no one knows for certain how big it really is , nor where it ends . '' 
`` And is everything alike on earth ? '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` The cities and all ? '' 
`` Well , of course , the cities are like cities . 
There are houses , streets -- and everything that is necessary . '' 
After many similar conversations the boy no longer stared so often into the distance with the interrogative look of his black eyes . 
The crew of the steamer loved him , and he , too , loved those fine , sun-burnt and weather-beaten fellows , who laughingly played with him . 
They made fishing tackles for him , and little boats out of bark , played with him and rowed him about the anchoring place , when Ignat went to town on business . 
The boy often heard the men talking about his father , but he paid no attention to what they said , and never told his father what he heard about him . 
But one day , in Astrakhan , while the steamer was taking in a cargo of fuel , Foma heard the voice of Petrovich , the machinist : `` He ordered such a lot of wood to be taken in . 
What an absurd man ! 
First he loads the steamer up to the very deck , and then he roars . 
` You break the machinery too often , ' he says . 
` You pour oil , ' he says , ` at random . ' '' 
The voice of the gray and stern pilot replied : `` It 's all his exorbitant greediness . 
Fuel is cheaper here , so he is taking all he can . 
He is greedy , the devil ! '' 
`` Oh , how greedy ! '' 
This word , repeated many times in succession , fixed itself in Foma 's memory , and in the evening , at supper , he suddenly asked his father : `` Papa ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Are you greedy ? '' 
In reply to his father 's questions Foma told him of the conversation between the pilot and the machinist . 
Ignat 's face became gloomy , and his eyes began to flash angrily . 
`` That 's how it is , '' ejaculated Ignat , shaking his head . 
`` Well , you -- do n't you listen to them . 
They are not your equals ; do n't have so much to do with them . 
You are their master , they are your servants , understand that . 
If we choose to , we can put every one of them ashore . 
They are cheap and they can be found everywhere like dogs . 
Understand ? 
They may say many bad things about me . 
But they say them , because I am their master . 
The whole thing arises because I am fortunate and rich , and the rich are always envied . 
A happy man is everybody 's enemy . '' 
About two days later there was a new pilot and another machinist on the steamer . 
`` And where is Yakov ? '' 
asked the boy . 
`` I discharged him . 
I ordered him away . '' 
`` For that ? '' 
queried Foma . 
`` Yes , for that very thing . '' 
`` And Petrovich , too ? '' 
`` Yes , I sent him the same way . '' 
Foma was pleased with the fact that his father was able to change the men so quickly . 
He smiled to his father , and , coming out on the deck , walked up to a sailor , who sat on the floor , untwisting a piece of rope and making a swab . 
`` We have a new pilot here , '' announced Foma . 
`` I know . 
Good health to you , Foma Ignatich ! 
How did you sleep ? '' 
`` And a new machinist , too . '' 
`` And a new machinist . 
Are you sorry for Petrovich ? '' 
`` Really ? 
And he was so good to you . '' 
`` Well , why did he abuse my father ? '' 
`` Oh ? 
Did he abuse him ? '' 
`` Of course he did . 
I heard it myself . '' 
`` Mm -- and your father heard it , too ? '' 
`` No , I told him . '' 
`` You -- so '' -- drawled the sailor and became silent , taking up his work again . 
`` And papa says to me : ` You , ' he says , ` you are master here -- you can drive them all away if you wish . ' '' 
`` So , '' said the sailor , gloomily looking at the boy , who was so enthusiastically boasting to him of his supreme power . 
From that day on Foma noticed that the crew did not regard him as before . 
Some became more obliging and kind , others did not care to speak to him , and when they did speak to him , it was done angrily , and not at all entertainingly , as before . 
Foma liked to watch while the deck was being washed : their trousers rolled up to their knees , or sometimes taken off altogether , the sailors , with swabs and brushes in their hands , cleverly ran about the deck , emptying pails of water on it , besprinkling one another , laughing , shouting , falling . 
Streams of water ran in every direction , and the lively noise of the men intermingled with the gray splash of the water . 
Before , the boy never bothered the sailors in this playful and light work ; nay , he took an active part , besprinkling them with water and laughingly running away , when they threatened to pour water over him . 
But after Yakov and Petrovich had been discharged , he felt that he was in everybody 's way , that no one cared to play with him and that no one regarded him kindly . 
Surprised and melancholy , he left the deck , walked up to the wheel , sat down there , and , offended , he thoughtfully began to stare at the distant green bank and the dented strip of woods upon it . 
And below , on the deck , the water was splashing playfully , and the sailors were gaily laughing . 
He yearned to go down to them , but something held him back . 
`` Keep away from them as much as possible , '' he recalled his father 's words ; `` you are their master . '' 
Then he felt like shouting at the sailors -- something harsh and authoritative , so his father would scold them . 
He thought a long time what to say , but could not think of anything . 
Another two , three days passed , and it became perfectly clear to him that the crew no longer liked him . 
He began to feel lonesome on the steamer , and amid the parti-coloured mist of new impressions , still more often there came up before Foma the image of his kind and gentle Aunt Anfisa , with her stories , and smiles , and soft , ringing laughter , which filled the boy 's soul with a joyous warmth . 
He still lived in the world of fairy-tales , but the invisible and pitiless hand of reality was already at work tearing the beautiful , fine web of the wonderful , through which the boy had looked at everything about him . 
The incident with the machinist and the pilot directed his attention to his surroundings ; Foma 's eyes became more sharp-sighted . 
A conscious searchfulness appeared in them and in his questions to his father rang a yearning to understand which threads and springs were managing the deeds of men . 
One day a scene took place before him : the sailors were carrying wood , and one of them , the young , curly-haired and gay Yefim , passing the deck of the ship with hand-barrows , said loudly and angrily : `` No , he has no conscience whatever ! 
There was no agreement that I should carry wood . 
A sailor -- well , one 's business is clear -- but to carry wood into the bargain -- thank you ! 
That means for me to take off the skin I have not sold . 
He is without conscience ! 
He thinks it is clever to sap the life out of us . '' 
The boy heard this grumbling and knew that it was concerning his father . 
He also noticed that although Yefim was grumbling , he carried more wood on his stretcher than the others , and walked faster than the others . 
None of the sailors replied to Yefim 's grumbling , and even the one who worked with him was silent , only now and then protesting against the earnestness with which Yefim piled up the wood on the stretchers . 
`` Enough ! '' 
he would say , morosely , `` you are not loading a horse , are you ? '' 
`` And you had better keep quiet . 
You were put to the cart -- cart it and do n't kick -- and should your blood be sucked -- keep quiet again . 
What can you say ? '' 
Suddenly Ignat appeared , walked up to the sailor and , stopping in front of him , asked sternly : `` What were you talking about ? '' 
`` I am talking -- I know , '' replied Yefim , hesitating . 
`` There was no agreement -- that I must say nothing . '' 
`` And who is going to suck blood ? '' 
asked Ignat , stroking his beard . 
The sailor understood that he had been caught unawares , and seeing no way out of it , he let the log of wood fall from his hands , rubbed his palms against his pants , and , facing Ignat squarely , said rather boldly : `` And am I not right ? 
Do n't you suck it ? '' 
`` I ? '' 
`` You . '' 
Foma saw that his father swung his hand . 
A loud blow resounded , and the sailor fell heavily on the wood . 
He arose immediately and worked on in silence . 
Blood was trickling from his bruised face on to the white bark of the birch wood ; he wiped the blood off his face with the sleeve of his shirt , looked at his sleeve and , heaving a sigh , maintained silence , and when he went past Foma with the hand-harrows , two big , turbid tears were trembling on his face , near the bridge of his nose , and Foma noticed them . 
At dinner Foma was pensive and now and then glanced at his father with fear in his eyes . 
`` Why do you frown ? '' 
asked his father , gently . 
`` Frown ? '' 
`` Are you ill , perhaps ? 
Be careful . 
If there is anything , tell me . '' 
`` You are strong , '' said Foma of a sudden musingly . 
`` I ? 
That 's right . 
God has favoured me with strength . '' 
`` How hard you struck him ! '' 
exclaimed the boy in a low voice , lowering his head . 
Ignat was about to put a piece of bread with caviar into his mouth , but his hand stopped , held back by his son 's exclamation ; he looked interrogatively at Foma 's drooping head and asked : `` You mean Yefim , do n't you ? '' 
`` Yes , he was bleeding . 
And how he walked afterward , how he cried , '' said the boy in a low voice . 
`` Mm , '' roared Ignat , chewing a bite . 
`` Well , are you sorry for him ? '' 
`` It 's a pity ! '' 
said Foma , with tears in his voice . 
`` Yes . 
So that 's the kind of a fellow you are , '' said Ignat . 
Then , after a moment 's silence , he filled a wineglass with vodka , emptied it , and said sternly , in a slightly reprimanding tone : `` There is no reason why you should pity him . 
He brawled at random , and therefore got what he deserved . 
I know him : he is a good fellow , industrious , strong and not a bit foolish . 
But to argue is not his business ; I may argue , because I am the master . 
It is n't simple to be master . 
A punch would n't kill him , but will make him wiser . 
That 's the way . 
Eh , Foma ! 
You are an infant , and you do not understand these things . 
I must teach you how to live . 
It may be that my days on earth are numbered . '' 
Ignat was silent for awhile , drank some more vodka and went on instinctively : `` It is necessary to have pity on men . 
You are right in doing so . 
But you must pity them sensibly . 
First look at a man , find out what good there is in him , and what use may be made of him ! 
And if you find him to be strong and capable -- pity and assist him . 
And if he is weak and not inclined to work -- spit upon him , pass him by . 
Just keep this in mind -- the man who complains against everything , who sighs and moans all the time -- that man is worth nothing ; he merits no compassion and you will do him no good whatever , even if you help him . 
Pity for such people makes them more morose , spoils them the more . 
In your godfather 's house you saw various kinds of people -- unfortunate travellers and hangers-on , and all sorts of rabble . 
Forget them . 
They are not men , they are just shells , and are good for nothing . 
They are like bugs , fleas and other unclean things . 
Nor do they live for God 's sake -- they have no God . 
They call His name in vain , in order to move fools to pity , and , thus pitied , to fill their bellies with something . 
They live but for their bellies , and aside from eating , drinking , sleeping and moaning they can do nothing . 
And all they accomplish is the soul 's decay . 
They are in your way and you trip over them . 
A good man among them -- like fresh apples among bad ones -- may soon be spoilt , and no one will profit by it . 
You are young , that 's the trouble . 
You can not comprehend my words . 
Help him who is firm in misery . 
He may not ask you for assistance , but think of it yourself , and assist him without his request . 
And if he should happen to be proud and thus feel offended at your aid , do not allow him to see that you are lending him a helping hand . 
That 's the way it should be done , according to common sense ! 
Here , for example , two boards , let us say , fall into the mud -- one of them is a rotten one , the other , a good sound board . 
What should you do ? 
What good is there in the rotten board ? 
You had better drop it , let it stay in the mud and step on it so as not to soil your feet . 
As to the sound board , lift it up and place it in the sun ; if it can be of no use to you , someone else may avail himself of it . 
That 's the way it is , my son ! 
Listen to me and remember . 
There is no reason why Yefim should be pitied . 
He is a capable fellow , he knows his value . 
You can not knock his soul out with a box on the ear . 
I 'll just watch him for about a week , and then I 'll put him at the helm . 
And there , I am quite sure , he 'll be a good pilot . 
And if he should be promoted to captain , he would n't lose courage -- he would make a clever captain ! 
That 's the way people grow . 
I have gone through this school myself , dear . 
I , too , received more than one box on the ear when I was of his age . 
Life , my son , is not a dear mother to all of us . 
It is our exacting mistress . '' 
Ignat talked with his son about two hours , telling him of his own youth , of his toils , of men ; their terrible power , and of their weakness ; of how they live , and sometimes pretend to be unfortunate in order to live on other people 's money ; and then he told him of himself , and of how he rose from a plain working man to be proprietor of a large concern . 
The boy listened to his words , looked at him and felt as though his father were coming nearer and nearer to him . 
And though his father 's story did not contain the material of which Aunt Anfisa 's fairy-tales were brimful , there was something new in it , something clearer and more comprehensible than in her fairy-tales , and something just as interesting . 
Something powerful and warm began to throb within his little heart , and he was drawn toward his father . 
Ignat , evidently , surmised his son 's feelings by his eyes : he rose abruptly from his seat , seized him in his arms and pressed him firmly to his breast . 
And Foma embraced his neck , and , pressing his cheek to that of his father , was silent and breathed rapidly . 
`` My son , '' whispered Ignat in a dull voice , `` My darling ! 
My joy ! 
Learn while I am alive . 
Alas ! 
it is hard to live . '' 
The child 's heart trembled at this whisper ; he set his teeth together , and hot tears gushed from his eyes . 
Until this day Ignat had never kindled any particular feeling in his son : the boy was used to him ; he was tired of looking at his enormous figure , and feared him slightly , but was at the same time aware that his father would do anything for him that he wanted . 
Sometimes Ignat would stay away from home a day , two , a week , or possibly the entire summer . 
And yet Foma did not even notice his absence , so absorbed was he by his love for Aunt Anfisa . 
When Ignat returned the boy was glad , but he could hardly tell whether it was his father 's arrival that gladdened him or the playthings he brought with him . 
But now , at the sight of Ignat , the boy ran to meet him , grasped him by the hand , laughed , stared into his eyes and felt weary if he did not see him for two or three hours : His father became interesting to him , and , rousing his curiosity , he fairly developed love and respect for himself . 
Every time that they were together Foma begged his father : `` Papa , tell me about yourself . '' 
... . 
The steamer was now going up the Volga . 
One suffocating night in July , when the sky was overcast with thick black clouds , and everything on the Volga was somewhat ominously calm , they reached Kazan and anchored near Uslon at the end of an enormous fleet of vessels . 
The clinking of the anchor chains and the shouting of the crew awakened Foma ; he looked out of the window and saw , far in the distance , small lights glimmering fantastically : the water about the boat black and thick , like oil -- and nothing else could be seen . 
The boy 's heart trembled painfully and he began to listen attentively . 
A scarcely audible , melancholy song reached his ears -- mournful and monotonous as a chant on the caravan the watchmen called to one another ; the steamer hissed angrily getting up steam . 
And the black water of the river splashed sadly and quietly against the sides of the vessels . 
Staring fixedly into the darkness , until his eyes hurt , the boy discerned black piles and small lights dimly burning high above them . 
He knew that those were barges , but this knowledge did not calm him and his heart throbbed unevenly , and , in his imagination , terrifying dark images arose . 
`` O-o-o , '' a drawling cry came from the distance and ended like a wail . 
Someone crossed the deck and went up to the side of the steamer . 
`` O-o-o , '' was heard again , but nearer this time . 
`` Yefim ! '' 
some one called in a low voice on the deck . 
`` Yefimka ! '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Devil ! 
Get up ! 
Take the boat-hook . '' 
`` O-o-o , '' someone moaned near by , and Foma , shuddering , stepped back from the window . 
The queer sound came nearer and nearer and grew in strength , sobbed and died out in the darkness . 
While on the deck they whispered with alarm : `` Yefimka ! 
Get up ! 
A guest is floating ! '' 
`` Where ? '' 
came a hasty question , then bare feet began to patter about the deck , a bustle was heard , and two boat-hooks slipped down past the boy 's face and almost noiselessly plunged into the water . 
`` A gue-e-est ! '' 
Some began to sob near by , and a quiet , but very queer splash resounded . 
The boy trembled with fright at this mournful cry , but he could not tear his hands from the window nor his eyes from the water . 
`` Light the lantern . 
You ca n't see anything . '' 
`` Directly . '' 
And then a spot of dim light fell over the water . 
Foma saw that the water was rocking calmly , that a ripple was passing over it , as though the water were afflicted , and trembled for pain . 
`` Look ! 
Look ! '' 
they whispered on the deck with fright . 
At the same time a big , terrible human face , with white teeth set together , appeared on the spot of light . 
It floated and rocked in the water , its teeth seemed to stare at Foma as though saying , with a smile : `` Eh , boy , boy , it is cold . 
Goodbye ! '' 
The boat-hooks shook , were lifted in the air , were lowered again into the water and carefully began to push something there . 
`` Shove him ! 
Shove ! 
Look out , he may be thrown under the wheel . '' 
`` Shove him yourself then . '' 
The boat-hooks glided over the side of the steamer , and , scratching against it , produced a noise like the grinding of teeth . 
Foma could not close his eyes for watching them . 
The noise of feet stamping on the deck , over his head , was gradually moving toward the stern . 
And then again that moaning cry for the dead was heard : `` A gue-e-est ! '' 
`` Papa ! '' 
cried Foma in a ringing voice . 
`` Papa ! '' 
His father jumped to his feet and rushed toward him . 
`` What is that ? 
What are they doing there ? '' 
cried Foma . 
Wildly roaring , Ignat jumped out of the cabin with huge bounds . 
He soon returned , sooner than Foma , staggering and looking around him , had time to reach his father 's bed . 
`` They frightened you ? 
It 's nothing ! '' 
said Ignat , taking him up in his arms . 
`` Lie down with me . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Foma , quietly . 
`` It was nothing , my son . 
Only a drowned man . 
A man was drowned and he is floating . 
That 's nothing ! 
Do n't be afraid , he has already floated clear of us . '' 
`` Why did they push him ? '' 
interrogated the boy , firmly pressing close to his father , and shutting his eyes for fright . 
`` It was necessary to do so . 
The water might have thrown him under the wheel . 
Under ours , for instance . 
Tomorrow the police would notice it , there would be trouble , inquests , and we would be held here for examination . 
That 's why we shoved him along . 
What difference does it make to him ? 
He is dead ; it does n't pain him ; it does n't offend him . 
And the living would be troubled on his account . 
Sleep , my son . 
`` So he will float on that way ? '' 
`` He will float . 
They 'll take him out somewhere and bury him . '' 
`` And will a fish devour him ? '' 
`` Fish do not eat human bodies . 
