Eh ! '' 
`` We scared an owl in the ravine , '' related the boy . 
`` That was fun ! 
It began to fly about and struck against a tree -- bang ! 
It even began to squeak so pitifully . 
And we scared it again ; again it rose and flew about here and there , and again it struck against something , so that its feathers were coming out . 
It flew about in the ravine and at last hid itself somewhere with difficulty . 
We did not try to look for it , we felt sorry it was all bruised . 
Papa , is an owl entirely blind in daytime ? '' 
`` Blind ! '' 
said Ignat ; `` some men will toss about in life even as this owl in daytime . 
Ever searching for his place , he strives and strives -- only feathers fly from him , but all to no purpose . 
He is bruised , sickened , stripped of everything , and then with all his might he thrusts himself anywhere , just to find repose from his restlessness . 
Woe to such people . 
Woe to them , dear ! '' 
`` How painful is it to them ? '' 
said Foma in a low voice . 
`` Just as painful as to that owl . '' 
`` And why is it so ? '' 
`` Why ? 
It is hard to tell . 
Someone suffers because he is darkened by his pride -- he desires much , but has but little strength . 
Another because of his foolishness . 
But then there are a thousand and one other reasons , which you can not understand . '' 
`` Come in and have some tea , '' Anfisa called to them . 
She had been standing in the doorway for quite a long while , and , folding her hands , lovingly admired the enormous figure of her brother , who bent over Foma with such friendliness , and the pensive pose of the boy , who clung to his father 's shoulder . 
Thus day by day Foma 's life developed slowly -- a quiet , peaceful life , not at all brimful of emotions . 
Powerful impressions , rousing the boy 's soul for an hour or for a day , sometimes stood out strikingly against the general background of this monotonous life , but these were soon obliterated . 
The boy 's soul was as yet but a calm lake -- a lake hidden from the stormy winds of life , and all that touched the surface of the lake either sank to the bottom , stirring the placid water for a moment , or gliding over the smooth surface , swam apart in big circles and disappeared . 
Having stayed at the district school for five years , Foma passed four classes tolerably well and came out a brave , dark-haired fellow , with a swarthy face , heavy eyebrows and dark down on the upper lip . 
His big dark eyes had a naive and pensive look , and his lips were like a child 's , half-open ; but when meeting with opposition to his desires or when irritated by something else , the pupils of his eyes would grow wide , his lips press tight , and his whole face assume a stubborn and resolute expression . 
His godfather , smiling sceptically , would often say to him : `` To women , Foma , you 'll be sweeter than honey , but as yet not much common sense can be seen in you . '' 
Ignat would heave a sigh at these words . 
`` You had better start out your son as soon as possible . '' 
`` There 's time yet , wait . '' 
`` Why wait ? 
He 'll go about the Volga for two or three years and then we 'll have him married . 
There 's my Lubov . '' 
Lubov Mayakina was now studying in the fifth class of some boarding school . 
Foma often met her on the street at which meeting she always bowed condescendingly , her fair head in a fashionable cap . 
Foma liked her , but her rosy cheeks , her cheerful brown eyes and crimson lips could not smooth the impression of offence given to him by her condescending bows . 
She was acquainted with some Gymnasium students , and although Yozhov , his old friend , was among them , Foma felt no inclination to be with them , and their company embarrassed him . 
It seemed to him that they were all boasting of their learning before him and that they were mocking his ignorance . 
Gathered together in Lubov 's house they would read some books , and whenever he found them reading or loudly arguing , they became silent at his sight . 
All this removed them further from him . 
One day when he was at Mayakin 's , Luba called him to go for a walk in the garden , and there , walking by his side , asked him with a grimace on her face : `` Why are you so unsociable ? 
You never talk about anything . '' 
`` What shall I talk about , since I know nothing ! '' 
said Foma , plainly . 
`` Study -- read books . '' 
`` I do n't feel like doing it . '' 
`` You see , the Gymnasium students know everything , and know how to talk about everything . 
Take Yozhov , for instance . '' 
`` I know Yozhov -- a chatterbox . '' 
`` You simply envy him . 
He is very clever -- yes . 
He will soon graduate from the Gymnasium -- and then he 'll go to Moscow to study in the University . '' 
`` Well , what of it ? '' 
said Foma , indifferently . 
`` And you 'll remain just an ignorant man . '' 
`` Well , be it so . '' 
`` That will be nice ! '' 
exclaimed Luba , ironically . 
`` I shall hold my ground without science , '' said Foma , sarcastically . 
`` And I 'll have a laugh at all the learned people . 
Let the hungry study . 
I do n't need it . '' 
`` Pshaw , how stupid you are , bad , disgusting ! '' 
said the girl with contempt and went away , leaving him alone in the garden . 
Offended and gloomy , he looked after her , moved his eyebrows and lowering his head , slowly walked off into the depth of the garden . 
He already began to recognise the beauty of solitude and the sweet poison of contemplation . 
Oftentimes , during summer evenings , when everything was coloured by the fiery tints of sunset , kindling the imagination , an uneasy longing for something incomprehensible penetrated his breast . 
Sitting somewhere in a dark corner of the garden or lying in bed , he conjured up before him the images of the fairy-tale princesses -- they appeared with the face of Luba and of other young ladies of his acquaintance , noiselessly floating before him in the twilight and staring into his eyes with enigmatic looks . 
At times these visions awakened in him a mighty energy , as though intoxicating him -- he would rise and , straightening his shoulders , inhale the perfumed air with a full chest ; but sometimes these same visions brought to him a feeling of sadness -- he felt like crying , but ashamed of shedding tears , he restrained himself and never wept in silence . 
Or suddenly his heart began to tremble with the desire to express his gratitude to God , to bow before Him ; the words of the prayer flashed through his memory , and beholding the sky , he whispered them for a long time , one by one , and his heart grew lighter , breathing into prayer the excess of his power . 
The father patiently and carefully introduced him into commercial circles , took him on the Exchange , told him about his contracts and enterprises , about his co-associates , described to him how they had made their way , what fortunes they now possessed , what natures were theirs . 
Foma soon mastered it , regarding everything seriously and thoughtfully . 
`` Our bud is blooming into a blood-red cup-rose ! '' 
Mayakin smiled , winking to Ignat . 
And yet , even when Foma was nineteen years old , there was something childish in him , something naive which distinguished him from the boys of his age . 
They were laughing at him , considering him stupid ; he kept away from them , offended by their relations toward him . 
As for his father and Mayakin , who were watching him vigilantly , this uncertainty of Foma 's character inspired them with serious apprehensions . 
`` I can not understand him ! '' 
Ignat would say with contrite heart . 
`` He does not lead a dissipated life , he does not seem to run after the women , treats me and you with respect , listens to everything -- he is more like a pretty girl than a fellow ! 
And yet he does not seem to be stupid ! '' 
`` No , there 's nothing particularly stupid about him , '' said Mayakin . 
`` It looks as though he were waiting for something -- as though some kind of shroud were covering his eyes . 
His late mother groped on earth in the same way . 
`` Just look , there 's Afrikanka Smolin , but two years older than my boy -- what a man he has become ! 
That is , it is difficult to tell whether he is his father 's head or his father his . 
He wants to go to some factory to study . 
He swears : '' ` Eh , ' says he , ` papa , you have not taught me enough . ' 
Yes . 
While mine does not express himself at all . 
Oh Lord ! '' 
`` Look here , '' Mayakin advised him , `` you had better push him head foremost into some active business ! 
I assure you ! 
Gold is tested in fire . 
We 'll see what his inclinations are when at liberty . 
Send him out on the Kama -- alone . '' 
`` To give him a trial ? '' 
`` Well , he 'll do some mischief -- you 'll lose something -- but then we 'll know what stuff he is made of . '' 
`` Indeed -- I 'll send him off , '' Ignat decided . 
And thus in the spring , Ignat sent his son off on the Kama with two barges laden with corn . 
The barges were led by Gordyeeff 's steamer `` Philezhny , '' under the command of Foma 's old acquaintance , the former sailor Yefim -- now , Yefim Ilyich , a squarely built man of about thirty with lynx-like eyes -- a sober-minded , steady and very strict captain . 
They sailed fast and cheerfully , because all were contented . 
At first Foma was proud of the responsible commission with which he had been charged . 
Yefim was pleased with the presence of the young master , who did not rebuke or abuse him for each and every oversight ; and the happy frame of mind of the two most important persons on the steamer reflected in straight rays on the entire crew . 
Having left the place where they had taken in their cargo of corn in April , the steamer reached the place of its destination in the beginning of May , and the barges were anchored near the shore with the steamer at their side . 
Foma 's duty was to deliver the corn as soon as possible , and receiving the payments , start off for Perm , where a cargo of iron was awaiting him , which Ignat had undertaken to deliver at the market . 
The barges stood opposite a large village , near a pine forest , about two versts distant from the shore . 
On the very next day after their arrival , a big and noisy crowd of women and peasants , on foot and on horses , came up to the shore early in the morning . 
Shouting and singing , they scattered on the decks and in an instant work started expeditiously . 
Having descended into the holds , the women were filling the sacks with rye , the peasants , throwing the sacks upon their shoulders , ran over the gang-planks to the shore , and from the shore , carts , heavily laden with the long-expected corn , went off slowly to the village . 
The women sang songs ; the peasants jested and gaily abused one another ; the sailors representing the guardians of peace , scolded the working people now and then ; the gang-planks , bending under the feet of the carriers , splashed against the water heavily ; while on the shore the horses neighed , and the carts and the sand under the wheels were creaking . 
The sun had just risen , the air was fresh and invigorating and densely filled with the odour of pines ; the calm water of the river , reflecting the clear sky , was gently murmuring , breaking against the sides of the vessels and the chains of the anchors . 
The loud and cheerful noise of toil , the youthful beauty of nature , gaily illumined by the sunbeams -- all was full of a kind-hearted , somewhat crude , sound power , which pleasantly stirred Foma 's soul , awakening in him new and perplexed sensations and desires . 
He was sitting by the table under the awning of the steamer and drinking tea , together with Yefim and the receiver of the corn , a provincial clerk -- a redheaded , short-sighted gentleman in glasses . 
Nervously shrugging his shoulders the receiver was telling in a hoarse voice how the peasants were starving , but Foma paid little attention to his words , looking now at the work below , now at the other side of the river -- a tall , yellow , sandy steep shore , whose edges were covered with pine trees . 
It was unpeopled and quiet . 
`` I 'll have to go over there , '' thought Foma . 
And as though from a distance the receiver 's tiresome , unpleasant , harsh voice fell on his ears : `` You would n't believe it -- at last it became horrible ! 
Such an incident took place ! 
A peasant came up to a certain intelligent man in Osa and brought along with him a girl about sixteen years old . '' 
` What do you wish ? '' '' 
` Here , ' he says , ` I 've brought my daughter to your Honour . ' '' 
` What for ? ' '' 
` Perhaps , ' he says , ` you 'll take her -- you are a bachelor . ' '' 
` That is , how ? 
What do you mean ? ' '' ' 
I took her around town , ' he says . ' 
I wanted to hire her out as a servant -- but nobody would have her -- take her at least as your mistress ! ' 
`` Do you understand ? 
He offered his own daughter -- just think of it ! 
A daughter -- as a mistress ! 
The devil knows what that is ! 
Eh ? 
The man , of course , became indignant and began abusing the peasant . 
But the peasant spoke to him reasonably : '' ` Your Honour ! 
Of what use is she to me at this time ? 
Utterly useless . 
I have , ' says he , ` three boys -- they will be working men ; it is necessary to keep them up . 
Give me , ' says he , ` ten roubles for the girl , and that will improve my lot and that of my boys . ' 
`` How is that ? 
Eh ? 
It is simply terrible , I tell you . '' 
`` No good ! '' 
sighed Yefim . 
`` As they say -- hunger will break through stone walls . 
The stomach , you see , has its own laws . '' 
This story called forth in Foma a great incomprehensible interest in the fate of the girl , and the youth hastened to enquire of the receiver : `` Well , did the man buy her ? '' 
`` Of course not ! '' 
exclaimed the receiver , reproachfully . 
`` Well , and what became of her ? '' 
`` Some good people took pity on her -- and provided for her . '' 
`` A-h ! '' 
drawled Foma , and suddenly he said firmly and angrily : `` I would have given that peasant such a thrashing ! 
I would have broken his head ! '' 
And he showed the receiver his big tightly-clenched fist . 
`` Eh ! 
What for ? '' 
cried the receiver in a sickly , loud voice , tearing his spectacles from his eyes . 
`` You do not understand the motive . '' 
`` I do understand it ! '' 
said Foma , with an obstinate shake of his head . 
`` But what could he do ? 
It came to his mind . '' 
`` How can one allow himself to sell a human being ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
It is brutal , I agree with you . '' 
`` And a girl at that ! 
I would have given him the ten roubles ! '' 
The receiver waved his hand hopelessly and became silent . 
His gesture confused Foma . 
He arose from his seat , walked off to the railing and looked down at the deck of the barge , which was covered with an industriously working crowd of people . 
The noise intoxicated him , and the uneasy something , which was rambling in his soul , was now defined into a powerful desire to work , to have the strength of a giant , to possess enormous shoulders and put on them at one time a hundred bags of rye , that every one looking at him might be astonished . 
`` Come now , hurry up there ! '' 
he shouted down in a ringing voice . 
A few heads were raised to him , some faces appeared before him , and one of them -- the face of a dark-eyed woman -- smiled at him a gentle and enticing smile . 
Something flared up in his breast at this smile and began to spread over his veins in a hot wave . 
He drew back from the railing and walked up to the table again , feeling that his cheeks were burning . 
`` Listen ! '' 
said the receiver , addressing him , `` wire to your father asking him to allow some grain for waste ! 
Just see how much is lost here . 
And here every pound is precious ! 
You should have understood this ! 
What a fine father you have , '' he concluded with a biting grimace . 
`` How much shall I allow ? '' 
asked Foma , boldly and disdainfully . 
`` Do you want a hundred puds ? 
-LSB- A pud is a weight of 40 Russian pounds . -RSB- 
Two hundred ? '' 
`` I -- I thank you ! '' 
exclaimed the receiver , overjoyed and confused , `` if you have the right to do it . '' 
`` I am the master ! '' 
said Foma , firmly . 
`` And you must not speak that way about my father -- nor make such faces . '' 
`` Pardon me ! 
I -- I do not doubt that you have full power . 
I thank you heartily . 
And your father , too -- in behalf of all these men -- in behalf of the people ! '' 
Yefim looked cautiously at the young master , spreading out and smacking his lips , while the master with an air of pride on his face listened to the quick-witted speech of the receiver , who was pressing his hand firmly . 
`` Two hundred puds ! 
That is Russian-like , young man ! 
I shall directly notify the peasants of your gift . 
You 'll see how grateful they will be -- how glad . '' 
And he shouted down : `` Eh , boys ! 
The master is giving away two hundred puds . '' 
`` Three hundred ! '' 
interposed Foma . 
`` Three hundred puds . 
Oh ! 
Thank you ! 
Three hundred puds of grain , boys ! '' 
But their response was weak . 
The peasants lifted up their heads and mutely lowered them again , resuming their work . 
A few voices said irresolutely and as though unwillingly : `` Thanks . 
May God give you . 
We thank you very humbly . '' 
And some cried out gaily and disdainfully : `` What 's the use of that ? 
If they had given each of us a glass of vodka instead -- that would be a just favour . 
For the grain is not for us -- but for the country Council . '' 
`` Eh ! 
They do not understand ! '' 
exclaimed the receiver , confused . 
`` I 'll go down and explain it to them . '' 
And he disappeared . 
But the peasants ' regard for his gift did not interest Foma . 
He saw that the black eyes of the rosy-cheeked woman were looking at him so strangely and pleasingly . 
They seemed to thank him and caressingly beckoned him , and besides those eyes he saw nothing . 
The woman was dressed like the city women . 
She wore shoes , a calico waist , and over her black hair she had a peculiar kerchief . 
Tall and supple , seated on a pile of wood , she repaired sacks , quickly moving her hands , which were bare up to the elbows , and she smiled at Foma all the time . 
`` Foma Ignatyich ! '' 
he heard Yefim 's reproachful voice , `` you 've showed off too much . 
Well , if it were only about fifty puds ! 
But why so much ? 
Look out that we do n't get a good scolding for this . '' 
`` Leave me alone ! '' 
said Foma , shortly . 
`` What is it to me ? 
I 'll keep quiet . 
But as you are so young , and as I was told to keep an eye on you , I may get a rap on the snout for being heedless . '' 
`` I 'll tell my father all about it . 
Keep quiet ! '' 
said Foma . 
`` As for me -- let it be so -- so that you are master here . '' 
`` Very well . '' 
`` I have said this , Foma Ignatyich , for your own sake -- because you are so young and simple-minded . '' 
`` Leave me alone , Yefim ! '' 
Yefim heaved a sigh and became silent , while Foma stared at the woman and thought : `` I wish they would bring such a woman for sale to me . '' 
His heart beat rapidly . 
Though as yet physically pure , he already knew from conversations the mysteries of intimate relations between men and women . 
He knew by rude and shameful names , and these names kindled in him an unpleasant , burning curiosity and shame ; his imagination worked obstinately , for he could not picture it to himself in intelligible images . 
And in his soul he did not believe that those relations were really so simple and rude , as he had been told . 
When they had laughed at him and assured him that they were such , and , indeed , could not be otherwise , he smiled stupidly and confusedly , but thought nevertheless that the relations with women did not have to be in such a shameful form for everyone , and that , in all probability , there was something purer , less rude and abusive to a human being . 
Now looking at the dark-eyed working woman with admiration , Foma distinctly felt just that rude inclination toward her , and he was ashamed and afraid of something . 
And Yefim , standing beside him , said admonitively : `` There you are staring at the woman , so that I can not keep silence any longer . 
You do not know her , but when she winks at you , you may , because of your youth -- and with a nature like yours -- you may do such a thing that we 'll have to go home on foot by the shore . 
And we 'll have to thank God if our trousers at least remain with us . '' 
`` What do you want ? '' 
asked Foma , red with confusion . 
`` I want nothing . 
And you had better mind me . 
In regard to affairs with women I may perfectly well be a teacher . 
You must deal with a woman very plainly -- give her a bottle of vodka , something to eat after it , then a couple of bottles of beer and after everything give her twenty kopecks in cash . 
For this price she will show you all her love in the best way possible . '' 
`` You are lying , '' said Foma , softly . 
`` I am lying ? 
Why shall I lie to you since I have observed that same policy perhaps a hundred times ? 
Just charge me to have dealings with her . 
Eh ? 
I 'll make you acquainted with her in a moment . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Foma , feeling that he could hardly breathe and that something was choking his throat . 
`` Well , then , I 'll bring her up in the evening . '' 
And Yefim smiled approvingly into Foma 's face and walked off . 
Until evening Foma walked about as though lost in mist , not noticing the respectful and beseeching glances with which the peasants greeted him at the receiver 's instigation . 
Dread fell on him , he felt himself guilty before somebody , and to all those that addressed him he replied humbly and gently , as though excusing himself for something . 
Some of the working people went home toward evening , others gathered on the shore near a big , bright bonfire and began cooking their supper . 
Fragments of their conversation floated about in the stillness of the evening . 
The reflection of the fire fell on the river in red and yellow stripes , which trembled on the calm water and on the window panes of the cabin where Foma was sitting . 
He sat in the corner on a lounge , which was covered with oilcloth -- and waited . 
On the table before him were a few bottles of vodka and beer , and plates with bread and dessert . 
He covered the windows and did not light the lamp ; the faint light from the bonfire , penetrating through the curtains , fell on the table , on the bottles and on the wall , and trembled , now growing brighter , now fainter . 
It was quiet on the steamer and on the barges , only from the shore came indistinct sounds of conversation , and the river was splashing , scarcely audible , against the sides of the steamer . 
It seemed to Foma that somebody was hiding in the dark near by , listening to him and spying upon him . 
Now somebody is walking over the gang-plank of the barges with quick and heavy steps -- the gang-plank strikes against the water clangously and angrily . 
Foma hears the muffled laughter of the captain and his lowered voice . 
Yefim stands by the cabin door and speaks softly , but somewhat reprimandingly , as though instructing . 
Foma suddenly felt like crying out : `` It is not necessary ! '' 
And he arose from the lounge -- but at this moment the cabin door was opened , the tall form of a woman appeared on the threshold , and , noiselessly closing the door behind her , she said in a low voice : `` Oh dear ! 
How dark it is ! 
Is there a living soul somewhere around here ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Foma , softly . 
`` Well , then , good evening . '' 
And the woman moved forward carefully . 
`` I 'll light the lamp , '' said Foma in a broken voice , and , sinking on the lounge , he curled himself up in the corner . 
`` It is good enough this way . 
When you get used to it you can see everything in the dark as well . '' 
`` Be seated , '' said Foma . 
`` I will . '' 
She sat down on the lounge about two steps away from him . 
Foma saw the glitter of her eyes , he saw a smile on her full lips . 
It seemed to him that this smile of hers was not at all like that other smile before -- this smile seemed plaintive , sad . 
This smile encouraged him ; he breathed with less difficulty at the sight of these eyes , which , on meeting his own , suddenly glanced down on the floor . 
But he did not know what to say to this woman and for about two minutes both were silent . 
It was a heavy , awkward silence . 
She began to speak : `` You must be feeling lonesome here all alone ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Foma . 
`` And do you like our place here ? '' 
asked the woman in a low voice . 
`` It is nice . 
There are many woods here . '' 
And again they became silent . 
`` The river , if you like , is more beautiful than the Volga , '' uttered Foma , with an effort . 
`` I was on the Volga . '' 
`` Where ? '' 
`` In the city of Simbirsk . '' 
`` Simbirsk ? '' 
repeated Foma like an echo , feeling that he was again unable to say a word . 
But she evidently understood with whom she had to deal , and she suddenly asked him in a bold whisper : `` Why do n't you treat me to something ? '' 
`` Here ! '' 
Foma gave a start . 
`` Indeed , how queer I am ? 
Well , then , come up to the table . '' 
He bustled about in the dark , pushed the table , took up one bottle , then another , and again returned them to their place , laughing guiltily and confusedly as he did so . 
She came up close to him and stood by his side , and , smiling , looked at his face and at his trembling hands . 
`` Are you bashful ? '' 
she suddenly whispered . 
He felt her breath on his cheek and replied just as softly : `` Yes . '' 
Then she placed her hands on his shoulders and quietly drew him to her breast , saying in a soothing whisper : `` Never mind , do n't be bashful , my young , handsome darling . 
How I pity you ! '' 
And he felt like crying because of her whisper , his heart was melting in sweet fatigue ; pressing his head close to her breast , he clasped her with his hands , mumbling to her some inarticulate words , which were unknown to himself . 
`` Be gone ! '' 
said Foma in a heavy voice , staring at the wall with his eyes wide open . 
Having kissed him on the cheek she walked out of the cabin , saying to him : `` Well , good-bye . '' 
Foma felt intolerably ashamed in her presence ; but no sooner did she disappear behind the door than he jumped up and seated himself on the lounge . 
Then he arose , staggering , and at once he was seized with the feeling of having lost something very valuable , something whose presence he did not seem to have noticed in himself until the moment it was lost . 
But immediately a new , manly feeling of self-pride took possession of him . 
It drowned his shame , and , instead of the shame , pity for the woman sprang up within him -- for the half-clad woman , who went out alone into the dark of the chilly May night . 
He hastily came out on the deck -- it was a starlit , but moonless night ; the coolness and the darkness embraced him . 
On the shore the golden-red pile of coals was still glimmering . 
Foma listened -- an oppressive stillness filled the air , only the water was murmuring , breaking against the anchor chains . 
There was not a sound of footsteps to be heard . 
Foma now longed to call the woman , but he did not know her name . 
Eagerly inhaling the fresh air into his broad chest , he stood on deck for a few minutes . 
Suddenly , from beyond the roundhouse -- from the prow -- a moan reached his ears -- a deep , loud moan , resembling a wail . 
He shuddered and went thither carefully , understanding that she was there . 
She sat on the deck close to the side of the steamer , and , leaning her head against a heap of ropes , she wept . 
Foma saw that her bare white shoulders were trembling , he heard her pitiful moans , and began to feel depressed . 
Bending over her , he asked her timidly : `` What is it ? '' 
She nodded her head and said nothing in reply . 
`` Have I offended you ? '' 
`` Go away , '' she said . 
`` But , how ? '' 
said Foma , alarmed and confused , touching her head with his hand . 
`` Do n't be angry . 
You came of your own free will . '' 
`` I am not angry ! '' 
she replied in a loud whisper . 
`` Why should I be angry at you ? 
You are not a seducer . 
You are a pure soul ! 
Eh , my darling ! 
Be seated here by my side . '' 
And taking Foma by the hand , she made him sit down , like a child , in her lap , pressed his head close to her breast , and , bending over him , pressed her lips to his for a long time . 
`` What are you crying about ? '' 
asked Foma , caressing her cheek with one hand , while the other clasped the woman 's neck . 
`` I am crying about myself . 
Why have you sent me away ? '' 
she asked plaintively . 
`` I began to feel ashamed of myself , '' said Foma , lowering his head . 
`` My darling ! 
Tell me the truth -- have n't you been pleased with me ? '' 
she asked with a smile , but her big , hot tears were still trickling down on Foma 's breast . 
`` Why should you speak like this ? '' 
exclaimed the youth , almost frightened , and hotly began to mumble to her some words about her beauty , about her kindness , telling her how sorry he was for her and how bashful in her presence . 
And she listened and kept on kissing his cheeks , his neck , his head and his uncovered breast . 
He became silent -- then she began to speak -- softly and mournfully as though speaking of the dead : `` And I thought it was something else . 
When you said , ` Be gone ! ' 
I got up and went away . 
And your words made me feel sad , very sad . 
There was a time , I remembered , when they caressed me and fondled me unceasingly , without growing tired ; for a single kind smile they used to do for me anything I pleased . 
I recalled all this and began to cry ! 
I felt sorry for my youth , for I am now thirty years old , the last days for a woman ! 
Eh , Foma Ignatyevich ! '' 
she exclaimed , lifting her voice louder , and reiterating the rhythm of her harmonious speech , whose accents rose and fell in unison with the melodious murmuring of the water . 
`` Listen to me -- preserve your youth ! 
There is nothing in the world better than that . 
There is nothing more precious than youth . 
With youth , as with gold , you can accomplish anything you please . 
Live so that you shall have in old age something to remind you of your youth . 
Here I recalled myself , and though I cried , yet my heart blazed up at the very recollection of my past life . 
And again I was young , as though I drank of the water of life ! 
My sweet child I 'll have a good time with you , if I please you , we 'll enjoy ourselves as much as we can . 
Eh ! 
I 'll burn to ashes , now that I have blazed up ! '' 
And pressing the youth close to herself , she greedily began to kiss him on the lips . 
`` Lo-o-ok o-u-u-u-t ! '' 
the watch on the barge wailed mournfully , and , cutting short the last syllable , began to strike his mallet against the cast-iron board . 
The shrill , trembling sounds harshly broke the solemn quiet of the night . 
A few days later , when the barges had discharged their cargo and the steamer was ready to leave for Perm , Yefim noticed , to his great sorrow , that a cart came up to the shore and that the dark-eyed Pelageya , with a trunk and with some bundles , was in it . 
`` Send a sailor to bring her things , '' ordered Foma , nodding his head toward the shore . 
With a reproachful shake of his head , Yefim carried out the order angrily , and then asked in a lowered voice : `` So she , too , is coming with us ? '' 
`` She is going with me , '' Foma announced shortly . 
`` It is understood . 
Not with all of us . 
Oh , Lord ! '' 
`` Why are you sighing ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Foma Ignatyich ! 
We are going to a big city . 
Are there not plenty of women of her kind ? '' 
`` Well , keep quiet ! '' 
said Foma , sternly . 
`` I will keep quiet , but this is n't right ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` This very wantonness of ours . 
Our steamer is perfect , clean -- and suddenly there is a woman there ! 
And if it were at least the right sort of a woman ! 
But as it is , she merely bears the name of woman . '' 
Foma frowned insinuatingly and addressed the captain , imperiously emphasizing his words : `` Yefim , I want you to bear it in mind , and to tell it to everybody here , that if anyone will utter an obscene word about her , I 'll strike him on the head with a log of wood ! '' 
`` How terrible ! '' 
said Yefim , incredulously , looking into the master 's face with curiosity . 
But he immediately made a step backward . 
Ignat 's son , like a wolf , showed his teeth , the apples of his eyes became wider , and he roared : `` Laugh ! 
I 'll show you how to laugh ! '' 
Though Yefim lost courage , he nevertheless said with dignity : `` Although you , Foma Ignatyich , are the master , yet as I was told , ` Watch , Yefim , ' and then I am the captain here . '' 
`` The captain ? '' 
cried Foma , shuddering in every limb and turning pale . 
`` And who am I ? '' 
`` Well , do n't bawl ! 
On account of such a trifle as a woman . '' 
Red spots came out on Foma 's pale face , he shifted from one foot to the other , thrust his hands into the pockets of his jacket with a convulsive motion and said in a firm and even voice : `` You ! 
Captain ! 
See here , say another word against me -- and you go to the devil ! 
I 'll put you ashore ! 
I 'll get along as well with the pilot ! 
Understand ? 
You can not command me . 
Do you see ? '' 
Yefim was dumfounded . 
He looked at his master and comically winked his eyes , finding no reply to his words . 
`` Do you understand , I say ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I understand ! '' 
drawled Yefim . 
`` But what is all this noise about ? 
On account of -- '' `` Silence ! '' 
Foma 's eyes , which flashed wildly , and his face distorted with wrath , suggested to the captain the happy thought to leave his master as soon as possible and , turning around quickly , he walked off . 
`` Pshaw ! 
How terrible ! 
As it seems the apple did not fall too far from the tree , '' he muttered sneeringly , walking on the deck . 
He was angry at Foma , and considered himself offended for nothing , but at the same time he began to feel over himself the real , firm hand of a master . 
For years accustomed to being subordinate , he rather liked this manifestation of power over him , and , entering the cabin of the old pilot , he related to him the scene between himself and his master , with a shade of satisfaction in his voice . 
`` See ? '' 
he concluded his story . 
`` A pup coming from a good breed is an excellent dog at the very first chase . 
From his exterior he is so-so . 
A man of rather heavy mind as yet . 
Well , never mind , let him have his fun . 
It seems now as though nothing wrong will come out of this . 
With a character like his , no . 
How he bawled at me ! 
A regular trumpet , I tell you ! 
And he appointed himself master at once . 
As though he had sipped power and strictness out of a ladle . '' 
Yefim spoke the truth : during these few days Foma underwent a striking transformation . 
The passion now kindled in him made him master of the soul and body of a woman ; he eagerly absorbed the fiery sweetness of this power , and this burned out all that was awkward in him , all that gave him the appearance of a somewhat stupid , gloomy fellow , and , destroying it , filled his heart with youthful pride , with the consciousness of his human personality . 
Love for a woman is always fruitful to the man , be the love whatever it may ; even though it were to cause but sufferings there is always much that is rich in it . 
Working as a powerful poison on those whose souls are afflicted , it is for the healthy man as fire for iron , which is to be transformed into steel . 
Foma 's passion for the thirty-year-old woman , who lamented in his embraces her dead youth , did not tear him away from his affairs ; he was never lost in the caresses , or in his affairs , bringing into both his whole self . 
The woman , like good wine , provoked in him alike a thirst for labour and for love , and she , too , became younger from the kisses of the youth . 
In Perm , Foma found a letter waiting for him . 
It was from his godfather , who notified him that Ignat , out of anxiety for his son , had begun to drink heavily , and that it was harmful to drink thus , for a man of his age . 
The letter concluded with advice to hurry up matters in order to return home the sooner . 
Foma felt alarmed over this advice , and it clouded the clear holiday of his heart . 
But this shadow soon melted in his worries over his affairs , and in the caresses of Pelageya . 
His life streamed on with the swiftness of a river wave , and each day brought to him new sensations , awakening in him new thoughts . 
Pelageya 's relations with him contained all the passion of a mistress , all that power of feeling which women of her age put into their passion when drinking the last drops from the cup of life . 
But at times a different feeling awoke in her , a feeling not less powerful , and by which Foma became still more attached to her -- something similar to a mother 's yearning to guard her beloved son from errors , to teach him the wisdom of life . 
Oftentimes at night , sitting in his embraces on the deck , she spoke to him tenderly and sadly : `` Mind me as an older sister of yours . 
I have lived , I know men . 
I have seen a great deal in my life ! 
Choose your companions with care , for there are people just as contagious as a disease . 
At first you can not tell them even when you see them ; he looks to be a man like everybody else , and , suddenly , without being aware of it yourself , you will start to imitate him in life . 
You look around -- and you find that you have contracted his scabs . 
I myself have lost everything on account of a friend . 
I had a husband and two children . 
We lived well . 
My husband was a clerk at a volost . '' 
She became silent and looked for a long time at the water , which was stirred by the vessel . 
Then she heaved a sigh and spoke to him again : `` May the Holy Virgin guard you from women of my kind -- be careful . 
You are tender as yet , your heart has not become properly hardened . 
And women are fond of such as you -- strong , handsome , rich . 
And most of all beware of the quiet women . 
They stick to a man like blood-suckers , and suck and suck . 
And at the same time they are always so kind , so gentle . 
They will keep on sucking your juice , but will preserve themselves . 
