She held out her hand to him and sadly looked into his eyes . 
`` Will you go to sleep now ? '' 
asked Foma , firmly shaking her hand . 
`` I 'll read a little . '' 
`` You 're to your books as the drunkard to his whisky , '' said the youth , with pity . 
`` What is there that is better ? '' 
Walking along the street he looked at the windows of the house and in one of them he noticed Luba 's face . 
It was just as vague as everything that the girl told him , even as vague as her longings . 
Foma nodded his head toward her and with a consciousness of his superiority over her , thought : `` She has also lost her way , like the other one . '' 
At this recollection he shook his head , as though he wanted to frighten away the thought of Medinskaya , and quickened his steps . 
Night was coming on , and the air was fresh . 
A cold , invigorating wind was violently raging in the street , driving the dust along the sidewalks and throwing it into the faces of the passers-by . 
It was dark , and people were hastily striding along in the darkness . 
Foma wrinkled his face , for the dust filled his eyes , and thought : `` If it is a woman I meet now -- then it will mean that Sophya Pavlovna will receive me in a friendly way , as before . 
I am going to see her tomorrow . 
And if it is a man -- I wo n't go tomorrow , I 'll wait . '' 
But it was a dog that came to meet him , and this irritated Foma to such an extent that he felt like striking him with his cane . 
In the refreshment-room of the club , Foma was met by the jovial Ookhtishchev . 
He stood at the door , and chatted with a certain stout , whiskered man ; but , noticing Gordyeeff , he came forward to meet him , saying , with a smile : `` How do you do , modest millionaire ! '' 
Foma rather liked him for his jolly mood , and was always pleased to meet him . 
Firmly and kind-heartedly shaking Ookhtishchev 's hand , Foma asked him : `` And what makes you think that I am modest ? '' 
`` What a question ! 
A man , who lives like a hermit , who neither drinks , nor plays , nor likes any women . 
By the way , do you know , Foma Ignatyevich , that peerless patroness of ours is going abroad tomorrow for the whole summer ? '' 
`` Sophya Pavlovna ? '' 
asked Foma , slowly . 
`` Of course ! 
The sun of my life is setting . 
And , perhaps , of yours as well ? '' 
Ookhtishchev made a comical , sly grimace and looked into Foma 's face . 
And Foma stood before him , feeling that his head was lowering on his breast , and that he was unable to hinder it . 
`` Yes , the radiant Aurora . '' 
`` Is Medinskaya going away ? '' 
a deep bass voice asked . 
`` That 's fine ! 
I am glad . '' 
`` May I know why ? '' 
exclaimed Ookhtishchev . 
Foma smiled sheepishly and stared in confusion at the whiskered man , Ookhtishchev 's interlocutor . 
That man was stroking his moustache with an air of importance , and deep , heavy , repulsive words fell from his lips on Foma 's ears . 
`` Because , you see , there will be one co-cot-te less in town . '' 
`` Shame , Martin Nikitich ! '' 
said Ookhtishchev , reproachfully , knitting his brow . 
`` How do you know that she is a coquette ? '' 
asked Foma , sternly , coming closer to the whiskered man . 
The man measured him with a scornful look , turned aside and moving his thigh , drawled out : `` I did n't say -- coquette . '' 
`` Martin Nikitich , you must n't speak that way about a woman who -- '' began Ookhtishchev in a convincing tone , but Foma interrupted him : `` Excuse me , just a moment ! 
I wish to ask the gentleman , what is the meaning of the word he said ? '' 
And as he articulated this firmly and calmly , Foma thrust his hands deep into his trousers-pockets , threw his chest forward , which at once gave his figure an attitude of defiance . 
The whiskered gentleman again eyed Foma with a sarcastic smile . 
`` Gentlemen ! '' 
exclaimed Ookhtishchev , softly . 
`` I said , co-cot-te , '' pronounced the whiskered man , moving his lips as if he tasted the word . 
`` And if you do n't understand it , I can explain it to you . '' 
`` You had better explain it , '' said Foma , with a deep sigh , not lifting his eyes off the man . 
Ookhtishchev clasped his hands and rushed aside . 
`` A cocotte , if you want to know it , is a prostitute , '' said the whiskered man in a low voice , moving his big , fat face closer to Foma . 
Foma gave a soft growl and , before the whiskered man had time to move away , he clutched with his right hand his curly , grayish hair . 
With a convulsive movement of the hand , Foma began to shake the man 's head and his big , solid body ; lifting up his left hand , he spoke in a dull voice , keeping time to the punishment : `` Do n't abuse a person -- in his absence . 
Abuse him -- right in his face -- straight in his eyes . '' 
He experienced a burning delight , seeing how comically the stout arms were swinging in the air , and how the legs of the man , whom he was shaking , were bending under him , scraping against the floor . 
His gold watch fell out of the pocket and dangled on the chain , over his round paunch . 
Intoxicated with his own strength and with the degradation of the sedate man , filled with the burning feeling of malignancy , trembling with the happiness of revenge , Foma dragged him along the floor and in a dull voice , growled wickedly , in wild joy . 
In these moments he experienced a great feeling -- the feeling of emancipation from the wearisome burden which had long oppressed his heart with grief and morbidness . 
He felt that he was seized by the waist and shoulders from behind , that someone seized his hand and bent it , trying to break it ; that someone was crushing his toes ; but he saw nothing , following with his bloodshot eyes the dark , heavy mass moaning and wriggling in his hand . 
Finally , they tore him away and downed him , and , as through a reddish mist , he noticed before him on the floor , at his feet , the man he had thrashed . 
Dishevelled , he was moving his legs over the floor , attempting to rise ; two dark men were holding him by the arms , his hands were dangling in the air like broken wings , and , in a voice that was choking with sobs , he cried to Foma : `` You must n't beat me ! 
You must n't ! 
I have an ... `` Order . 
You rascal ! 
Oh , rascal ! 
I have children . 
`` Everybody knows me ! 
Scoundrel ! 
Savage , O -- O -- O ! 
You may expect a duel ! '' 
And Ookhtishchev spoke loudly in Foma 's ear : `` Come , my dear boy , for God 's sake ! '' 
`` Wait , I 'll give him a kick in the face , '' begged Foma . 
But he was dragged off . 
There was a buzzing in his ears , his heart beat fast , but he felt relieved and well . 
At the entrance of the club he heaved a deep sigh of relief and said to Ookhtishchev , with a good-natured smile : `` I gave him a sound drubbing , did n't I ? '' 
`` Listen ! '' 
exclaimed the gay secretary , indignantly . 
`` You must pardon me but that was the act of a savage ! 
The devil take it . 
I never witnessed such a thing before ! '' 
`` My dear man ! '' 
said Foma , friendly , `` did he not deserve the drubbing ? 
Is he not a scoundrel ? 
How can he speak like that behind a person 's back ? 
No ! 
Let him go to her and tell it plainly to her alone . '' 
`` Excuse me . 
The devil take you ! 
But it was n't for her alone that you gave him the drubbing ? '' 
`` That is , what do you mea , -- not for her alone ? 
For whom then ? '' 
asked Foma , amazed . 
`` For whom ? 
I do n't know . 
Evidently you had old accounts to settle ! 
Oh Lord ! 
That was a scene ! 
I shall not forget it in all my life ! '' 
`` He -- that man -- who is he ? '' 
asked Foma , and suddenly burst out laughing . 
`` How he roared , the fool ! '' 
Ookhtishchev looked fixedly into his face and asked : `` Tell me , is it true , that you do n't know whom you 've thrashed ? 
And is it really only for Sophya Pavlovna ? '' 
`` It is , by God ! '' 
avowed Foma . 
`` So , the devil knows what the result may be ! '' 
He stopped short , shrugged his shoulders perplexedly , waved his hand , and again began to pace the sidewalk , looking at Foma askance . 
`` You 'll pay for this , Foma Ignatyevich . '' 
`` Will he take me to court ? '' 
`` Would to God he does . 
He is the Vice-Governor 's son-in-law . '' 
`` Is that so ? '' 
said Foma , slowly , and made a long face . 
`` Yes . 
To tell the truth , he is a scoundrel and a rascal . 
According to this fact I must admit , that he deserves a drubbing . 
But taking into consideration the fact that the lady you defended is also -- '' `` Sir ! '' 
said Foma , firmly , placing his hand on Ookhtishchev 's shoulder , `` I have always liked you , and you are now walking with me . 
I understand it and can appreciate it . 
But do not speak ill of her in my presence . 
Whatever she may be in your opinion , in my opinion , she is dear to me . 
To me she is the best woman . 
So I am telling you frankly . 
Since you are going with me , do not touch her . 
I consider her good , therefore she is good . '' 
There was great emotion in Foma 's voice . 
Ookhtishchev looked at him and said thoughtfully : `` You are a queer man , I must confess . '' 
`` I am a simple man -- a savage . 
I have given him a thrashing and now I feel jolly , and as to the result , let come what will . ' 
`` I am afraid that it will result in something bad . 
Do you know -- to be frank , in return for your frankness -- I also like you , although -- Mm ! 
It is rather dangerous to be with you . 
Such a knightly temper may come over you and one may get a thrashing at your hands . '' 
`` How so ? 
This was but the first time . 
I am not going to beat people every day , am I ? '' 
said Foma , confused . 
His companion began to laugh . 
`` What a monster you are ! 
Listen to me -- it is savage to fight -- you must excuse me , but it is abominable . 
Yet , I must tell you , in this case you made a happy selection . 
You have thrashed a rake , a cynic , a parasite -- a man who robbed his nephews with impunity . '' 
`` Well , thank God for that ! '' 
said Foma with satisfaction . 
`` Now I have punished him a little . '' 
`` A little ? 
Very well , let us suppose it was a little . 
But listen to me , my child , permit me to give you advice . 
I am a man of the law . 
He , that Kayazev , is a rascal ! 
True ! 
But you must not thrash even a rascal , for he is a social being , under the paternal custody of the law . 
You can not touch him until he transgresses the limits of the penal code . 
But even then , not you , but we , the judges , will give him his due . 
While you must have patience . '' 
`` And will he soon fall into your hands ? '' 
inquired Foma , naively . 
`` It is hard to tell . 
Being far from stupid , he will probably never be caught , and to the end of his days he will live with you and me in the same degree of equality before the law . 
Oh God , what I am telling you ! '' 
said Ookhtishchev , with a comical sigh . 
`` Betraying secrets ? '' 
grinned Foma . 
`` It is n't secrets ; but I ought not to be frivolous . 
De-e-evil ! 
But then , this affair enlivened me . 
Indeed , Nemesis is even then true to herself when she simply kicks like a horse . '' 
Foma stopped suddenly , as though he had met an obstacle on his way . 
`` Nemesis -- the goddess of Justice , '' babbled Ookhtishchev . 
`` What 's the matter with you ? '' 
`` And it all came about , '' said Foma , slowly , in a dull voice , `` because you said that she was going away . '' 
`` Who ? 
`` Sophya Pavlovna . '' 
`` Yes , she is going away . 
Well ? '' 
He stood opposite Foma and stared at him , with a smile in his eyes . 
Gordyeeff was silent , with lowered head , tapping the stone of the sidewalk with his cane . 
`` Come , '' said Ookhtishchev . 
Foma started , saying indifferently : `` Well , let her go . 
And I am alone . '' 
Ookhtishchev , waving his cane , began to whistle , looking at his companion . 
`` Sha 'n' t I be able to get along without her ? '' 
asked Foma , looking somewhere in front of him and then , after a pause , he answered himself softly and irresolutely : `` Of course , I shall . '' 
`` Listen to me ! '' 
exclaimed Ookhtishchev . 
`` I 'll give you some good advice . 
A man must be himself . 
While you , you are an epic man , so to say , and the lyrical is not becoming to you . 
It is n't your genre . '' 
`` Speak to me more simply , sir , '' said Foma , having listened attentively to his words . 
`` More simply ? 
Very well . 
I want to say , give up thinking of this little lady . 
She is poisonous food for you . '' 
`` She told me the same , '' put in Foma , gloomily . 
`` She told you ? '' 
Ookhtishchev asked and became thoughtful . 
`` Now , I 'll tell you , should n't we perhaps go and have supper ? '' 
`` Let 's go , '' Foma assented . 
And he suddenly roared obdurately , clinching his fists and waving them in the air : `` Well , let us go , and I 'll get wound up ; I 'll break loose , after all this , so you ca n't hold me back ! '' 
`` What for ? 
We 'll do it modestly . '' 
`` No ! 
wait ! '' 
said Foma , anxiously , seizing him by the shoulder . 
`` What 's that ? 
Am I worse than other people ? 
Everybody lives , whirls , hustles about , has his own point . 
While I am weary . 
Everybody is satisfied with himself . 
And as to their complaining , they lie , the rascals ! 
They are simply pretending for beauty 's sake . 
I have no reason to pretend . 
I am a fool . 
I do n't understand anything , my dear fellow . 
I simply wish to live ! 
I am unable to think . 
I feel disgusted ; one says this , another that ! 
Pshaw ! 
But she , eh ! 
If you knew . 
My hope was in her . 
I expected of her -- just what I expected , I can not tell ; but she is the best of women ! 
And I had so much faith in her -- when sometimes she spoke such peculiar words , all her own . 
Her eyes , my dear boy , are so beautiful ! 
Oh Lord ! 
I was ashamed to look upon them , and as I am telling you , she would say a few words , and everything would become clear to me . 
For I did not come to her with love alone -- I came to her with all my soul ! 
I sought -- I thought that since she was so beautiful , consequently , I might become a man by her side ! '' 
Ookhtishchev listened to the painful , unconnected words that burst from his companion 's lips . 
He saw how the muscles of his face contracted with the effort to express his thoughts , and he felt that behind this bombast there was a great , serious grief . 
There was something intensely pathetic in the powerlessness of this strong and savage youth , who suddenly started to pace the sidewalk with big , uneven steps . 
Skipping along after him with his short legs , Ookhtishchev felt it his duty somehow to calm Foma . 
Everything Foma had said and done that evening awakened in the jolly secretary a feeling of lively curiosity toward Foma , and then he felt flattered by the frankness of the young millionaire . 
This frankness confused him with its dark power ; he was disconcerted by its pressure , and though , in spite of his youth , he had a stock of words ready for all occasions in life , it took him quite awhile to recall them . 
`` I feel that everything is dark and narrow about me , '' said Gordyeeff . 
`` I feel that a burden is falling on my shoulders , but what it is I can not understand ! 
It puts a restraint on me , and it checks the freedom of my movements along the road of life . 
Listening to people , you hear that each says a different thing . 
But she could have said -- '' `` Eh , my dear boy ! '' 
Ookhtishchev interrupted Foma , gently taking his arm . 
`` That is n't right ! 
You have just started to live and already you are philosophizing ! 
No , that is not right ! 
Life is given us to live ! 
Which means -- live and let others live . 
That 's the philosophy ! 
And that woman . 
Bah ! 
Is she then the only one in the world ? 
The world is large enough . 
If you wish , I 'll introduce you to such a virile woman , that even the slightest trace of your philosophy would at once vanish from your soul ! 
Oh , a remarkable woman ! 
And how well she knows how to avail herself of life ! 
Do you know , there 's also something epic about her ? 
She is beautiful ; a Phryne , I may say , and what a match she would be to you ! 
Ah , devil ! 
It is really a splendid idea . 
I 'll make you acquainted with her ! 
We must drive one nail out with another . '' 
`` My conscience does not allow it , '' said Foma , sadly and sternly . 
`` So long as she is alive , I can not even look at women . '' 
`` Such a robust and healthy young man . 
Ho , ho ! '' 
exclaimed Ookhtishchev , and in the tone of a teacher began to argue with Foma that it was essential for him to give his passion an outlet in a good spree , in the company of women . 
`` This will be magnificent , and it is indispensable to you . 
You may believe me . 
And as to conscience , you must excuse me . 
You do n't define it quite properly . 
It is not conscience that interferes with you , but timidity , I believe . 
You live outside of society . 
You are bashful , and awkward . 
Youare dimly conscious of all this , and it is this consciousness that you mistake for conscience . 
In this case there can be no question about conscience . 
What has conscience to do here , since it is natural for man to enjoy himself , since it is his necessity and his right ? '' 
Foma walked on , regulating his steps to those of his companion , and staring along the road , which lay between two rows of buildings , resembled an enormous ditch , and was filled with darkness . 
It seemed that there was no end to the road and that something dark , inexhaustible and suffocating was slowly flowing along it in the distance . 
Ookhtishchev 's kind , suasive voice rang monotonously in Foma 's ears , and though he was not listening to his words , he felt that they were tenacious in their way ; that they adhered to him , and that he was involuntarily memorizing them . 
Notwithstanding that a man walked beside him , he felt as though he were alone , straying in the dark . 
And the darkness seized him and slowly drew him along , and he felt that he was drawn somewhere , and yet had no desire to stop . 
Some sort of fatigue hindered his thinking ; there was no desire in him to resist the admonitions of his companion -- and why should he resist them ? 
`` It is n't for everyone to philosophize , '' said Ookhtishchev , swinging his cane in the air , and somewhat carried away by his wisdom . 
`` For if everybody were to philosophize , who would live ? 
And we live but once ! 
And therefore it were best to make haste to live . 
By God ! 
That 's true ! 
But what 's the use of talking ? 
Would you permit me to give you a shaking up ? 
Let 's go immediately to a pleasure-house I know . 
Two sisters live there . 
Ah , how they live ! 
You will come ? '' 
`` Well , I 'll go , '' said Foma , calmly , and yawned . 
`` Is n't it rather late ? '' 
he asked , looking up at the sky which was covered with clouds . 
`` It 's never too late to go to see them ! '' 
exclaimed Ookhtishchev , merrily . 
ON the third day after the scene in the club , Foma found himself about seven versts from the town , on the timber-wharf of the merchant Zvantzev , in the company of the merchant 's son of Ookhtishchev -- a sedate , bald-headed and red-nosed gentleman with side whiskers -- and four ladies . 
The young Zvantzev wore eyeglasses , was thin and pale , and when he stood , the calves of his legs were forever trembling as though they were disgusted at supporting the feeble body , clad in a long , checked top-coat with a cape , in whose folds a small head in a jockey cap was comically shaking . 
The gentleman with the side whiskers called him Jean and pronounced this name as though he was suffering from an inveterate cold . 
Jean 's lady was a tall , stout woman with a showy bust . 
Her head was compressed on the sides , her low forehead receded , her long , sharp-pointed nose gave her face an expression somewhat bird-like . 
And this ugly face was perfectly motionless , and the eyes alone , small , round and cold , were forever smiling a penetrating and cunning smile . 
Ookhtishchev 's lady 's name was Vera ; she was a tall , pale woman with red hair . 
She had so much hair , that it seemed as though the woman had put on her head an enormous cap which was coming down over her ears , her cheeks and her high forehead , from under which her large blue eyes looked forth calmly and lazily . 
The gentleman with the side whiskers sat beside a young , plump , buxom girl , who constantly giggled in a ringing voice at something which he whispered in her ear as he leaned over her shoulder . 
And Foma 's lady was a stately brunette , clad all in black . 
Dark-complexioned , with wavy locks , she kept her head so erect and high and looked at everything about her with such condescending haughtiness , that it was at once evident that she considered herself the most important person there . 
The company were seated on the extreme link of the raft , extending far into the smooth expanse of the river . 
Boards were spread out on the raft and in the centre stood a crudely constructed table ; empty bottles , provision baskets , candy-wrappers and orange peels were scattered about everywhere . 
In the corner of the raft was a pile of earth , upon which a bonfire was burning , and a peasant in a short fur coat , squatting , warmed his hands over the fire , and cast furtive glances at the people seated around the table . 
They had just finished eating their sturgeon soup , and now wines and fruits were before them on the table . 
Fatigued with a two-days ' spree and with the dinner that had just been finished , the company was in a weary frame of mind . 
They all gazed at the river , chatting , but their conversation was now and again interrupted by long pauses . 
The day was clear and bright and young , as in spring . 
The cold , clear sky stretched itself majestically over the turbid water of the gigantically-wide , overflowing river , which was as calm as the sky and as vast as the sea . 
The distant , mountainous shore was tenderly bathed in bluish mist . 
Through it , there , on the mountain tops , the crosses of churches were flashing like big stars . 
The river was animated at the mountainous shore ; steamers were going hither and thither , and their noise came in deep moans toward the rafts and into the meadows , where the calm flow of the waves filled the air with soft and faint sounds . 
Gigantic barges stretched themselves one after another against the current , like huge pigs , tearing asunder the smooth expanse of the river . 
Black smoke came in ponderous puffs from the chimneys of the steamers , slowly melting in the fresh air , which was full of bright sunshine . 
At times a whistle resounded -- it was like the roar of some huge , enraged animal , embittered by toil . 
And on the meadows near the rafts , all was calm and silent . 
Solitary trees that had been drowned by the flood , were now already covered with light-green spangles of foliage . 
Covering their roots and reflecting their tops , the water gave them the appearance of globes , and it seemed as though the slightest breeze would send them floating , fantastically beautiful , down the mirror-like bosom of the river . 
The red-haired woman , pensively gazing into the distance , began to sing softly and sadly : `` Along the Volga river A little boat is flo-o-oating . '' 
The brunette , snapping her large , stern eyes with contempt , said , without looking at her : `` We feel gloomy enough without this . '' 
`` Do n't touch her . 
Let her sing ! '' 
entreated Foma , kindly , looking into his lady 's face . 
He was pale some spark seemed to flash up in his eyes now and then , and an indefinite , indolent smile played about his lips . 
`` Let us sing in chorus ! '' 
suggested the man with the side whiskers . 
`` No , let these two sing ! '' 
exclaimed Ookhtishchev with enthusiasm . 
`` Vera , sing that song ! 
You know , ' I will go at dawn . ' 
How is it ? 
Sing , Pavlinka ! '' 
The giggling girl glanced at the brunette and asked her respectfully : `` Shall I sing , Sasha ? '' 
`` I shall sing myself , '' announced Foma 's companion , and turning toward the lady with the birdlike face , she ordered : `` Vassa , sing with me ! '' 
Vassa immediately broke off her conversation with Zvantzev , stroked her throat a little with her hand and fixed her round eyes on the face of her sister . 
Sasha rose to her feet , leaned her hand against the table , and her head lifted haughtily , began to declaim in a powerful , almost masculine voice : `` Life on earth is bright to him , Who knows no cares or woe , And whose heart is not consumed By passion 's ardent glow ! '' 
Her sister nodded her head and slowly , plaintively began to moan in a deep contralto : `` Ah me ! 
Of me the maiden fair . '' 
Flashing her eyes at her sister , Sasha exclaimed in her low-pitched notes : `` Like a blade of grass my heart has withered . '' 
The two voices mingled and floated over the water in melodious , full sounds , which quivered from excess of power . 
One of them was complaining of the unbearable pain in the heart , and intoxicated by the poison of its plaint , it sobbed with melancholy and impotent grief ; sobbed , quenching with tears the fire of the suffering . 
The other -- the lower , more masculine voice -- rolled powerfully through the air , full of the feeling of bloody mortification and of readiness to avenge . 
Pronouncing the words distinctly , the voice came from her breast in a deep stream , and each word reeked with boiling blood , stirred up by outrage , poisoned by offence and mightily demanding vengeance . 
`` I will requite him , '' sang Vassa , plaintively , closing her eyes . 
`` I will inflame him , I 'll dry him up , '' Sasha promised sternly and confidently , wafting into the air strong , powerful tones , which sounded like blows . 
And suddenly , changing the tempo of the song and striking a higher pitch , she began to sing , as slowly as her sister , voluptuous and exultant threats : `` Drier than the raging wind , Drier than the mown-down grass , Oi , the mown and dried-up grass . '' 
Resting his elbows on the table , Foma bent his head , and with knitted brow , gazed into the face of the woman , into her black , half-shut eyes Staring fixedly into the distance , her eyes flashed so brightly and malignantly that , because of their light , the velvety voice , that burst from the woman 's chest , seemed to him also black and flashing , like her eyes . 
He recalled her caresses and thought : `` How does she come to be such as she is ? 
It is even fearful to be with her . '' 
Ookhtishchev , sitting close to his lady , an expression of happiness on his face , listened to the song and was radiant with satisfaction . 
The gentleman with the side whiskers and Zvantzev were drinking wine , softly whispering something as they leaned toward each other . 
The red-headed woman was thoughtfully examining the palm of Ookhtishchev 's hand , holding it in her own , and the jolly girl became sad . 
She drooped her head low and listened to the song , motionless , as though bewitched by it . 
From the fire came the peasant . 
He stepped carefully over the boards , on tiptoe ; his hands were clasped behind his back , and his broad , bearded face was now transformed into a smile of astonishment and of a naive delight . 
`` Eh ! 
but feel , my kind , brave man ! '' 
entreated Vassa , plaintively , nodding her head . 
And her sister , her chest bent forward , her hand still higher , wound up the song in powerful triumphant notes : `` The yearning and the pangs of love ! '' 
When she finished singing , she looked haughtily about her , and seating herself by Foma 's side , clasped his neck with a firm and powerful hand . 
`` Well , was it a nice song ? '' 
`` It 's capital ! '' 
said Foma with a sigh , as he smiled at her . 
The song filled his heart with thirst for tenderness and , still full of charming sounds , it quivered , but at the touch of her arm he felt awkward and ashamed before the other people . 
`` Bravo-o ! 
Bravo , Aleksandra Sarelyevna ! '' 
shouted Ookhtishchev , and the others were clapping their hands . 
But she paid no attention to them , and embracing Foma authoritatively , said : `` Well , make me a present of something for the song . '' 
`` Very well , I will , '' Foma assented . 
`` What ? '' 
`` You tell me . '' 
`` I 'll tell you when we come to town . 
And if you 'll give me what I like -- Oh , how I will love you ! '' 
`` For the present ? '' 
asked Foma , smiling suspiciously . 
`` You ought to love me anyway . '' 
She looked at him calmly and , after a moment 's thought , said resolutely : `` It 's too soon to love you anyway . 
I will not lie . 
Why should I lie to you ? 
I am telling you frankly . 
I love you for money , for presents . 
Because aside from money , men have nothing . 
They can not give anything more than money . 
Nothing of worth . 
I know it well already . 
One can love merely so . 
Yes , wait a little -- I 'll know you better and then , perhaps , I may love you free of charge . 
And meanwhile , you must n't take me amiss . 
I need much money in my mode of life . '' 
Foma listened to her , smiled and now and then quivered from the nearness of her sound , well-shaped body . 
Zvantzev 's sour , cracked and boring voice was falling on his ears . 
`` I do n't like it . 
I can not understand the beauty of this renowned Russian song . 
What is it that sounds in it ? 
Eh ? 
The howl of a wolf . 
Something hungry , wild . 
Eh ! 
it 's the groan of a sick dog -- altogether something beastly . 
There 's nothing cheerful , there 's no chic to it ; there are no live and vivifying sounds in it . 
No , you ought to hear what and how the French peasant sings . 
Ah ! 
or the Italian . '' 
`` Excuse me , Ivan Nikolayevich , '' cried Ookhtishchev , agitated . 
`` I must agree with you , the Russian song is monotonous and gloomy . 
It has not , you know , that brilliancy of culture , '' said the man with the side whiskers wearily , as he sipped some wine out of his glass . 
`` But nevertheless , there is always a warm heart in it , '' put in the red-haired lady , as she peeled an orange . 
The sun was setting . 
Sinking somewhere far beyond the forest , on the meadow shore , it painted the entire forest with purple tints and cast rosy and golden spots over the dark cold water . 
Foma gazed in that direction at this play of the sunbeams , watched how they quivered as they were transposed over the placid and vast expanse of waters , and catching fragments of conversation , he pictured to himself the words as a swarm of dark butterflies , busily fluttering in the air . 
Sasha , her head resting on his shoulder , was softly whispering into his ear something at which he blushed and was confused , for he felt that she was kindling in him the desire to embrace this woman and kiss her unceasingly . 
Aside from her , none of those assembled there interested him -- while Zvantzev and the gentleman with the side whiskers were actually repulsive to him . 
`` What are you staring at ? 
Eh ? '' 
he heard Ookhtishchev 's jestingly-stern voice . 
The peasant , at whom Ookhtishchev shouted , drew the cap from his head , clapped it against his knee and answered , with a smile : `` I came over to listen to the lady 's song . '' 
`` Well , does she sing well ? '' 
`` What a question ! 
Of course , '' said the peasant , looking at Sasha , with admiration in his eyes . 
`` That 's right ! '' 
exclaimed Ookhtishchev . 
`` There is a great power of voice in that lady 's breast , '' said the peasant , nodding his head . 
At his words , the ladies burst out laughing and the men made some double-meaning remarks about Sasha . 
After she had calmly listened to these and said nothing in reply , Sasha asked the peasant : `` Do you sing ? '' 
`` We sing a little ! '' 
and he waved his hand , `` What songs do you know ? '' 
`` All kinds . 
I love singing . '' 
And he smiled apologetically . 
`` Come , let 's sing something together , you and I. '' `` How can we ? 
Am I a match for you ? '' 
`` Well , strike up ! '' 
`` May I sit down ? '' 
`` Come over here , to the table . '' 
`` How lively this is ! '' 
exclaimed Zvantzev , wrinkling his face . 
`` If you find it tedious , go and drown yourself , '' said Sasha , angrily flashing her eyes at him . 
`` No , the water is cold , '' replied Zvantzev , shrinking at her glance . 
`` As you please ! '' 
The woman shrugged her shoulders . 
`` But it is about time you did it , and then , there 's also plenty of water now , so that you would n't spoil it all with your rotten body . '' 
`` Fie , how witty ! '' 
hissed the youth , turning away from her , and added with contempt : `` In Russia even the prostitutes are rude . '' 
He addressed himself to his neighbour , but the latter gave him only an intoxicated smile in return . 
Ookhtishchev was also drunk . 
Staring into the face of his companion , with his eyes grown dim , he muttered something and heard nothing . 
The lady with the bird-like face was pecking candy , holding the box under her very nose . 
Pavlinka went away to the edge of the raft and , standing there , threw orange peels into the water . 
`` I never before participated in such an absurd outing and -- company , '' said Zvantzev , to his neighbour , plaintively . 
And Foma watched him with a smile , delighted that this feeble and ugly-looking man felt bored , and that Sasha had insulted him . 
Now and then he cast at her a kind glance of approval . 
He was pleased with the fact that she was so frank with everybody and that she bore herself proudly , like a real gentlewoman . 
The peasant seated himself on the boards at her feet , clasped his knees in his hands , lifted his face to her and seriously listened to her words . 
`` You must raise your voice , when I lower mine , understand ? '' 
`` I understand ; but , Madam , you ought to hand me some just to give me courage ! '' 
`` Foma , give him a glass of brandy ! '' 
And when the peasant emptied it , cleared his throat with pleasure , licked his lips and said : `` Now , I can do it , '' she ordered , knitting her brow : `` Begin ! '' 
The peasant made a wry mouth , lifted his eyes to her face , and started in a high-pitched tenor : `` I can not drink , I can not eat . '' 
Trembling in every limb , the woman sobbed out tremulously , with strange sadness : `` Wine can not gladden my soul . '' 
The peasant smiled sweetly , tossed his head to and fro , and closing his eyes , poured out into the air a tremulous wave of high-pitched notes : `` Oh , time has come for me to bid goodbye ! '' 
And the woman , shuddering and writhing , moaned and wailed : `` Oi , from my kindred I must part . '' 
Lowering his voice and swaying to and fro , the peasant declaimed in a sing-song with a remarkably intense expression of anguish : `` Alas , to foreign lands I must depart . '' 
When the two voices , yearning and sobbing , poured forth into the silence and freshness of the evening , everything about them seemed warmer and better ; everything seemed to smile the sorrowful smile of sympathy on the anguish of the man whom an obscure power is tearing away from his native soil into some foreign place , where hard labour and degradation are in store for him . 
It seemed as though not the sounds , nor the song , but the burning tears of the human heart in which the plaint had surged up -- it seemed as though these tears moistened the air . 
Wild grief and pain from the sores of body and soul , which were wearied in the struggle with stern life ; intense sufferings from the wounds dealt to man by the iron hand of want -- all this was invested in the simple , crude words and was tossed in ineffably melancholy sounds toward the distant , empty sky , which has no echo for anybody or anything . 
Foma had stepped aside from the singers , and stared at them with a feeling akin to fright , and the song , in a huge wave , poured forth into his breast , and the wild power of grief , with which it had been invested , clutched his heart painfully . 
He felt that tears would soon gush from his breast , something was clogging his throat and his face was quivering . 
He dimly saw Sasha 's black eyes ; immobile and flashing gloomily , they seemed to him enormous and still growing larger and larger . 
And it seemed to him that it was not two persons who were singing -- that everything about him was singing and sobbing , quivering and palpitating in torrents of sorrow , madly striving somewhere , shedding burning tears , and all -- and all things living seemed clasped in one powerful embrace of despair . 
And it seemed to him that he , too , was singing in unison with all of them -- with the people , the river and the distant shore , whence came plaintive moans that mingled with the song . 
Now the peasant went down on his knees , and gazing at Sasha , waved his hands , and she bent down toward him and shook her head , keeping time to the motions of his hands . 
Both were now singing without words , with sounds only , and Foma still could not believe that only two voices were pouring into the air these moans and sobs with such mighty power . 
When they had finished singing , Foma , trembling with excitement , with a tear-stained face , gazed at them and smiled sadly . 
`` Well , did it move you ? '' 
asked Sasha . 
Pale with fatigue , she breathed quickly and heavily . 
Foma glanced at the peasant . 
The latter was wiping the sweat off his brow and looking around him with such a wandering look as though he could not make out what had taken place . 
All was silence . 
All were motionless and speechless . 
`` Oh Lord ! '' 
sighed Foma , rising to his feet . 
`` Eh , Sasha ! 
Peasant ! 
Who are you ? '' 
he almost shouted . 
