Good Madame , recommend us to the prayers of your sainted relative , Monsieur the Cardinal . 
As for your dear Sylvanie , she has done well in not wasting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me . 
She is well , works as you would wish , and loves me . 
That is all that I desire . 
The souvenir which she sent through you reached me safely , and it makes me very happy . 
My health is not so very bad , and yet I grow thinner every day . 
Farewell ; my paper is at an end , and this forces me to leave you . 
A thousand good wishes . 
BAPTISTINE . 
P.S. Your grand nephew is charming . 
Do you know that he will soon be five years old ? 
Yesterday he saw some one riding by on horseback who had on knee-caps , and he said , `` What has he got on his knees ? '' 
He is a charming child ! 
His little brother is dragging an old broom about the room , like a carriage , and saying , `` Hu ! '' 
As will be perceived from this letter , these two women understood how to mould themselves to the Bishop 's ways with that special feminine genius which comprehends the man better than he comprehends himself . 
The Bishop of D -- , in spite of the gentle and candid air which never deserted him , sometimes did things that were grand , bold , and magnificent , without seeming to have even a suspicion of the fact . 
They trembled , but they let him alone . 
Sometimes Madame Magloire essayed a remonstrance in advance , but never at the time , nor afterwards . 
They never interfered with him by so much as a word or sign , in any action once entered upon . 
At certain moments , without his having occasion to mention it , when he was not even conscious of it himself in all probability , so perfect was his simplicity , they vaguely felt that he was acting as a bishop ; then they were nothing more than two shadows in the house . 
They served him passively ; and if obedience consisted in disappearing , they disappeared . 
They understood , with an admirable delicacy of instinct , that certain cares may be put under constraint . 
Thus , even when believing him to be in peril , they understood , I will not say his thought , but his nature , to such a degree that they no longer watched over him . 
They confided him to God . 
Moreover , Baptistine said , as we have just read , that her brother 's end would prove her own . 
Madame Magloire did not say this , but she knew it . 
At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the preceding pages , he did a thing which , if the whole town was to be believed , was even more hazardous than his trip across the mountains infested with bandits . 
In the country near D -- a man lived quite alone . 
This man , we will state at once , was a former member of the Convention . 
His name was G -- Member of the Convention , G -- was mentioned with a sort of horror in the little world of D -- A member of the Convention -- can you imagine such a thing ? 
That existed from the time when people called each other thou , and when they said `` citizen . '' 
This man was almost a monster . 
He had not voted for the death of the king , but almost . 
He was a quasi-regicide . 
He had been a terrible man . 
How did it happen that such a man had not been brought before a provost 's court , on the return of the legitimate princes ? 
They need not have cut off his head , if you please ; clemency must be exercised , agreed ; but a good banishment for life . 
An example , in short , etc. . 
Besides , he was an atheist , like all the rest of those people . 
Gossip of the geese about the vulture . 
Was G -- a vulture after all ? 
Yes ; if he were to be judged by the element of ferocity in this solitude of his . 
As he had not voted for the death of the king , he had not been included in the decrees of exile , and had been able to remain in France . 
He dwelt at a distance of three-quarters of an hour from the city , far from any hamlet , far from any road , in some hidden turn of a very wild valley , no one knew exactly where . 
He had there , it was said , a sort of field , a hole , a lair . 
There were no neighbors , not even passers-by . 
Since he had dwelt in that valley , the path which led thither had disappeared under a growth of grass . 
The locality was spoken of as though it had been the dwelling of a hangman . 
Nevertheless , the Bishop meditated on the subject , and from time to time he gazed at the horizon at a point where a clump of trees marked the valley of the former member of the Convention , and he said , `` There is a soul yonder which is lonely . '' 
And he added , deep in his own mind , `` I owe him a visit . '' 
But , let us avow it , this idea , which seemed natural at the first blush , appeared to him after a moment 's reflection , as strange , impossible , and almost repulsive . 
For , at bottom , he shared the general impression , and the old member of the Convention inspired him , without his being clearly conscious of the fact himself , with that sentiment which borders on hate , and which is so well expressed by the word estrangement . 
Still , should the scab of the sheep cause the shepherd to recoil ? 
No . 
But what a sheep ! 
The good Bishop was perplexed . 
Sometimes he set out in that direction ; then he returned . 
Finally , the rumor one day spread through the town that a sort of young shepherd , who served the member of the Convention in his hovel , had come in quest of a doctor ; that the old wretch was dying , that paralysis was gaining on him , and that he would not live over night . 
-- `` Thank God ! '' 
some added . 
The Bishop took his staff , put on his cloak , on account of his too threadbare cassock , as we have mentioned , and because of the evening breeze which was sure to rise soon , and set out . 
The sun was setting , and had almost touched the horizon when the Bishop arrived at the excommunicated spot . 
With a certain beating of the heart , he recognized the fact that he was near the lair . 
He strode over a ditch , leaped a hedge , made his way through a fence of dead boughs , entered a neglected paddock , took a few steps with a good deal of boldness , and suddenly , at the extremity of the waste land , and behind lofty brambles , he caught sight of the cavern . 
It was a very low hut , poor , small , and clean , with a vine nailed against the outside . 
Near the door , in an old wheel-chair , the arm-chair of the peasants , there was a white-haired man , smiling at the sun . 
Near the seated man stood a young boy , the shepherd lad . 
He was offering the old man a jar of milk . 
While the Bishop was watching him , the old man spoke : `` Thank you , '' he said , `` I need nothing . '' 
And his smile quitted the sun to rest upon the child . 
The Bishop stepped forward . 
At the sound which he made in walking , the old man turned his head , and his face expressed the sum total of the surprise which a man can still feel after a long life . 
`` This is the first time since I have been here , '' said he , `` that any one has entered here . 
Who are you , sir ? '' 
The Bishop answered : -- `` My name is Bienvenu Myriel . '' 
`` Bienvenu Myriel ? 
I have heard that name . 
Are you the man whom the people call Monseigneur Welcome ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
The old man resumed with a half-smile `` In that case , you are my bishop ? '' 
`` Something of that sort . '' 
`` Enter , sir . '' 
The member of the Convention extended his hand to the Bishop , but the Bishop did not take it . 
The Bishop confined himself to the remark : -- `` I am pleased to see that I have been misinformed . 
You certainly do not seem to me to be ill . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the old man , `` I am going to recover . '' 
He paused , and then said : -- `` I shall die three hours hence . '' 
Then he continued : -- `` I am something of a doctor ; I know in what fashion the last hour draws on . 
Yesterday , only my feet were cold ; to-day , the chill has ascended to my knees ; now I feel it mounting to my waist ; when it reaches the heart , I shall stop . 
The sun is beautiful , is it not ? 
I had myself wheeled out here to take a last look at things . 
You can talk to me ; it does not fatigue me . 
You have done well to come and look at a man who is on the point of death . 
It is well that there should be witnesses at that moment . 
One has one 's caprices ; I should have liked to last until the dawn , but I know that I shall hardly live three hours . 
It will be night then . 
What does it matter , after all ? 
Dying is a simple affair . 
One has no need of the light for that . 
So be it . 
I shall die by starlight . '' 
The old man turned to the shepherd lad : -- `` Go to thy bed ; thou wert awake all last night ; thou art tired . '' 
The child entered the hut . 
The old man followed him with his eyes , and added , as though speaking to himself : -- `` I shall die while he sleeps . 
The two slumbers may be good neighbors . '' 
The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been . 
He did not think he discerned God in this manner of dying ; let us say the whole , for these petty contradictions of great hearts must be indicated like the rest : he , who on occasion , was so fond of laughing at `` His Grace , '' was rather shocked at not being addressed as Monseigneur , and he was almost tempted to retort `` citizen . '' 
He was assailed by a fancy for peevish familiarity , common enough to doctors and priests , but which was not habitual with him . 
This man , after all , this member of the Convention , this representative of the people , had been one of the powerful ones of the earth ; for the first time in his life , probably , the Bishop felt in a mood to be severe . 
Meanwhile , the member of the Convention had been surveying him with a modest cordiality , in which one could have distinguished , possibly , that humility which is so fitting when one is on the verge of returning to dust . 
The Bishop , on his side , although he generally restrained his curiosity , which , in his opinion , bordered on a fault , could not refrain from examining the member of the Convention with an attention which , as it did not have its course in sympathy , would have served his conscience as a matter of reproach , in connection with any other man . 
A member of the Convention produced on him somewhat the effect of being outside the pale of the law , even of the law of charity . 
G -- , calm , his body almost upright , his voice vibrating , was one of those octogenarians who form the subject of astonishment to the physiologist . 
The Revolution had many of these men , proportioned to the epoch . 
In this old man one was conscious of a man put to the proof . 
Though so near to his end , he preserved all the gestures of health . 
In his clear glance , in his firm tone , in the robust movement of his shoulders , there was something calculated to disconcert death . 
Azrael , the Mohammedan angel of the sepulchre , would have turned back , and thought that he had mistaken the door . 
G -- seemed to be dying because he willed it so . 
There was freedom in his agony . 
His legs alone were motionless . 
It was there that the shadows held him fast . 
His feet were cold and dead , but his head survived with all the power of life , and seemed full of light . 
G -- , at this solemn moment , resembled the king in that tale of the Orient who was flesh above and marble below . 
There was a stone there . 
The Bishop sat down . 
The exordium was abrupt . 
`` I congratulate you , '' said he , in the tone which one uses for a reprimand . 
`` You did not vote for the death of the king , after all . '' 
The old member of the Convention did not appear to notice the bitter meaning underlying the words `` after all . '' 
He replied . 
The smile had quite disappeared from his face . 
`` Do not congratulate me too much , sir . 
I did vote for the death of the tyrant . '' 
It was the tone of austerity answering the tone of severity . 
`` What do you mean to say ? '' 
resumed the Bishop . 
`` I mean to say that man has a tyrant , -- ignorance . 
I voted for the death of that tyrant . 
That tyrant engendered royalty , which is authority falsely understood , while science is authority rightly understood . 
Man should be governed only by science . '' 
`` And conscience , '' added the Bishop . 
`` It is the same thing . 
Conscience is the quantity of innate science which we have within us . '' 
Monseigneur Bienvenu listened in some astonishment to this language , which was very new to him . 
The member of the Convention resumed : -- `` So far as Louis XVI . 
was concerned , I said ` no . ' 
I did not think that I had the right to kill a man ; but I felt it my duty to exterminate evil . 
I voted the end of the tyrant , that is to say , the end of prostitution for woman , the end of slavery for man , the end of night for the child . 
In voting for the Republic , I voted for that . 
I voted for fraternity , concord , the dawn . 
I have aided in the overthrow of prejudices and errors . 
The crumbling away of prejudices and errors causes light . 
We have caused the fall of the old world , and the old world , that vase of miseries , has become , through its upsetting upon the human race , an urn of joy . '' 
`` Mixed joy , '' said the Bishop . 
`` You may say troubled joy , and to-day , after that fatal return of the past , which is called 1814 , joy which has disappeared ! 
Alas ! 
The work was incomplete , I admit : we demolished the ancient regime in deeds ; we were not able to suppress it entirely in ideas . 
To destroy abuses is not sufficient ; customs must be modified . 
The mill is there no longer ; the wind is still there . '' 
`` You have demolished . 
It may be of use to demolish , but I distrust a demolition complicated with wrath . '' 
`` Right has its wrath , Bishop ; and the wrath of right is an element of progress . 
In any case , and in spite of whatever may be said , the French Revolution is the most important step of the human race since the advent of Christ . 
Incomplete , it may be , but sublime . 
It set free all the unknown social quantities ; it softened spirits , it calmed , appeased , enlightened ; it caused the waves of civilization to flow over the earth . 
It was a good thing . 
The French Revolution is the consecration of humanity . '' 
The Bishop could not refrain from murmuring : -- `` Yes ? ' 
93 ! '' 
The member of the Convention straightened himself up in his chair with an almost lugubrious solemnity , and exclaimed , so far as a dying man is capable of exclamation : -- `` Ah , there you go ; ' 93 ! 
I was expecting that word . 
A cloud had been forming for the space of fifteen hundred years ; at the end of fifteen hundred years it burst . 
You are putting the thunderbolt on its trial . '' 
The Bishop felt , without , perhaps , confessing it , that something within him had suffered extinction . 
Nevertheless , he put a good face on the matter . 
He replied : -- `` The judge speaks in the name of justice ; the priest speaks in the name of pity , which is nothing but a more lofty justice . 
A thunderbolt should commit no error . '' 
And he added , regarding the member of the Convention steadily the while , `` Louis XVII . ? '' 
The conventionary stretched forth his hand and grasped the Bishop 's arm . 
`` Louis XVII . ! 
let us see . 
For whom do you mourn ? 
is it for the innocent child ? 
very good ; in that case I mourn with you . 
Is it for the royal child ? 
I demand time for reflection . 
To me , the brother of Cartouche , an innocent child who was hung up by the armpits in the Place de Greve , until death ensued , for the sole crime of having been the brother of Cartouche , is no less painful than the grandson of Louis XV. , an innocent child , martyred in the tower of the Temple , for the sole crime of having been grandson of Louis XV . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said the Bishop , `` I like not this conjunction of names . '' 
`` Cartouche ? 
Louis XV . ? 
To which of the two do you object ? '' 
A momentary silence ensued . 
The Bishop almost regretted having come , and yet he felt vaguely and strangely shaken . 
The conventionary resumed : -- `` Ah , Monsieur Priest , you love not the crudities of the true . 
Christ loved them . 
He seized a rod and cleared out the Temple . 
His scourge , full of lightnings , was a harsh speaker of truths . 
When he cried , ` Sinite parvulos , ' he made no distinction between the little children . 
It would not have embarrassed him to bring together the Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod . 
Innocence , Monsieur , is its own crown . 
Innocence has no need to be a highness . 
It is as august in rags as in fleurs de lys . '' 
`` That is true , '' said the Bishop in a low voice . 
`` I persist , '' continued the conventionary G -- `` You have mentioned Louis XVII . 
to me . 
Let us come to an understanding . 
Shall we weep for all the innocent , all martyrs , all children , the lowly as well as the exalted ? 
I agree to that . 
But in that case , as I have told you , we must go back further than ' 93 , and our tears must begin before Louis XVII . 
I will weep with you over the children of kings , provided that you will weep with me over the children of the people . '' 
`` I weep for all , '' said the Bishop . 
`` Equally ! '' 
exclaimed conventionary G -- ; `` and if the balance must incline , let it be on the side of the people . 
They have been suffering longer . '' 
Another silence ensued . 
The conventionary was the first to break it . 
He raised himself on one elbow , took a bit of his cheek between his thumb and his forefinger , as one does mechanically when one interrogates and judges , and appealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forces of the death agony . 
It was almost an explosion . 
`` Yes , sir , the people have been suffering a long while . 
And hold ! 
that is not all , either ; why have you just questioned me and talked to me about Louis XVII . ? 
I know you not . 
Ever since I have been in these parts I have dwelt in this enclosure alone , never setting foot outside , and seeing no one but that child who helps me . 
Your name has reached me in a confused manner , it is true , and very badly pronounced , I must admit ; but that signifies nothing : clever men have so many ways of imposing on that honest goodman , the people . 
By the way , I did not hear the sound of your carriage ; you have left it yonder , behind the coppice at the fork of the roads , no doubt . 
I do not know you , I tell you . 
You have told me that you are the Bishop ; but that affords me no information as to your moral personality . 
In short , I repeat my question . 
Who are you ? 
You are a bishop ; that is to say , a prince of the church , one of those gilded men with heraldic bearings and revenues , who have vast prebends , -- the bishopric of D -- fifteen thousand francs settled income , ten thousand in perquisites ; total , twenty-five thousand francs , -- who have kitchens , who have liveries , who make good cheer , who eat moor-hens on Friday , who strut about , a lackey before , a lackey behind , in a gala coach , and who have palaces , and who roll in their carriages in the name of Jesus Christ who went barefoot ! 
You are a prelate , -- revenues , palace , horses , servants , good table , all the sensualities of life ; you have this like the rest , and like the rest , you enjoy it ; it is well ; but this says either too much or too little ; this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and essential value of the man who comes with the probable intention of bringing wisdom to me . 
To whom do I speak ? 
Who are you ? '' 
The Bishop hung his head and replied , `` Vermis sum -- I am a worm . '' 
`` A worm of the earth in a carriage ? '' 
growled the conventionary . 
It was the conventionary 's turn to be arrogant , and the Bishop 's to be humble . 
The Bishop resumed mildly : -- `` So be it , sir . 
But explain to me how my carriage , which is a few paces off behind the trees yonder , how my good table and the moor-hens which I eat on Friday , how my twenty-five thousand francs income , how my palace and my lackeys prove that clemency is not a duty , and that '93 was not inexorable . '' 
The conventionary passed his hand across his brow , as though to sweep away a cloud . 
`` Before replying to you , '' he said , `` I beseech you to pardon me . 
I have just committed a wrong , sir . 
You are at my house , you are my guest , I owe you courtesy . 
You discuss my ideas , and it becomes me to confine myself to combating your arguments . 
Your riches and your pleasures are advantages which I hold over you in the debate ; but good taste dictates that I shall not make use of them . 
I promise you to make no use of them in the future . '' 
`` I thank you , '' said the Bishop . 
G -- resumed . 
`` Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me . 
Where were we ? 
What were you saying to me ? 
That '93 was inexorable ? '' 
`` Inexorable ; yes , '' said the Bishop . 
`` What think you of Marat clapping his hands at the guillotine ? '' 
`` What think you of Bossuet chanting the Te Deum over the dragonnades ? '' 
The retort was a harsh one , but it attained its mark with the directness of a point of steel . 
The Bishop quivered under it ; no reply occurred to him ; but he was offended by this mode of alluding to Bossuet . 
The best of minds will have their fetiches , and they sometimes feel vaguely wounded by the want of respect of logic . 
The conventionary began to pant ; the asthma of the agony which is mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice ; still , there was a perfect lucidity of soul in his eyes . 
He went on : -- `` Let me say a few words more in this and that direction ; I am willing . 
Apart from the Revolution , which , taken as a whole , is an immense human affirmation , '93 is , alas ! 
a rejoinder . 
You think it inexorable , sir ; but what of the whole monarchy , sir ? 
Carrier is a bandit ; but what name do you give to Montrevel ? 
Fouquier-Tainville is a rascal ; but what is your opinion as to Lamoignon-Baville ? 
Maillard is terrible ; but Saulx-Tavannes , if you please ? 
Duchene senior is ferocious ; but what epithet will you allow me for the elder Letellier ? 
Jourdan-Coupe-Tete is a monster ; but not so great a one as M. the Marquis de Louvois . 
Sir , sir , I am sorry for Marie Antoinette , archduchess and queen ; but I am also sorry for that poor Huguenot woman , who , in 1685 , under Louis the Great , sir , while with a nursing infant , was bound , naked to the waist , to a stake , and the child kept at a distance ; her breast swelled with milk and her heart with anguish ; the little one , hungry and pale , beheld that breast and cried and agonized ; the executioner said to the woman , a mother and a nurse , ` Abjure ! ' 
giving her her choice between the death of her infant and the death of her conscience . 
What say you to that torture of Tantalus as applied to a mother ? 
Bear this well in mind sir : the French Revolution had its reasons for existence ; its wrath will be absolved by the future ; its result is the world made better . 
From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the human race . 
I abridge , I stop , I have too much the advantage ; moreover , I am dying . '' 
And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop , the conventionary concluded his thoughts in these tranquil words : -- `` Yes , the brutalities of progress are called revolutions . 
When they are over , this fact is recognized , -- that the human race has been treated harshly , but that it has progressed . '' 
The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered all the inmost intrenchments of the Bishop . 
One remained , however , and from this intrenchment , the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu 's resistance , came forth this reply , wherein appeared nearly all the harshness of the beginning : -- `` Progress should believe in God . 
Good can not have an impious servitor . 
He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race . '' 
The former representative of the people made no reply . 
He was seized with a fit of trembling . 
He looked towards heaven , and in his glance a tear gathered slowly . 
When the eyelid was full , the tear trickled down his livid cheek , and he said , almost in a stammer , quite low , and to himself , while his eyes were plunged in the depths : -- `` O thou ! 
O ideal ! 
Thou alone existest ! '' 
The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock . 
After a pause , the old man raised a finger heavenward and said : -- `` The infinite is . 
He is there . 
If the infinite had no person , person would be without limit ; it would not be infinite ; in other words , it would not exist . 
There is , then , an I . 
That I of the infinite is God . '' 
The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice , and with the shiver of ecstasy , as though he beheld some one . 
When he had spoken , his eyes closed . 
The effort had exhausted him . 
It was evident that he had just lived through in a moment the few hours which had been left to him . 
That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is in death . 
The supreme moment was approaching . 
The Bishop understood this ; time pressed ; it was as a priest that he had come : from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extreme emotion ; he gazed at those closed eyes , he took that wrinkled , aged and ice-cold hand in his , and bent over the dying man . 
`` This hour is the hour of God . 
Do you not think that it would be regrettable if we had met in vain ? '' 
The conventionary opened his eyes again . 
A gravity mingled with gloom was imprinted on his countenance . 
`` Bishop , '' said he , with a slowness which probably arose more from his dignity of soul than from the failing of his strength , `` I have passed my life in meditation , study , and contemplation . 
I was sixty years of age when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself with its affairs . 
I obeyed . 
Abuses existed , I combated them ; tyrannies existed , I destroyed them ; rights and principles existed , I proclaimed and confessed them . 
Our territory was invaded , I defended it ; France was menaced , I offered my breast . 
I was not rich ; I am poor . 
I have been one of the masters of the state ; the vaults of the treasury were encumbered with specie to such a degree that we were forced to shore up the walls , which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of gold and silver ; I dined in Dead Tree Street , at twenty-two sous . 
I have succored the oppressed , I have comforted the suffering . 
I tore the cloth from the altar , it is true ; but it was to bind up the wounds of my country . 
I have always upheld the march forward of the human race , forward towards the light , and I have sometimes resisted progress without pity . 
I have , when the occasion offered , protected my own adversaries , men of your profession . 
And there is at Peteghem , in Flanders , at the very spot where the Merovingian kings had their summer palace , a convent of Urbanists , the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu , which I saved in 1793 . 
I have done my duty according to my powers , and all the good that I was able . 
After which , I was hunted down , pursued , persecuted , blackened , jeered at , scorned , cursed , proscribed . 
For many years past , I with my white hair have been conscious that many people think they have the right to despise me ; to the poor ignorant masses I present the visage of one damned . 
And I accept this isolation of hatred , without hating any one myself . 
Now I am eighty-six years old ; I am on the point of death . 
What is it that you have come to ask of me ? '' 
`` Your blessing , '' said the Bishop . 
And he knelt down . 
When the Bishop raised his head again , the face of the conventionary had become august . 
He had just expired . 
The Bishop returned home , deeply absorbed in thoughts which can not be known to us . 
He passed the whole night in prayer . 
On the following morning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him about member of the Convention G -- ; he contented himself with pointing heavenward . 
From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feeling towards all children and sufferers . 
Any allusion to `` that old wretch of a G -- '' caused him to fall into a singular preoccupation . 
No one could say that the passage of that soul before his , and the reflection of that grand conscience upon his , did not count for something in his approach to perfection . 
This `` pastoral visit '' naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur of comment in all the little local coteries . 
`` Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for a bishop ? 
There was evidently no conversion to be expected . 
All those revolutionists are backsliders . 
Then why go there ? 
What was there to be seen there ? 
He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carried off by the devil . '' 
One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks herself spiritual , addressed this sally to him , `` Monseigneur , people are inquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red cap ! '' 
-- `` Oh ! 
oh ! 
that 's a coarse color , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` It is lucky that those who despise it in a cap revere it in a hat . '' 
We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves , were we to conclude from this that Monseigneur Welcome was `` a philosophical bishop , '' or a `` patriotic cure . '' 
His meeting , which may almost be designated as his union , with conventionary G -- , left behind it in his mind a sort of astonishment , which rendered him still more gentle . 
That is all . 
Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician , this is , perhaps , the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was in the events of that epoch , supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu ever dreamed of having an attitude . 
Let us , then , go back a few years . 
Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate , the Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire , in company with many other bishops . 
The arrest of the Pope took place , as every one knows , on the night of the 5th to the 6th of July , 1809 ; on this occasion , M. Myriel was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France and Italy convened at Paris . 
This synod was held at Notre-Dame , and assembled for the first time on the 15th of June , 1811 , under the presidency of Cardinal Fesch . 
M. Myriel was one of the ninety-five bishops who attended it . 
But he was present only at one sitting and at three or four private conferences . 
Bishop of a mountain diocese , living so very close to nature , in rusticity and deprivation , it appeared that he imported among these eminent personages , ideas which altered the temperature of the assembly . 
He very soon returned to D -- He was interrogated as to this speedy return , and he replied : `` I embarrassed them . 
The outside air penetrated to them through me . 
I produced on them the effect of an open door . '' 
On another occasion he said , `` What would you have ? 
Those gentlemen are princes . 
I am only a poor peasant bishop . '' 
The fact is that he displeased them . 
Among other strange things , it is said that he chanced to remark one evening , when he found himself at the house of one of his most notable colleagues : `` What beautiful clocks ! 
What beautiful carpets ! 
What beautiful liveries ! 
They must be a great trouble . 
I would not have all those superfluities , crying incessantly in my ears : ` There are people who are hungry ! 
There are people who are cold ! 
There are poor people ! 
There are poor people ! ' '' 
Let us remark , by the way , that the hatred of luxury is not an intelligent hatred . 
This hatred would involve the hatred of the arts . 
Nevertheless , in churchmen , luxury is wrong , except in connection with representations and ceremonies . 
It seems to reveal habits which have very little that is charitable about them . 
An opulent priest is a contradiction . 
The priest must keep close to the poor . 
Now , can one come in contact incessantly night and day with all this distress , all these misfortunes , and this poverty , without having about one 's own person a little of that misery , like the dust of labor ? 
Is it possible to imagine a man near a brazier who is not warm ? 
Can one imagine a workman who is working near a furnace , and who has neither a singed hair , nor blackened nails , nor a drop of sweat , nor a speck of ashes on his face ? 
The first proof of charity in the priest , in the bishop especially , is poverty . 
This is , no doubt , what the Bishop of D -- thought . 
It must not be supposed , however , that he shared what we call the `` ideas of the century '' on certain delicate points . 
He took very little part in the theological quarrels of the moment , and maintained silence on questions in which Church and State were implicated ; but if he had been strongly pressed , it seems that he would have been found to be an ultramontane rather than a gallican . 
Since we are making a portrait , and since we do not wish to conceal anything , we are forced to add that he was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline . 
Beginning with 1813 , he gave in his adherence to or applauded all hostile manifestations . 
He refused to see him , as he passed through on his return from the island of Elba , and he abstained from ordering public prayers for the Emperor in his diocese during the Hundred Days . 
Besides his sister , Mademoiselle Baptistine , he had two brothers , one a general , the other a prefect . 
He wrote to both with tolerable frequency . 
He was harsh for a time towards the former , because , holding a command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes , the general had put himself at the head of twelve hundred men and had pursued the Emperor as though the latter had been a person whom one is desirous of allowing to escape . 
His correspondence with the other brother , the ex-prefect , a fine , worthy man who lived in retirement at Paris , Rue Cassette , remained more affectionate . 
Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit , his hour of bitterness , his cloud . 
The shadow of the passions of the moment traversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things . 
Certainly , such a man would have done well not to entertain any political opinions . 
Let there be no mistake as to our meaning : we are not confounding what is called `` political opinions '' with the grand aspiration for progress , with the sublime faith , patriotic , democratic , humane , which in our day should be the very foundation of every generous intellect . 
Without going deeply into questions which are only indirectly connected with the subject of this book , we will simply say this : It would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a Royalist , and if his glance had never been , for a single instant , turned away from that serene contemplation in which is distinctly discernible , above the fictions and the hatreds of this world , above the stormy vicissitudes of human things , the beaming of those three pure radiances , truth , justice , and charity . 
While admitting that it was not for a political office that God created Monseigneur Welcome , we should have understood and admired his protest in the name of right and liberty , his proud opposition , his just but perilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon . 
But that which pleases us in people who are rising pleases us less in the case of people who are falling . 
We only love the fray so long as there is danger , and in any case , the combatants of the first hour have alone the right to be the exterminators of the last . 
He who has not been a stubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face of ruin . 
The denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner of the fall . 
