Rodolphe leant forward and removed them as they rode along . 
At other times , to turn aside the branches , he passed close to her , and Emma felt his knee brushing against her leg . 
The sky was now blue , the leaves no longer stirred . 
There were spaces full of heather in flower , and plots of violets alternated with the confused patches of the trees that were grey , fawn , or golden coloured , according to the nature of their leaves . 
Often in the thicket was heard the fluttering of wings , or else the hoarse , soft cry of the ravens flying off amidst the oaks . 
They dismounted . 
Rodolphe fastened up the horses . 
She walked on in front on the moss between the paths . 
But her long habit got in her way , although she held it up by the skirt ; and Rodolphe , walking behind her , saw between the black cloth and the black shoe the fineness of her white stocking , that seemed to him as if it were a part of her nakedness . 
She stopped . 
`` I am tired , '' she said . 
`` Come , try again , '' he went on . 
`` Courage ! '' 
Then some hundred paces farther on she again stopped , and through her veil , that fell sideways from her man 's hat over her hips , her face appeared in a bluish transparency as if she were floating under azure waves . 
`` But where are we going ? '' 
He did not answer . 
She was breathing irregularly . 
Rodolphe looked round him biting his moustache . 
They came to a larger space where the coppice had been cut . 
They sat down on the trunk of a fallen tree , and Rodolphe began speaking to her of his love . 
He did not begin by frightening her with compliments . 
He was calm , serious , melancholy . 
Emma listened to him with bowed head , and stirred the bits of wood on the ground with the tip of her foot . 
But at the words , `` Are not our destinies now one ? '' 
`` Oh , no ! '' 
she replied . 
`` You know that well . 
It is impossible ! '' 
She rose to go . 
He seized her by the wrist . 
She stopped . 
Then , having gazed at him for a few moments with an amorous and humid look , she said hurriedly -- `` Ah ! 
do not speak of it again ! 
Where are the horses ? 
Let us go back . '' 
He made a gesture of anger and annoyance . 
She repeated : `` Where are the horses ? 
Where are the horses ? '' 
Then smiling a strange smile , his pupil fixed , his teeth set , he advanced with outstretched arms . 
She recoiled trembling . 
She stammered : `` Oh , you frighten me ! 
You hurt me ! 
Let me go ! '' 
`` If it must be , '' he went on , his face changing ; and he again became respectful , caressing , timid . 
She gave him her arm . 
They went back . 
He said -- `` What was the matter with you ? 
Why ? 
I do not understand . 
You were mistaken , no doubt . 
In my soul you are as a Madonna on a pedestal , in a place lofty , secure , immaculate . 
But I need you to live ! 
I must have your eyes , your voice , your thought ! 
Be my friend , my sister , my angel ! '' 
And he put out his arm round her waist . 
She feebly tried to disengage herself . 
He supported her thus as they walked along . 
But they heard the two horses browsing on the leaves . 
`` Oh ! 
one moment ! '' 
said Rodolphe . 
`` Do not let us go ! 
Stay ! '' 
He drew her farther on to a small pool where duckweeds made a greenness on the water . 
Faded water lilies lay motionless between the reeds . 
At the noise of their steps in the grass , frogs jumped away to hide themselves . 
`` I am wrong ! 
I am wrong ! '' 
she said . 
`` I am mad to listen to you ! '' 
`` Why ? 
Emma ! 
Emma ! '' 
`` Oh , Rodolphe ! '' 
said the young woman slowly , leaning on his shoulder . 
The cloth of her habit caught against the velvet of his coat . 
She threw back her white neck , swelling with a sigh , and faltering , in tears , with a long shudder and hiding her face , she gave herself up to him -- The shades of night were falling ; the horizontal sun passing between the branches dazzled the eyes . 
Here and there around her , in the leaves or on the ground , trembled luminous patches , as it hummingbirds flying about had scattered their feathers . 
Silence was everywhere ; something sweet seemed to come forth from the trees ; she felt her heart , whose beating had begun again , and the blood coursing through her flesh like a stream of milk . 
Then far away , beyond the wood , on the other hills , she heard a vague prolonged cry , a voice which lingered , and in silence she heard it mingling like music with the last pulsations of her throbbing nerves . 
Rodolphe , a cigar between his lips , was mending with his penknife one of the two broken bridles . 
They returned to Yonville by the same road . 
On the mud they saw again the traces of their horses side by side , the same thickets , the same stones to the grass ; nothing around them seemed changed ; and yet for her something had happened more stupendous than if the mountains had moved in their places . 
Rodolphe now and again bent forward and took her hand to kiss it . 
She was charming on horseback -- upright , with her slender waist , her knee bent on the mane of her horse , her face somewhat flushed by the fresh air in the red of the evening . 
On entering Yonville she made her horse prance in the road . 
People looked at her from the windows . 
At dinner her husband thought she looked well , but she pretended not to hear him when he inquired about her ride , and she remained sitting there with her elbow at the side of her plate between the two lighted candles . 
`` Emma ! '' 
he said . 
`` What ? '' 
`` Well , I spent the afternoon at Monsieur Alexandre 's . 
He has an old cob , still very fine , only a little broken-kneed , and that could be bought ; I am sure , for a hundred crowns . '' 
He added , `` And thinking it might please you , I have bespoken it -- bought it . 
Have I done right ? 
Do tell me ? '' 
She nodded her head in assent ; then a quarter of an hour later -- `` Are you going out to-night ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Yes . 
Why ? '' 
`` Oh , nothing , nothing , my dear ! '' 
And as soon as she had got rid of Charles she went and shut herself up in her room . 
At first she felt stunned ; she saw the trees , the paths , the ditches , Rodolphe , and she again felt the pressure of his arm , while the leaves rustled and the reeds whistled . 
But when she saw herself in the glass she wondered at her face . 
Never had her eyes been so large , so black , of so profound a depth . 
Something subtle about her being transfigured her . 
She repeated , `` I have a lover ! 
a lover ! '' 
delighting at the idea as if a second puberty had come to her . 
So at last she was to know those joys of love , that fever of happiness of which she had despaired ! 
She was entering upon marvels where all would be passion , ecstasy , delirium . 
An azure infinity encompassed her , the heights of sentiment sparkled under her thought , and ordinary existence appeared only afar off , down below in the shade , through the interspaces of these heights . 
Then she recalled the heroines of the books that she had read , and the lyric legion of these adulterous women began to sing in her memory with the voice of sisters that charmed her . 
She became herself , as it were , an actual part of these imaginings , and realised the love-dream of her youth as she saw herself in this type of amorous women whom she had so envied . 
Besides , Emma felt a satisfaction of revenge . 
Had she not suffered enough ? 
But now she triumphed , and the love so long pent up burst forth in full joyous bubblings . 
She tasted it without remorse , without anxiety , without trouble . 
The day following passed with a new sweetness . 
They made vows to one another She told him of her sorrows . 
Rodolphe interrupted her with kisses ; and she looking at him through half-closed eyes , asked him to call her again by her name -- to say that he loved her They were in the forest , as yesterday , in the shed of some woodenshoe maker . 
The walls were of straw , and the roof so low they had to stoop . 
They were seated side by side on a bed of dry leaves . 
From that day forth they wrote to one another regularly every evening . 
Emma placed her letter at the end of the garden , by the river , in a fissure of the wall . 
Rodolphe came to fetch it , and put another there , that she always found fault with as too short . 
One morning , when Charles had gone out before day break , she was seized with the fancy to see Rodolphe at once . 
She would go quickly to La Huchette , stay there an hour , and be back again at Yonville while everyone was still asleep . 
This idea made her pant with desire , and she soon found herself in the middle of the field , walking with rapid steps , without looking behind her . 
Day was just breaking . 
Emma from afar recognised her lover 's house . 
Its two dove-tailed weathercocks stood out black against the pale dawn . 
Beyond the farmyard there was a detached building that she thought must be the chateau She entered -- it was if the doors at her approach had opened wide of their own accord . 
A large straight staircase led up to the corridor . 
Emma raised the latch of a door , and suddenly at the end of the room she saw a man sleeping . 
It was Rodolphe . 
She uttered a cry . 
`` You here ? 
You here ? '' 
he repeated . 
`` How did you manage to come ? 
Ah ! 
your dress is damp . '' 
`` I love you , '' she answered , throwing her arms about his neck . 
This first piece of daring successful , now every time Charles went out early Emma dressed quickly and slipped on tiptoe down the steps that led to the waterside . 
But when the plank for the cows was taken up , she had to go by the walls alongside of the river ; the bank was slippery ; in order not to fall she caught hold of the tufts of faded wallflowers . 
Then she went across ploughed fields , in which she sank , stumbling ; and clogging her thin shoes . 
Her scarf , knotted round her head , fluttered to the wind in the meadows . 
She was afraid of the oxen ; she began to run ; she arrived out of breath , with rosy cheeks , and breathing out from her whole person a fresh perfume of sap , of verdure , of the open air . 
At this hour Rodolphe still slept . 
It was like a spring morning coming into his room . 
The yellow curtains along the windows let a heavy , whitish light enter softly . 
Emma felt about , opening and closing her eyes , while the drops of dew hanging from her hair formed , as it were , a topaz aureole around her face . 
Rodolphe , laughing , drew her to him , and pressed her to his breast . 
Then she examined the apartment , opened the drawers of the tables , combed her hair with his comb , and looked at herself in his shaving-glass . 
Often she even put between her teeth the big pipe that lay on the table by the bed , amongst lemons and pieces of sugar near a bottle of water . 
It took them a good quarter of an hour to say goodbye . 
Then Emma cried . 
She would have wished never to leave Rodolphe . 
Something stronger than herself forced her to him ; so much so , that one day , seeing her come unexpectedly , he frowned as one put out . 
`` What is the matter with you ? '' 
she said . 
`` Are you ill ? 
Tell me ! '' 
At last he declared with a serious air that her visits were becoming imprudent -- that she was compromising herself . 
Gradually Rodolphe 's fears took possession of her . 
At first , love had intoxicated her ; and she had thought of nothing beyond . 
But now that he was indispensable to her life , she feared to lose anything of this , or even that it should be disturbed . 
When she came back from his house she looked all about her , anxiously watching every form that passed in the horizon , and every village window from which she could be seen . 
She listened for steps , cries , the noise of the ploughs , and she stopped short , white , and trembling more than the aspen leaves swaying overhead . 
One morning as she was thus returning , she suddenly thought she saw the long barrel of a carbine that seemed to be aimed at her . 
It stuck out sideways from the end of a small tub half-buried in the grass on the edge of a ditch . 
Emma , half-fainting with terror , nevertheless walked on , and a man stepped out of the tub like a Jack-in-the-box . 
He had gaiters buckled up to the knees , his cap pulled down over his eyes , trembling lips , and a red nose . 
It was Captain Binet lying in ambush for wild ducks . 
`` You ought to have called out long ago ! '' 
he exclaimed ; `` When one sees a gun , one should always give warning . '' 
The tax-collector was thus trying to hide the fright he had had , for a prefectorial order having prohibited duckhunting except in boats , Monsieur Binet , despite his respect for the laws , was infringing them , and so he every moment expected to see the rural guard turn up . 
But this anxiety whetted his pleasure , and , all alone in his tub , he congratulated himself on his luck and on his cuteness . 
At sight of Emma he seemed relieved from a great weight , and at once entered upon a conversation . 
`` It is n't warm ; it 's nipping . '' 
Emma answered nothing . 
He went on -- `` And you 're out so early ? '' 
`` Yes , '' she said stammering ; `` I am just coming from the nurse where my child is . '' 
`` Ah ! 
very good ! 
very good ! 
For myself , I am here , just as you see me , since break of day ; but the weather is so muggy , that unless one had the bird at the mouth of the gun -- '' `` Good evening , Monsieur Binet , '' she interrupted him , turning on her heel . 
`` Your servant , madame , '' he replied drily ; and he went back into his tub . 
Emma regretted having left the tax-collector so abruptly . 
No doubt he would form unfavourable conjectures . 
The story about the nurse was the worst possible excuse , everyone at Yonville knowing that the little Bovary had been at home with her parents for a year . 
Besides , no one was living in this direction ; this path led only to La Huchette . 
Binet , then , would guess whence she came , and he would not keep silence ; he would talk , that was certain . 
She remained until evening racking her brain with every conceivable lying project , and had constantly before her eyes that imbecile with the game-bag . 
Charles after dinner , seeing her gloomy , proposed , by way of distraction , to take her to the chemist 's , and the first person she caught sight of in the shop was the taxcollector again . 
He was standing in front of the counter , lit up by the gleams of the red bottle , and was saying -- `` Please give me half an ounce of vitriol . '' 
`` Justin , '' cried the druggist , `` bring us the sulphuric acid . '' 
Then to Emma , who was going up to Madame Homais ' room , `` No , stay here ; it is n't worth while going up ; she is just coming down . 
Warm yourself at the stove in the meantime . 
Excuse me . 
Good-day , doctor , '' -LRB- for the chemist much enjoyed pronouncing the word `` doctor , '' as if addressing another by it reflected on himself some of the grandeur that he found in it -RRB- . 
`` Now , take care not to upset the mortars ! 
You 'd better fetch some chairs from the little room ; you know very well that the arm-chairs are not to be taken out of the drawing-room . '' 
And to put his arm-chair back in its place he was darting away from the counter , when Binet asked him for half an ounce of sugar acid . 
`` Sugar acid ! '' 
said the chemist contemptuously , `` do n't know it ; I 'm ignorant of it ! 
But perhaps you want oxalic acid . 
It is oxalic acid , is n't it ? '' 
Binet explained that he wanted a corrosive to make himself some copperwater with which to remove rust from his hunting things . 
Emma shuddered . 
The chemist began saying -- `` Indeed the weather is not propitious on account of the damp . '' 
`` Nevertheless , '' replied the tax-collector , with a sly look , `` there are people who like it . '' 
She was stifling . 
`` And give me -- '' `` Will he never go ? '' 
thought she . 
`` Half an ounce of resin and turpentine , four ounces of yellow wax , and three half ounces of animal charcoal , if you please , to clean the varnished leather of my togs . '' 
The druggist was beginning to cut the wax when Madame Homais appeared , Irma in her arms , Napoleon by her side , and Athalie following . 
She sat down on the velvet seat by the window , and the lad squatted down on a footstool , while his eldest sister hovered round the jujube box near her papa . 
The latter was filling funnels and corking phials , sticking on labels , making up parcels . 
Around him all were silent ; only from time to time , were heard the weights jingling in the balance , and a few low words from the chemist giving directions to his pupil . 
`` And how 's the little woman ? '' 
suddenly asked Madame Homais . 
`` Silence ! '' 
exclaimed her husband , who was writing down some figures in his waste-book . 
`` Why did n't you bring her ? '' 
she went on in a low voice . 
`` Hush ! 
hush ! '' 
said Emma , pointing with her finger to the druggist . 
But Binet , quite absorbed in looking over his bill , had probably heard nothing . 
At last he went out . 
Then Emma , relieved , uttered a deep sigh . 
`` How hard you are breathing ! '' 
said Madame Homais . 
`` Well , you see , it 's rather warm , '' she replied . 
So the next day they talked over how to arrange their rendezvous . 
Emma wanted to bribe her servant with a present , but it would be better to find some safe house at Yonville . 
Rodolphe promised to look for one . 
All through the winter , three or four times a week , in the dead of night he came to the garden . 
Emma had on purpose taken away the key of the gate , which Charles thought lost . 
To call her , Rodolphe threw a sprinkle of sand at the shutters . 
She jumped up with a start ; but sometimes he had to wait , for Charles had a mania for chatting by the fireside , and he would not stop . 
She was wild with impatience ; if her eyes could have done it , she would have hurled him out at the window . 
At last she would begin to undress , then take up a book , and go on reading very quietly as if the book amused her . 
But Charles , who was in bed , called to her to come too . 
`` Come , now , Emma , '' he said , `` it is time . '' 
`` Yes , I am coming , '' she answered . 
Then , as the candles dazzled him ; he turned to the wall and fell asleep . 
She escaped , smiling , palpitating , undressed . 
Rodolphe had a large cloak ; he wrapped her in it , and putting his arm round her waist , he drew her without a word to the end of the garden . 
It was in the arbour , on the same seat of old sticks where formerly Leon had looked at her so amorously on the summer evenings . 
She never thought of him now . 
The stars shone through the leafless jasmine branches . 
Behind them they heard the river flowing , and now and again on the bank the rustling of the dry reeds . 
Masses of shadow here and there loomed out in the darkness , and sometimes , vibrating with one movement , they rose up and swayed like immense black waves pressing forward to engulf them . 
The cold of the nights made them clasp closer ; the sighs of their lips seemed to them deeper ; their eyes that they could hardly see , larger ; and in the midst of the silence low words were spoken that fell on their souls sonorous , crystalline , and that reverberated in multiplied vibrations . 
When the night was rainy , they took refuge in the consulting-room between the cart-shed and the stable . 
She lighted one of the kitchen candles that she had hidden behind the books . 
Rodolphe settled down there as if at home . 
The sight of the library , of the bureau , of the whole apartment , in fine , excited his merriment , and he could not refrain from making jokes about Charles , which rather embarrassed Emma . 
She would have liked to see him more serious , and even on occasions more dramatic ; as , for example , when she thought she heard a noise of approaching steps in the alley . 
`` Someone is coming ! '' 
she said . 
He blew out the light . 
`` Have you your pistols ? '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Why , to defend yourself , '' replied Emma . 
`` From your husband ? 
Oh , poor devil ! '' 
And Rodolphe finished his sentence with a gesture that said , `` I could crush him with a flip of my finger . '' 
She was wonder-stricken at his bravery , although she felt in it a sort of indecency and a naive coarseness that scandalised her . 
Rodolphe reflected a good deal on the affair of the pistols . 
If she had spoken seriously , it was very ridiculous , he thought , even odious ; for he had no reason to hate the good Charles , not being what is called devoured by jealousy ; and on this subject Emma had taken a great vow that he did not think in the best of taste . 
Besides , she was growing very sentimental . 
She had insisted on exchanging miniatures ; they had cut off handfuls of hair , and now she was asking for a ring -- a real wedding-ring , in sign of an eternal union . 
She often spoke to him of the evening chimes , of the voices of nature . 
Then she talked to him of her mother -- hers ! 
and of his mother -- his ! 
Rodolphe had lost his twenty years ago . 
Emma none the less consoled him with caressing words as one would have done a lost child , and she sometimes even said to him , gazing at the moon -- `` I am sure that above there together they approve of our love . '' 
But she was so pretty . 
He had possessed so few women of such ingenuousness . 
This love without debauchery was a new experience for him , and , drawing him out of his lazy habits , caressed at once his pride and his sensuality . 
Emma 's enthusiasm , which his bourgeois good sense disdained , seemed to him in his heart of hearts charming , since it was lavished on him . 
Then , sure of being loved , he no longer kept up appearances , and insensibly his ways changed . 
He had no longer , as formerly , words so gentle that they made her cry , nor passionate caresses that made her mad , so that their great love , which engrossed her life , seemed to lessen beneath her like the water of a stream absorbed into its channel , and she could see the bed of it . 
She would not believe it ; she redoubled in tenderness , and Rodolphe concealed his indifference less and less . 
She did not know if she regretted having yielded to him , or whether she did not wish , on the contrary , to enjoy him the more . 
The humiliation of feeling herself weak was turning to rancour , tempered by their voluptuous pleasures . 
It was not affection ; it was like a continual seduction . 
He subjugated her ; she almost feared him . 
Appearances , nevertheless , were calmer than ever , Rodolphe having succeeded in carrying out the adultery after his own fancy ; and at the end of six months , when the spring-time came , they were to one another like a married couple , tranquilly keeping up a domestic flame . 
It was the time of year when old Rouault sent his turkey in remembrance of the setting of his leg . 
The present always arrived with a letter . 
Emma cut the string that tied it to the basket , and read the following lines : -- `` My Dear Children -- I hope this will find you well , and that this one will be as good as the others . 
For it seems to me a little more tender , if I may venture to say so , and heavier . 
But next time , for a change , I 'll give you a turkeycock , unless you have a preference for some dabs ; and send me back the hamper , if you please , with the two old ones . 
I have had an accident with my cart-sheds , whose covering flew off one windy night among the trees . 
The harvest has not been overgood either . 
Finally , I do n't know when I shall come to see you . 
It is so difficult now to leave the house since I am alone , my poor Emma . '' 
Here there was a break in the lines , as if the old fellow had dropped his pen to dream a little while . 
`` For myself , I am very well , except for a cold I caught the other day at the fair at Yvetot , where I had gone to hire a shepherd , having turned away mine because he was too dainty . 
How we are to be pitied with such a lot of thieves ! 
Besides , he was also rude . 
I heard from a pedlar , who , travelling through your part of the country this winter , had a tooth drawn , that Bovary was as usual working hard . 
That does n't surprise me ; and he showed me his tooth ; we had some coffee together . 
I asked him if he had seen you , and he said not , but that he had seen two horses in the stables , from which I conclude that business is looking up . 
So much the better , my dear children , and may God send you every imaginable happiness ! 
It grieves me not yet to have seen my dear little grand-daughter , Berthe Bovary . 
I have planted an Orleans plum-tree for her in the garden under your room , and I wo n't have it touched unless it is to have jam made for her by and bye , that I will keep in the cupboard for her when she comes . 
`` Good-bye , my dear children . 
I kiss you , my girl , you too , my son-in-law , and the little one on both cheeks . 
I am , with best compliments , your loving father . 
`` Theodore Rouault . '' 
She held the coarse paper in her fingers for some minutes . 
The spelling mistakes were interwoven one with the other , and Emma followed the kindly thought that cackled right through it like a hen half hidden in the hedge of thorns . 
The writing had been dried with ashes from the hearth , for a little grey powder slipped from the letter on to her dress , and she almost thought she saw her father bending over the hearth to take up the tongs . 
How long since she had been with him , sitting on the footstool in the chimney-corner , where she used to burn the end of a bit of wood in the great flame of the sea-sedges ! 
She remembered the summer evenings all full of sunshine . 
The colts neighed when anyone passed by , and galloped , galloped . 
Under her window there was a beehive , and sometimes the bees wheeling round in the light struck against her window like rebounding balls of gold . 
What happiness there had been at that time , what freedom , what hope ! 
What an abundance of illusions ! 
Nothing was left of them now . 
She had got rid of them all in her soul 's life , in all her successive conditions of life , maidenhood , her marriage , and her love -- thus constantly losing them all her life through , like a traveller who leaves something of his wealth at every inn along his road . 
But what then , made her so unhappy ? 
What was the extraordinary catastrophe that had transformed her ? 
And she raised her head , looking round as if to seek the cause of that which made her suffer . 
An April ray was dancing on the china of the whatnot ; the fire burned ; beneath her slippers she felt the softness of the carpet ; the day was bright , the air warm , and she heard her child shouting with laughter . 
In fact , the little girl was just then rolling on the lawn in the midst of the grass that was being turned . 
She was lying flat on her stomach at the top of a rick . 
The servant was holding her by her skirt . 
Lestiboudois was raking by her side , and every time he came near she lent forward , beating the air with both her arms . 
`` Bring her to me , '' said her mother , rushing to embrace her . 
`` How I love you , my poor child ! 
How I love you ! '' 
Then noticing that the tips of her ears were rather dirty , she rang at once for warm water , and washed her , changed her linen , her stockings , her shoes , asked a thousand questions about her health , as if on the return from a long journey , and finally , kissing her again and crying a little , she gave her back to the servant , who stood quite thunderstricken at this excess of tenderness . 
That evening Rodolphe found her more serious than usual . 
`` That will pass over , '' he concluded ; `` it 's a whim : '' And he missed three rendezvous running . 
When he did come , she showed herself cold and almost contemptuous . 
`` Ah ! 
you 're losing your time , my lady ! '' 
And he pretended not to notice her melancholy sighs , nor the handkerchief she took out . 
Then Emma repented . 
She even asked herself why she detested Charles ; if it had not been better to have been able to love him ? 
But he gave her no opportunities for such a revival of sentiment , so that she was much embarrassed by her desire for sacrifice , when the druggist came just in time to provide her with an opportunity . 
He had recently read a eulogy on a new method for curing club-foot , and as he was a partisan of progress , he conceived the patriotic idea that Yonville , in order to keep to the fore , ought to have some operations for strephopody or club-foot . 
`` For , '' said he to Emma , `` what risk is there ? 
See -- '' -LRB- and he enumerated on his fingers the advantages of the attempt -RRB- , `` success , almost certain relief and beautifying of the patient , celebrity acquired by the operator . 
Why , for example , should not your husband relieve poor Hippolyte of the ` Lion d'Or ' ? 
Note that he would not fail to tell about his cure to all the travellers , and then '' -LRB- Homais lowered his voice and looked round him -RRB- `` who is to prevent me from sending a short paragraph on the subject to the paper ? 
Eh ! 
goodness me ! 
an article gets about ; it is talked of ; it ends by making a snowball ! 
And who knows ? 
who knows ? '' 
In fact , Bovary might succeed . 
Nothing proved to Emma that he was not clever ; and what a satisfaction for her to have urged him to a step by which his reputation and fortune would be increased ! 
She only wished to lean on something more solid than love . 
Charles , urged by the druggist and by her , allowed himself to be persuaded . 
He sent to Rouen for Dr. Duval 's volume , and every evening , holding his head between both hands , plunged into the reading of it . 
While he was studying equinus , varus , and valgus , that is to say , katastrephopody , endostrephopody , and exostrephopody -LRB- or better , the various turnings of the foot downwards , inwards , and outwards , with the hypostrephopody and anastrephopody -RRB- , otherwise torsion downwards and upwards , Monsier Homais , with all sorts of arguments , was exhorting the lad at the inn to submit to the operation . 
`` You will scarcely feel , probably , a slight pain ; it is a simple prick , like a little blood-letting , less than the extraction of certain corns . '' 
Hippolyte , reflecting , rolled his stupid eyes . 
`` However , '' continued the chemist , `` it does n't concern me . 
It 's for your sake , for pure humanity ! 
I should like to see you , my friend , rid of your hideous caudication , together with that waddling of the lumbar regions which , whatever you say , must considerably interfere with you in the exercise of your calling . '' 
Then Homais represented to him how much jollier and brisker he would feel afterwards , and even gave him to understand that he would be more likely to please the women ; and the stable-boy began to smile heavily . 
Then he attacked him through his vanity : `` Are n't you a man ? 
Hang it ! 
what would you have done if you had had to go into the army , to go and fight beneath the standard ? 
Ah ! 
Hippolyte ! '' 
And Homais retired , declaring that he could not understand this obstinacy , this blindness in refusing the benefactions of science . 
The poor fellow gave way , for it was like a conspiracy . 
Binet , who never interfered with other people 's business , Madame Lefrancois , Artemise , the neighbours , even the mayor , Monsieur Tuvache -- everyone persuaded him , lectured him , shamed him ; but what finally decided him was that it would cost him nothing . 
Bovary even undertook to provide the machine for the operation . 
This generosity was an idea of Emma 's , and Charles consented to it , thinking in his heart of hearts that his wife was an angel . 
So by the advice of the chemist , and after three fresh starts , he had a kind of box made by the carpenter , with the aid of the locksmith , that weighed about eight pounds , and in which iron , wood , sheer-iron , leather , screws , and nuts had not been spared . 
But to know which of Hippolyte 's tendons to cut , it was necessary first of all to find out what kind of club-foot he had . 
He had a foot forming almost a straight line with the leg , which , however , did not prevent it from being turned in , so that it was an equinus together with something of a varus , or else a slight varus with a strong tendency to equinus . 
But with this equinus , wide in foot like a horse 's hoof , with rugose skin , dry tendons , and large toes , on which the black nails looked as if made of iron , the clubfoot ran about like a deer from morn till night . 
He was constantly to be seen on the Place , jumping round the carts , thrusting his limping foot forwards . 
He seemed even stronger on that leg than the other . 
By dint of hard service it had acquired , as it were , moral qualities of patience and energy ; and when he was given some heavy work , he stood on it in preference to its fellow . 
Now , as it was an equinus , it was necessary to cut the tendon of Achilles , and , if need were , the anterior tibial muscle could be seen to afterwards for getting rid of the varus ; for the doctor did not dare to risk both operations at once ; he was even trembling already for fear of injuring some important region that he did not know . 
Neither Ambrose Pare , applying for the first time since Celsus , after an interval of fifteen centuries , a ligature to an artery , nor Dupuytren , about to open an abscess in the brain , nor Gensoul when he first took away the superior maxilla , had hearts that trembled , hands that shook , minds so strained as Monsieur Bovary when he approached Hippolyte , his tenotome between his fingers . 
And as at hospitals , near by on a table lay a heap of lint , with waxed thread , many bandages -- a pyramid of bandages -- every bandage to be found at the druggist 's . 
It was Monsieur Homais who since morning had been organising all these preparations , as much to dazzle the multitude as to keep up his illusions . 
Charles pierced the skin ; a dry crackling was heard . 
The tendon was cut , the operation over . 
Hippolyte could not get over his surprise , but bent over Bovary 's hands to cover them with kisses . 
`` Come , be calm , '' said the druggist ; `` later on you will show your gratitude to your benefactor . '' 
And he went down to tell the result to five or six inquirers who were waiting in the yard , and who fancied that Hippolyte would reappear walking properly . 
Then Charles , having buckled his patient into the machine , went home , where Emma , all anxiety , awaited him at the door . 
She threw herself on his neck ; they sat down to table ; he ate much , and at dessert he even wanted to take a cup of coffee , a luxury he only permitted himself on Sundays when there was company . 
The evening was charming , full of prattle , of dreams together . 
They talked about their future fortune , of the improvements to be made in their house ; he saw people 's estimation of him growing , his comforts increasing , his wife always loving him ; and she was happy to refresh herself with a new sentiment , healthier , better , to feel at last some tenderness for this poor fellow who adored her . 
