The thought of Rodolphe for one moment passed through her mind , but her eyes turned again to Charles ; she even noticed with surprise that he had not bad teeth . 
They were in bed when Monsieur Homais , in spite of the servant , suddenly entered the room , holding in his hand a sheet of paper just written . 
It was the paragraph he intended for the `` Fanal de Rouen . '' 
He brought it for them to read . 
`` Read it yourself , '' said Bovary . 
He read -- '' ` Despite the prejudices that still invest a part of the face of Europe like a net , the light nevertheless begins to penetrate our country places . 
Thus on Tuesday our little town of Yonville found itself the scene of a surgical operation which is at the same time an act of loftiest philanthropy . 
Monsieur Bovary , one of our most distinguished practitioners -- ' '' `` Oh , that is too much ! 
too much ! '' 
said Charles , choking with emotion . 
`` No , no ! 
not at all ! 
What next ! '' '' ' 
-- Performed an operation on a club-footed man . ' 
I have not used the scientific term , because you know in a newspaper everyone would not perhaps understand . 
The masses must -- ' '' `` No doubt , '' said Bovary ; `` go on ! '' 
`` I proceed , '' said the chemist . '' 
` Monsieur Bovary , one of our most distinguished practitioners , performed an operation on a club-footed man called Hippolyte Tautain , stableman for the last twenty-five years at the hotel of the `` Lion d'Or , '' kept by Widow Lefrancois , at the Place d'Armes . 
The novelty of the attempt , and the interest incident to the subject , had attracted such a concourse of persons that there was a veritable obstruction on the threshold of the establishment . 
The operation , moreover , was performed as if by magic , and barely a few drops of blood appeared on the skin , as though to say that the rebellious tendon had at last given way beneath the efforts of art . 
The patient , strangely enough -- we affirm it as an eye-witness -- complained of no pain . 
His condition up to the present time leaves nothing to be desired . 
Everything tends to show that his convelescence will be brief ; and who knows even if at our next village festivity we shall not see our good Hippolyte figuring in the bacchic dance in the midst of a chorus of joyous boon-companions , and thus proving to all eyes by his verve and his capers his complete cure ? 
Honour , then , to the generous savants ! 
Honour to those indefatigable spirits who consecrate their vigils to the amelioration or to the alleviation of their kind ! 
Honour , thrice honour ! 
Is it not time to cry that the blind shall see , the deaf hear , the lame walk ? 
But that which fanaticism formerly promised to its elect , science now accomplishes for all men . 
We shall keep our readers informed as to the successive phases of this remarkable cure . ' '' 
This did not prevent Mere Lefrancois , from coming five days after , scared , and crying out -- `` Help ! 
he is dying ! 
I am going crazy ! '' 
Charles rushed to the `` Lion d'Or , '' and the chemist , who caught sight of him passing along the Place hatless , abandoned his shop . 
He appeared himself breathless , red , anxious , and asking everyone who was going up the stairs -- `` Why , what 's the matter with our interesting strephopode ? '' 
The strephopode was writhing in hideous convulsions , so that the machine in which his leg was enclosed was knocked against the wall enough to break it . 
With many precautions , in order not to disturb the position of the limb , the box was removed , and an awful sight presented itself . 
The outlines of the foot disappeared in such a swelling that the entire skin seemed about to burst , and it was covered with ecchymosis , caused by the famous machine . 
Hippolyte had already complained of suffering from it . 
No attention had been paid to him ; they had to acknowledge that he had not been altogether wrong , and he was freed for a few hours . 
But , hardly had the oedema gone down to some extent , than the two savants thought fit to put back the limb in the apparatus , strapping it tighter to hasten matters . 
At last , three days after , Hippolyte being unable to endure it any longer , they once more removed the machine , and were much surprised at the result they saw . 
The livid tumefaction spread over the leg , with blisters here and there , whence there oozed a black liquid . 
Matters were taking a serious turn . 
Hippolyte began to worry himself , and Mere Lefrancois , had him installed in the little room near the kitchen , so that he might at least have some distraction . 
But the tax-collector , who dined there every day , complained bitterly of such companionship . 
Then Hippolyte was removed to the billiard-room . 
He lay there moaning under his heavy coverings , pale with long beard , sunken eyes , and from time to time turning his perspiring head on the dirty pillow , where the flies alighted . 
Madame Bovary went to see him . 
She brought him linen for his poultices ; she comforted , and encouraged him . 
Besides , he did not want for company , especially on market-days , when the peasants were knocking about the billiard-balls round him , fenced with the cues , smoked , drank , sang , and brawled . 
`` How are you ? '' 
they said , clapping him on the shoulder . 
`` Ah ! 
you 're not up to much , it seems , but it 's your own fault . 
You should do this ! 
do that ! '' 
And then they told him stories of people who had all been cured by other remedies than his . 
Then by way of consolation they added -- `` You give way too much ! 
Get up ! 
You coddle yourself like a king ! 
All the same , old chap , you do n't smell nice ! '' 
Gangrene , in fact , was spreading more and more . 
Bovary himself turned sick at it . 
He came every hour , every moment . 
Hippolyte looked at him with eyes full of terror , sobbing -- `` When shall I get well ? 
Oh , save me ! 
How unfortunate I am ! 
How unfortunate I am ! '' 
And the doctor left , always recommending him to diet himself . 
`` Do n't listen to him , my lad , '' said Mere Lefrancois , `` Have n't they tortured you enough already ? 
You 'll grow still weaker . 
Here ! 
swallow this . '' 
And she gave him some good beef-tea , a slice of mutton , a piece of bacon , and sometimes small glasses of brandy , that he had not the strength to put to his lips . 
Abbe Bournisien , hearing that he was growing worse , asked to see him . 
He began by pitying his sufferings , declaring at the same time that he ought to rejoice at them since it was the will of the Lord , and take advantage of the occasion to reconcile himself to Heaven . 
`` For , '' said the ecclesiastic in a paternal tone , `` you rather neglected your duties ; you were rarely seen at divine worship . 
How many years is it since you approached the holy table ? 
I understand that your work , that the whirl of the world may have kept you from care for your salvation . 
But now is the time to reflect . 
Yet do n't despair . 
I have known great sinners , who , about to appear before God -LRB- you are not yet at this point I know -RRB- , had implored His mercy , and who certainly died in the best frame of mind . 
Let us hope that , like them , you will set us a good example . 
Thus , as a precaution , what is to prevent you from saying morning and evening a ` Hail Mary , full of grace , ' and ` Our Father which art in heaven ' ? 
Yes , do that , for my sake , to oblige me . 
That wo n't cost you anything . 
Will you promise me ? '' 
The poor devil promised . 
The cure came back day after day . 
He chatted with the landlady ; and even told anecdotes interspersed with jokes and puns that Hippolyte did not understand . 
Then , as soon as he could , he fell back upon matters of religion , putting on an appropriate expression of face . 
His zeal seemed successful , for the club-foot soon manifested a desire to go on a pilgrimage to Bon-Secours if he were cured ; to which Monsieur Bournisien replied that he saw no objection ; two precautions were better than one ; it was no risk anyhow . 
The druggist was indignant at what he called the manoeuvres of the priest ; they were prejudicial , he said , to Hippolyte 's convalescence , and he kept repeating to Madame Lefrancois , `` Leave him alone ! 
leave him alone ! 
You perturb his morals with your mysticism . '' 
But the good woman would no longer listen to him ; he was the cause of it all . 
From a spirit of contradiction she hung up near the bedside of the patient a basin filled with holy-water and a branch of box . 
Religion , however , seemed no more able to succour him than surgery , and the invincible gangrene still spread from the extremities towards the stomach . 
It was all very well to vary the potions and change the poultices ; the muscles each day rotted more and more ; and at last Charles replied by an affirmative nod of the head when Mere Lefrancois , asked him if she could not , as a forlorn hope , send for Monsieur Canivet of Neufchatel , who was a celebrity . 
A doctor of medicine , fifty years of age , enjoying a good position and self-possessed , Charles 's colleague did not refrain from laughing disdainfully when he had uncovered the leg , mortified to the knee . 
Then having flatly declared that it must be amputated , he went off to the chemist 's to rail at the asses who could have reduced a poor man to such a state . 
Shaking Monsieur Homais by the button of his coat , he shouted out in the shop -- `` These are the inventions of Paris ! 
These are the ideas of those gentry of the capital ! 
It is like strabismus , chloroform , lithotrity , a heap of monstrosities that the Government ought to prohibit . 
But they want to do the clever , and they cram you with remedies without , troubling about the consequences . 
We are not so clever , not we ! 
We are not savants , coxcombs , fops ! 
We are practitioners ; we cure people , and we should not dream of operating on anyone who is in perfect health . 
Straighten club-feet ! 
As if one could straighten club-feet ! 
It is as if one wished , for example , to make a hunchback straight ! '' 
Homais suffered as he listened to this discourse , and he concealed his discomfort beneath a courtier 's smile ; for he needed to humour Monsier Canivet , whose prescriptions sometimes came as far as Yonville . 
So he did not take up the defence of Bovary ; he did not even make a single remark , and , renouncing his principles , he sacrificed his dignity to the more serious interests of his business . 
This amputation of the thigh by Doctor Canivet was a great event in the village . 
On that day all the inhabitants got up earlier , and the Grande Rue , although full of people , had something lugubrious about it , as if an execution had been expected . 
At the grocer 's they discussed Hippolyte 's illness ; the shops did no business , and Madame Tuvache , the mayor 's wife , did not stir from her window , such was her impatience to see the operator arrive . 
He came in his gig , which he drove himself . 
But the springs of the right side having at length given way beneath the weight of his corpulence , it happened that the carriage as it rolled along leaned over a little , and on the other cushion near him could be seen a large box covered in red sheep-leather , whose three brass clasps shone grandly . 
After he had entered like a whirlwind the porch of the `` Lion d'Or , '' the doctor , shouting very loud , ordered them to unharness his horse . 
Then he went into the stable to see that she was eating her oats all right ; for on arriving at a patient 's he first of all looked after his mare and his gig . 
People even said about this -- `` Ah ! 
Monsieur Canivet 's a character ! '' 
And he was the more esteemed for this imperturbable coolness . 
The universe to the last man might have died , and he would not have missed the smallest of his habits . 
Homais presented himself . 
`` I count on you , '' said the doctor . 
`` Are we ready ? 
Come along ! '' 
But the druggist , turning red , confessed that he was too sensitive to assist at such an operation . 
`` When one is a simple spectator , '' he said , `` the imagination , you know , is impressed . 
And then I have such a nervous system ! '' 
`` Pshaw ! '' 
interrupted Canivet ; `` on the contrary , you seem to me inclined to apoplexy . 
Besides , that does n't astonish me , for you chemist fellows are always poking about your kitchens , which must end by spoiling your constitutions . 
Now just look at me . 
I get up every day at four o'clock ; I shave with cold water -LRB- and am never cold -RRB- . 
I do n't wear flannels , and I never catch cold ; my carcass is good enough ! 
I live now in one way , now in another , like a philosopher , taking pot-luck ; that is why I am not squeamish like you , and it is as indifferent to me to carve a Christian as the first fowl that turns up . 
Then , perhaps , you will say , habit ! 
habit ! '' 
Then , without any consideration for Hippolyte , who was sweating with agony between his sheets , these gentlemen entered into a conversation , in which the druggist compared the coolness of a surgeon to that of a general ; and this comparison was pleasing to Canivet , who launched out on the exigencies of his art . 
He looked upon , it as a sacred office , although the ordinary practitioners dishonoured it . 
At last , coming back to the patient , he examined the bandages brought by Homais , the same that had appeared for the club-foot , and asked for someone to hold the limb for him . 
Lestiboudois was sent for , and Monsieur Canivet having turned up his sleeves , passed into the billiard-room , while the druggist stayed with Artemise and the landlady , both whiter than their aprons , and with ears strained towards the door . 
Bovary during this time did not dare to stir from his house . 
He kept downstairs in the sitting-room by the side of the fireless chimney , his chin on his breast , his hands clasped , his eyes staring . 
`` What a mishap ! '' 
he thought , `` what a mishap ! '' 
Perhaps , after all , he had made some slip . 
He thought it over , but could hit upon nothing . 
But the most famous surgeons also made mistakes ; and that is what no one would ever believe ! 
People , on the contrary , would laugh , jeer ! 
It would spread as far as Forges , as Neufchatel , as Rouen , everywhere ! 
Who could say if his colleagues would not write against him . 
Polemics would ensue ; he would have to answer in the papers . 
Hippolyte might even prosecute him . 
He saw himself dishonoured , ruined , lost ; and his imagination , assailed by a world of hypotheses , tossed amongst them like an empty cask borne by the sea and floating upon the waves . 
Emma , opposite , watched him ; she did not share his humiliation ; she felt another -- that of having supposed such a man was worth anything . 
As if twenty times already she had not sufficiently perceived his mediocrity . 
Charles was walking up and down the room ; his boots creaked on the floor . 
`` Sit down , '' she said ; `` you fidget me . '' 
He sat down again . 
How was it that she -- she , who was so intelligent -- could have allowed herself to be deceived again ? 
and through what deplorable madness had she thus ruined her life by continual sacrifices ? 
She recalled all her instincts of luxury , all the privations of her soul , the sordidness of marriage , of the household , her dream sinking into the mire like wounded swallows ; all that she had longed for , all that she had denied herself , all that she might have had ! 
And for what ? 
for what ? 
In the midst of the silence that hung over the village a heart-rending cry rose on the air . 
Bovary turned white to fainting . 
She knit her brows with a nervous gesture , then went on . 
And it was for him , for this creature , for this man , who understood nothing , who felt nothing ! 
For he was there quite quiet , not even suspecting that the ridicule of his name would henceforth sully hers as well as his . 
She had made efforts to love him , and she had repented with tears for having yielded to another ! 
`` But it was perhaps a valgus ! '' 
suddenly exclaimed Bovary , who was meditating . 
At the unexpected shock of this phrase falling on her thought like a leaden bullet on a silver plate , Emma , shuddering , raised her head in order to find out what he meant to say ; and they looked at the other in silence , almost amazed to see each other , so far sundered were they by their inner thoughts . 
Charles gazed at her with the dull look of a drunken man , while he listened motionless to the last cries of the sufferer , that followed each other in long-drawn modulations , broken by sharp spasms like the far-off howling of some beast being slaughtered . 
Emma bit her wan lips , and rolling between her fingers a piece of coral that she had broken , fixed on Charles the burning glance of her eyes like two arrows of fire about to dart forth . 
Everything in him irritated her now ; his face , his dress , what he did not say , his whole person , his existence , in fine . 
She repented of her past virtue as of a crime , and what still remained of it rumbled away beneath the furious blows of her pride . 
She revelled in all the evil ironies of triumphant adultery . 
The memory of her lover came back to her with dazzling attractions ; she threw her whole soul into it , borne away towards this image with a fresh enthusiasm ; and Charles seemed to her as much removed from her life , as absent forever , as impossible and annihilated , as if he had been about to die and were passing under her eyes . 
There was a sound of steps on the pavement . 
Charles looked up , and through the lowered blinds he saw at the corner of the market in the broad sunshine Dr. Canivet , who was wiping his brow with his handkerchief . 
Homais , behind him , was carrying a large red box in his hand , and both were going towards the chemist 's . 
Then with a feeling of sudden tenderness and discouragement Charles turned to his wife saying to her -- `` Oh , kiss me , my own ! '' 
`` Leave me ! '' 
she said , red with anger . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
he asked , stupefied . 
`` Be calm ; compose yourself . 
You know well enough that I love you . 
Come ! '' 
`` Enough ! '' 
she cried with a terrible look . 
And escaping from the room , Emma closed the door so violently that the barometer fell from the wall and smashed on the floor . 
Charles sank back into his arm-chair overwhelmed , trying to discover what could be wrong with her , fancying some nervous illness , weeping , and vaguely feeling something fatal and incomprehensible whirling round him . 
When Rodolphe came to the garden that evening , he found his mistress waiting for him at the foot of the steps on the lowest stair . 
They threw their arms round one another , and all their rancour melted like snow beneath the warmth of that kiss . 
They began to love one another again . 
Often , even in the middle of the day , Emma suddenly wrote to him , then from the window made a sign to Justin , who , taking his apron off , quickly ran to La Huchette . 
Rodolphe would come ; she had sent for him to tell him that she was bored , that her husband was odious , her life frightful . 
`` But what can I do ? '' 
he cried one day impatiently . 
`` Ah ! 
if you would -- '' She was sitting on the floor between his knees , her hair loose , her look lost . 
`` Why , what ? '' 
said Rodolphe . 
She sighed . 
`` We would go and live elsewhere -- somewhere ! '' 
`` You are really mad ! '' 
he said laughing . 
`` How could that be possible ? '' 
She returned to the subject ; he pretended not to understand , and turned the conversation . 
What he did not understand was all this worry about so simple an affair as love . 
She had a motive , a reason , and , as it were , a pendant to her affection . 
Her tenderness , in fact , grew each day with her repulsion to her husband . 
The more she gave up herself to the one , the more she loathed the other . 
Never had Charles seemed to her so disagreeable , to have such stodgy fingers , such vulgar ways , to be so dull as when they found themselves together after her meeting with Rodolphe . 
Then , while playing the spouse and virtue , she was burning at the thought of that head whose black hair fell in a curl over the sunburnt brow , of that form at once so strong and elegant , of that man , in a word , who had such experience in his reasoning , such passion in his desires . 
It was for him that she filed her nails with the care of a chaser , and that there was never enough cold-cream for her skin , nor of patchouli for her handkerchiefs . 
She loaded herself with bracelets , rings , and necklaces . 
When he was coming she filled the two large blue glass vases with roses , and prepared her room and her person like a courtesan expecting a prince . 
The servant had to be constantly washing linen , and all day Felicite did not stir from the kitchen , where little Justin , who often kept her company , watched her at work . 
With his elbows on the long board on which she was ironing , he greedily watched all these women 's clothes spread about him , the dimity petticoats , the fichus , the collars , and the drawers with running strings , wide at the hips and growing narrower below . 
`` What is that for ? '' 
asked the young fellow , passing his hand over the crinoline or the hooks and eyes . 
`` Why , have n't you ever seen anything ? '' 
Felicite answered laughing . 
`` As if your mistress , Madame Homais , did n't wear the same . '' 
`` Oh , I daresay ! 
Madame Homais ! '' 
And he added with a meditative air , `` As if she were a lady like madame ! '' 
But Felicite grew impatient of seeing him hanging round her . 
She was six years older than he , and Theodore , Monsieur Guillaumin 's servant , was beginning to pay court to her . 
`` Let me alone , '' she said , moving her pot of starch . 
`` You 'd better be off and pound almonds ; you are always dangling about women . 
Before you meddle with such things , bad boy , wait till you 've got a beard to your chin . '' 
`` Oh , do n't be cross ! 
I 'll go and clean her boots . '' 
And he at once took down from the shelf Emma 's boots , all coated with mud , the mud of the rendezvous , that crumbled into powder beneath his fingers , and that he watched as it gently rose in a ray of sunlight . 
`` How afraid you are of spoiling them ! '' 
said the servant , who was n't so particular when she cleaned them herself , because as soon as the stuff of the boots was no longer fresh madame handed them over to her . 
Emma had a number in her cupboard that she squandered one after the other , without Charles allowing himself the slightest observation . 
So also he disbursed three hundred francs for a wooden leg that she thought proper to make a present of to Hippolyte . 
Its top was covered with cork , and it had spring joints , a complicated mechanism , covered over by black trousers ending in a patent-leather boot . 
But Hippolyte , not daring to use such a handsome leg every day , begged Madame Bovary to get him another more convenient one . 
The doctor , of course , had again to defray the expense of this purchase . 
So little by little the stable-man took up his work again . 
One saw him running about the village as before , and when Charles heard from afar the sharp noise of the wooden leg , he at once went in another direction . 
It was Monsieur Lheureux , the shopkeeper , who had undertaken the order ; this provided him with an excuse for visiting Emma . 
He chatted with her about the new goods from Paris , about a thousand feminine trifles , made himself very obliging , and never asked for his money . 
Emma yielded to this lazy mode of satisfying all her caprices . 
Thus she wanted to have a very handsome ridding-whip that was at an umbrella-maker 's at Rouen to give to Rodolphe . 
The week after Monsieur Lheureux placed it on her table . 
But the next day he called on her with a bill for two hundred and seventy francs , not counting the centimes . 
Emma was much embarrassed ; all the drawers of the writing-table were empty ; they owed over a fortnight 's wages to Lestiboudois , two quarters to the servant , for any quantity of other things , and Bovary was impatiently expecting Monsieur Derozeray 's account , which he was in the habit of paying every year about Midsummer . 
She succeeded at first in putting off Lheureux . 
At last he lost patience ; he was being sued ; his capital was out , and unless he got some in he should be forced to take back all the goods she had received . 
`` Oh , very well , take them ! '' 
said Emma . 
`` I was only joking , '' he replied ; `` the only thing I regret is the whip . 
My word ! 
I 'll ask monsieur to return it to me . '' 
`` No , no ! '' 
she said . 
`` Ah ! 
I 've got you ! '' 
thought Lheureux . 
And , certain of his discovery , he went out repeating to himself in an undertone , and with his usual low whistle -- `` Good ! 
we shall see ! 
we shall see ! '' 
She was thinking how to get out of this when the servant coming in put on the mantelpiece a small roll of blue paper `` from Monsieur Derozeray 's . '' 
Emma pounced upon and opened it . 
It contained fifteen napoleons ; it was the account . 
She heard Charles on the stairs ; threw the gold to the back of her drawer , and took out the key . 
Three days after Lheureux reappeared . 
`` I have an arrangement to suggest to you , '' he said . 
`` If , instead of the sum agreed on , you would take -- '' `` Here it is , '' she said placing fourteen napoleons in his hand . 
The tradesman was dumfounded . 
Then , to conceal his disappointment , he was profuse in apologies and proffers of service , all of which Emma declined ; then she remained a few moments fingering in the pocket of her apron the two five-franc pieces that he had given her in change . 
She promised herself she would economise in order to pay back later on . 
`` Pshaw ! '' 
she thought , `` he wo n't think about it again . '' 
Besides the riding-whip with its silver-gilt handle , Rodolphe had received a seal with the motto Amor nel cor * furthermore , a scarf for a muffler , and , finally , a cigar-case exactly like the Viscount 's , that Charles had formerly picked up in the road , and that Emma had kept . 
These presents , however , humiliated him ; he refused several ; she insisted , and he ended by obeying , thinking her tyrannical and overexacting . 
* A loving heart . 
Then she had strange ideas . 
`` When midnight strikes , '' she said , `` you must think of me . '' 
And if he confessed that he had not thought of her , there were floods of reproaches that always ended with the eternal question -- `` Do you love me ? '' 
`` Why , of course I love you , '' he answered . 
`` A great deal ? '' 
`` Certainly ! '' 
`` You have n't loved any others ? '' 
`` Did you think you 'd got a virgin ? '' 
he exclaimed laughing . 
Emma cried , and he tried to console her , adorning his protestations with puns . 
`` Oh , '' she went on , `` I love you ! 
I love you so that I could not live without you , do you see ? 
There are times when I long to see you again , when I am torn by all the anger of love . 
I ask myself , Where is he ? 
Perhaps he is talking to other women . 
They smile upon him ; he approaches . 
Oh no ; no one else pleases you . 
There are some more beautiful , but I love you best . 
I know how to love best . 
I am your servant , your concubine ! 
You are my king , my idol ! 
You are good , you are beautiful , you are clever , you are strong ! '' 
He had so often heard these things said that they did not strike him as original . 
Emma was like all his mistresses ; and the charm of novelty , gradually falling away like a garment , laid bare the eternal monotony of passion , that has always the same forms and the same language . 
He did not distinguish , this man of so much experience , the difference of sentiment beneath the sameness of expression . 
Because lips libertine and venal had murmured such words to him , he believed but little in the candour of hers ; exaggerated speeches hiding mediocre affections must be discounted ; as if the fullness of the soul did not sometimes overflow in the emptiest metaphors , since no one can ever give the exact measure of his needs , nor of his conceptions , nor of his sorrows ; and since human speech is like a cracked tin kettle , on which we hammer out tunes to make bears dance when we long to move the stars . 
But with that superior critical judgment that belongs to him who , in no matter what circumstance , holds back , Rodolphe saw other delights to be got out of this love . 
He thought all modesty in the way . 
He treated her quite sans facon . 
* He made of her something supple and corrupt . 
Hers was an idiotic sort of attachment , full of admiration for him , of voluptuousness for her , a beatitude that benumbed her ; her soul sank into this drunkenness , shrivelled up , drowned in it , like Clarence in his butt of Malmsey . 
* Off-handedly . 
By the mere effect of her love Madame Bovary 's manners changed . 
Her looks grew bolder , her speech more free ; she even committed the impropriety of walking out with Monsieur Rodolphe , a cigarette in her mouth , `` as if to defy the people . '' 
At last , those who still doubted doubted no longer when one day they saw her getting out of the `` Hirondelle , '' her waist squeezed into a waistcoat like a man ; and Madame Bovary senior , who , after a fearful scene with her husband , had taken refuge at her son 's , was not the least scandalised of the women-folk . 
Many other things displeased her . 
First , Charles had not attended to her advice about the forbidding of novels ; then the `` ways of the house '' annoyed her ; she allowed herself to make some remarks , and there were quarrels , especially one on account of Felicite . 
Madame Bovary senior , the evening before , passing along the passage , had surprised her in company of a man -- a man with a brown collar , about forty years old , who , at the sound of her step , had quickly escaped through the kitchen . 
Then Emma began to laugh , but the good lady grew angry , declaring that unless morals were to be laughed at one ought to look after those of one 's servants . 
`` Where were you brought up ? '' 
asked the daughter-in-law , with so impertinent a look that Madame Bovary asked her if she were not perhaps defending her own case . 
`` Leave the room ! '' 
said the young woman , springing up with a bound . 
`` Emma ! 
Mamma ! '' 
cried Charles , trying to reconcile them . 
But both had fled in their exasperation . 
Emma was stamping her feet as she repeated -- `` Oh ! 
what manners ! 
What a peasant ! '' 
He ran to his mother ; she was beside herself . 
She stammered `` She is an insolent , giddy-headed thing , or perhaps worse ! '' 
And she was for leaving at once if the other did not apologise . 
So Charles went back again to his wife and implored her to give way ; he knelt to her ; she ended by saying -- `` Very well ! 
I 'll go to her . '' 
And in fact she held out her hand to her mother-in-law with the dignity of a marchioness as she said -- `` Excuse me , madame . '' 
Then , having gone up again to her room , she threw herself flat on her bed and cried there like a child , her face buried in the pillow . 
She and Rodolphe had agreed that in the event of anything extraordinary occurring , she should fasten a small piece of white paper to the blind , so that if by chance he happened to be in Yonville , he could hurry to the lane behind the house . 
Emma made the signal ; she had been waiting three-quarters of an hour when she suddenly caught sight of Rodolphe at the corner of the market . 
She felt tempted to open the window and call him , but he had already disappeared . 
She fell back in despair . 
Soon , however , it seemed to her that someone was walking on the pavement . 
It was he , no doubt . 
She went downstairs , crossed the yard . 
He was there outside . 
She threw herself into his arms . 
`` Do take care ! '' 
he said . 
`` Ah ! 
if you knew ! '' 
she replied . 
And she began telling him everything , hurriedly , disjointedly , exaggerating the facts , inventing many , and so prodigal of parentheses that he understood nothing of it . 
`` Come , my poor angel , courage ! 
Be comforted ! 
be patient ! '' 
`` But I have been patient ; I have suffered for four years . 
A love like ours ought to show itself in the face of heaven . 
They torture me ! 
I can bear it no longer ! 
Save me ! '' 
She clung to Rodolphe . 
Her eyes , full of tears , flashed like flames beneath a wave ; her breast heaved ; he had never loved her so much , so that he lost his head and said `` What is , it ? 
What do you wish ? '' 
`` Take me away , '' she cried , `` carry me off ! 
Oh , I pray you ! '' 
And she threw herself upon his mouth , as if to seize there the unexpected consent if breathed forth in a kiss . 
`` But -- '' Rodolphe resumed . 
`` What ? '' 
`` Your little girl ! '' 
She reflected a few moments , then replied -- `` We will take her ! 
It ca n't be helped ! '' 
`` What a woman ! '' 
he said to himself , watching her as she went . 
For she had run into the garden . 
Someone was calling her . 
On the following days Madame Bovary senior was much surprised at the change in her daughter-in-law . 
Emma , in fact , was showing herself more docile , and even carried her deference so far as to ask for a recipe for pickling gherkins . 
Was it the better to deceive them both ? 
Or did she wish by a sort of voluptuous stoicism to feel the more profoundly the bitterness of the things she was about to leave ? 
But she paid no heed to them ; on the contrary , she lived as lost in the anticipated delight of her coming happiness . 
It was an eternal subject for conversation with Rodolphe . 
She leant on his shoulder murmuring -- `` Ah ! 
when we are in the mail-coach ! 
Do you think about it ? 
Can it be ? 
It seems to me that the moment I feel the carriage start , it will be as if we were rising in a balloon , as if we were setting out for the clouds . 
Do you know that I count the hours ? 
And you ? '' 
Never had Madame Bovary been so beautiful as at this period ; she had that indefinable beauty that results from joy , from enthusiasm , from success , and that is only the harmony of temperament with circumstances . 
Her desires , her sorrows , the experience of pleasure , and her ever-young illusions , that had , as soil and rain and winds and the sun make flowers grow , gradually developed her , and she at length blossomed forth in all the plenitude of her nature . 
Her eyelids seemed chiselled expressly for her long amorous looks in which the pupil disappeared , while a strong inspiration expanded her delicate nostrils and raised the fleshy corner of her lips , shaded in the light by a little black down . 
One would have thought that an artist apt in conception had arranged the curls of hair upon her neck ; they fell in a thick mass , negligently , and with the changing chances of their adultery , that unbound them every day . 
Her voice now took more mellow infections , her figure also ; something subtle and penetrating escaped even from the folds of her gown and from the line of her foot . 
