tchk ! '' 
The boards of the harness room shone like the flooring of a drawing room . 
The carriage harness was piled up in the middle against two twisted columns , and the bits , the whips , the spurs , the curbs , were ranged in a line all along the wall . 
Charles , meanwhile , went to ask a groom to put his horse to . 
The dog-cart was brought to the foot of the steps , and , all the parcels being crammed in , the Bovarys paid their respects to the Marquis and Marchioness and set out again for Tostes . 
Emma watched the turning wheels in silence . 
Charles , on the extreme edge of the seat , held the reins with his two arms wide apart , and the little horse ambled along in the shafts that were too big for him . 
The loose reins hanging over his crupper were wet with foam , and the box fastened on behind the chaise gave great regular bumps against it . 
They were on the heights of Thibourville when suddenly some horsemen with cigars between their lips passed laughing . 
Emma thought she recognized the Viscount , turned back , and caught on the horizon only the movement of the heads rising or falling with the unequal cadence of the trot or gallop . 
A mile farther on they had to stop to mend with some string the traces that had broken . 
But Charles , giving a last look to the harness , saw something on the ground between his horse 's legs , and he picked up a cigar-case with a green silk border and beblazoned in the centre like the door of a carriage . 
`` There are even two cigars in it , '' said he ; `` they 'll do for this evening after dinner . '' 
`` Why , do you smoke ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Sometimes , when I get a chance . '' 
He put his find in his pocket and whipped up the nag . 
When they reached home the dinner was not ready . 
Madame lost her temper . 
Nastasie answered rudely . 
`` Leave the room ! '' 
said Emma . 
`` You are forgetting yourself . 
I give you warning . '' 
For dinner there was onion soup and a piece of veal with sorrel . 
Charles , seated opposite Emma , rubbed his hands gleefully . 
`` How good it is to be at home again ! '' 
Nastasie could be heard crying . 
He was rather fond of the poor girl . 
She had formerly , during the wearisome time of his widowhood , kept him company many an evening . 
She had been his first patient , his oldest acquaintance in the place . 
`` Have you given her warning for good ? '' 
he asked at last . 
`` Yes . 
Who is to prevent me ? '' 
she replied . 
Then they warmed themselves in the kitchen while their room was being made ready . 
Charles began to smoke . 
He smoked with lips protruding , spitting every moment , recoiling at every puff . 
`` You 'll make yourself ill , '' she said scornfully . 
He put down his cigar and ran to swallow a glass of cold water at the pump . 
Emma seizing hold of the cigar case threw it quickly to the back of the cupboard . 
The next day was a long one . 
She walked about her little garden , up and down the same walks , stopping before the beds , before the espalier , before the plaster curate , looking with amazement at all these things of once-on-a-time that she knew so well . 
How far off the ball seemed already ! 
What was it that thus set so far asunder the morning of the day before yesterday and the evening of to-day ? 
Her journey to Vaubyessard had made a hole in her life , like one of those great crevices that a storm will sometimes make in one night in mountains . 
Still she was resigned . 
She devoutly put away in her drawers her beautiful dress , down to the satin shoes whose soles were yellowed with the slippery wax of the dancing floor . 
Her heart was like these . 
In its friction against wealth something had come over it that could not be effaced . 
The memory of this ball , then , became an occupation for Emma . 
Whenever the Wednesday came round she said to herself as she awoke , `` Ah ! 
I was there a week -- a fortnight -- three weeks ago . '' 
And little by little the faces grew confused in her remembrance . 
She forgot the tune of the quadrilles ; she no longer saw the liveries and appointments so distinctly ; some details escaped her , but the regret remained with her . 
Often when Charles was out she took from the cupboard , between the folds of the linen where she had left it , the green silk cigar case . 
She looked at it , opened it , and even smelt the odour of the lining -- a mixture of verbena and tobacco . 
Whose was it ? 
The Viscount 's ? 
Perhaps it was a present from his mistress . 
It had been embroidered on some rosewood frame , a pretty little thing , hidden from all eyes , that had occupied many hours , and over which had fallen the soft curls of the pensive worker . 
A breath of love had passed over the stitches on the canvas ; each prick of the needle had fixed there a hope or a memory , and all those interwoven threads of silk were but the continuity of the same silent passion . 
And then one morning the Viscount had taken it away with him . 
Of what had they spoken when it lay upon the wide-mantelled chimneys between flower-vases and Pompadour clocks ? 
She was at Tostes ; he was at Paris now , far away ! 
What was this Paris like ? 
What a vague name ! 
She repeated it in a low voice , for the mere pleasure of it ; it rang in her ears like a great cathedral bell ; it shone before her eyes , even on the labels of her pomade-pots . 
At night , when the carriers passed under her windows in their carts singing the `` Marjolaine , '' she awoke , and listened to the noise of the iron-bound wheels , which , as they gained the country road , was soon deadened by the soil . 
`` They will be there to-morrow ! '' 
she said to herself . 
And she followed them in thought up and down the hills , traversing villages , gliding along the highroads by the light of the stars . 
At the end of some indefinite distance there was always a confused spot , into which her dream died . 
She bought a plan of Paris , and with the tip of her finger on the map she walked about the capital . 
She went up the boulevards , stopping at every turning , between the lines of the streets , in front of the white squares that represented the houses . 
At last she would close the lids of her weary eyes , and see in the darkness the gas jets flaring in the wind and the steps of carriages lowered with much noise before the peristyles of theatres . 
She took in `` La Corbeille , '' a lady 's journal , and the `` Sylphe des Salons . '' 
She devoured , without skipping a word , all the accounts of first nights , races , and soirees , took interest in the debut of a singer , in the opening of a new shop . 
She knew the latest fashions , the addresses of the best tailors , the days of the Bois and the Opera . 
In Eugene Sue she studied descriptions of furniture ; she read Balzac and George Sand , seeking in them imaginary satisfaction for her own desires . 
Even at table she had her book by her , and turned over the pages while Charles ate and talked to her . 
The memory of the Viscount always returned as she read . 
Between him and the imaginary personages she made comparisons . 
But the circle of which he was the centre gradually widened round him , and the aureole that he bore , fading from his form , broadened out beyond , lighting up her other dreams . 
Paris , more vague than the ocean , glimmered before Emma 's eyes in an atmosphere of vermilion . 
The many lives that stirred amid this tumult were , however , divided into parts , classed as distinct pictures . 
Emma perceived only two or three that hid from her all the rest , and in themselves represented all humanity . 
The world of ambassadors moved over polished floors in drawing rooms lined with mirrors , round oval tables covered with velvet and gold-fringed cloths . 
There were dresses with trains , deep mysteries , anguish hidden beneath smiles . 
Then came the society of the duchesses ; all were pale ; all got up at four o'clock ; the women , poor angels , wore English point on their petticoats ; and the men , unappreciated geniuses under a frivolous outward seeming , rode horses to death at pleasure parties , spent the summer season at Baden , and towards the forties married heiresses . 
In the private rooms of restaurants , where one sups after midnight by the light of wax candles , laughed the motley crowd of men of letters and actresses . 
They were prodigal as kings , full of ideal , ambitious , fantastic frenzy . 
This was an existence outside that of all others , between heaven and earth , in the midst of storms , having something of the sublime . 
For the rest of the world it was lost , with no particular place and as if non-existent . 
The nearer things were , moreover , the more her thoughts turned away from them . 
All her immediate surroundings , the wearisome country , the middle-class imbeciles , the mediocrity of existence , seemed to her exceptional , a peculiar chance that had caught hold of her , while beyond stretched , as far as eye could see , an immense land of joys and passions . 
She confused in her desire the sensualities of luxury with the delights of the heart , elegance of manners with delicacy of sentiment . 
Did not love , like Indian plants , need a special soil , a particular temperature ? 
Signs by moonlight , long embraces , tears flowing over yielded hands , all the fevers of the flesh and the languors of tenderness could not be separated from the balconies of great castles full of indolence , from boudoirs with silken curtains and thick carpets , well-filled flower-stands , a bed on a raised dias , nor from the flashing of precious stones and the shoulder-knots of liveries . 
The lad from the posting house who came to groom the mare every morning passed through the passage with his heavy wooden shoes ; there were holes in his blouse ; his feet were bare in list slippers . 
And this was the groom in knee-britches with whom she had to be content ! 
His work done , he did not come back again all day , for Charles on his return put up his horse himself , unsaddled him and put on the halter , while the servant-girl brought a bundle of straw and threw it as best she could into the manger . 
To replace Nastasie -LRB- who left Tostes shedding torrents of tears -RRB- Emma took into her service a young girl of fourteen , an orphan with a sweet face . 
She forbade her wearing cotton caps , taught her to address her in the third person , to bring a glass of water on a plate , to knock before coming into a room , to iron , starch , and to dress her -- wanted to make a lady 's - maid of her . 
The new servant obeyed without a murmur , so as not to be sent away ; and as madame usually left the key in the sideboard , Felicite every evening took a small supply of sugar that she ate alone in her bed after she had said her prayers . 
Sometimes in the afternoon she went to chat with the postilions . 
Madame was in her room upstairs . 
She wore an open dressing gown that showed between the shawl facings of her bodice a pleated chamisette with three gold buttons . 
Her belt was a corded girdle with great tassels , and her small garnet coloured slippers had a large knot of ribbon that fell over her instep . 
She had bought herself a blotting book , writing case , pen-holder , and envelopes , although she had no one to write to ; she dusted her what-not , looked at herself in the glass , picked up a book , and then , dreaming between the lines , let it drop on her knees . 
She longed to travel or to go back to her convent . 
She wished at the same time to die and to live in Paris . 
Charles in snow and rain trotted across country . 
He ate omelettes on farmhouse tables , poked his arm into damp beds , received the tepid spurt of blood-lettings in his face , listened to death-rattles , examined basins , turned over a good deal of dirty linen ; but every evening he found a blazing fire , his dinner ready , easy-chairs , and a well-dressed woman , charming with an odour of freshness , though no one could say whence the perfume came , or if it were not her skin that made odorous her chemise . 
She charmed him by numerous attentions ; now it was some new way of arranging paper sconces for the candles , a flounce that she altered on her gown , or an extraordinary name for some very simple dish that the servant had spoilt , but that Charles swallowed with pleasure to the last mouthful . 
At Rouen she saw some ladies who wore a bunch of charms on the watch-chains ; she bought some charms . 
She wanted for her mantelpiece two large blue glass vases , and some time after an ivory necessaire with a silver-gilt thimble . 
The less Charles understood these refinements the more they seduced him . 
They added something to the pleasure of the senses and to the comfort of his fireside . 
It was like a golden dust sanding all along the narrow path of his life . 
He was well , looked well ; his reputation was firmly established . 
The country-folk loved him because he was not proud . 
He petted the children , never went to the public house , and , moreover , his morals inspired confidence . 
He was specially successful with catarrhs and chest complaints . 
Being much afraid of killing his patients , Charles , in fact only prescribed sedatives , from time to time and emetic , a footbath , or leeches . 
It was not that he was afraid of surgery ; he bled people copiously like horses , and for the taking out of teeth he had the `` devil 's own wrist . '' 
Finally , to keep up with the times , he took in `` La Ruche Medicale , '' a new journal whose prospectus had been sent him . 
He read it a little after dinner , but in about five minutes the warmth of the room added to the effect of his dinner sent him to sleep ; and he sat there , his chin on his two hands and his hair spreading like a mane to the foot of the lamp . 
Emma looked at him and shrugged her shoulders . 
Why , at least , was not her husband one of those men of taciturn passions who work at their books all night , and at last , when about sixty , the age of rheumatism sets in , wear a string of orders on their ill-fitting black coat ? 
She could have wished this name of Bovary , which was hers , had been illustrious , to see it displayed at the booksellers ' , repeated in the newspapers , known to all France . 
But Charles had no ambition . 
An Yvetot doctor whom he had lately met in consultation had somewhat humiliated him at the very bedside of the patient , before the assembled relatives . 
When , in the evening , Charles told her this anecdote , Emma inveighed loudly against his colleague . 
Charles was much touched . 
He kissed her forehead with a tear in his eyes . 
But she was angered with shame ; she felt a wild desire to strike him ; she went to open the window in the passage and breathed in the fresh air to calm herself . 
`` What a man ! 
What a man ! '' 
she said in a low voice , biting her lips . 
Besides , she was becoming more irritated with him . 
As he grew older his manner grew heavier ; at dessert he cut the corks of the empty bottles ; after eating he cleaned his teeth with his tongue ; in taking soup he made a gurgling noise with every spoonful ; and , as he was getting fatter , the puffed-out cheeks seemed to push the eyes , always small , up to the temples . 
Sometimes Emma tucked the red borders of his under-vest unto his waistcoat , rearranged his cravat , and threw away the dirty gloves he was going to put on ; and this was not , as he fancied , for himself ; it was for herself , by a diffusion of egotism , of nervous irritation . 
Sometimes , too , she told him of what she had read , such as a passage in a novel , of a new play , or an anecdote of the `` upper ten '' that she had seen in a feuilleton ; for , after all , Charles was something , an ever-open ear , and ever-ready approbation . 
She confided many a thing to her greyhound . 
She would have done so to the logs in the fireplace or to the pendulum of the clock . 
At the bottom of her heart , however , she was waiting for something to happen . 
Like shipwrecked sailors , she turned despairing eyes upon the solitude of her life , seeking afar off some white sail in the mists of the horizon . 
She did not know what this chance would be , what wind would bring it her , towards what shore it would drive her , if it would be a shallop or a three-decker , laden with anguish or full of bliss to the portholes . 
But each morning , as she awoke , she hoped it would come that day ; she listened to every sound , sprang up with a start , wondered that it did not come ; then at sunset , always more saddened , she longed for the morrow . 
Spring came round . 
With the first warm weather , when the pear trees began to blossom , she suffered from dyspnoea . 
From the beginning of July she counted how many weeks there were to October , thinking that perhaps the Marquis d'Andervilliers would give another ball at Vaubyessard . 
But all September passed without letters or visits . 
After the ennui of this disappointment her heart once more remained empty , and then the same series of days recommenced . 
So now they would thus follow one another , always the same , immovable , and bringing nothing . 
Other lives , however flat , had at least the chance of some event . 
One adventure sometimes brought with it infinite consequences and the scene changed . 
But nothing happened to her ; God had willed it so ! 
The future was a dark corridor , with its door at the end shut fast . 
She gave up music . 
What was the good of playing ? 
Who would hear her ? 
Since she could never , in a velvet gown with short sleeves , striking with her light fingers the ivory keys of an Erard at a concert , feel the murmur of ecstasy envelop her like a breeze , it was not worth while boring herself with practicing . 
Her drawing cardboard and her embroidery she left in the cupboard . 
What was the good ? 
What was the good ? 
Sewing irritated her . 
`` I have read everything , '' she said to herself . 
And she sat there making the tongs red-hot , or looked at the rain falling . 
How sad she was on Sundays when vespers sounded ! 
She listened with dull attention to each stroke of the cracked bell . 
A cat slowly walking over some roof put up his back in the pale rays of the sun . 
The wind on the highroad blew up clouds of dust . 
Afar off a dog sometimes howled ; and the bell , keeping time , continued its monotonous ringing that died away over the fields . 
But the people came out from church . 
The women in waxed clogs , the peasants in new blouses , the little bare-headed children skipping along in front of them , all were going home . 
And till nightfall , five or six men , always the same , stayed playing at corks in front of the large door of the inn . 
The winter was severe . 
The windows every morning were covered with rime , and the light shining through them , dim as through ground-glass , sometimes did not change the whole day long . 
At four o'clock the lamp had to be lighted . 
On fine days she went down into the garden . 
The dew had left on the cabbages a silver lace with long transparent threads spreading from one to the other . 
No birds were to be heard ; everything seemed asleep , the espalier covered with straw , and the vine , like a great sick serpent under the coping of the wall , along which , on drawing near , one saw the many-footed woodlice crawling . 
Under the spruce by the hedgerow , the curie in the three-cornered hat reading his breviary had lost his right foot , and the very plaster , scaling off with the frost , had left white scabs on his face . 
Then she went up again , shut her door , put on coals , and fainting with the heat of the hearth , felt her boredom weigh more heavily than ever . 
She would have liked to go down and talk to the servant , but a sense of shame restrained her . 
Every day at the same time the schoolmaster in a black skullcap opened the shutters of his house , and the rural policeman , wearing his sabre over his blouse , passed by . 
Night and morning the post-horses , three by three , crossed the street to water at the pond . 
From time to time the bell of a public house door rang , and when it was windy one could hear the little brass basins that served as signs for the hairdresser 's shop creaking on their two rods . 
This shop had as decoration an old engraving of a fashion-plate stuck against a windowpane and the wax bust of a woman with yellow hair . 
He , too , the hairdresser , lamented his wasted calling , his hopeless future , and dreaming of some shop in a big town -- at Rouen , for example , overlooking the harbour , near the theatre -- he walked up and down all day from the mairie to the church , sombre and waiting for customers . 
When Madame Bovary looked up , she always saw him there , like a sentinel on duty , with his skullcap over his ears and his vest of lasting . 
Sometimes in the afternoon outside the window of her room , the head of a man appeared , a swarthy head with black whiskers , smiling slowly , with a broad , gentle smile that showed his white teeth . 
A waltz immediately began and on the organ , in a little drawing room , dancers the size of a finger , women in pink turbans , Tyrolians in jackets , monkeys in frock coats , gentlemen in knee-breeches , turned and turned between the sofas , the consoles , multiplied in the bits of looking glass held together at their corners by a piece of gold paper . 
The man turned his handle , looking to the right and left , and up at the windows . 
Now and again , while he shot out a long squirt of brown saliva against the milestone , with his knee raised his instrument , whose hard straps tired his shoulder ; and now , doleful and drawling , or gay and hurried , the music escaped from the box , droning through a curtain of pink taffeta under a brass claw in arabesque . 
They were airs played in other places at the theatres , sung in drawing rooms , danced to at night under lighted lustres , echoes of the world that reached even to Emma . 
Endless sarabands ran through her head , and , like an Indian dancing girl on the flowers of a carpet , her thoughts leapt with the notes , swung from dream to dream , from sadness to sadness . 
When the man had caught some coppers in his cap , he drew down an old cover of blue cloth , hitched his organ on to his back , and went off with a heavy tread . 
She watched him going . 
But it was above all the meal-times that were unbearable to her , in this small room on the ground floor , with its smoking stove , its creaking door , the walls that sweated , the damp flags ; all the bitterness in life seemed served up on her plate , and with smoke of the boiled beef there rose from her secret soul whiffs of sickliness . 
Charles was a slow eater ; she played with a few nuts , or , leaning on her elbow , amused herself with drawing lines along the oilcloth table cover with the point of her knife . 
She now let everything in her household take care of itself , and Madame Bovary senior , when she came to spend part of Lent at Tostes , was much surprised at the change . 
She who was formerly so careful , so dainty , now passed whole days without dressing , wore grey cotton stockings , and burnt tallow candles . 
She kept saying they must be economical since they were not rich , adding that she was very contented , very happy , that Tostes pleased her very much , with other speeches that closed the mouth of her mother-in-law . 
Besides , Emma no longer seemed inclined to follow her advice ; once even , Madame Bovary having thought fit to maintain that mistresses ought to keep an eye on the religion of their servants , she had answered with so angry a look and so cold a smile that the good woman did not interfere again . 
Emma was growing difficult , capricious . 
She ordered dishes for herself , then she did not touch them ; one day drank only pure milk , the next cups of tea by the dozen . 
Often she persisted in not going out , then , stifling , threw open the windows and put on light dresses . 
After she had well scolded her servant she gave her presents or sent her out to see neighbours , just as she sometimes threw beggars all the silver in her purse , although she was by no means tender-hearted or easily accessible to the feelings of others , like most country-bred people , who always retain in their souls something of the horny hardness of the paternal hands . 
Towards the end of February old Rouault , in memory of his cure , himself brought his son-in-law a superb turkey , and stayed three days at Tostes . 
Charles being with his patients , Emma kept him company . 
He smoked in the room , spat on the firedogs , talked farming , calves , cows , poultry , and municipal council , so that when he left she closed the door on him with a feeling of satisfaction that surprised even herself . 
Moreover she no longer concealed her contempt for anything or anybody , and at times she set herself to express singular opinions , finding fault with that which others approved , and approving things perverse and immoral , all of which made her husband open his eyes widely . 
Would this misery last for ever ? 
Would she never issue from it ? 
Yet she was as good as all the women who were living happily . 
She had seen duchesses at Vaubyessard with clumsier waists and commoner ways , and she execrated the injustice of God . 
She leant her head against the walls to weep ; she envied lives of stir ; longed for masked balls , for violent pleasures , with all the wildness that she did not know , but that these must surely yield . 
She grew pale and suffered from palpitations of the heart . 
Charles prescribed valerian and camphor baths . 
Everything that was tried only seemed to irritate her the more . 
On certain days she chatted with feverish rapidity , and this over-excitement was suddenly followed by a state of torpor , in which she remained without speaking , without moving . 
What then revived her was pouring a bottle of eau-de-cologne over her arms . 
As she was constantly complaining about Tostes , Charles fancied that her illness was no doubt due to some local cause , and fixing on this idea , began to think seriously of setting up elsewhere . 
From that moment she drank vinegar , contracted a sharp little cough , and completely lost her appetite . 
It cost Charles much to give up Tostes after living there four years and `` when he was beginning to get on there . '' 
Yet if it must be ! 
He took her to Rouen to see his old master . 
It was a nervous complaint : change of air was needed . 
After looking about him on this side and on that , Charles learnt that in the Neufchatel arrondissement there was a considerable market town called Yonville-l'Abbaye , whose doctor , a Polish refugee , had decamped a week before . 
Then he wrote to the chemist of the place to ask the number of the population , the distance from the nearest doctor , what his predecessor had made a year , and so forth ; and the answer being satisfactory , he made up his mind to move towards the spring , if Emma 's health did not improve . 
One day when , in view of her departure , she was tidying a drawer , something pricked her finger . 
It was a wire of her wedding bouquet . 
The orange blossoms were yellow with dust and the silver bordered satin ribbons frayed at the edges . 
She threw it into the fire . 
It flared up more quickly than dry straw . 
Then it was , like a red bush in the cinders , slowly devoured . 
She watched it burn . 
The little pasteboard berries burst , the wire twisted , the gold lace melted ; and the shriveled paper corollas , fluttering like black butterflies at the back of the stove , at last flew up the chimney . 
When they left Tostes at the month of March , Madame Bovary was pregnant . 
Yonville-l'Abbaye -LRB- so called from an old Capuchin abbey of which not even the ruins remain -RRB- is a market-town twenty-four miles from Rouen , between the Abbeville and Beauvais roads , at the foot of a valley watered by the Rieule , a little river that runs into the Andelle after turning three water-mills near its mouth , where there are a few trout that the lads amuse themselves by fishing for on Sundays . 
We leave the highroad at La Boissiere and keep straight on to the top of the Leux hill , whence the valley is seen . 
The river that runs through it makes of it , as it were , two regions with distinct physiognomies -- all on the left is pasture land , all of the right arable . 
The meadow stretches under a bulge of low hills to join at the back with the pasture land of the Bray country , while on the eastern side , the plain , gently rising , broadens out , showing as far as eye can follow its blond cornfields . 
The water , flowing by the grass , divides with a white line the colour of the roads and of the plains , and the country is like a great unfolded mantle with a green velvet cape bordered with a fringe of silver . 
Before us , on the verge of the horizon , lie the oaks of the forest of Argueil , with the steeps of the Saint-Jean hills scarred from top to bottom with red irregular lines ; they are rain tracks , and these brick-tones standing out in narrow streaks against the grey colour of the mountain are due to the quantity of iron springs that flow beyond in the neighboring country . 
Here we are on the confines of Normandy , Picardy , and the Ile-de-France , a bastard land whose language is without accent and its landscape is without character . 
It is there that they make the worst Neufchatel cheeses of all the arrondissement ; and , on the other hand , farming is costly because so much manure is needed to enrich this friable soil full of sand and flints . 
Up to 1835 there was no practicable road for getting to Yonville , but about this time a cross-road was made which joins that of Abbeville to that of Amiens , and is occasionally used by the Rouen wagoners on their way to Flanders . 
Yonville-l'Abbaye has remained stationary in spite of its `` new outlet . '' 
Instead of improving the soil , they persist in keeping up the pasture lands , however depreciated they may be in value , and the lazy borough , growing away from the plain , has naturally spread riverwards . 
It is seem from afar sprawling along the banks like a cowherd taking a siesta by the water-side . 
At the foot of the hill beyond the bridge begins a roadway , planted with young aspens , that leads in a straight line to the first houses in the place . 
These , fenced in by hedges , are in the middle of courtyards full of straggling buildings , wine-presses , cart-sheds and distilleries scattered under thick trees , with ladders , poles , or scythes hung on to the branches . 
The thatched roofs , like fur caps drawn over eyes , reach down over about a third of the low windows , whose coarse convex glasses have knots in the middle like the bottoms of bottles . 
Against the plaster wall diagonally crossed by black joists , a meagre pear-tree sometimes leans and the ground-floors have at their door a small swing-gate to keep out the chicks that come pilfering crumbs of bread steeped in cider on the threshold . 
But the courtyards grow narrower , the houses closer together , and the fences disappear ; a bundle of ferns swings under a window from the end of a broomstick ; there is a blacksmith 's forge and then a wheelwright 's , with two or three new carts outside that partly block the way . 
Then across an open space appears a white house beyond a grass mound ornamented by a Cupid , his finger on his lips ; two brass vases are at each end of a flight of steps ; scutcheons * blaze upon the door . 
It is the notary 's house , and the finest in the place . 
* The panonceaux that have to be hung over the doors of notaries . 
The Church is on the other side of the street , twenty paces farther down , at the entrance of the square . 
The little cemetery that surrounds it , closed in by a wall breast high , is so full of graves that the old stones , level with the ground , form a continuous pavement , on which the grass of itself has marked out regular green squares . 
The church was rebuilt during the last years of the reign of Charles X . 
The wooden roof is beginning to rot from the top , and here and there has black hollows in its blue colour . 
Over the door , where the organ should be , is a loft for the men , with a spiral staircase that reverberates under their wooden shoes . 
The daylight coming through the plain glass windows falls obliquely upon the pews ranged along the walls , which are adorned here and there with a straw mat bearing beneath it the words in large letters , `` Mr. So-and-so 's pew . '' 
Farther on , at a spot where the building narrows , the confessional forms a pendant to a statuette of the Virgin , clothed in a satin robe , coifed with a tulle veil sprinkled with silver stars , and with red cheeks , like an idol of the Sandwich Islands ; and , finally , a copy of the `` Holy Family , presented by the Minister of the Interior , '' overlooking the high altar , between four candlesticks , closes in the perspective . 
The choir stalls , of deal wood , have been left unpainted . 
The market , that is to say , a tiled roof supported by some twenty posts , occupies of itself about half the public square of Yonville . 
The town hall , constructed `` from the designs of a Paris architect , '' is a sort of Greek temple that forms the corner next to the chemist 's shop . 
On the ground-floor are three Ionic columns and on the first floor a semicircular gallery , while the dome that crowns it is occupied by a Gallic cock , resting one foot upon the `` Charte '' and holding in the other the scales of Justice . 
But that which most attracts the eye is opposite the Lion d'Or inn , the chemist 's shop of Monsieur Homais . 
In the evening especially its argand lamp is lit up and the red and green jars that embellish his shop-front throw far across the street their two streams of colour ; then across them as if in Bengal lights is seen the shadow of the chemist leaning over his desk . 
His house from top to bottom is placarded with inscriptions written in large hand , round hand , printed hand : `` Vichy , Seltzer , Barege waters , blood purifiers , Raspail patent medicine , Arabian racahout , Darcet lozenges , Regnault paste , trusses , baths , hygienic chocolate , '' etc. . 
And the signboard , which takes up all the breadth of the shop , bears in gold letters , `` Homais , Chemist . '' 
Then at the back of the shop , behind the great scales fixed to the counter , the word `` Laboratory '' appears on a scroll above a glass door , which about half-way up once more repeats `` Homais '' in gold letters on a black ground . 
Beyond this there is nothing to see at Yonville . 
The street -LRB- the only one -RRB- a gunshot in length and flanked by a few shops on either side stops short at the turn of the highroad . 
If it is left on the right hand and the foot of the Saint-Jean hills followed the cemetery is soon reached . 
At the time of the cholera , in order to enlarge this , a piece of wall was pulled down , and three acres of land by its side purchased ; but all the new portion is almost tenantless ; the tombs , as heretofore , continue to crowd together towards the gate . 
The keeper , who is at once gravedigger and church beadle -LRB- thus making a double profit out of the parish corpses -RRB- , has taken advantage of the unused plot of ground to plant potatoes there . 
From year to year , however , his small field grows smaller , and when there is an epidemic , he does not know whether to rejoice at the deaths or regret the burials . 
`` You live on the dead , Lestiboudois ! '' 
the curie at last said to him one day . 
This grim remark made him reflect ; it checked him for some time ; but to this day he carries on the cultivation of his little tubers , and even maintains stoutly that they grow naturally . 
Since the events about to be narrated , nothing in fact has changed at Yonville . 
The tin tricolour flag still swings at the top of the church-steeple ; the two chintz streamers still flutter in the wind from the linen-draper 's ; the chemist 's fetuses , like lumps of white amadou , rot more and more in their turbid alcohol , and above the big door of the inn the old golden lion , faded by rain , still shows passers-by its poodle mane . 
On the evening when the Bovarys were to arrive at Yonville , Widow Lefrancois , the landlady of this inn , was so very busy that she sweated great drops as she moved her saucepans . 
To-morrow was market-day . 
The meat had to be cut beforehand , the fowls drawn , the soup and coffee made . 
Moreover , she had the boarders ' meal to see to , and that of the doctor , his wife , and their servant ; the billiard-room was echoing with bursts of laughter ; three millers in a small parlour were calling for brandy ; the wood was blazing , the brazen pan was hissing , and on the long kitchen table , amid the quarters of raw mutton , rose piles of plates that rattled with the shaking of the block on which spinach was being chopped . 
From the poultry-yard was heard the screaming of the fowls whom the servant was chasing in order to wring their necks . 
A man slightly marked with small-pox , in green leather slippers , and wearing a velvet cap with a gold tassel , was warming his back at the chimney . 
His face expressed nothing but self-satisfaction , and he appeared to take life as calmly as the goldfinch suspended over his head in its wicker cage : this was the chemist . 
`` Artemise ! '' 
shouted the landlady , `` chop some wood , fill the water bottles , bring some brandy , look sharp ! 
If only I knew what dessert to offer the guests you are expecting ! 
Good heavens ! 
Those furniture-movers are beginning their racket in the billiard-room again ; and their van has been left before the front door ! 
The ` Hirondelle ' might run into it when it draws up . 
Call Polyte and tell him to put it up . 
Only think , Monsieur Homais , that since morning they have had about fifteen games , and drunk eight jars of cider ! 
Why , they 'll tear my cloth for me , '' she went on , looking at them from a distance , her strainer in her hand . 
`` That would n't be much of a loss , '' replied Monsieur Homais . 
`` You would buy another . '' 
`` Another billiard-table ! '' 
exclaimed the widow . 
`` Since that one is coming to pieces , Madame Lefrancois . 
I tell you again you are doing yourself harm , much harm ! 
And besides , players now want narrow pockets and heavy cues . 
Hazards are n't played now ; everything is changed ! 
One must keep pace with the times ! 
Just look at Tellier ! '' 
The hostess reddened with vexation . 
The chemist went on -- `` You may say what you like ; his table is better than yours ; and if one were to think , for example , of getting up a patriotic pool for Poland or the sufferers from the Lyons floods -- '' `` It is n't beggars like him that 'll frighten us , '' interrupted the landlady , shrugging her fat shoulders . 
`` Come , come , Monsieur Homais ; as long as the ` Lion d'Or ' exists people will come to it . 
We 've feathered our nest ; while one of these days you 'll find the ` Cafe Francais ' closed with a big placard on the shutters . 
Change my billiard-table ! '' 
she went on , speaking to herself , `` the table that comes in so handy for folding the washing , and on which , in the hunting season , I have slept six visitors ! 
But that dawdler , Hivert , does n't come ! '' 
`` Are you waiting for him for your gentlemen 's dinner ? '' 
`` Wait for him ! 
And what about Monsieur Binet ? 
As the clock strikes six you 'll see him come in , for he has n't his equal under the sun for punctuality . 
He must always have his seat in the small parlour . 
He 'd rather die than dine anywhere else . 
And so squeamish as he is , and so particular about the cider ! 
Not like Monsieur Leon ; he sometimes comes at seven , or even half-past , and he does n't so much as look at what he eats . 
Such a nice young man ! 
Never speaks a rough word ! '' 
`` Well , you see , there 's a great difference between an educated man and an old carabineer who is now a tax-collector . '' 
Six o'clock struck . 
Binet came in . 
He wore a blue frock-coat falling in a straight line round his thin body , and his leather cap , with its lappets knotted over the top of his head with string , showed under the turned-up peak a bald forehead , flattened by the constant wearing of a helmet . 
He wore a black cloth waistcoat , a hair collar , grey trousers , and , all the year round , well-blacked boots , that had two parallel swellings due to the sticking out of his big-toes . 
Not a hair stood out from the regular line of fair whiskers , which , encircling his jaws , framed , after the fashion of a garden border , his long , wan face , whose eyes were small and the nose hooked . 
Clever at all games of cards , a good hunter , and writing a fine hand , he had at home a lathe , and amused himself by turning napkin rings , with which he filled up his house , with the jealousy of an artist and the egotism of a bourgeois . 
He went to the small parlour , but the three millers had to be got out first , and during the whole time necessary for laying the cloth , Binet remained silent in his place near the stove . 
Then he shut the door and took off his cap in his usual way . 
`` It is n't with saying civil things that he 'll wear out his tongue , '' said the chemist , as soon as he was along with the landlady . 
`` He never talks more , '' she replied . 
`` Last week two travelers in the cloth line were here -- such clever chaps who told such jokes in the evening , that I fairly cried with laughing ; and he stood there like a dab fish and never said a word . '' 
`` Yes , '' observed the chemist ; `` no imagination , no sallies , nothing that makes the society-man . '' 
`` Yet they say he has parts , '' objected the landlady . 
`` Parts ! '' 
replied Monsieur Homais ; `` he , parts ! 
In his own line it is possible , '' he added in a calmer tone . 
And he went on -- `` Ah ! 
That a merchant , who has large connections , a jurisconsult , a doctor , a chemist , should be thus absent-minded , that they should become whimsical or even peevish , I can understand ; such cases are cited in history . 
But at least it is because they are thinking of something . 
Myself , for example , how often has it happened to me to look on the bureau for my pen to write a label , and to find , after all , that I had put it behind my ear ! '' 
Madame Lefrancois just then went to the door to see if the `` Hirondelle '' were not coming . 
She started . 
A man dressed in black suddenly came into the kitchen . 
By the last gleam of the twilight one could see that his face was rubicund and his form athletic . 
`` What can I do for you , Monsieur le Curie ? '' 
asked the landlady , as she reached down from the chimney one of the copper candlesticks placed with their candles in a row . 
`` Will you take something ? 
A thimbleful of Cassis * ? 
A glass of wine ? '' 
* Black currant liqueur . 
The priest declined very politely . 
He had come for his umbrella , that he had forgotten the other day at the Ernemont convent , and after asking Madame Lefrancois to have it sent to him at the presbytery in the evening , he left for the church , from which the Angelus was ringing . 
When the chemist no longer heard the noise of his boots along the square , he thought the priest 's behaviour just now very unbecoming . 
This refusal to take any refreshment seemed to him the most odious hypocrisy ; all priests tippled on the sly , and were trying to bring back the days of the tithe . 
The landlady took up the defence of her curie . 
`` Besides , he could double up four men like you over his knee . 
Last year he helped our people to bring in the straw ; he carried as many as six trusses at once , he is so strong . '' 
`` Bravo ! '' 
said the chemist . 
`` Now just send your daughters to confess to fellows which such a temperament ! 
I , if I were the Government , I 'd have the priests bled once a month . 
Yes , Madame Lefrancois , every month -- a good phlebotomy , in the interests of the police and morals . '' 
`` Be quiet , Monsieur Homais . 
You are an infidel ; you 've no religion . '' 
The chemist answered : `` I have a religion , my religion , and I even have more than all these others with their mummeries and their juggling . 
I adore God , on the contrary . 
I believe in the Supreme Being , in a Creator , whatever he may be . 
I care little who has placed us here below to fulfil our duties as citizens and fathers of families ; but I do n't need to go to church to kiss silver plates , and fatten , out of my pocket , a lot of good-for-nothings who live better than we do . 
For one can know Him as well in a wood , in a field , or even contemplating the eternal vault like the ancients . 
My God ! 
Mine is the God of Socrates , of Franklin , of Voltaire , and of Beranger ! 
I am for the profession of faith of the ` Savoyard Vicar , ' and the immortal principles of ' 89 ! 
And I ca n't admit of an old boy of a God who takes walks in his garden with a cane in his hand , who lodges his friends in the belly of whales , dies uttering a cry , and rises again at the end of three days ; things absurd in themselves , and completely opposed , moreover , to all physical laws , which prove to us , by the way , that priests have always wallowed in turpid ignorance , in which they would fain engulf the people with them . '' 
He ceased , looking round for an audience , for in his bubbling over the chemist had for a moment fancied himself in the midst of the town council . 
But the landlady no longer heeded him ; she was listening to a distant rolling . 
One could distinguish the noise of a carriage mingled with the clattering of loose horseshoes that beat against the ground , and at last the `` Hirondelle '' stopped at the door . 
It was a yellow box on two large wheels , that , reaching to the tilt , prevented travelers from seeing the road and dirtied their shoulders . 
The small panes of the narrow windows rattled in their sashes when the coach was closed , and retained here and there patches of mud amid the old layers of dust , that not even storms of rain had altogether washed away . 
It was drawn by three horses , the first a leader , and when it came down-hill its bottom jolted against the ground . 
Some of the inhabitants of Yonville came out into the square ; they all spoke at once , asking for news , for explanations , for hampers . 
Hivert did not know whom to answer . 
It was he who did the errands of the place in town . 
He went to the shops and brought back rolls of leather for the shoemaker , old iron for the farrier , a barrel of herrings for his mistress , caps from the milliner 's , locks from the hair-dresser 's and all along the road on his return journey he distributed his parcels , which he threw , standing upright on his seat and shouting at the top of his voice , over the enclosures of the yards . 
An accident had delayed him . 
Madame Bovary 's greyhound had run across the field . 
They had whistled for him a quarter of an hour ; Hivert had even gone back a mile and a half expecting every moment to catch sight of her ; but it had been necessary to go on . 
