Charles , as when they were first married , thought her delicious and quite irresistible . 
When he came home in the middle of the night , he did not dare to wake her . 
The porcelain night-light threw a round trembling gleam upon the ceiling , and the drawn curtains of the little cot formed as it were a white hut standing out in the shade , and by the bedside Charles looked at them . 
He seemed to hear the light breathing of his child . 
She would grow big now ; every season would bring rapid progress . 
He already saw her coming from school as the day drew in , laughing , with ink-stains on her jacket , and carrying her basket on her arm . 
Then she would have to be sent to the boarding-school ; that would cost much ; how was it to be done ? 
Then he reflected . 
He thought of hiring a small farm in the neighbourhood , that he would superintend every morning on his way to his patients . 
He would save up what he brought in ; he would put it in the savings-bank . 
Then he would buy shares somewhere , no matter where ; besides , his practice would increase ; he counted upon that , for he wanted Berthe to be well-educated , to be accomplished , to learn to play the piano . 
Ah ! 
how pretty she would be later on when she was fifteen , when , resembling her mother , she would , like her , wear large straw hats in the summer-time ; from a distance they would be taken for two sisters . 
He pictured her to himself working in the evening by their side beneath the light of the lamp ; she would embroider him slippers ; she would look after the house ; she would fill all the home with her charm and her gaiety . 
At last , they would think of her marriage ; they would find her some good young fellow with a steady business ; he would make her happy ; this would last for ever . 
Emma was not asleep ; she pretended to be ; and while he dozed off by her side she awakened to other dreams . 
To the gallop of four horses she was carried away for a week towards a new land , whence they would return no more . 
They went on and on , their arms entwined , without a word . 
Often from the top of a mountain there suddenly glimpsed some splendid city with domes , and bridges , and ships , forests of citron trees , and cathedrals of white marble , on whose pointed steeples were storks ' nests . 
They went at a walking-pace because of the great flag-stones , and on the ground there were bouquets of flowers , offered you by women dressed in red bodices . 
They heard the chiming of bells , the neighing of mules , together with the murmur of guitars and the noise of fountains , whose rising spray refreshed heaps of fruit arranged like a pyramid at the foot of pale statues that smiled beneath playing waters . 
And then , one night they came to a fishing village , where brown nets were drying in the wind along the cliffs and in front of the huts . 
It was there that they would stay ; they would live in a low , flat-roofed house , shaded by a palm-tree , in the heart of a gulf , by the sea . 
They would row in gondolas , swing in hammocks , and their existence would be easy and large as their silk gowns , warm and star-spangled as the nights they would contemplate . 
However , in the immensity of this future that she conjured up , nothing special stood forth ; the days , all magnificent , resembled each other like waves ; and it swayed in the horizon , infinite , harmonised , azure , and bathed in sunshine . 
But the child began to cough in her cot or Bovary snored more loudly , and Emma did not fall asleep till morning , when the dawn whitened the windows , and when little Justin was already in the square taking down the shutters of the chemist 's shop . 
She had sent for Monsieur Lheureux , and had said to him -- `` I want a cloak -- a large lined cloak with a deep collar . '' 
`` You are going on a journey ? '' 
he asked . 
`` No ; but -- never mind . 
I may count on you , may I not , and quickly ? '' 
He bowed . 
`` Besides , I shall want , '' she went on , `` a trunk -- not too heavy -- handy . '' 
`` Yes , yes , I understand . 
About three feet by a foot and a half , as they are being made just now . '' 
`` And a travelling bag . '' 
`` Decidedly , '' thought Lheureux , `` there 's a row on here . '' 
`` And , '' said Madame Bovary , taking her watch from her belt , `` take this ; you can pay yourself out of it . '' 
But the tradesman cried out that she was wrong ; they knew one another ; did he doubt her ? 
What childishness ! 
She insisted , however , on his taking at least the chain , and Lheureux had already put it in his pocket and was going , when she called him back . 
`` You will leave everything at your place . 
As to the cloak '' -- she seemed to be reflecting -- `` do not bring it either ; you can give me the maker 's address , and tell him to have it ready for me . '' 
It was the next month that they were to run away . 
She was to leave Yonville as if she was going on some business to Rouen . 
Rodolphe would have booked the seats , procured the passports , and even have written to Paris in order to have the whole mail-coach reserved for them as far as Marseilles , where they would buy a carriage , and go on thence without stopping to Genoa . 
She would take care to send her luggage to Lheureux whence it would be taken direct to the `` Hirondelle , '' so that no one would have any suspicion . 
And in all this there never was any allusion to the child . 
Rodolphe avoided speaking of her ; perhaps he no longer thought about it . 
He wished to have two more weeks before him to arrange some affairs ; then at the end of a week he wanted two more ; then he said he was ill ; next he went on a journey . 
The month of August passed , and , after all these delays , they decided that it was to be irrevocably fixed for the 4th September -- a Monday . 
At length the Saturday before arrived . 
Rodolphe came in the evening earlier than usual . 
`` Everything is ready ? '' 
she asked him . 
`` Yes . '' 
Then they walked round a garden-bed , and went to sit down near the terrace on the kerb-stone of the wall . 
`` You are sad , '' said Emma . 
`` No ; why ? '' 
And yet he looked at her strangely in a tender fashion . 
`` It is because you are going away ? '' 
she went on ; `` because you are leaving what is dear to you -- your life ? 
Ah ! 
I understand . 
I have nothing in the world ! 
you are all to me ; so shall I be to you . 
I will be your people , your country ; I will tend , I will love you ! '' 
`` How sweet you are ! '' 
he said , seizing her in his arms . 
`` Really ! '' 
she said with a voluptuous laugh . 
`` Do you love me ? 
Swear it then ! '' 
`` Do I love you -- love you ? 
I adore you , my love . '' 
The moon , full and purple-coloured , was rising right out of the earth at the end of the meadow . 
She rose quickly between the branches of the poplars , that hid her here and there like a black curtain pierced with holes . 
Then she appeared dazzling with whiteness in the empty heavens that she lit up , and now sailing more slowly along , let fall upon the river a great stain that broke up into an infinity of stars ; and the silver sheen seemed to writhe through the very depths like a heedless serpent covered with luminous scales ; it also resembled some monster candelabra all along which sparkled drops of diamonds running together . 
The soft night was about them ; masses of shadow filled the branches . 
Emma , her eyes half closed , breathed in with deep sighs the fresh wind that was blowing . 
They did not speak , lost as they were in the rush of their reverie . 
The tenderness of the old days came back to their hearts , full and silent as the flowing river , with the softness of the perfume of the syringas , and threw across their memories shadows more immense and more sombre than those of the still willows that lengthened out over the grass . 
Often some night-animal , hedgehog or weasel , setting out on the hunt , disturbed the lovers , or sometimes they heard a ripe peach falling all alone from the espalier . 
`` Ah ! 
what a lovely night ! '' 
said Rodolphe . 
`` We shall have others , '' replied Emma ; and , as if speaking to herself : `` Yet , it will be good to travel . 
And yet , why should my heart be so heavy ? 
Is it dread of the unknown ? 
The effect of habits left ? 
Or rather -- ? 
No ; it is the excess of happiness . 
How weak I am , am I not ? 
Forgive me ! '' 
`` There is still time ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Reflect ! 
perhaps you may repent ! '' 
`` Never ! '' 
she cried impetuously . 
And coming closer to him : `` What ill could come to me ? 
There is no desert , no precipice , no ocean I would not traverse with you . 
The longer we live together the more it will be like an embrace , every day closer , more heart to heart . 
There will be nothing to trouble us , no cares , no obstacle . 
We shall be alone , all to ourselves eternally . 
Oh , speak ! 
Answer me ! '' 
At regular intervals he answered , `` Yes -- Yes -- '' She had passed her hands through his hair , and she repeated in a childlike voice , despite the big tears which were falling , `` Rodolphe ! 
Rodolphe ! 
Ah ! 
Rodolphe ! 
dear little Rodolphe ! '' 
Midnight struck . 
`` Midnight ! '' 
said she . 
`` Come , it is to-morrow . 
One day more ! '' 
He rose to go ; and as if the movement he made had been the signal for their flight , Emma said , suddenly assuming a gay air -- `` You have the passports ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You are forgetting nothing ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Are you sure ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
`` It is at the Hotel de Provence , is it not , that you will wait for me at midday ? '' 
He nodded . 
`` Till to-morrow then ! '' 
said Emma in a last caress ; and she watched him go . 
He did not turn round . 
She ran after him , and , leaning over the water 's edge between the bulrushes -- `` To-morrow ! '' 
she cried . 
He was already on the other side of the river and walking fast across the meadow . 
After a few moments Rodolphe stopped ; and when he saw her with her white gown gradually fade away in the shade like a ghost , he was seized with such a beating of the heart that he leant against a tree lest he should fall . 
`` What an imbecile I am ! '' 
he said with a fearful oath . 
`` No matter ! 
She was a pretty mistress ! '' 
And immediately Emma 's beauty , with all the pleasures of their love , came back to him . 
For a moment he softened ; then he rebelled against her . 
`` For , after all , '' he exclaimed , gesticulating , `` I ca n't exile myself -- have a child on my hands . '' 
He was saying these things to give himself firmness . 
`` And besides , the worry , the expense ! 
Ah ! 
no , no , no , no ! 
a thousand times no ! 
That would be too stupid . '' 
No sooner was Rodolphe at home than he sat down quickly at his bureau under the stag 's head that hung as a trophy on the wall . 
But when he had the pen between his fingers , he could think of nothing , so that , resting on his elbows , he began to reflect . 
Emma seemed to him to have receded into a far-off past , as if the resolution he had taken had suddenly placed a distance between them . 
To get back something of her , he fetched from the cupboard at the bedside an old Rheims biscuit-box , in which he usually kept his letters from women , and from it came an odour of dry dust and withered roses . 
First he saw a handkerchief with pale little spots . 
It was a handkerchief of hers . 
Once when they were walking her nose had bled ; he had forgotten it . 
Near it , chipped at all the corners , was a miniature given him by Emma : her toilette seemed to him pretentious , and her languishing look in the worst possible taste . 
Then , from looking at this image and recalling the memory of its original , Emma 's features little by little grew confused in his remembrance , as if the living and the painted face , rubbing one against the other , had effaced each other . 
Finally , he read some of her letters ; they were full of explanations relating to their journey , short , technical , and urgent , like business notes . 
He wanted to see the long ones again , those of old times . 
In order to find them at the bottom of the box , Rodolphe disturbed all the others , and mechanically began rummaging amidst this mass of papers and things , finding pell-mell bouquets , garters , a black mask , pins , and hair -- hair ! 
dark and fair , some even , catching in the hinges of the box , broke when it was opened . 
Thus dallying with his souvenirs , he examined the writing and the style of the letters , as varied as their orthography . 
They were tender or jovial , facetious , melancholy ; there were some that asked for love , others that asked for money . 
A word recalled faces to him , certain gestures , the sound of a voice ; sometimes , however , he remembered nothing at all . 
In fact , these women , rushing at once into his thoughts , cramped each other and lessened , as reduced to a uniform level of love that equalised them all . 
So taking handfuls of the mixed-up letters , he amused himself for some moments with letting them fall in cascades from his right into his left hand . 
At last , bored and weary , Rodolphe took back the box to the cupboard , saying to himself , `` What a lot of rubbish ! '' 
Which summed up his opinion ; for pleasures , like schoolboys in a school courtyard , had so trampled upon his heart that no green thing grew there , and that which passed through it , more heedless than children , did not even , like them , leave a name carved upon the wall . 
`` Come , '' said he , `` let 's begin . '' 
He wrote -- `` Courage , Emma ! 
courage ! 
I would not bring misery into your life . '' 
`` After all , that 's true , '' thought Rodolphe . 
`` I am acting in her interest ; I am honest . '' 
`` Have you carefully weighed your resolution ? 
Do you know to what an abyss I was dragging you , poor angel ? 
No , you do not , do you ? 
You were coming confident and fearless , believing in happiness in the future . 
Ah ! 
unhappy that we are -- insensate ! '' 
Rodolphe stopped here to think of some good excuse . 
`` If I told her all my fortune is lost ? 
No ! 
Besides , that would stop nothing . 
It would all have to be begun over again later on . 
As if one could make women like that listen to reason ! '' 
He reflected , then went on -- `` I shall not forget you , oh believe it ; and I shall ever have a profound devotion for you ; but some day , sooner or later , this ardour -LRB- such is the fate of human things -RRB- would have grown less , no doubt . 
Lassitude would have come to us , and who knows if I should not even have had the atrocious pain of witnessing your remorse , of sharing it myself , since I should have been its cause ? 
The mere idea of the grief that would come to you tortures me , Emma . 
Forget me ! 
Why did I ever know you ? 
Why were you so beautiful ? 
Is it my fault ? 
O my God ! 
No , no ! 
Accuse only fate . '' 
`` That 's a word that always tells , '' he said to himself . 
`` Ah , if you had been one of those frivolous women that one sees , certainly I might , through egotism , have tried an experiment , in that case without danger for you . 
But that delicious exaltation , at once your charm and your torment , has prevented you from understanding , adorable woman that you are , the falseness of our future position . 
Nor had I reflected upon this at first , and I rested in the shade of that ideal happiness as beneath that of the manchineel tree , without foreseeing the consequences . '' 
`` Perhaps she 'll think I 'm giving it up from avarice . 
Ah , well ! 
so much the worse ; it must be stopped ! '' 
`` The world is cruel , Emma . 
Wherever we might have gone , it would have persecuted us . 
You would have had to put up with indiscreet questions , calumny , contempt , insult perhaps . 
Insult to you ! 
Oh ! 
And I , who would place you on a throne ! 
I who bear with me your memory as a talisman ! 
For I am going to punish myself by exile for all the ill I have done you . 
I am going away . 
Whither I know not . 
I am mad . 
Adieu ! 
Be good always . 
Preserve the memory of the unfortunate who has lost you . 
Teach my name to your child ; let her repeat it in her prayers . '' 
The wicks of the candles flickered . 
Rodolphe got up to , shut the window , and when he had sat down again -- `` I think it 's all right . 
Ah ! 
and this for fear she should come and hunt me up . '' 
`` I shall be far away when you read these sad lines , for I have wished to flee as quickly as possible to shun the temptation of seeing you again . 
No weakness ! 
I shall return , and perhaps later on we shall talk together very coldly of our old love . 
Adieu ! '' 
And there was a last `` adieu '' divided into two words ! 
`` A Dieu ! '' 
which he thought in very excellent taste . 
`` Now how am I to sign ? '' 
he said to himself . '' 
` Yours devotedly ? ' 
No ! 
` Your friend ? ' 
Yes , that 's it . '' 
`` Your friend . '' 
He re-read his letter . 
He considered it very good . 
`` Poor little woman ! '' 
he thought with emotion . 
`` She 'll think me harder than a rock . 
There ought to have been some tears on this ; but I ca n't cry ; it is n't my fault . '' 
Then , having emptied some water into a glass , Rodolphe dipped his finger into it , and let a big drop fall on the paper , that made a pale stain on the ink . 
Then looking for a seal , he came upon the one `` Amor nel cor . '' 
`` That does n't at all fit in with the circumstances . 
Pshaw ! 
never mind ! '' 
After which he smoked three pipes and went to bed . 
The next day when he was up -LRB- at about two o'clock -- he had slept late -RRB- , Rodolphe had a basket of apricots picked . 
He put his letter at the bottom under some vine leaves , and at once ordered Girard , his ploughman , to take it with care to Madame Bovary . 
He made use of this means for corresponding with her , sending according to the season fruits or game . 
`` If she asks after me , '' he said , `` you will tell her that I have gone on a journey . 
You must give the basket to her herself , into her own hands . 
Get along and take care ! '' 
Girard put on his new blouse , knotted his handkerchief round the apricots , and walking with great heavy steps in his thick iron-bound galoshes , made his way to Yonville . 
Madame Bovary , when he got to her house , was arranging a bundle of linen on the kitchen-table with Felicite . 
`` Here , '' said the ploughboy , `` is something for you -- from the master . '' 
She was seized with apprehension , and as she sought in her pocket for some coppers , she looked at the peasant with haggard eyes , while he himself looked at her with amazement , not understanding how such a present could so move anyone . 
At last he went out . 
Felicite remained . 
She could bear it no longer ; she ran into the sitting room as if to take the apricots there , overturned the basket , tore away the leaves , found the letter , opened it , and , as if some fearful fire were behind her , Emma flew to her room terrified . 
Charles was there ; she saw him ; he spoke to her ; she heard nothing , and she went on quickly up the stairs , breathless , distraught , dumb , and ever holding this horrible piece of paper , that crackled between her fingers like a plate of sheet-iron . 
On the second floor she stopped before the attic door , which was closed . 
Then she tried to calm herself ; she recalled the letter ; she must finish it ; she did not dare to . 
And where ? 
How ? 
She would be seen ! 
`` Ah , no ! 
here , '' she thought , `` I shall be all right . '' 
Emma pushed open the door and went in . 
The slates threw straight down a heavy heat that gripped her temples , stifled her ; she dragged herself to the closed garret-window . 
She drew back the bolt , and the dazzling light burst in with a leap . 
Opposite , beyond the roofs , stretched the open country till it was lost to sight . 
Down below , underneath her , the village square was empty ; the stones of the pavement glittered , the weathercocks on the houses were motionless . 
At the corner of the street , from a lower storey , rose a kind of humming with strident modulations . 
It was Binet turning . 
She leant against the embrasure of the window , and reread the letter with angry sneers . 
But the more she fixed her attention upon it , the more confused were her ideas . 
She saw him again , heard him , encircled him with her arms , and throbs of her heart , that beat against her breast like blows of a sledge-hammer , grew faster and faster , with uneven intervals . 
She looked about her with the wish that the earth might crumble into pieces . 
Why not end it all ? 
What restrained her ? 
She was free . 
She advanced , looking at the paving-stones , saying to herself , `` Come ! 
come ! '' 
The luminous ray that came straight up from below drew the weight of her body towards the abyss . 
It seemed to her that the ground of the oscillating square went up the walls and that the floor dipped on end like a tossing boat . 
She was right at the edge , almost hanging , surrounded by vast space . 
The blue of the heavens suffused her , the air was whirling in her hollow head ; she had but to yield , to let herself be taken ; and the humming of the lathe never ceased , like an angry voice calling her . 
`` Emma ! 
Emma ! '' 
cried Charles . 
She stopped . 
`` Wherever are you ? 
Come ! '' 
The thought that she had just escaped from death almost made her faint with terror . 
She closed her eyes ; then she shivered at the touch of a hand on her sleeve ; it was Felicite . 
`` Master is waiting for you , madame ; the soup is on the table . '' 
And she had to go down to sit at table . 
She tried to eat . 
The food choked her . 
Then she unfolded her napkin as if to examine the darns , and she really thought of applying herself to this work , counting the threads in the linen . 
Suddenly the remembrance of the letter returned to her . 
How had she lost it ? 
Where could she find it ? 
But she felt such weariness of spirit that she could not even invent a pretext for leaving the table . 
Then she became a coward ; she was afraid of Charles ; he knew all , that was certain ! 
Indeed he pronounced these words in a strange manner : `` We are not likely to see Monsieur Rodolphe soon again , it seems . '' 
`` Who told you ? '' 
she said , shuddering . 
`` Who told me ! '' 
he replied , rather astonished at her abrupt tone . 
`` Why , Girard , whom I met just now at the door of the Cafe Francais . 
He has gone on a journey , or is to go . '' 
She gave a sob . 
`` What surprises you in that ? 
He absents himself like that from time to time for a change , and , ma foi , I think he 's right , when one has a fortune and is a bachelor . 
Besides , he has jolly times , has our friend . 
He 's a bit of a rake . 
Monsieur Langlois told me -- '' He stopped for propriety 's sake because the servant came in . 
She put back into the basket the apricots scattered on the sideboard . 
Charles , without noticing his wife 's colour , had them brought to him , took one , and bit into it . 
`` Ah ! 
perfect ! '' 
said he ; `` just taste ! '' 
And he handed her the basket , which she put away from her gently . 
`` Do just smell ! 
What an odour ! '' 
he remarked , passing it under her nose several times . 
`` I am choking , '' she cried , leaping up . 
But by an effort of will the spasm passed ; then -- `` It is nothing , '' she said , `` it is nothing ! 
It is nervousness . 
Sit down and go on eating . '' 
For she dreaded lest he should begin questioning her , attending to her , that she should not be left alone . 
Charles , to obey her , sat down again , and he spat the stones of the apricots into his hands , afterwards putting them on his plate . 
Suddenly a blue tilbury passed across the square at a rapid trot . 
Emma uttered a cry and fell back rigid to the ground . 
In fact , Rodolphe , after many reflections , had decided to set out for Rouen . 
Now , as from La Huchette to Buchy there is no other way than by Yonville , he had to go through the village , and Emma had recognised him by the rays of the lanterns , which like lightning flashed through the twilight . 
The chemist , at the tumult which broke out in the house ran thither . 
The table with all the plates was upset ; sauce , meat , knives , the salt , and cruet-stand were strewn over the room ; Charles was calling for help ; Berthe , scared , was crying ; and Felicite , whose hands trembled , was unlacing her mistress , whose whole body shivered convulsively . 
`` I 'll run to my laboratory for some aromatic vinegar , '' said the druggist . 
Then as she opened her eyes on smelling the bottle -- `` I was sure of it , '' he remarked ; `` that would wake any dead person for you ! '' 
`` Speak to us , '' said Charles ; `` collect yourself ; it is your Charles , who loves you . 
Do you know me ? 
See ! 
here is your little girl ! 
Oh , kiss her ! '' 
The child stretched out her arms to her mother to cling to her neck . 
But turning away her head , Emma said in a broken voice `` No , no ! 
no one ! '' 
She fainted again . 
They carried her to her bed . 
She lay there stretched at full length , her lips apart , her eyelids closed , her hands open , motionless , and white as a waxen image . 
Two streams of tears flowed from her eyes and fell slowly upon the pillow . 
Charles , standing up , was at the back of the alcove , and the chemist , near him , maintained that meditative silence that is becoming on the serious occasions of life . 
`` Do not be uneasy , '' he said , touching his elbow ; `` I think the paroxysm is past . '' 
`` Yes , she is resting a little now , '' answered Charles , watching her sleep . 
`` Poor girl ! 
poor girl ! 
She had gone off now ! '' 
Then Homais asked how the accident had come about . 
Charles answered that she had been taken ill suddenly while she was eating some apricots . 
`` Extraordinary ! '' 
continued the chemist . 
`` But it might be that the apricots had brought on the syncope . 
Some natures are so sensitive to certain smells ; and it would even be a very fine question to study both in its pathological and physiological relation . 
The priests know the importance of it , they who have introduced aromatics into all their ceremonies . 
It is to stupefy the senses and to bring on ecstasies -- a thing , moreover , very easy in persons of the weaker sex , who are more delicate than the other . 
Some are cited who faint at the smell of burnt hartshorn , of new bread -- '' `` Take care ; you 'll wake her ! '' 
said Bovary in a low voice . 
`` And not only , '' the druggist went on , `` are human beings subject to such anomalies , but animals also . 
Thus you are not ignorant of the singularly aphrodisiac effect produced by the Nepeta cataria , vulgarly called catmint , on the feline race ; and , on the other hand , to quote an example whose authenticity I can answer for . 
Bridaux -LRB- one of my old comrades , at present established in the Rue Malpalu -RRB- possesses a dog that falls into convulsions as soon as you hold out a snuff-box to him . 
He often even makes the experiment before his friends at his summer-house at Guillaume Wood . 
Would anyone believe that a simple sternutation could produce such ravages on a quadrupedal organism ? 
It is extremely curious , is it not ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Charles , who was not listening to him . 
`` This shows us , '' went on the other , smiling with benign self-sufficiency , `` the innumerable irregularities of the nervous system . 
With regard to madame , she has always seemed to me , I confess , very susceptible . 
And so I should by no means recommend to you , my dear friend , any of those so-called remedies that , under the pretence of attacking the symptoms , attack the constitution . 
No ; no useless physicking ! 
Diet , that is all ; sedatives , emollients , dulcification . 
Then , do n't you think that perhaps her imagination should be worked upon ? '' 
`` In what way ? 
How ? '' 
said Bovary . 
`` Ah ! 
that is it . 
Such is indeed the question . 
` That is the question , ' as I lately read in a newspaper . '' 
But Emma , awaking , cried out -- `` The letter ! 
the letter ! '' 
They thought she was delirious ; and she was by midnight . 
Brain-fever had set in . 
For forty-three days Charles did not leave her . 
He gave up all his patients ; he no longer went to bed ; he was constantly feeling her pulse , putting on sinapisms and cold-water compresses . 
He sent Justin as far as Neufchatel for ice ; the ice melted on the way ; he sent him back again . 
He called Monsieur Canivet into consultation ; he sent for Dr. Lariviere , his old master , from Rouen ; he was in despair . 
What alarmed him most was Emma 's prostration , for she did not speak , did not listen , did not even seem to suffer , as if her body and soul were both resting together after all their troubles . 
About the middle of October she could sit up in bed supported by pillows . 
Charles wept when he saw her eat her first bread-and-jelly . 
Her strength returned to her ; she got up for a few hours of an afternoon , and one day , when she felt better , he tried to take her , leaning on his arm , for a walk round the garden . 
