His distrust made him only susceptible to those associations which are called up by their opposites , but he was then affected to the verge of breaking down . 
This tendency was increased by the sight of the house of the director of the workhouse . 
He was shown over it . 
Everything in it was new and magnificent , and he was told the price of every article of furniture . 
But Julien detected a certain element of sordidness , which smacked of stolen money into the bargain . 
Everybody in it , down to the servants , had the air of setting his face in advance against contempt . 
The collector of taxes , the superintendent of indirect taxes , the officer of gendarmerie , and two or three other public officials arrived with their wives . 
They were followed by some rich Liberals . 
Dinner was announced . 
It occurred to Julien , who was already feeling upset , that there were some poor prisoners on the other side of the dining-room wall , and that an illicit profit had perhaps been made over their rations of meat in order to purchase all that garish luxury with which they were trying to overwhelm him . 
`` Perhaps they are hungry at this very minute , '' he said to himself . 
He felt a choking in his throat . 
He found it impossible to eat and almost impossible to speak . 
Matters became much worse a quarter of an hour afterwards ; they heard in the distance some refrains of a popular song that was , it must be confessed , a little vulgar , which was being sung by one of the inmates . 
M. Valenod gave a look to one of his liveried servants who disappeared and soon there was no more singing to be heard . 
At that moment a valet offered Julien some Rhine wine in a green glass and Madame Valenod made a point of asking him to note that this wine cost nine francs a bottle in the market . 
Julien held up his green glass and said to M. Valenod , `` They are not singing that wretched song any more . '' 
`` Zounds , I should think not , '' answered the triumphant governor . 
`` I have made the rascals keep quiet . '' 
These words were too much for Julien . 
He had the manners of his new position , but he had not yet assimilated its spirit . 
In spite of all his hypocrisy and its frequent practice , he felt a big tear drip down his cheek . 
He tried to hide it in the green glass , but he found it absolutely impossible to do justice to the Rhine wine . 
`` Preventing singing he said to himself : Oh , my God , and you suffer it . '' 
Fortunately nobody noticed his ill-bred emotion . 
The collector of taxes had struck up a royalist song . 
`` So this , '' reflected Julien 's conscience during the hubbub of the refrain which was sung in chorus , `` is the sordid prosperity which you will eventually reach , and you will only enjoy it under these conditions and in company like this . 
You will , perhaps , have a post worth twenty thousand francs ; but while you gorge yourself on meat , you will have to prevent a poor prisoner from singing ; you will give dinners with the money which you have stolen out of his miserable rations and during your dinners he will be still more wretched . 
Oh , Napoleon , how sweet it was to climb to fortune in your way through the dangers of a battle , but to think of aggravating the pain of the unfortunate in this cowardly way . '' 
I own that the weakness which Julien had been manifesting in this soliloquy gives me a poor opinion of him . 
He is worthy of being the accomplice of those kid-gloved conspirators who purport to change the whole essence of a great country 's existence , without wishing to have on their conscience the most trivial scratch . 
Julien was sharply brought back to his role . 
He had not been invited to dine in such good company simply to moon dreamily and say nothing . 
A retired manufacturer of cotton prints , a corresponding member of the Academy of Besançon and of that of Uzès , spoke to him from the other end of the table and asked him if what was said everywhere about his astonishing progress in the study of the New Testament was really true . 
A profound silence was suddenly inaugurated . 
A New Testament in Latin was found as though by magic in the possession of the learned member of the two Academies . 
After Julien had answered , part of a sentence in Latin was read at random . 
Julien then recited . 
His memory proved faithful and the prodigy was admired with all the boisterous energy of the end of dinner . 
Julien looked at the flushed faces of the ladies . 
A good many were not so plain . 
He recognised the wife of the collector , who was a fine singer . 
`` I am ashamed , as a matter of fact , to talk Latin so long before these ladies , '' he said , turning his eyes on her . 
`` If M. Rubigneau , '' that was the name of the member of the two Academies , `` will be kind enough to read a Latin sentence at random instead of answering by following the Latin text , I will try to translate it impromptu . '' 
This second test completed his glory . 
Several Liberals were there , who , though rich , were none the less the happy fathers of children capable of obtaining scholarships , and had consequently been suddenly converted at the last mission . 
In spite of this diplomatic step , M. de Rênal had never been willing to receive them in his house . 
These worthy people , who only knew Julien by name and from having seen him on horseback on the day of the king of -- 's entry , were his most noisy admirers . 
`` When will those fools get tired of listening to this Biblical language , which they do n't understand in the least , '' he thought . 
But , on the contrary , that language amused them by its strangeness and made them smile . 
But Julien got tired . 
As six o'clock struck he got up gravely and talked about a chapter in Ligorio 's New Theology which he had to learn by heart to recite on the following day to M. Chélan , `` for , '' he added pleasantly , `` my business is to get lessons said by heart to me , and to say them by heart myself . '' 
There was much laughter and admiration ; such is the kind of wit which is customary in Verrières . 
Julien had already got up and in spite of etiquette everybody got up as well , so great is the dominion exercised by genius . 
Madame Valenod kept him for another quarter of an hour . 
He really must hear her children recite their catechisms . 
They made the most absurd mistakes which he alone noticed . 
He was careful not to point them out . 
`` What ignorance of the first principles of religion , '' he thought . 
Finally he bowed and thought he could get away ; but they insisted on his trying a fable of La Fontaine . 
`` That author is quite immoral , '' said Julien to Madame Valenod . 
A certain fable on Messire Jean Chouart dares to pour ridicule on all that we hold most venerable . 
He is shrewdly blamed by the best commentators . 
Before Julien left he received four or five invitations to dinner . 
`` This young man is an honour to the department , '' cried all the guests in chorus . 
They even went so far as to talk of a pension voted out of the municipal funds to put him in the position of continuing his studies at Paris . 
While this rash idea was resounding through the dining-room Julien had swiftly reached the front door . 
`` You scum , you scum , '' he cried , three or four times in succession in a low voice as he indulged in the pleasure of breathing in the fresh air . 
He felt quite an aristocrat at this moment , though he was the very man who had been shocked for so long a period by the haughty smile of disdainful superiority which he detected behind all the courtesies addressed to him at M. de Rênal 's . 
He could not help realising the extreme difference . 
Why let us even forget the fact of its being money stolen from the poor inmates , he said to himself as he went away , let us forget also their stopping the singing . 
M. de Rênal would never think of telling his guests the price of each bottle of wine with which he regales them , and as for this M. Valenod , and his chronic cataloguing of his various belongings , he can not talk of his house , his estate , etc. , in the presence of his wife without saying , `` Your house , your estate . '' 
This lady , who was apparently so keenly alive to the delights of decorum , had just had an awful scene during the dinner with a servant who had broken a wine-glass and spoilt one of her dozens ; and the servant too had answered her back with the utmost insolence . 
`` What a collection , '' said Julien to himself ; `` I would not live like they do were they to give me half of all they steal . 
I shall give myself away one fine day . 
I should not be able to restrain myself from expressing the disgust with which they inspire one . '' 
It was necessary , however , to obey Madame de Rênal 's injunction and be present at several dinners of the same kind . 
Julien was the fashion ; he was forgiven his Guard of Honour uniform , or rather that indiscretion was the real cause of his successes . 
Soon the only question in Verrières was whether M. de Rênal or M. the director of the workhouse would be the victor in the struggle for the clever young man . 
These gentlemen formed , together with M. Maslon , a triumvirate which had tyrannised over the town for a number of years . 
People were jealous of the mayor , and the Liberals had good cause for complaint , but , after all , he was noble and born for a superior position , while M. Valenod 's father had not left him six hundred francs a year . 
His career had necessitated a transition from pitying the shabby green suit which had been so notorious in his youth , to envying the Norman horses , his gold chains , his Paris clothes , his whole present prosperity . 
Julien thought that he had discovered one honest man in the whirlpool of this novel world . 
He was a geometrist named Gros , and had the reputation of being a Jacobin . 
Julien , who had vowed to say nothing but that which he disbelieved himself , was obliged to watch himself carefully when speaking to M. Gros . 
He received big packets of exercises from Vergy . 
He was advised to visit his father frequently , and he fulfilled his unpleasant duty . 
In a word he was patching his reputation together pretty well , when he was thoroughly surprised to find himself woken up one morning by two hands held over his eyes . 
It was Madame de Rênal who had made a trip to the town , and who , running up the stairs four at a time while she left her children playing with a pet rabbit , had reached Julien 's room a moment before her sons . 
This moment was delicious but very short : Madame de Rênal had disappeared when the children arrived with the rabbit which they wanted to show to their friend . 
Julien gave them all a hearty welcome , including the rabbit . 
He seemed at home again . 
He felt that he loved these children and that he enjoyed gossiping with them . 
He was astonished at the sweetness of their voices , at the simplicity and dignity of their little ways ; he felt he needed to purge his imagination of all the vulgar practices and all the unpleasantnesses among which he had been living in Verrières . 
For there everyone was always frightened of being scored off , and luxury and poverty were at daggers drawn . 
The people with whom he would dine would enter into confidences over the joint which were as humiliating for themselves as they were nauseating to the hearer . 
`` You others , who are nobles , you are right to be proud , '' he said to Madame de Rênal , as he gave her an account of all the dinners which he had put up with . 
`` You 're the fashion then , '' and she laughed heartily as she thought of the rouge which Madame Valenod thought herself obliged to put on each time she expected Julien . 
`` I think she has designs on your heart , '' she added . 
The breakfast was delicious . 
The presence of the children , though apparently embarrassing , increased as a matter of fact the happiness of the party . 
The poor children did not know how to give expression to the joy at seeing Julien again . 
The servants had not failed to tell them that he had been offered two hundred francs a year more to educate the little Valenods . 
Stanislas-Xavier , who was still pale from his illness , suddenly asked his mother in the middle of the breakfast , the value of his silver cover and of the goblet in which he was drinking . 
`` Why do you want to know that ? '' 
`` I want to sell them to give the price to M. Julien so that he sha n't be done if he stays with us . '' 
Julien kissed him with tears in his eyes . 
His mother wept unrestrainedly , for Julien took Stanislas on his knees and explained to him that he should not use the word `` done '' which , when employed in that meaning was an expression only fit for the servants ' hall . 
Seeing the pleasure which he was giving to Madame de Rênal , he tried to explain the meaning of being `` done '' by picturesque illustrations which amused the children . 
`` I understand , '' said Stanislas , `` it 's like the crow who is silly enough to let his cheese fall and be taken by the fox who has been playing the flatterer . '' 
Madame de Rênal felt mad with joy and covered her children with kisses , a process which involved her leaning a little on Julien . 
Suddenly the door opened . 
It was M. de Rênal . 
His severe and discontented expression contrasted strangely with the sweet joy which his presence dissipated . 
Madame de Rênal grew pale , she felt herself incapable of denying anything . 
Julien seized command of the conversation and commenced telling M. the mayor in a loud voice the incident of the silver goblet which Stanislas wanted to sell . 
He was quite certain this story would not be appreciated . 
M. de Rênal first of all frowned mechanically at the mere mention of money . 
Any allusion to that mineral , he was accustomed to say , is always a prelude to some demand made upon my purse . 
But this was something more than a mere money matter . 
His suspicions were increased . 
The air of happiness which animated his family during his absence was not calculated to smooth matters over with a man who was a prey to so touchy a vanity . 
`` Yes , yes , '' he said , as his wife started to praise to him the combined grace and cleverness of the way in which Julien gave ideas to his pupils . 
`` I know , he renders me hateful to my own children . 
It is easy enough for him to make himself a hundred times more loveable to them than I am myself , though after all , I am the master . 
In this century everything tends to make legitimate authority unpopular . 
Poor France ! '' 
Madame de Rênal had not stopped to examine the fine shades of the welcome which her husband gave her . 
She had just caught a glimpse of the possibility of spending twelve hours with Julien . 
She had a lot of purchases to make in the town and declared that she positively insisted in going to dine at the tavern . 
She stuck to her idea in spite of all her husband 's protests and remonstrances . 
The children were delighted with the mere word tavern , which our modern prudery denounces with so much gusto . 
M. de Rênal left his wife in the first draper 's shop which she entered and went to pay some visits . 
He came back more morose than he had been in the morning . 
He was convinced that the whole town was busy with himself and Julien . 
As a matter of fact no one had yet given him any inkling as to the more offensive part of the public gossip . 
Those items which had been repeated to M. the mayor dealt exclusively with the question of whether Julien would remain with him with six hundred francs , or would accept the eight hundred francs offered by M. the director of the workhouse . 
The director , when he met M. de Rênal in society , gave him the cold shoulder . 
These tactics were not without cleverness . 
There is no impulsiveness in the provinces . 
Sensations are so rare there that they are never allowed to be wasted . 
M. le Valenod was what is called a hundred miles from Paris a faraud ; that means a coarse imprudent type of man . 
His triumphant existence since 1815 had consolidated his natural qualities . 
He reigned , so to say , in Verrières subject to the orders of M. de Rênal ; but as he was much more energetic , was ashamed of nothing , had a finger in everything , and was always going about writing and speaking , and was oblivious of all snubs , he had , although without any personal pretensions , eventually come to equal the mayor in reputation in the eyes of the ecclesiastical authorities . 
M. Valenod had , as it were , said to the local tradesmen `` Give me the two biggest fools among your number ; '' to the men of law `` Show me the two greatest dunces ; '' to the sanitary officials `` Point out to me the two biggest charlatans . '' 
When he had thus collected the most impudent members of each separate calling , he had practically said to them , `` Let us reign together . '' 
The manners of those people were offensive to M. de Rênal . 
The coarseness of Valenod took offence at nothing , not even the frequency with which the little abbé Maslon would give the lie to him in public . 
But in the middle of all this prosperity M. Valenod found it necessary to reassure himself by a number of petty acts of insolence on the score of the crude truths which he well realised that everybody was justified in addressing to him . 
His activity had redoubled since the fears which the visit of M. Appert had left him . 
He had made three journeys to Besançon . 
He wrote several letters by each courier ; he sent others by unknown men who came to his house at nightfall . 
Perhaps he had been wrong in securing the dismissal of the old curé Chélan . 
For this piece of vindictiveness had resulted in his being considered an extremely malicious man by several pious women of good birth . 
Besides , the rendering of this service had placed him in absolute dependence on M. the Grand Vicar de Frilair from whom he received some strange commissions . 
He had reached this point in his intrigues when he had yielded to the pleasure of writing an anonymous letter , and thus increasing his embarrassment . 
His wife declared to him that she wanted to have Julien in her house ; her vanity was intoxicated with the idea . 
Such being his position M. Valenod imagined in advance a decisive scene with his old colleague M. de Rênal . 
The latter might address to him some harsh words , which he would not mind much ; but he might write to Besançon and even to Paris . 
Some minister 's cousin might suddenly fall down on Verrières and take over the workhouse . 
Valenod thought of coming to terms with the Liberals . 
It was for that purpose that several of them had been invited to the dinner when Julien was present . 
He would have obtained powerful support against the mayor but the elections might supervene , and it was only too evident that the directorship of the workhouse was inconsistent with voting on the wrong side . 
Madame de Rênal had made a shrewd guess at this intrigue , and while she explained it to Julien as he gave her his arm to pass from one shop to another , they found themselves gradually taken as far as the Cours de la Fidélité where they spent several hours nearly as tranquil as those at Vergy . 
At the same time M. Valenod was trying to put off a definite crisis with his old patron by himself assuming the aggressive . 
These tactics succeeded on this particular day , but aggravated the mayor 's bad temper . 
Never has vanity at close grips with all the harshness and meanness of a pettifogging love of money reduced a man to a more sorry condition than that of M. de Rênal when he entered the tavern . 
The children , on the other hand , had never been more joyful and more merry . 
This contrast put the finishing touch on his pique . 
`` So far as I can see I am not wanted in my family , '' he said as he entered in a tone which he meant to be impressive . 
For answer , his wife took him on one side and declared that it was essential to send Julien away . 
The hours of happiness which she had just enjoyed had given her again the ease and firmness of demeanour necessary to follow out the plan of campaign which she had been hatching for a fortnight . 
The finishing touch to the trouble of the poor mayor of Verrières was the fact that he knew that they joked publicly in the town about his love for cash . 
Valenod was as generous as a thief , and on his side had acquitted himself brilliantly in the last five or six collections for the Brotherhood of St. Joseph , the congregation of the Virgin , the congregation of the Holy Sacrament , etc. , etc. . 
M. de Rênal 's name had been seen more than once at the bottom of the list of gentlefolk of Verrières , and the surrounding neighbourhood who were adroitly classified in the list of the collecting brethren according to the amount of their offerings . 
It was in vain that he said that he was not making money . 
The clergy stands no nonsense in such matters . 
Il piacere di alzar la testa tutto l'anno , è ben pagato da certi quarti d'ora che bisogna passar . 
-- Casti . 
Let us leave this petty man to his petty fears ; why did he take a man of spirit into his household when he needed someone with the soul of a valet ? 
Why ca n't he select his staff ? 
The ordinary trend of the nineteenth century is that when a noble and powerful individual encounters a man of spirit , he kills him , exiles him and imprisons him , or so humiliates him that the other is foolish enough to die of grief . 
In this country it so happens that it is not merely the man of spirit who suffers . 
The great misfortunes of the little towns of France and of representative governments , like that of New York , is that they find it impossible to forget the existence of individuals like M. de Rênal . 
It is these men who make public opinion in a town of twenty thousand inhabitants , and public opinion is terrible in a country which has a charter of liberty . 
A man , though of a naturally noble and generous disposition , who would have been your friend in the natural course of events , but who happens to live a hundred leagues off , judges you by the public opinion of your town which is made by those fools who have chanced to be born noble , rich and conservative . 
Unhappy is the man who distinguishes himself . 
Immediately after dinner they left for Vergy , but the next day but one Julien saw the whole family return to Verrières . 
An hour had not passed before he discovered to his great surprise that Madame de Rênal had some mystery up her sleeve . 
Whenever he came into the room she would break off her conversation with her husband and would almost seem to desire that he should go away . 
Julien did not need to be given this hint twice . 
He became cold and reserved . 
Madame de Rênal noticed it and did not ask for an explanation . 
`` Is she going to give me a successor , '' thought Julien . 
`` And to think of her being so familiar with me the day before yesterday , but that is how these great ladies are said to act . 
It 's just like kings . 
One never gets any more warning than the disgraced minister who enters his house to find his letter of dismissal . '' 
Julien noticed that these conversations which left off so abruptly at his approach , often dealt with a big house which belonged to the municipality of Verrières , a house which though old was large and commodious and situated opposite the church in the most busy commercial district of the town . 
`` What connection can there be between this house and a new lover , '' said Julien to himself . 
In his chagrin he repeated to himself the pretty verses of Francis I. which seemed novel to him , for Madame de Rênal had only taught him them a month before : Souvent femme varie Bien fol est qui s ' y fie . 
M. de Rênal took the mail to Besançon . 
This journey was a matter of two hours . 
He seemed extremely harassed . 
On his return he threw a big grey paper parcel on the table . 
`` Here 's that silly business , '' he said to his wife . 
An hour afterwards Julien saw the bill-poster carrying the big parcel . 
He followed him eagerly . 
`` I shall learn the secret at the first street corner . '' 
He waited impatiently behind the bill-poster who was smearing the back of the poster with his big brush . 
It had scarcely been put in its place before Julien 's curiosity saw the detailed announcement of the putting up for public auction of that big old house whose name had figured so frequently in M. de Rênal 's conversations with his wife . 
The auction of the lease was announced for to-morrow at two o'clock in the Town Hall after the extinction of the third fire . 
Julien was very disappointed . 
He found the time a little short . 
How could there be time to apprise all the other would-be purchasers . 
But , moreover , the bill , which was dated a fortnight back , and which he read again in its entirety in three distinct places , taught him nothing . 
He went to visit the house which was to let . 
The porter , who had not seen him approach , was saying mysteriously to a neighbour : `` Pooh , pooh , waste of time . 
M. Maslon has promised him that he shall have it for three hundred francs ; and , as the mayor kicked , he has been summoned to the bishop 's palace by M. the Grand Vicar de Frilair . '' 
Julien 's arrival seemed very much to disconcert the two friends who did not say another word . 
Julien made a point of being present at the auction of the lease . 
There was a crowd in the badly-lighted hall , but everybody kept quizzing each other in quite a singular way . 
All eyes were fixed on a table where Julien perceived three little lighted candle-ends on a tin plate . 
The usher was crying out `` Three hundred francs , gentlemen . '' 
`` Three hundred francs , that 's a bit too thick , '' said a man to his neighbour in a low voice . 
Julien was between the two of them . 
`` It 's worth more than eight hundred , I will raise the bidding . '' 
`` It 's cutting off your nose to spite your face . 
What will you gain by putting M. Maslon , M. Valenod , the Bishop , this terrible Grand Vicar de Frilair and the whole gang on your track . '' 
`` Three hundred and twenty francs , '' shouted out the other . 
`` Damned brute , '' answered his neighbour . 
`` Why here we have a spy of the mayor , '' he added , designating Julien . 
Julien turned sharply round to punish this remark , but the two , Franc-comtois , were no longer paying any attention to him . 
Their coolness gave him back his own . 
At that moment the last candle-end went out and the usher 's drawling voice awarded the house to M. de St. Giraud of the office of the prefecture of -- for a term of nine years and for a rent of 320 francs . 
As soon as the mayor had left the hall , the gossip began again . 
`` Here 's thirty francs that Grogeot 's recklessness is landing the municipality in for , '' said one -- `` But , '' answered another , `` M. de Saint Giraud will revenge himself on Grogeot . '' 
`` How monstrous , '' said a big man on Julien 's left . 
`` A house which I myself would have given eight hundred francs for my factory , and I would have got a good bargain . '' 
`` Pooh ! '' 
answered a young manufacturer , `` does n't M. de St. Giraud belong to the congregation ? 
Have n't his four children got scholarships ? 
poor man ! 
The community of Verrières must give him five hundred francs over and above his salary , that is all . '' 
`` And to say that the mayor was not able to stop it , '' remarked a third . 
`` For he 's an ultra he is , I 'm glad to say , but he does n't steal . '' 
`` Does n't he ? '' 
answered another . 
`` Suppose it 's simply a mere game of ` snap ' -LSB- 1 -RSB- then . 
Everything goes into a big common purse , and everything is divided up at the end of the year . 
But here 's that little Sorel , let 's go away . '' 
Julien got home in a very bad temper . 
He found Madame de Rênal very sad . 
`` You come from the auction ? '' 
she said to him . 
`` Yes , madam , where I had the honour of passing for a spy of M. the Mayor . '' 
`` If he had taken my advice , he would have gone on a journey . '' 
At this moment Monsieur de Rênal appeared : he looked very dismal . 
The dinner passed without a single word . 
Monsieur de Rênal ordered Julien to follow the children to Vergy . 
Madame de Rênal endeavoured to console her husband . 
`` You ought to be used to it , my dear . '' 
That evening they were seated in silence around the domestic hearth . 
The crackle of the burnt pinewood was their only distraction . 
It was one of those moments of silence which happen in the most united families . 
One of the children cried out gaily , `` Somebody 's ringing , somebody 's ringing ! '' 
`` Zounds ! 
supposing it 's Monsieur de Saint Giraud who has come under the pretext of thanking me , '' exclaimed the mayor . 
`` I will give him a dressing down . 
It is outrageous . 
It is Valenod to whom he 'll feel under an obligation , and it is I who get compromised . 
What shall I say if those damned Jacobin journalists get hold of this anecdote , and turn me into a M. Nonante Cinque . '' 
A very good-looking man , with big black whiskers , entered at this moment , preceded by the servant . 
`` Monsieur the mayor , I am Signor Geronimo . 
Here is a letter which M. the Chevalier de Beauvoisis , who is attached to the Embassy of Naples , gave me for you on my departure . 
That is only nine days ago , added Signor Geronimo , gaily looking at Madame de Rênal . 
Your cousin , and my good friend , Signor de Beauvoisis says that you know Italian , Madame . '' 
The Neapolitan 's good humour changed this gloomy evening into a very gay one . 
Madame de Rênal insisted upon giving him supper . 
She put the whole house on the go . 
She wanted to free Julien at any price from the imputation of espionage which she had heard already twice that day . 
Signor Geronimo was an excellent singer , excellent company , and had very gay qualities which , at any rate in France , are hardly compatible with each other . 
After dinner he sang a little duet with Madame de Rênal , and told some charming tales . 
At one o'clock in the morning the children protested , when Julien suggested that they should go to bed . 
`` Another of those stories , '' said the eldest . 
`` It is my own , Signorino , '' answered Signor Geronimo . 
`` Eight years ago I was , like you , a young pupil of the Naples Conservatoire . 
I mean I was your age , but I did not have the honour to be the son of the distinguished mayor of the pretty town of Verrières . '' 
This phrase made M. de Rênal sigh , and look at his wife . 
`` Signor Zingarelli , '' continued the young singer , somewhat exaggerating his action , and thus making the children burst into laughter , `` Signor Zingarelli was an excellent though severe master . 
He is not popular at the Conservatoire , but he insists on the pretence being kept up that he is . 
I went out as often as I could . 
I used to go to the little Theatre de San Carlino , where I used to hear divine music . 
But heavens ! 
the question was to scrape together the eight sous which were the price of admission to the parterre ? 
An enormous sum , '' he said , looking at the children and watching them laugh . 
`` Signor Giovannone , director of the San Carlino , heard me sing . 
I was sixteen . 
` That child is a treasure , ' he said . '' 
` Would you like me to engage you , my dear boy ? ' 
he said . '' 
` And how much will you give me ? ' '' 
` Forty ducats a month . ' 
That is one hundred and sixty francs , gentlemen . 
I thought the gates of heaven had opened . '' 
` But , ' I said to Giovannone , ` how shall I get the strict Zingarelli to let me go out ? ' '' ' 
Lascia fare a me . ' '' 
`` Leave it to me , '' exclaimed the eldest of the children . 
`` Quite right , my young sir . 
Signor Giovannone he says to me , ` First sign this little piece of paper , my dear friend . ' 
I sign . 
`` He gives me three ducats . 
I had never seen so much money . 
Then he told me what I had to do . 
`` Next day I asked the terrible Zingarelli for an audience . 
His old valet ushered me in . '' 
` What do you want of me , you naughty boy ? ' 
said Zingarelli . '' 
` Maestro , ' I said , ' I repent of all my faults . 
I will never go out of the Conservatoire by passing through the iron grill . 
I will redouble my diligence . ' '' 
` If I were not frightened of spoiling the finest bass voice I have ever heard , I would put you in prison for a fortnight on bread and water , you rascal . ' '' 
` Maestro , ' I answered , ' I will be the model boy of the whole school , credete a me , but I would ask one favour of you . 
If anyone comes and asks permission for me to sing outside , refuse . 
As a favour , please say that you can not let me . ' '' 
` And who the devil do you think is going to ask for a ne'er - do-well like you ? 
Do you think I should ever allow you to leave the Conservatoire ? 
Do you want to make fun of me ? 
Clear out ! 
Clear out ! ' 
he said , trying to give me a kick , ` or look out for prison and dry bread . ' '' 
One thing astonished Julien . 
The solitary weeks passed at Verrières in de Rênal 's house had been a period of happiness for him . 
He had only experienced revulsions and sad thoughts at the dinners to which he had been invited . 
And was he not able to read , write and reflect , without being distracted , in this solitary house ? 
He was not distracted every moment from his brilliant reveries by the cruel necessity of studying the movement of a false soul in order to deceive it by intrigue and hypocrisy . 
`` To think of happiness being so near to me -- the expense of a life like that is small enough . 
I could have my choice of either marrying Mademoiselle Elisa or of entering into partnership with Fouqué . 
But it is only the traveller who has just scaled a steep mountain and sits down on the summit who finds a perfect pleasure in resting . 
Would he be happy if he had to rest all the time ? '' 
Madame de Rênal 's mind had now reached a state of desperation . 
In spite of her resolutions , she had explained to Julien all the details of the auction . 
`` He will make me forget all my oaths ! '' 
she thought . 
She would have sacrificed her life without hesitation to save that of her husband if she had seen him in danger . 
She was one of those noble , romantic souls who find a source of perpetual remorse equal to that occasioned by the actual perpetration of a crime , in seeing the possibility of a generous action and not doing it . 
None the less , there were deadly days when she was not able to banish the imagination of the excessive happiness which she would enjoy if she suddenly became a widow , and were able to marry Julien . 
He loved her sons much more than their father did ; in spite of his strict justice they were devoted to him . 
She quite realised that if she married Julien , it would be necessary to leave that Vergy , whose shades were so dear to her . 
She pictured herself living at Paris , and continuing to give her sons an education which would make them admired by everyone . 
Her children , herself , and Julien ! 
They would be all perfectly happy ! 
Strange result of marriage such as the nineteenth century has made it ! 
The boredom of matrimonial life makes love fade away inevitably , when love has preceded the marriage . 
But none the less , said a philosopher , married life soon reduces those people who are sufficiently rich not to have to work , to a sense of being utterly bored by all quiet enjoyments . 
And among women , it is only arid souls whom it does not predispose to love . 
The philosopher 's reflection makes me excuse Madame de Rênal , but she was not excused in Verrières , and without her suspecting it , the whole town found its sole topic of interest in the scandal of her intrigue . 
As a result of this great affair , the autumn was less boring than usual . 
The autumn and part of the winter passed very quickly . 
It was necessary to leave the woods of Vergy . 
Good Verrières society began to be indignant at the fact that its anathemas made so little impression on Monsieur de Rênal . 
Within eight days , several serious personages who made up for their habitual gravity of demeanour by their pleasure in fulfilling missions of this kind , gave him the most cruel suspicions , at the same time utilising the most measured terms . 
M. Valenod , who was playing a deep game , had placed Elisa in an aristocratic family of great repute , where there were five women . 
Elisa , fearing , so she said , not to find a place during the winter , had only asked from this family about two-thirds of what she had received in the house of the mayor . 
The girl hit upon the excellent idea of going to confession at the same time to both the old curé Chélan , and also to the new one , so as to tell both of them in detail about Julien 's amours . 
The day after his arrival , the abbé Chélan summoned Julien to him at six o'clock in the morning . 
`` I ask you nothing , '' he said . 
`` I beg you , and if needs be I insist , that you either leave for the Seminary of Besançon , or for your friend Fouqué , who is always ready to provide you with a splendid future . 
I have seen to everything and have arranged everything , but you must leave , and not come back to Verrières for a year . '' 
Julien did not answer . 
He was considering whether his honour ought to regard itself offended at the trouble which Chélan , who , after all , was not his father , had taken on his behalf . 
`` I shall have the honour of seeing you again to-morrow at the same hour , '' he said finally to the curé . 
Chélan , who reckoned on carrying so young a man by storm , talked a great deal . 
Julien , cloaked in the most complete humbleness , both of demeanour and expression , did not open his lips . 
Eventually he left , and ran to warn Madame de Rênal whom he found in despair . 
Her husband had just spoken to her with a certain amount of frankness . 
The weakness of his character found support in the prospect of the legacy , and had decided him to treat her as perfectly innocent . 
He had just confessed to her the strange state in which he had found public opinion in Verrières . 
The public was wrong ; it had been misled by jealous tongues . 
But , after all , what was one to do ? 
Madame de Rênal was , for the moment , under the illusion that Julien would accept the offer of Valenod and stay at Verrières . 
But she was no longer the simple , timid woman that she had been the preceding year . 
Her fatal passion and remorse had enlightened her . 
She soon realised the painful truth -LRB- while at the same time she listened to her husband -RRB- , that at any rate a temporary separation had become essential . 
When he is far from me , Julien will revert to those ambitious projects which are so natural when one has no money . 
And I , Great God ! 
I am so rich , and my riches are so useless for my happiness . 
He will forget me . 
Loveable as he is , he will be loved , and he will love . 
You unhappy woman . 
What can I complain of ? 
Heaven is just . 
I was not virtuous enough to leave off the crime . 
Fate robs me of my judgment . 
I could easily have bribed Elisa if I had wanted to ; nothing was easier . 
I did not take the trouble to reflect for a moment . 
The mad imagination of love absorbed all my time . 
I am ruined . 
When Julien apprised Madame de Rênal of the terrible news of his departure , he was struck with one thing . 
He did not find her put forward any selfish objections . 
She was evidently making efforts not to cry . 
