We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the house and the kitchen ; and there was things enough on that table for seven families -- and all hot , too ; none of your flabby , tough meat that 's laid in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night and tastes like a hunk of old cold cannibal in the morning . 
Uncle Silas he asked a pretty long blessing over it , but it was worth it ; and it did n't cool it a bit , neither , the way I 've seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times . 
There was a considerable good deal of talk all the afternoon , and me and Tom was on the lookout all the time ; but it war n't no use , they did n't happen to say nothing about any runaway nigger , and we was afraid to try to work up to it . 
But at supper , at night , one of the little boys says : `` Pa , may n't Tom and Sid and me go to the show ? '' 
`` No , '' says the old man , `` I reckon there ai n't going to be any ; and you could n't go if there was ; because the runaway nigger told Burton and me all about that scandalous show , and Burton said he would tell the people ; so I reckon they 've drove the owdacious loafers out of town before this time . '' 
So there it was ! 
-- but I could n't help it . 
Tom and me was to sleep in the same room and bed ; so , being tired , we bid good-night and went up to bed right after supper , and clumb out of the window and down the lightning - rod , and shoved for the town ; for I did n't believe anybody was going to give the king and the duke a hint , and so if I did n't hurry up and give them one they 'd get into trouble sure . 
On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered , and how pap disappeared pretty soon , and did n't come back no more , and what a stir there was when Jim run away ; and I told Tom all about our Royal Nonesuch rapscallions , and as much of the raft voyage as I had time to ; and as we struck into the town and up through the -- here comes a raging rush of people with torches , and an awful whooping and yelling , and banging tin pans and blowing horns ; and we jumped to one side to let them go by ; and as they went by I see they had the king and the duke astraddle of a rail -- that is , I knowed it WAS the king and the duke , though they was all over tar and feathers , and did n't look like nothing in the world that was human -- just looked like a couple of monstrous big soldier-plumes . 
Well , it made me sick to see it ; and I was sorry for them poor pitiful rascals , it seemed like I could n't ever feel any hardness against them any more in the world . 
