Blame it , I says , I might get hunted up and jailed ; I 'd better lay low and keep dark , and not write at all ; the thing 's awful mixed now ; trying to better it , I 've worsened it a hundred times , and I wish to goodness I 'd just let it alone , dad fetch the whole business ! 
They buried him , and we come back home , and I went to watching faces again -- I could n't help it , and I could n't rest easy . 
But nothing come of it ; the faces did n't tell me nothing . 
The king he visited around in the evening , and sweetened everybody up , and made himself ever so friendly ; and he give out the idea that his congregation over in England would be in a sweat about him , so he must hurry and settle up the estate right away and leave for home . 
He was very sorry he was so pushed , and so was everybody ; they wished he could stay longer , but they said they could see it could n't be done . 
And he said of course him and William would take the girls home with them ; and that pleased everybody too , because then the girls would be well fixed and amongst their own relations ; and it pleased the girls , too -- tickled them so they clean forgot they ever had a trouble in the world ; and told him to sell out as quick as he wanted to , they would be ready . 
Them poor things was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see them getting fooled and lied to so , but I did n't see no safe way for me to chip in and change the general tune . 
Well , blamed if the king did n't bill the house and the niggers and all the property for auction straight off -- sale two days after the funeral ; but anybody could buy private beforehand if they wanted to . 
So the next day after the funeral , along about noon-time , the girls ' joy got the first jolt . 
A couple of nigger traders come along , and the king sold them the niggers reasonable , for three-day drafts as they called it , and away they went , the two sons up the river to Memphis , and their mother down the river to Orleans . 
