There was one where a young lady was at a window looking up at the moon , and tears running down her cheeks ; and she had an open letter in one hand with black sealing wax showing on one edge of it , and she was mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth , and underneath the picture it said `` And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art Gone Alas . '' 
These was all nice pictures , I reckon , but I did n't somehow seem to take to them , because if ever I was down a little they always give me the fan-tods . 
Everybody was sorry she died , because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures to do , and a body could see by what she had done what they had lost . 
But I reckoned that with her disposition she was having a better time in the graveyard . 
She was at work on what they said was her greatest picture when she took sick , and every day and every night it was her prayer to be allowed to live till she got it done , but she never got the chance . 
It was a picture of a young woman in a long white gown , standing on the rail of a bridge all ready to jump off , with her hair all down her back , and looking up to the moon , with the tears running down her face , and she had two arms folded across her breast , and two arms stretched out in front , and two more reaching up towards the moon -- and the idea was to see which pair would look best , and then scratch out all the other arms ; but , as I was saying , she died before she got her mind made up , and now they kept this picture over the head of the bed in her room , and every time her birthday come they hung flowers on it . 
Other times it was hid with a little curtain . 
The young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice sweet face , but there was so many arms it made her look too spidery , seemed to me . 
This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive , and used to paste obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering in it out of the Presbyterian Observer , and write poetry after them out of her own head . 
It was very good poetry . 
