When we come around , you turn your back ; and then whatever we 've put in the pan , do n't you let on you see it at all . 
And do n't you look when Jim unloads the pan -- something might happen , I do n't know what . 
And above all , do n't you HANDLE the witch-things . '' 
`` HANNEL 'm , Mars Sid ? 
What IS you a-talkin ' ` bout ? 
I wouldn ' lay de weight er my finger on um , not f ' r ten hund 'd thous 'n billion dollars , I would n't . '' 
THAT was all fixed . 
So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile in the back yard , where they keep the old boots , and rags , and pieces of bottles , and wore-out tin things , and all such truck , and scratched around and found an old tin washpan , and stopped up the holes as well as we could , to bake the pie in , and took it down cellar and stole it full of flour and started for breakfast , and found a couple of shingle-nails that Tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and sorrows on the dungeon walls with , and dropped one of them in Aunt Sally 's apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair , and t ` other we stuck in the band of Uncle Silas 's hat , which was on the bureau , because we heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger 's house this morning , and then went to breakfast , and Tom dropped the pewter spoon in Uncle Silas 's coat-pocket , and Aunt Sally was n't come yet , so we had to wait a little while . 
And when she come she was hot and red and cross , and could n't hardly wait for the blessing ; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with one hand and cracking the handiest child 's head with her thimble with the other , and says : `` I 've hunted high and I 've hunted low , and it does beat all what HAS become of your other shirt . '' 
My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things , and a hard piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the road with a cough , and was shot across the table , and took one of the children in the eye and curled him up like a fishing-worm , and let a cry out of him the size of a warwhoop , and Tom he turned kinder blue around the gills , and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for about a quarter of a minute or as much as that , and I would a sold out for half price if there was a bidder . 
