We could a had a whole dinner . 
But we did n't need it . 
All we needed was just enough for the pie , and so we throwed the rest away . 
We did n't cook none of the pies in the wash - pan -- afraid the solder would melt ; but Uncle Silas he had a noble brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of , because it belonged to one of his ancesters with a long wooden handle that come over from England with William the Conqueror in the Mayflower or one of them early ships and was hid away up garret with a lot of other old pots and things that was valuable , not on account of being any account , because they war n't , but on account of them being relicts , you know , and we snaked her out , private , and took her down there , but she failed on the first pies , because we did n't know how , but she come up smiling on the last one . 
We took and lined her with dough , and set her in the coals , and loaded her up with rag rope , and put on a dough roof , and shut down the lid , and put hot embers on top , and stood off five foot , with the long handle , cool and comfortable , and in fifteen minutes she turned out a pie that was a satisfaction to look at . 
But the person that et it would want to fetch a couple of kags of toothpicks along , for if that rope ladder would n't cramp him down to business I do n't know nothing what I 'm talking about , and lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him till next time , too . 
Nat did n't look when we put the witch pie in Jim 's pan ; and we put the three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under the vittles ; and so Jim got everything all right , and as soon as he was by himself he busted into the pie and hid the rope ladder inside of his straw tick , and scratched some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the window-hole . 
MAKING them pens was a distressid tough job , and so was the saw ; and Jim allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all . 
That 's the one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall . 
But he had to have it ; Tom said he 'd GOT to ; there war n't no case of a state prisoner not scrabbling his inscription to leave behind , and his coat of arms . 
