I hid the letter behind the first thing that come handy , and rushed . 
She flung herself at Tom , crying , and says : `` Oh , he 's dead , he 's dead , I know he 's dead ! '' 
And Tom he turned his head a little , and muttered something or other , which showed he war n't in his right mind ; then she flung up her hands , and says : `` He 's alive , thank God ! 
And that 's enough ! '' 
and she snatched a kiss of him , and flew for the house to get the bed ready , and scattering orders right and left at the niggers and everybody else , as fast as her tongue could go , every jump of the way . 
I followed the men to see what they was going to do with Jim ; and the old doctor and Uncle Silas followed after Tom into the house . 
The men was very huffy , and some of them wanted to hang Jim for an example to all the other niggers around there , so they would n't be trying to run away like Jim done , and making such a raft of trouble , and keeping a whole family scared most to death for days and nights . 
But the others said , do n't do it , it would n't answer at all ; he ai n't our nigger , and his owner would turn up and make us pay for him , sure . 
So that cooled them down a little , because the people that 's always the most anxious for to hang a nigger that hai n't done just right is always the very ones that ai n't the most anxious to pay for him when they 've got their satisfaction out of him . 
They cussed Jim considerble , though , and give him a cuff or two side the head once in a while , but Jim never said nothing , and he never let on to know me , and they took him to the same cabin , and put his own clothes on him , and chained him again , and not to no bed-leg this time , but to a big staple drove into the bottom log , and chained his hands , too , and both legs , and said he war n't to have nothing but bread and water to eat after this till his owner come , or he was sold at auction because he did n't come in a certain length of time , and filled up our hole , and said a couple of farmers with guns must stand watch around about the cabin every night , and a bulldog tied to the door in the daytime ; and about this time they was through with the job and was tapering off with a kind of generl good-bye cussing , and then the old doctor comes and takes a look , and says : `` Do n't be no rougher on him than you 're obleeged to , because he ai n't a bad nigger . 
