And all about that neighbourhood , even from the august London and Country Banking Company , from the tills of shops and inns -- doors standing that sunny weather entirely open -- money had been quietly and dexterously making off that day in handfuls and rouleaux , floating quietly along by walls and shady places , dodging quickly from the approaching eyes of men . 
And it had , though no man had traced it , invariably ended its mysterious flight in the pocket of that agitated gentleman in the obsolete silk hat , sitting outside the little inn on the outskirts of Port Stowe . 
It was ten days after -- and indeed only when the Burdock story was already old -- that the mariner collated these facts and began to understand how near he had been to the wonderful Invisible Man . 
THE MAN WHO WAS RUNNING In the early evening time Dr. Kemp was sitting in his study in the belvedere on the hill overlooking Burdock . 
It was a pleasant little room , with three windows -- north , west , and south -- and bookshelves covered with books and scientific publications , and a broad writing-table , and , under the north window , a microscope , glass slips , minute instruments , some cultures , and scattered bottles of reagents . 
Dr. Kemp 's solar lamp was lit , albeit the sky was still bright with the sunset light , and his blinds were up because there was no offence of peering outsiders to require them pulled down . 
Dr. Kemp was a tall and slender young man , with flaxen hair and a moustache almost white , and the work he was upon would earn him , he hoped , the fellowship of the Royal Society , so highly did he think of it . 
And his eye , presently wandering from his work , caught the sunset blazing at the back of the hill that is over against his own . 
For a minute perhaps he sat , pen in mouth , admiring the rich golden colour above the crest , and then his attention was attracted by the little figure of a man , inky black , running over the hill-brow towards him . 
He was a shortish little man , and he wore a high hat , and he was running so fast that his legs verily twinkled . 
