Of the Monstrous Pictures of Whales I shall ere long paint to you as well as one can without canvas , something like the true form of the whale as he actually appears to the eye of the whaleman when in his own absolute body the whale is moored alongside the whaleship so that he can be fairly stepped upon there . 
It may be worth while , therefore , previously to advert to those curious imaginary portraits of him which even down to the present day confidently challenge the faith of the landsman . 
It is time to set the world right in this matter , by proving such pictures of the whale all wrong . 
It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial delusions will be found among the oldest Hindoo , Egyptian , and Grecian sculptures . 
For ever since those inventive but unscrupulous times when on the marble panellings of temples , the pedestals of statues , and on shields , medallions , cups , and coins , the dolphin was drawn in scales of chain-armor like Saladin 's , and a helmeted head like St. George 's ; ever since then has something of the same sort of license prevailed , not only in most popular pictures of the whale , but in many scientific presentations of him . 
Now , by all odds , the most ancient extant portrait anyways purporting to be the whale 's , is to be found in the famous cavern-pagoda of Elephants , in India . 
The Brahmins maintain that in the almost endless sculptures of that immemorial pagoda , all the trades and pursuits , every conceivable avocation of man , were prefigured ages before any of them actually came into being . 
No wonder then , that in some sort our noble profession of whaling should have been there shadowed forth . 
The Hindoo whale referred to , occurs in a separate department of the wall , depicting the incarnation of Vishnu in the form of leviathan , learnedly known as the Matse Avatar . 
But though this sculpture is half man and half whale , so as only to give the tail of the latter , yet that small section of him is all wrong . 
