So ignorant are most landsmen of some of the plainest and most palpable wonders of the world , that without some hints touching the plain facts , historical and otherwise , of the fishery , they might scout at Moby Dick as a monstrous fable , or still worse and more detestable , a hideous and intolerable allegory . 
First : Though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the general perils of the grand fishery , yet they have nothing like a fixed , vivid conception of those perils , and the frequency with which they recur . 
One reason perhaps is , that not one in fifty of the actual disasters and deaths by casualties in the fishery , ever finds a public record at home , however transient and immediately forgotten that record . 
Do you suppose that that poor fellow there , who this moment perhaps caught by the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea , is being carried down to the bottom of the sea by the sounding leviathan -- do you suppose that that poor fellow 's name will appear in the newspaper obituary you will read to-morrow at your breakfast ? 
No : because the mails are very irregular between here and New Guinea . 
In fact , did you ever hear what might be called regular news direct or indirect from New Guinea ? 
Yet I will tell you that upon one particular voyage which I made to the Pacific , among many others we spoke thirty different ships , every one of which had had a death by a whale , some of them more than one , and three that had each lost a boat 's crew . 
For God 's sake , be economical with your lamps and candles ! 
not a gallon you burn , but at least one drop of man 's blood was spilled for it . 
Secondly : People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whale is an enormous creature of enormous power ; but I have ever found that when narrating to them some specific example of this two-fold enormousness , they have significantly complimented me upon my facetiousness ; when , I declare upon my soul , I had no more idea of being facetious than Moses , when he wrote the history of the plagues of Egypt . 
