Almost renouncing all thought of falling in with any game hereabouts , the ship had well nigh entered the straits , when the customary cheering cry was heard from aloft , and ere long a spectacle of singular magnificence saluted us . 
But here be it premised , that owing to the unwearied activity with which of late they have been hunted over all four oceans , the Sperm Whales , instead of almost invariably sailing in small detached companies , as in former times , are now frequently met with in extensive herds , sometimes embracing so great a multitude , that it would almost seem as if numerous nations of them had sworn solemn league and covenant for mutual assistance and protection . 
To this aggregation of the Sperm Whale into such immense caravans , may be imputed the circumstance that even in the best cruising grounds , you may now sometimes sail for weeks and months together , without being greeted by a single spout ; and then be suddenly saluted by what sometimes seems thousands on thousands . 
Broad on both bows , at the distance of some two or three miles , and forming a great semicircle , embracing one half of the level horizon , a continuous chain of whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling in the noon-day air . 
Unlike the straight perpendicular twin-jets of the Right Whale , which , dividing at top , falls over in two branches , like the cleft drooping boughs of a willow , the single forward-slanting spout of the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist , continually rising and falling away to leeward . 
Seen from the Pequod 's deck , then , as she would rise on a high hill of the sea , this host of vapory spouts , individually curling up into the air , and beheld through a blending atmosphere of bluish haze , showed like the thousand cheerful chimneys of some dense metropolis , descried of a balmy autumnal morning , by some horseman on a height . 
As marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in the mountains , accelerate their march , all eagerness to place that perilous passage in their rear , and once more expand in comparative security upon the plain ; even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurrying forward through the straits ; gradually contracting the wings of their semicircle , and swimming on , in one solid , but still crescentic centre . 
Crowding all sail the Pequod pressed after them ; the harpooneers handling their weapons , and loudly cheering from the heads of their yet suspended boats . 
If the wind only held , little doubt had they , that chased through these Straits of Sunda , the vast host would only deploy into the Oriental seas to witness the capture of not a few of their number . 
And who could tell whether , in that congregated caravan , Moby Dick himself might not temporarily be swimming , like the worshipped white-elephant in the coronation procession of the Siamese ! 
