And however the general experiences in the fishery may amend such reports as these ; yet in their full terribleness , even to the bloodthirsty item of Povelson , the superstitious belief in them is , in some vicissitudes of their vocation , revived in the minds of the hunters . 
So that overawed by the rumors and portents concerning him , not a few of the fishermen recalled , in reference to Moby Dick , the earlier days of the Sperm Whale fishery , when it was oftentimes hard to induce long practised Right whalemen to embark in the perils of this new and daring warfare ; such men protesting that although other leviathans might be hopefully pursued , yet to chase and point lances at such an apparition as the Sperm Whale was not for mortal man . 
That to attempt it , would be inevitably to be torn into a quick eternity . 
On this head , there are some remarkable documents that may be consulted . 
Nevertheless , some there were , who even in the face of these things were ready to give chase to Moby Dick ; and a still greater number who , chancing only to hear of him distantly and vaguely , without the specific details of any certain calamity , and without superstitious accompaniments were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battle if offered . 
One of the wild suggestions referred to , as at last coming to be linked with the White Whale in the minds of the superstitiously inclined , was the unearthly conceit that Moby Dick was ubiquitous ; that he had actually been encountered in opposite latitudes at one and the same instant of time . 
Nor , credulous as such minds must have been , was this conceit altogether without some faint show of superstitious probability . 
For as the secrets of the currents in the seas have never yet been divulged , even to the most erudite research ; so the hidden ways of the Sperm Whale when beneath the surface remain , in great part , unaccountable to his pursuers ; and from time to time have originated the most curious and contradictory speculations regarding them , especially concerning the mystic modes whereby , after sounding to a great depth , he transports himself with such vast swiftness to the most widely distant points . 
It is a thing well known to both American and English whale-ships , and as well a thing placed upon authoritative record years ago by Scoresby , that some whales have been captured far north in the Pacific , in whose bodies have been found the barbs of harpoons darted in the Greenland seas . 
Nor is it to be gainsaid , that in some of these instances it has been declared that the interval of time between the two assaults could not have exceeded very many days . 
