Very shy ; always going solitary ; unexpectedly rising to the surface in the remotest and most sullen waters ; his straight and single lofty jet rising like a tall misanthropic spear upon a barren plain ; gifted with such wondrous power and velocity in swimming , as to defy all present pursuit from man ; this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race , bearing for his mark that style upon his back . 
From having the baleen in his mouth , the Fin-Back is sometimes included with the right whale , among a theoretic species denominated Whalebone whales , that is , whales with baleen . 
Of these so-called Whalebone whales , there would seem to be several varieties , most of which , however , are little known . 
Broad-nosed whales and beaked whales ; pike-headed whales ; bunched whales ; under-jawed whales and rostrated whales , are the fisherman 's names for a few sorts . 
In connexion with this appellative of `` Whalebone whales , '' it is of great importance to mention , that however such a nomenclature may be convenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales , yet it is in vain to attempt a clear classification of the Leviathan , founded upon either his baleen , or hump , or fin , or teeth ; notwithstanding that those marked parts or features very obviously seem better adapted to afford the basis for a regular system of Cetology than any other detached bodily distinctions , which the whale , in his kinds , presents . 
How then ? 
The baleen , hump , back-fin , and teeth ; these are things whose peculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales , without any regard to what may be the nature of their structure in other and more essential particulars . 
Thus , the sperm whale and the humpbacked whale , each has a hump ; but there the similitude ceases . 
Then this same humpbacked whale and the Greenland whale , each of these has baleen ; but there again the similitude ceases . 
And it is just the same with the other parts above mentioned . 
