Pressing his foot upon it , till the rope hummed like a harp-string , then eagerly bending over it , and seeing no strandings , Ahab exclaimed , `` Good ! 
and now for the seizings . '' 
At one extremity the rope was unstranded , and the separate spread yarns were all braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon ; the pole was then driven hard up into the socket ; from the lower end the rope was traced halfway along the pole 's length , and firmly secured so , with inter-twistings of twine . 
This done , pole , iron , and rope -- like the Three Fates -- remained inseparable , and Ahab moodily stalked away with the weapon ; the sound of his ivory leg , and the sound of the hickory pole , both hollowly ringing along every plank . 
But ere he entered his cabin , a light , unnatural , half-bantering , yet most piteous sound was heard . 
Oh ! 
Pip , thy wretched laugh , thy idle but unresting eye ; all thy strange mummeries not unmeaningly blended with the black tragedy of the melancholy ship , and mocked it ! 
The Gilder Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising ground the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery . 
Often , in mild , pleasant weather , for twelve , fifteen , eighteen , and twenty hours on the stretch , they were engaged in the boats , steadily pulling , or sailing , or paddling after the whales , or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their uprising ; though with but small success for their pains . 
At such times , under an abated sun ; afloat all day upon smooth , slow heaving swells ; seated in his boat , light as a birch canoe ; and so sociably mixing with the soft waves themselves , that like hearth-stone cats they purr against the gunwale ; these are the times of dreamy quietude , when beholding the tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean 's skin , one forgets the tiger heart that pants beneath it ; and would not willingly remember , that this velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang . 
