These temporary apprehensions , so vague but so awful , derived a wondrous potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather , in which , beneath all its blue blandness , some thought there lurked a devilish charm , as for days and days we voyaged along , through seas so wearily , lonesomely mild , that all space , in repugnance to our vengeful errand , seemed vacating itself of life before our urn-like prow . 
But , at last , when turning to the eastward , the Cape winds began howling around us , and we rose and fell upon the long , troubled seas that are there ; when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast , and gored the dark waves in her madness , till , like showers of silver chips , the foamflakes flew over her bulwarks ; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away , but gave place to sights more dismal than before . 
Close to our bows , strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before us ; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens . 
And every morning , perched on our stays , rows of these birds were seen ; and spite of our hootings , for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp , as though they deemed our ship some drifting , uninhabited craft ; a thing appointed to desolation , and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves . 
And heaved and heaved , still unrestingly heaved the black sea , as if its vast tides were a conscience ; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the long sin and suffering it had bred . 
Cape of Good Hope , do they call ye ? 
Rather Cape Tormentoto , as called of yore ; for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us , we found ourselves launched into this tormented sea , where guilty beings transformed into those fowls and these fish , seemed condemned to swim on everlastingly without any haven in store , or beat that black air without any horizon . 
But calm , snow-white , and unvarying ; still directing its fountain of feathers to the sky ; still beckoning us on from before , the solitary jet would at times be descried . 
During all this blackness of the elements , Ahab , though assuming for the time the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck , manifested the gloomiest reserve ; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates . 
In tempestuous times like these , after everything above and aloft has been secured , nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the gale . 
