In one of those southern whalesmen , on a long three or four years ' voyage , as often happens , the sum of the various hours you spend at the mast-head would amount to several entire months . 
And it is much to be deplored that the place to which you devote so considerable a portion of the whole term of your natural life , should be so sadly destitute of anything approaching to a cosy inhabitiveness , or adapted to breed a comfortable localness of feeling , such as pertains to a bed , a hammock , a hearse , a sentry box , a pulpit , a coach , or any other of those small and snug contrivances in which men temporarily isolate themselves . 
Your most usual point of perch is the head of the t ' gallant-mast , where you stand upon two thin parallel sticks -LRB- almost peculiar to whalemen -RRB- called the t ' gallant crosstrees . 
Here , tossed about by the sea , the beginner feels about as cosy as he would standing on a bull 's horns . 
To be sure , in cold weather you may carry your house aloft with you , in the shape of a watch-coat ; but properly speaking the thickest watch-coat is no more of a house than the unclad body ; for as the soul is glued inside of its fleshy tabernacle , and can not freely move about in it , nor even move out of it , without running great risk of perishing -LRB- like an ignorant pilgrim crossing the snowy Alps in winter -RRB- ; so a watch-coat is not so much of a house as it is a mere envelope , or additional skin encasing you . 
You can not put a shelf or chest of drawers in your body , and no more can you make a convenience closet of your watch-coat . 
Concerning all this , it is much to be deplored that the mast-heads of a southern whale ship are unprovided with those enviable little tents or pulpits , called crow 's - nests , in which the look-outs of a Greenland whaler are protected from the inclement weather of the frozen seas . 
In the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet , entitled `` A Voyage among the Icebergs , in quest of the Greenland Whale , and incidentally for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies of Old Greenland ; '' in this admirable volume , all standers of mast-heads are furnished with a charmingly circumstantial account of the then recently invented crow 's - nest of the Glacier , which was the name of Captain Sleet 's good craft . 
He called it the Sleet 's crow 's - nest , in honor of himself ; he being the original inventor and patentee , and free from all ridiculous false delicacy , and holding that if we call our own children after our own names -LRB- we fathers being the original inventors and patentees -RRB- , so likewise should we denominate after ourselves any other apparatus we may beget . 
In shape , the Sleet 's crow 's - nest is something like a large tierce or pipe ; it is open above , however , where it is furnished with a movable sidescreen to keep to windward of your head in a hard gale . 
