Such large virtue lurks in these small things when extreme political superstitions invest them , that in some royal instances even to idiot imbecility they have imparted potency . 
But when , as in the case of Nicholas the Czar , the ringed crown of geographical empire encircles an imperial brain ; then , the plebeian herds crouch abased before the tremendous centralization . 
Nor , will the tragic dramatist who would depict mortal indomitableness in its fullest sweep and direct swing , ever forget a hint , incidentally so important in his art , as the one now alluded to . 
But Ahab , my Captain , still moves before me in all his Nantucket grimness and shagginess ; and in this episode touching Emperors and Kings , I must not conceal that I have only to do with a poor old whale-hunter like him ; and , therefore , all outward majestical trappings and housings are denied me . 
Oh , Ahab ! 
what shall be grand in thee , it must needs be plucked at from the skies , and dived for in the deep , and featured in the unbodied air ! 
The Cabin-Table It is noon ; and Dough-Boy , the steward , thrusting his pale loaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle , announces dinner to his lord and master who , sitting in the lee quarter-boat , has just been taking an observation of the sun ; and is now mutely reckoning the latitude on the smooth , medallion-shaped tablet , reserved for that daily purpose on the upper part of his ivory leg . 
From his complete inattention to the tidings , you would think that moody Ahab had not heard his menial . 
But presently , catching hold of the mizen shrouds , he swings himself to the deck , and in an even , unexhilarated voice , saying , `` Dinner , Mr. Starbuck , '' disappears into the cabin . 
When the last echo of his sultan 's step has died away , and Starbuck , the first Emir , has every reason to suppose that he is seated , then Starbuck rouses from his quietude , takes a few turns along the planks , and , after a grave peep into the binnacle , says , with some touch of pleasantness , `` Dinner , Mr. Stubb , '' and descends the scuttle . 
