He averred , that upon first thrusting in for him , a leg was presented ; but well knowing that that was not as it ought to be , and might occasion great trouble ; -- he had thrust back the leg , and by a dexterous heave and toss , had wrought a somerset upon the Indian ; so that with the next trial , he came forth in the good old way -- head foremost . 
As for the great head itself , that was doing as well as could be expected . 
And thus , through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of Queequeg , the deliverance , or rather , delivery of Tashtego , was successfully accomplished , in the teeth , too , of the most untoward and apparently hopeless impediments ; which is a lesson by no means to be forgotten . 
Midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing and boxing , riding and rowing . 
I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header 's will be sure to seem incredible to some landsmen , though they themselves may have either seen or heard of some one 's falling into a cistern ashore ; an accident which not seldom happens , and with much less reason too than the Indian 's , considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb of the Sperm Whale 's well . 
But , peradventure , it may be sagaciously urged , how is this ? 
We thought the tissued , infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale , was the lightest and most corky part about him ; and yet thou makest it sink in an element of a far greater specific gravity than itself . 
We have thee there . 
Not at all , but I have ye ; for at the time poor Tash fell in , the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents , leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well -- a double welded , hammered substance , as I have before said , much heavier than the sea water , and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost . 
But the tendency to rapid sinking in this substance was in the present instance materially counteracted by the other parts of the head remaining undetached from it , so that it sank very slowly and deliberately indeed , affording Queequeg a fair chance for performing his agile obstetrics on the run , as you may say . 
