And about this harpooneer , whom I have not yet seen , you persist in telling me the most mystifying and exasperating stories tending to beget in me an uncomfortable feeling towards the man whom you design for my bedfellow -- a sort of connexion , landlord , which is an intimate and confidential one in the highest degree . 
I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and what this harpooneer is , and whether I shall be in all respects safe to spend the night with him . 
And in the first place , you will be so good as to unsay that story about selling his head , which if true I take to be good evidence that this harpooneer is stark mad , and I 've no idea of sleeping with a madman ; and you , sir , you I mean , landlord , you , sir , by trying to induce me to do so knowingly would thereby render yourself liable to a criminal prosecution . '' 
`` Wall , '' said the landlord , fetching a long breath , `` that 's a purty long sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and then . 
But be easy , be easy , this here harpooneer I have been tellin ' you of has just arrived from the south seas , where he bought up a lot of ` balmed New Zealand heads -LRB- great curios , you know -RRB- , and he 's sold all on 'em but one , and that one he 's trying to sell to-night , cause to-morrow 's Sunday , and it would not do to be sellin ' human heads about the streets when folks is goin ' to churches . 
He wanted to last Sunday , but I stopped him just as he was goin ' out of the door with four heads strung on a string , for all the airth like a string of inions . '' 
This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery , and showed that the landlord , after all , had had no idea of fooling me -- but at the same time what could I think of a harpooneer who stayed out of a Saturday night clean into the holy Sabbath , engaged in such a cannibal business as selling the heads of dead idolators ? 
`` Depend upon it , landlord , that harpooneer is a dangerous man . '' 
`` He pays reg ` lar , '' was the rejoinder . 
`` But come , it 's getting dreadful late , you had better be turning flukes -- it 's a nice bed : Sal and me slept in that ere bed the night we were spliced . 
