His story being ended with his pipe 's last dying puff , Queequeg embraced me , pressed his forehead against mine , and blowing out the light , we rolled over from each other , this way and that , and very soon were sleeping . 
Wheelbarrow Next morning , Monday , after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber , for a block , I settled my own and comrade 's bill ; using , however , my comrade 's money . 
The grinning landlord , as well as the boarders , seemed amazingly tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and Queequeg -- especially as Peter Coffin 's cock and bull stories about him had previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied with . 
We borrowed a wheelbarrow , and embarking our things , including my own poor carpet-bag , and Queequeg 's canvas sack and hammock , away we went down to `` the Moss , '' the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf . 
As we were going along the people stared ; not at Queequeg so much -- for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in their streets , -- but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms . 
But we heeded them not , going along wheeling the barrow by turns , and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon barbs . 
I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore , and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons . 
To this , in substance , he replied , that though what I hinted was true enough , yet he had a particular affection for his own harpoon , because it was of assured stuff , well tried in many a mortal combat , and deeply intimate with the hearts of whales . 
In short , like many inland reapers and mowers , who go into the farmer 's meadows armed with their own scythes -- though in no wise obliged to furnish them -- even so , Queequeg , for his own private reasons , preferred his own harpoon . 
Shifting the barrow from my hand to his , he told me a funny story about the first wheelbarrow he had ever seen . 
