Sin not ; but if you do , take heed to repent of it like Jonah . '' 
While he was speaking these words , the howling of the shrieking , slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher , who , when describing Jonah 's sea-storm , seemed tossed by a storm himself . 
His deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell ; his tossed arms seemed the warring elements at work ; and the thunders that rolled away from off his swarthy brow , and the light leaping from his eye , made all his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that was strange to them . 
There now came a lull in his look , as he silently turned over the leaves of the Book once more ; and , at last , standing motionless , with closed eyes , for the moment , seemed communing with God and himself . 
But again he leaned over towards the people , and bowing his head lowly , with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility , he spake these words : `` Shipmates , God has laid but one hand upon you ; both his hands press upon me . 
I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches to all sinners ; and therefore to ye , and still more to me , for I am a greater sinner than ye . 
And now how gladly would I come down from this mast-head and sit on the hatches there where you sit , and listen as you listen , while some one of you reads me that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to me , as a pilot of the living God . 
How being an anointed pilot-prophet , or speaker of true things and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths in the ears of a wicked Nineveh , Jonah , appalled at the hostility he should raise , fled from his mission , and sought to escape his duty and his God by taking ship at Joppa . 
But God is everywhere ; Tarshish he never reached . 
As we have seen , God came upon him in the whale , and swallowed him down to living gulfs of doom , and with swift slantings tore him along ` into the midst of the seas , ' where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down , and ` the weeds were wrapped about his head , ' and all the watery world of woe bowled over him . 
