Three better , more likely sea-officers and men , each in his own different way , could not readily be found , and they were every one of them Americans ; a Nantucketer , a Vineyarder , a Cape man . 
Now , it being Christmas when the ship shot from out her harbor , for a space we had biting Polar weather , though all the time running away from it to the southward ; and by every degree and minute of latitude which we sailed , gradually leaving that merciless winter , and all its intolerable weather behind us . 
It was one of those less lowering , but still grey and gloomy enough mornings of the transition , when with a fair wind the ship was rushing through the water with a vindictive sort of leaping and melancholy rapidity , that as I mounted to the deck at the call of the forenoon watch , so soon as I levelled my glance towards the taffrail , foreboding shivers ran over me . 
Reality outran apprehension ; Captain Ahab stood upon his quarter-deck . 
There seemed no sign of common bodily illness about him , nor of the recovery from any . 
He looked like a man cut away from the stake , when the fire has overrunningly wasted all the limbs without consuming them , or taking away one particle from their compacted aged robustness . 
His whole high , broad form , seemed made of solid bronze , and shaped in an unalterable mould , like Cellini 's cast Perseus . 
Threading its way out from among his grey hairs , and continuing right down one side of his tawny scorched face and neck , till it disappeared in his clothing , you saw a slender rod-like mark , lividly whitish . 
It resembled that perpendicular seam sometimes made in the straight , lofty trunk of a great tree , when the upper lightning tearingly darts down it , and without wrenching a single twig , peels and grooves out the bark from top to bottom ere running off into the soil , leaving the tree still greenly alive , but branded . 
Whether that mark was born with him , or whether it was the scar left by some desperate wound , no one could certainly say . 
