Now , the grand distinction drawn between officer and man at sea , is this -- the first lives aft , the last forward . 
Hence , in whale-ships and merchantmen alike , the mates have their quarters with the captain ; and so , too , in most of the American whalers the harpooneers are lodged in the after part of the ship . 
That is to say , they take their meals in the captain 's cabin , and sleep in a place indirectly communicating with it . 
Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage -LRB- by far the longest of all voyages now or ever made by man -RRB- , the peculiar perils of it , and the community of interest prevailing among a company , all of whom , high or low , depend for their profits , not upon fixed wages , but upon their common luck , together with their common vigilance , intrepidity , and hard work ; though all these things do in some cases tend to beget a less rigorous discipline than in merchantmen generally ; yet , never mind how much like an old Mesopotamian family these whalemen may , in some primitive instances , live together ; for all that , the punctilious externals , at least , of the quarter-deck are seldom materially relaxed , and in no instance done away . 
Indeed , many are the Nantucket ships in which you will see the skipper parading his quarter-deck with an elated grandeur not surpassed in any military navy ; nay , extorting almost as much outward homage as if he wore the imperial purple , and not the shabbiest of pilot-cloth . 
And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod was the least given to that sort of shallowest assumption ; and though the only homage he ever exacted , was implicit , instantaneous obedience ; though he required no man to remove the shoes from his feet ere stepping upon the quarter-deck ; and though there were times when , owing to peculiar circumstances connected with events hereafter to be detailed , he addressed them in unusual terms , whether of condescension or in terrorem , or otherwise ; yet even Captain Ahab was by no means unobservant of the paramount forms and usages of the sea . 
Nor , perhaps , will it fail to be eventually perceived , that behind those forms and usages , as it were , he sometimes masked himself ; incidentally making use of them for other and more private ends than they were legitimately intended to subserve . 
That certain sultanism of his brain , which had otherwise in a good degree remained unmanifested ; through those forms that same sultanism became incarnate in an irresistible dictatorship . 
For be a man 's intellectual superiority what it will , it can never assume the practical , available supremacy over other men , without the aid of some sort of external arts and entrenchments , always , in themselves , more or less paltry and base . 
This it is , that for ever keeps God 's true princes of the Empire from the world 's hustings ; and leaves the highest honors that this air can give , to those men who become famous more through their infinite inferiority to the choice hidden handful of the Divine Inert , than through their undoubted superiority over the dead level of the mass . 
