Intolerably striding along the deck , the mate commanded him to get a broom and sweep down the planks , and also a shovel , and remove some offensive matters consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large . 
`` Now , gentlemen , sweeping a ship 's deck at sea is a piece of household work which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening ; it has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the time . 
Such , gentlemen , is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive love of neatness in seamen ; some of whom would not willingly drown without first washing their faces . 
But in all vessels this broom business is the prescriptive province of the boys , if boys there be aboard . 
Besides , it was the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs , taking turns at the pumps ; and being the most athletic seaman of them all , Steelkilt had been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs ; consequently he should have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical duties , such being the case with his comrades . 
I mention all these particulars so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men . 
`` But there was more than this : the order about the shovel was almost as plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt , as though Radney had spat in his face . 
Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this ; and all this and doubtless much more , the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate uttered his command . 
But as he sat still for a moment , and as he steadfastly looked into the mate 's malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up in him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them ; as he instinctively saw all this , that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being -- a repugnance most felt , when felt at all , by really valiant men even when aggrieved -- this nameless phantom feeling , gentlemen , stole over Steelkilt . 
`` Therefore , in his ordinary tone , only a little broken by the bodily exhaustion he was temporarily in , he answered him saying that sweeping the deck was not his business , and he would not do it . 
