While the two crews were yet circling in the waters , reaching out after the revolving line-tubs , oars , and other floating furniture , while aslope little Flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial , twitching his legs upwards to escape the dreaded jaws of sharks ; and Stubb was lustily singing out for some one to ladle him up ; and while the old man 's line -- now parting -- admitted of his pulling into the creamy pool to rescue whom he could ; -- in that wild simultaneousness of a thousand concreted perils , -- Ahab 's yet unstricken boat seemed drawn up towards Heaven by invisible wires , -- as , arrow-like , shooting perpendicularly from the sea , the White Whale dashed his broad forehead against its bottom , and sent it turning over and over , into the air ; till it fell again -- gunwale downwards -- and Ahab and his men struggled out from under it , like seals from a sea-side cave . 
The first uprising momentum of the whale -- modifying its direction as he struck the surface -- involuntarily launched him along it , to a little distance from the centre of the destruction he had made ; and with his back to it , he now lay for a moment slowly feeling with his flukes from side to side ; and whenever a stray oar , bit of plank , the least chip or crumb of the boats touched his skin , his tail swiftly drew back , and came sideways smiting the sea . 
But soon , as if satisfied that his work for that time was done , he pushed his pleated forehead through the ocean , and trailing after him the intertangled lines , continued his leeward way at a traveller 's methodic pace . 
As before , the attentive ship having descried the whole fight , again came bearing down to the rescue , and dropping a boat , picked up the floating mariners , tubs , oars , and whatever else could be caught at , and safely landed them on her decks . 
Some sprained shoulders , wrists , and ankles ; livid contusions ; wrenched harpoons and lances ; inextricable intricacies of rope ; shattered oars and planks ; all these were there ; but no fatal or even serious ill seemed to have befallen any one . 
As with Fedallah the day before , so Ahab was now found grimly clinging to his boat 's broken half , which afforded a comparatively easy float ; nor did it so exhaust him as the previous day 's mishap . 
But when he was helped to the deck , all eyes were fastened upon him ; as instead of standing by himself he still half-hung upon the shoulder of Starbuck , who had thus far been the foremost to assist him . 
His ivory leg had been snapped off , leaving but one short sharp splinter . 
`` Aye , aye , Starbuck , 't is sweet to lean sometimes , be the leaner who he will ; and would old Ahab had leaned oftener than he has . '' 
`` The ferrule has not stood , sir , '' said the carpenter , now coming up ; I put good work into that leg . '' 
