Natural as it is to be somewhat incredulous concerning the populousness of the more enormous creatures of the globe , yet what shall we say to Harto , the historian of Goa , when he tells us that at one hunting the King of Siam took 4,000 elephants ; that in those regions elephants are numerous as droves of cattle in the temperate climes . 
And there seems no reason to doubt that if these elephants , which have now been hunted for thousands of years , by Semiramis , by Porus , by Hannibal , and by all the successive monarchs of the East -- if they still survive there in great numbers , much more may the great whale outlast all hunting , since he has a pasture to expatiate in , which is precisely twice as large as all Asia , both Americas , Europe and Africa , New Holland , and all the Isles of the sea combined . 
Moreover : we are to consider , that from the presumed great longevity of whales , their probably attaining the age of a century and more , therefore at any one period of time , several distinct adult generations must be contemporary . 
And what this is , we may soon gain some idea of , by imagining all the grave-yards , cemeteries , and family vaults of creation yielding up the live bodies of all the men , women , and children who were alive seventy-five years ago ; and adding this countless host to the present human population of the globe . 
Wherefore , for all these things , we account the whale immortal in his species , however perishable in his individuality . 
He swam the seas before the continents broke water ; he once swam over the site of the Tuileries , and Windsor Castle , and the Kremlin . 
In Noah 's flood he despised Noah 's Ark ; and if ever the world is to be again flooded , like the Netherlands , to kill off its rats , then the eternal whale will still survive , and rearing upon the topmost crest of the equatorial flood , spout his frothed defiance to the skies . 
Ahab 's Leg The precipitating manner in which Captain Ahab had quitted the Samuel Enderby of London , had not been unattended with some small violence to his own person . 
He had lighted with such energy upon a thwart of his boat that his ivory leg had received a half-splintering shock . 
And when after gaining his own deck , and his own pivot-hole there , he so vehemently wheeled round with an urgent command to the steersman -LRB- it was , as ever , something about his not steering inflexibly enough -RRB- ; then , the already shaken ivory received such an additional twist and wrench , that though it still remained entire , and to all appearances lusty , yet Ahab did not deem it entirely trustworthy . 
