It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of those waters , some really landless latitude , that her captain begins to feel a little anxious . 
`` Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho ; so when her leak was found gaining once more , there was in truth some small concern manifested by several of her company ; especially by Radney the mate . 
He commanded the upper sails to be well hoisted , sheeted home anew , and every way expanded to the breeze . 
Now this Radney , I suppose , was as little of a coward , and as little inclined to any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless , unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine , gentlemen . 
Therefore when he betrayed this imagine , solicitude about the safety of the ship , some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a part owner in her . 
So when they were working that evening at the pumps , there was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them , as they stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water ; clear as any mountain spring , gentlemen -- that bubbling from the pumps ran across the deck , and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-holes . 
`` Now , as you well know , it is not seldom the case in this conventional world of ours -- watery or otherwise ; that when a person placed in command over his fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general pride of manhood , straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable dislike and bitterness ; and if he had a chance he will pull down and pulverize that subaltern 's tower , and make a little heap of dust of it . 
Be this conceit of mine as it may , gentlemen , at all events Steelkilt was a tall and noble animal with a head like a Roman , and a flowing golden beard like the tasseled housings of your last viceroy 's snorting charger ; and a brain , and a heart , and a soul in him , gentlemen , which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne , had he been born son to Charlemagne 's father . 
But Radney , the mate , was ugly as a mule ; yet as hardy , as stubborn , as malicious . 
He did not love Steelkilt , and Steelkilt knew it . 
