The same waves wash the moles of the new-built California towns , but yesterday planted by the recentest race of men and lave the faded but still gorgeous skirts of Asiatic lands , older than Abraham ; while all between float milky-ways of coral isles , and low-lying , endless , unknown Archipelagoes , and impenetrable Japans . 
Thus this mysterious , divine Pacific zones the world 's whole bulk about ; makes all coasts one bay to it ; seems the tide-beating heart of earth . 
Lifted by those eternal swells , you needs must own the seductive god , bowing your head to Pan . 
But few thoughts of Pan stirred Ahab 's brain , as standing , like an iron statue at his accustomed place beside the mizen rigging , with one nostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the Bashee isles -LRB- in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking -RRB- , and with the other consciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea ; that sea in which the hated White Whale must even then be swimming . 
Launched at length upon these almost final waters , and gliding towards the Japanese cruising-ground , the old man 's purpose intensified itself . 
His firm lips met like the lips of a vice ; the Delta of his forehead 's veins swelled like overladen brooks ; in his very sleep , his ringing cry ran through the vaulted hull , `` Stern all ! 
the White Whale spouts thick blood ! '' 
The Blacksmith Availing himself of the mild , summer-cool weather that now reigned in these latitudes , and in preparation for the peculiarly active pursuits shortly to be anticipated , Perth , the begrimed , blistered old blacksmith , had not removed his portable forge to the hold again , after concluding his contributory work for Ahab 's leg , but still retained it on deck , fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast ; being now almost incessantly invoked by the headsmen , and harpooneers , and bowsmen to do some little job for them ; altering , or repairing , or new shaping their various weapons and boat furniture . 
Often he would be surrounded by an eager circle , all waiting to be served ; holding boat-spades , pikeheads , harpoons , and lances , and jealously watching his every sooty movement , as he toiled . 
Nevertheless , this old man 's was a patient hammer wielded by a patient arm . 
