But Starbuck looked away . 
With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance , and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining , bade him hold it upright , without its touching the deck . 
Then , with the maul , after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod , he placed the blunted needle endwise on the top of it , and less strongly hammered that , several times , the mate still holding the rod as before . 
Then going through some small strange motions with it -- whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel , or merely intended to augment the awe of the crew , is uncertain -- he called for linen thread ; and moving to the binnacle , slipped out the two reversed needles there , and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle , over one of the compass cards . 
At first , the steel went round and round , quivering and vibrating at either end ; but at last it settled to its place , when Ahab , who had been intently watching for this result , stepped frankly back from the binnacle , and pointing his stretched arm towards it , exclaimed , -- `` Look ye , for yourselves , if Ahab be not the lord of the level loadstone ! 
The sun is East , and that compass swears it ! '' 
One after another they peered in , for nothing but their own eyes could persuade such ignorance as theirs , and one after another they slunk away . 
In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph , you then saw Ahab in all his fatal pride . 
The Log and Line While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage , the log and line had but very seldom been in use . 
Owing to a confident reliance upon other means of determining the vessel 's place , some merchantmen , and many whalemen , especially when cruising , wholly neglect to heave the log ; though at the same time , and frequently more for form 's sake than anything else , regularly putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship , as well as the presumed average rate of progression every hour . 
