At intervals , he would refer to piles of old log-books beside him , wherein were set down the seasons and places in which , on various former voyages of various ships , sperm whales had been captured or seen . 
While thus employed , the heavy pewter lamp suspended in chains over his head , continually rocked with the motion of the ship , and for ever threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his wrinkled brow , till it almost seemed that while he himself was marking out lines and courses on the wrinkled charts , some invisible pencil was also tracing lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his forehead . 
But it was not this night in particular that , in the solitude of his cabin , Ahab thus pondered over his charts . 
Almost every night they were brought out ; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced , and others were substituted . 
For with the charts of all four oceans before him , Ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies , with a view to the more certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of his soul . 
Now , to any one not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans , it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one solitary creature in the unhooped oceans of this planet . 
But not so did it seem to Ahab , who knew the sets of all tides and currents ; and thereby calculating the driftings of the sperm whale 's food ; and , also calling to mind the regular , ascertained seasons for hunting him in particular latitudes ; could arrive at reasonable surmises , almost approaching to certainties , concerning the timeliest day to be upon this or that ground in search of his prey . 
So assured , indeed , is the fact concerning the periodicalness of the sperm whale 's resorting to given waters , that many hunters believe that , could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world ; were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefully collated , then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to correspond in invariability to those of the herring-shoals or the flights of swallows . 
On this hint , attempts have been made to construct elaborate migratory charts of the sperm whale . 
* * Since the above was written , the statement is happily borne out by an official circular , issued by Lieutenant Maury , of the National Observatory , Washington , April 16th , 1851 . 
