From the ship , the smoke of the torments of the boiling whale is going up like the smoke over a village of smithies ; and to windward , a black cloud , rising up with earnest of squalls and rains , seems to quicken the activity of the excited seamen . 
Of Whales in Paint ; in Teeth ; in Wood ; in Sheet-Iron ; in Stone ; in Mountains ; in Stars On Tower-hill , as you go down to the London docks , you may have seen a crippled beggar -LRB- or kedger , as the sailors say -RRB- holding a painted board before him , representing the tragic scene in which he lost his leg . 
There are three whales and three boats ; and one of the boats -LRB- presumed to contain the missing leg in all its original integrity -RRB- is being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale . 
Any time these ten years , they tell me , has that man held up that picture , and exhibited that stump to an incredulous world . 
But the time of his justification has now come . 
His three whales are as good whales as were ever published in Wapping , at any rate ; and his stump as unquestionable a stump as any you will find in the western clearings . 
But , though for ever mounted on that stump , never a stump-speech does the poor whaleman make ; but , with downcast eyes , stands ruefully contemplating his own amputation . 
Throughout the Pacific , and also in Nantucket , and New Bedford , and Sag Harbor , you will come across lively sketches of whales and whaling-scenes , graven by the fishermen themselves on Sperm Whale-teeth , or ladies ' busks wrought out of the Right Whale-bone , and other like skrimshander articles , as the whalemen call the numerous little ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out of the rough material , in their hours of ocean leisure . 
Some of them have little boxes of dentistical-looking implements , specially intended for the skrimshandering business . 
But , in general , they toil with their jack-knives alone ; and , with that almost omnipotent tool of the sailor , they will turn you out anything you please , in the way of a mariner 's fancy . 
