NOUN -- A social meeting of two -LRB- or more -RRB- Whaleships , generally on a cruising-ground ; when , after exchanging hails , they exchange visits by boats ' crews , the two captains remaining , for the time , on board of one ship , and the two chief mates on the other . 
There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten here . 
All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail ; so has the whale fishery . 
In a pirate , man-of-war , or slave ship , when the captain is rowed anywhere in his boat , he always sits in the stern sheets on a comfortable , sometimes cushioned seat there , and often steers himself with a pretty little milliner 's tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons . 
But the whale-boat has no seat astern , no sofa of that sort whatever , and no tiller at all . 
High times indeed , if whaling captains were wheeled about the water on castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs . 
And as for a tiller , the whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy ; and therefore as in gamming a complete boat 's crew must leave the ship , and hence as the boat steerer or harpooneer is of the number , that subordinate is the steersman upon the occasion , and the captain , having no place to sit in , is pulled off to his visit all standing like a pine tree . 
And often you will notice that being conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides of the two ships , this standing captain is all alive to the importance of sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs . 
Nor is this any very easy matter ; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering oar hitting him now and then in the small of his back , the after-oar reciprocating by rapping his knees in front . 
He is thus completely wedged before and behind , and can only expand himself sideways by settling down on his stretched legs ; but a sudden , violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him , because length of foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth . 
