So , Mr. Queequeg '' -LRB- for she had learned his name -RRB- , `` I will just take this here iron , and keep it for you till morning . 
But the chowder ; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast , men ? '' 
`` Both , '' says I ; `` and let 's have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety . '' 
The Ship In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow . 
But to my surprise and no small concern , Queequeg now gave me to understand , that he had been diligently consulting Yojo -- the name of his black little god -- and Yojo had told him two or three times over , and strongly insisted upon it everyway , that instead of our going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor , and in concert selecting our craft ; instead of this , I say , Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest wholly with me , inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us ; and , in order to do so , had already pitched upon a vessel , which , if left to myself , I , Ishmael , should infallibly light upon , for all the world as though it had turned out by chance ; and in that vessel I must immediately ship myself , for the present irrespective of Queequeg . 
I have forgotten to mention that , in many things , Queequeg placed great confidence in the excellence of Yojo 's judgment and surprising forecast of things ; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem , as a rather good sort of god , who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole , but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs . 
Now , this plan of Queequeg 's or rather Yojo 's , touching the selection of our craft ; I did not like that plan at all . 
I had not a little relied on Queequeg 's sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely . 
But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon Queequeg , I was obliged to acquiesce ; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor , that should quickly settle that trifling little affair . 
Next morning early , leaving Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom -- for it seemed that it was some sort of Lent or Ramadan , or day of fasting , humiliation , and prayer with Queequeg and Yojo that day ; how it was I never could find out , for , though I applied myself to it several times , I never could master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles -- leaving Queequeg , then , fasting on his tomahawk pipe , and Yojo warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings , I sallied out among the shipping . 
