On the grim Pequod 's forecastle , ye shall ere long see him , beating his tambourine ; prelusive of the eternal time , when sent for , to the great quarter-deck on high , he was bid strike in with angels , and beat his tambourine in glory ; called a coward here , hailed a hero there ! 
Ahab For several days after leaving Nantucket , nothing above hatches was seen of Captain Ahab . 
The mates regularly relieved each other at the watches , and for aught that could be seen to the contrary , they seemed to be the only commanders of the ship ; only they sometimes issued from the cabin with orders so sudden and peremptory , that after all it was plain they but commanded vicariously . 
Yes , their supreme lord and dictator was there , though hitherto unseen by any eyes not permitted to penetrate into the now sacred retreat of the cabin . 
Every time I ascended to the deck from my watches below , I instantly gazed aft to mark if any strange face were visible ; for my first vague disquietude touching the unknown captain , now in the seclusion of the sea became almost a perturbation . 
This was strangely heightened at times by the ragged Elijah 's diabolical incoherences uninvitedly recurring to me , with a subtle energy I could not have before conceived of . 
But poorly could I withstand them , much as in other moods I was almost ready to smile at the solemn whimsicalities of that outlandish prophet of the wharves . 
But whatever it was of apprehensiveness or uneasiness -- to call it so -- which I felt , yet whenever I came to look about me in the ship , it seemed against all warranty to cherish such emotions . 
For though the harpooneers , with the great body of the crew , were a far more barbaric , heathenish , and motley set than any of the tame merchant-ship companies which my previous experiences had made me acquainted with , still I ascribed this -- and rightly ascribed it -- to the fierce uniqueness of the very nature of that wild Scandinavian vocation in which I had so abandonedly embarked . 
But it was especially the aspect of the three chief officers of the ship , the mates , which was most forcibly calculated to allay these colorless misgivings , and induce confidence and cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage . 
