But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of , or in tormented chase of that demon phantom that , some time or other , swims before all human hearts ; while chasing such over this round globe , they either lead us on in barren mazes or midway leave us whelmed . 
The Gam The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had spoken was this : the wind and sea betokened storms . 
But even had this not been the case , he would not after all , perhaps , have boarded her -- judging by his subsequent conduct on similar occasions -- if so it had been that , by the process of hailing , he had obtained a negative answer to the question he put . 
For , as it eventually turned out , he cared not to consort , even for five minutes , with any stranger captain , except he could contribute some of that information he so absorbingly sought . 
But all this might remain inadequately estimated , were not something said here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting each other in foreign seas , and especially on a common cruising-ground . 
If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State , or the equally desolate Salisbury Plain in England ; if casually encountering each other in such inhospitable wilds , these twain , for the life of them , can not well avoid a mutual salutation ; and stopping for a moment to interchange the news ; and , perhaps , sitting down for a while and resting in concert : then , how much more natural that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the sea , two whaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth -- off lone Fanning 's Island , or the far away King 's Mills ; how much more natural , I say , that under such circumstances these ships should not only interchange hails , but come into still closer , more friendly and sociable contact . 
And especially would this seem to be a matter of course , in the case of vessels owned in one seaport , and whose captains , officers , and not a few of the men are personally known to each other ; and consequently , have all sorts of dear domestic things to talk about . 
For the long absent ship , the outward-bounder , perhaps , has letters on board ; at any rate , she will be sure to let her have some papers of a date a year or two later than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files . 
And in return for that courtesy , the outward-bound ship would receive the latest whaling intelligence from the cruising-ground to which she may be destined , a thing of the utmost importance to her . 
And in degree , all this will hold true concerning whaling vessels crossing each other 's track on the cruising-ground itself , even though they are equally long absent from home . 
