How he wasted and wasted away in those few long-lingering days , till there seemed but little left of him but his frame and tattooing . 
But as all else in him thinned , and his cheek-bones grew sharper , his eyes , nevertheless , seemed growing fuller and fuller ; they became of a strange softness of lustre ; and mildly but deeply looked out at you there from his sickness , a wondrous testimony to that immortal health in him which could not die , or be weakened . 
And like circles on the water , which , as they grow fainter , expand ; so his eyes seemed rounding and rounding , like the rings of Eternity . 
An awe that can not be named would steal over you as you sat by the side of this waning savage , and saw as strange things in his face , as any beheld who were bystanders when Zoroaster died . 
For whatever is truly wondrous and fearful in man , never yet was put into words or books . 
And the drawing near of Death , which alike levels all , alike impresses all with a last revelation , which only an author from the dead could adequately tell . 
So that -- let us say it again -- no dying Chaldee or Greek had higher and holier thoughts than those , whose mysterious shades you saw creeping over the face of poor Queequeg , as he quietly lay in his swaying hammock , and the rolling sea seemed gently rocking him to his final rest , and the ocean 's invisible flood-tide lifted him higher and higher towards his destined heaven . 
Not a man of the crew but gave him up ; and , as for Queequeg himself , what he thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious favor he asked . 
He called one to him in the grey morning watch , when the day was just breaking , and taking his hand , said that while in Nantucket he had chanced to see certain little canoes of dark wood , like the rich war-wood of his native isle ; and upon inquiry , he had learned that all whalemen who died in Nantucket , were laid in those same dark canoes , and that the fancy of being so laid had much pleased him ; for it was not unlike the custom of his own race , who , after embalming a dead warrior , stretched him out in his canoe , and so left him to be floated away to the starry archipelagoes ; for not only do they believe that the stars are isles , but that far beyond all visible horizons , their own mild , uncontinented seas , interflow with the blue heavens ; and so form the white breakers of the milky way . 
He added , that he shuddered at the thought of being buried in his hammock , according to the usual sea-custom , tossed like something vile to the death-devouring sharks . 
