The Shark Massacre When in the Southern Fishery a captured Sperm Whale , after long and weary toil , is brought alongside late at night , it is not , as a general thing at least , customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting him in . 
For that business is an exceedingly laborious one ; is not very soon completed ; and requires all hands to set about it . 
Therefore , the common usage is to take in all sail ; lash the helm a ` lee ; and then send every one below to his hammock till daylight , with the reservation that , until that time , anchor-watches shall be kept ; that is , two and two for an hour , each couple , the crew in rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well . 
But sometimes , especially upon the Line in the Pacific , this plan will not answer at all ; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather round the moored carcase , that were he left so for six hours , say , on a stretch , little more than the skeleton would be visible by morning . 
In most other parts of the ocean , however , where these fish do not so largely abound , their wondrous voracity can be at times considerably diminished , by vigorously stirring them up with sharp whaling-spades , a procedure notwithstanding , which , in some instances , only seems to tickle them into still greater activity . 
But it was not thus in the present case with the Pequod 's sharks ; though , to be sure , any man unaccustomed to such sights , to have looked over her side that night , would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese , and those sharks the maggots in it . 
Nevertheless , upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was concluded ; and when , accordingly Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came on deck , no small excitement was created among the sharks ; for immediately suspending the cutting stages over the side , and lowering three lanterns , so that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid sea , these two mariners , darting their long whaling-spades , * kept up an incessant murdering of the sharks , by striking the keen steel deep into their skulls , seemingly their only vital part . 
But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling hosts , the marksmen could not always hit their mark ; and this brought about new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe . 
They viciously snapped , not only at each other 's disembowelments , but like flexible bows , bent round , and bit their own ; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again by the same mouth , to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound . 
Nor was this all . 
