Alone , in such remotest waters , that though you sailed a thousand miles , and passed a thousand shores , you would not come to any chiselled hearth-stone , or aught hospitable beneath that part of the sun ; in such latitudes and longitudes , pursuing too such a calling as he does , the whaleman is wrapped by influences all tending to make his fancy pregnant with many a mighty birth . 
No wonder , then , that ever gathering volume from the mere transit over the wildest watery spaces , the outblown rumors of the White Whale did in the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbid hints , and half-formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies , which eventually invested Moby Dick with new terrors unborrowed from anything that visibly appears . 
So that in many cases such a panic did he finally strike , that few who by those rumors , at least , had heard of the White Whale , few of those hunters were willing to encounter the perils of his jaw . 
But there were still other and more vital practical influences at work . 
Nor even at the present day has the original prestige of the Sperm Whale , as fearfully distinguished from all other species of the leviathan , died out of the minds of the whalemen as a body . 
There are those this day among them , who , though intelligent and courageous enough in offering battle to the Greenland or Right whale , would perhaps -- either from professional inexperience , or incompetency , or timidity , decline a contest with the Sperm Whale ; at any rate , there are plenty of whalemen , especially among those whaling nations not sailing under the American flag , who have never hostilely encountered the Sperm Whale , but whose sole knowledge of the leviathan is restricted to the ignoble monster primitively pursued in the North ; seated on their hatches , these men will hearken with a childish fireside interest and awe , to the wild , strange tales of Southern whaling . 
Nor is the preeminent tremendousness of the great Sperm Whale anywhere more feelingly comprehended , than on board of those prows which stem him . 
And as if the now tested reality of his might had in former legendary times thrown its shadow before it ; we find some book naturalists -- Olassen and Povelson -- declaring the Sperm Whale not only to be a consternation to every other creature in the sea , but also to be so incredibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for human blood . 
Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier 's , were these or almost similar impressions effaced . 
For in his Natural History , the Baron himself affirms that at sight of the Sperm Whale , all fish -LRB- sharks included -RRB- are `` struck with the most lively terrors , '' and `` often in the precipitancy of their flight dash themselves against the rocks with such violence as to cause instantaneous death . '' 
