Stubb longed for vermillion stars to be painted upon the blade of his every oar ; screwing each oar in his big vice of wood , the carpenter symmetrically supplies the constellation . 
A sailor takes a fancy to wear shark-bone ear-rings : the carpenter drills his ears . 
Another has the toothache : the carpenter out pincers , and clapping one hand upon his bench bids him be seated there ; but the poor fellow unmanageably winces under the unconcluded operation ; whirling round the handle of his wooden vice , the carpenter signs him to clap his jaw in that , if he would have him draw the tooth . 
Thus , this carpenter was prepared at all points , and alike indifferent and without respect in all . 
Teeth he accounted bits of ivory ; heads he deemed but top-blocks ; men themselves he lightly held for capstans . 
But while now upon so wide a field thus variously accomplished and with such liveliness of expertness in him , too ; all this would seem to argue some uncommon vivacity of intelligence . 
But not precisely so . 
For nothing was this man more remarkable , than for a certain impersonal stolidity as it were ; impersonal , I say ; for it so shaded off into the surrounding infinite of things , that it seemed one with the general stolidity discernible in the whole visible world ; which while pauselessly active in uncounted modes , still eternally holds its peace , and ignores you , though you dig foundations for cathedrals . 
Yet was this half-horrible stolidity in him , involving , too , as it appeared , an all-ramifying heartlessness ; -- yet was it oddly dashed at times , with an old , crutch-like , antediluvian , wheezing humorousness , not unstreaked now and then with a certain grizzled wittiness ; such as might have served to pass the time during the midnight watch on the bearded forecastle of Noah 's ark . 
Was it that this old carpenter had been a life-long wanderer , whose much rolling , to and fro , not only had gathered no moss ; but what is more , had rubbed off whatever small outward clingings might have originally pertained to him ? 
