By that circular , it appears that precisely such a chart is in course of completion ; and portions of it are presented in the circular . 
`` This chart divides the ocean into districts of five degrees of latitude by five degrees of longitude ; perpendicularly through each of which districts are twelve columns for the twelve months ; and horizontally through each of which districts are three lines ; one to show the number of days that have been spent in each month in every district , and the two others to show the number of days in which whales , sperm or right , have been seen . '' 
Besides , when making a passage from one feeding-ground to another , the sperm whales , guided by some infallible instinct -- say , rather , secret intelligence from the Deity -- mostly swim in veins , as they are called ; continuing their way along a given ocean-line with such undeviating exactitude , that no ship ever sailed her course , by any chart , with one tithe of such marvellous precision . 
Though , in these cases , the direction taken by any one whale be straight as a surveyor 's parallel , and though the line of advance be strictly confined to its own unavoidable , straight wake , yet the arbitrary vein in which at these times he is said to swim , generally embraces some few miles in width -LRB- more or less , as the vein is presumed to expand or contract -RRB- ; but never exceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship 's mast-heads , when circumspectly gliding along this magic zone . 
The sum is , that at particular seasons within that breadth and along that path , migrating whales may with great confidence be looked for . 
And hence not only at substantiated times , upon well known separate feeding-grounds , could Ahab hope to encounter his prey ; but in crossing the widest expanses of water between those grounds he could , by his art , so place and time himself on his way , as even then not to be wholly without prospect of a meeting . 
There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle his delirious but still methodical scheme . 
But not so in the reality , perhaps . 
Though the gregarious sperm whales have their regular seasons for particular grounds , yet in general you can not conclude that the herds which haunted such and such a latitude or longitude this year , say , will turn out to be identically the same with those that were found there the preceding season ; though there are peculiar and unquestionable instances where the contrary of this has proved true . 
In general , the same remark , only within a less wide limit , applies to the solitaries and hermits among the matured , aged sperm whales . 
