About two and a half miles from Cæsarea in Cappadocia , upon the woody spurs of Mount Argæus , and close to the great Roman road , bubbled a certain warm spring , famous for its healing virtues . 
A granite slab , adorned with rough sculpture and bearing a Greek inscription , proved that this spring had of old time been consecrated to the twin sons of Zeus , Castor and Pollux ; but this by no means prevented the unbroken images of these Pagan demigods from being locally worshipped as St. Cosmas and St. Damian respectively . 
On the other side of the road , opposite the sacred fountain , rose a little thatched tavern , flanked by a dirty stable , and by a shed where fowls and geese were dabbling in the mud . 
In this tavern , owned by one Syrax , a wily Armenian , could be bought goats ' - milk cheese , black bread , honey , olive oil , and a thin sour wine , grown in neighbouring vineyards . 
A screen divided the tavern into two compartments ; one for the use of common folk , the other for guests of more importance . 
From the smoked ceiling hung hams curing , and odorous bunches of mountain herbs , proving that Fortunata , the wife of Syrax , was a careful housewife ; a fact that did not save the dubious reputation of the establishment . 
At night honest travellers dared not halt here , remembering sundry rumours about dark plots hatched in the cottage ; but Syrax , ever scheming , and knowing whose hand to cross with silver , had never troubled his head about rumour . 
The partition was formed by two slender columns , between which was stretched , in the manner of a door-curtain , an old chlamys -LRB- or outer garment -RRB- of faded wool , belonging to the mistress of the house . 
The little columns , wrought in a barefaced attempt at the Doric style , were the pride of the heart of Syrax and the single ornament of the tavern . 
Once gilded , they had long stood creviced and chipped and hopelessly cracked . 
The stuff of the chlamys , when new , had been a bright violet ; now it was a dirty blue , eked out by many patches , and stained with innumerable stains , due to the breakfasts , dinners , and suppers of ten years of the conjugal life of the hard-working Fortunata . 
In the clean half of the tavern , on a single narrow couch , which was torn in many places , Marcus Scuda , Roman tribune of the ninth cohort of the sixteenth legion , was lolling before a tankard-strewn table . 
A dandy provincial , he had one of those faces at the sight of which prosperous slaves and second-rate courtesans would inevitably exclaim with heartfelt admiration : '' What a handsome man ! '' 
At his feet , in an uncomfortable but respectful attitude , a red-faced man sat , panting . 
His bald head was fringed with grey hair , brushed towards the temples . 
He was the centurion of the eighth centuria , Publius Aquila . 
Farther off , twelve soldiers , stretched on the floor , were playing at knuckle-bones . 
`` By Hercules ! '' 
cried Scuda , `` I 'd rather be the meanest beggar in Constantinople than the first man in a mouse-trap like this . 
Can you call this an existence , Publius ? 
Answer me honestly . 
Is this living ? 
To think that outside barracks and camps the future has nothing in store for one ; that one must rot in this sickening marsh without ever catching a glimpse of the world again ! '' 
`` Yes , '' assented Publius ; `` it 's a fact that life here is n't precisely gay ; but on the other hand , it 's peaceful ! '' 
The knuckle-bones pre-occupied the attention of the old captain . 
Pretending to listen to the gossipings of his superior officer , and fully to agree with the drift of his remarks , he followed with an interested eye the game of the legionaries . 
He said to himself , `` If the red aims well , he 'll certainly win . '' 
However , by way of politeness , Publius asked Scuda , with a show of attention -- `` Why , by the way , have you brought down on yourself the indignation of the Prefect Helvidius ? '' 
`` A woman , a friend of mine , was at the bottom of it , a girl ... '' And Marcus Scuda , in a fit of garrulous intimacy , confided to the ear of the old centurion that the Prefect , `` that old goat of a Helvidius , '' had grown jealous on account of the special favours conferred on him , Marcus , by a certain frail lady , a Lydian . 
Now Scuda wanted , by rendering some important service , to win back the good-will of the Prefect ; and he had resolved upon a plan . 
Not far from Cæsarea , in the fortress of Macellum , dwelt Julian and Gallus , the cousins of the reigning Emperor Constantius , and the nephews of Constantine the Great . 
These two were the last representatives of the luckless house of the Flavii . 
On his accession to the throne , fearing rivals , Constantius had assassinated his uncle , the father of Julian and Gallus , Julian Constantius , the brother of Constantine . 
But Julian and Gallus themselves had been spared , and imprisoned in the solitary castle of Macellum , where they lived oppressed by perpetual fear of death . 
In great perplexity , knowing that the new Emperor loathed the two orphans who reminded him of his crime , Helvidius , Prefect of Cæsarea , desired , but dreaded , to divine the will of his master . 
Scuda , the adroit tribune , possessed by visions of a career at Court , grasped , from chance words of his superior officer , that the latter dared not take upon himself the heavy responsibility , and trembled lest the current rumour about an escape of the heirs of Constantine should be realised in fact . 
At this point Scuda made up his mind to go to Macellum , seize the prisoners , and bring them to Cæsarea under the safeguard of his legionaries , well assured that he had nothing to fear from these orphaned minors , abandoned by the world and hated by the Emperor . 
By this valiant proceeding , Scuda counted on regaining the favours of the Prefect Helvidius , so unhappily lost on account of the auburn-haired lady of Lydia . 
Nevertheless , being of a suspicious nature , he only communicated to Publius part of his plan . 
`` And what do you propose now , Scuda ? 
Have you received instructions from Constantinople ? '' 
`` I have received nothing ; nobody knows anything ; but there is an everlasting hawking about of rumours , do n't you see ? 
There are endless veiled hopes and hints , unfinished phrases , threats and warnings , allusions ... . 
Any idiot can do what he has been told to do . 
But this is a matter of guessing the mute will of our master . 
That 's a job that brings reward . 
Come , let us make the venture , take the risk . 
The great thing is to be speedy and stout-hearted , and to trust in the Holy Cross ! 
... I confide myself to you , Publius . 
Perhaps we shall be drinking at Court , you and I , before many days are over ; and , by God , a better wine than this ! '' 
Through the little barred window filtered the troubled light of a melancholy dusk . 
It was raining monotonously . 
A single clay wall , full of crevices , separated the room from the stable . 
The acrid odour of dung came though , and the clucking of hens , the shrill chirping of chickens , and the grunting of pigs was audible . 
There came also the steady noise of a liquid falling into a sonorous can , as if the good wife were milking her cow . 
The soldiers , discussing their winnings , were quarrelling among themselves in undertones . 
Close against the floor , through the frail lath and plaster , a hog had thrust his fat , pink snout . 
Caught in too narrow a slit , he could not draw out his muzzle and was groaning piteously . 
Publius mused -- `` By Jupiter ! 
we 're nearer the courtyard of the cattle than the court of the Emperor ! '' 
His interest in the game had melted away . 
The tribune after his excess of confidence himself felt sad . 
Through the window he looked at the grey sky , dissolving itself into water , at the muzzle of the pig , the thick lees of wine in the tankards , the dirty soldiers . 
Anger mounted to his brain . 
He struck the table , which swayed on its uneven legs , with his fist . 
`` Hi , rascality ! 
betrayer of Christ , Syrax , come here ! 
What wine do you call that , you scoundrel ? '' 
The innkeeper ran up . 
He wore hair and beard frizzled into fine ringlets , black as ebony , with bluish shadows . 
Fortunata used to say , in her hours of conjugal tenderness , that the beard of Syrax was like a bunch of the grapes of Samos . 
His eyes were also black and extraordinarily brilliant , and a honeyed smile never left his purple lips . 
He resembled a caricature of Bacchus , and was black and sugary from every point of view . 
To appease the wrath of Scuda , the innkeeper took to witness Moses and Deidamia , Christ and Hercules , that his wine was superexcellent . 
But the tribune was obstinate , declaring that he knew in whose house Glabrio , a rich merchant of Lyrnas , had recently been assassinated ; and that he , Scuda , would denounce Syrax in the proper quarters . 
Terrified , the Armenian rushed to the cellars , and brought back thence in triumph a strange bulky bottle , flat at its base , narrow-necked , covered with mildew , and grey with age . 
Through the mouldiness in places the glass was visible , no longer transparent , but irised , and upon the label of cypress-wood attached to the neck of the bottle could be deciphered the initial letters of '' Anthosmium '' and below '' Annorum Centum . '' 
But Syrax assured the couple that even in the reign of the Emperor Diocletian the wine had been more than a hundred years old . 
`` Black wine ? '' 
asked Publius , with respect . 
`` Black as tar , and sweet smelling as nectar . 
Ho ! 
Fortunata ! 
for this wine bring summer glasses , cups of crystal , and bring too the whitest snow from the ice-tub . '' 
Fortunata brought in two glasses . 
Her healthy face was of a dull pallor like thick cream , and with her came in the smell of country freshness , milk , and manure . 
The landlord gazed at the bottle amorously , and kissed its neck ; then with caution he raised the waxen seal . 
The wine flowed black and odorous in a thick jet , dissolving the snow , while the crystal of the cups became dull and cloudy under the action of cold . 
Thereupon Scuda , who had pretensions to learning -LRB- he was capable of confusing Hecuba with Hecate -RRB- , declaimed proudly the only line of Martial he could remember -- Candida nigrescant vetulo crystalla Falerno ! 
`` Wait a moment . 
Here is something still better , '' and Syrax plunged his hand into his pocket , drew thence a minute flask carved out of onyx , and with a sensual smile poured into the wine a drop of precious Arabian cinnamon . 
The drop fell , and , like a creaming pearl , melted into the black liquor . 
A strangely heavy perfume filled the room . 
While the tribune was slowly drinking , Syrax made a clacking noise with his tongue , murmuring , `` The wines of Biblos , of Lesbos , of Lathea in Chios , of Icaria ... are less than nothing to this wine ! '' 
Night was falling . 
Scuda gave the order to get ready to march . 
The legionaries began putting on their armour , fastened the greave protecting the right leg , and took up bucklers and lances . 
When they entered the outer hall , the Icarian shepherds , who were brigands rather than shepherds , seated near the fire , rose respectfully before the Roman tribune . 
Scuda , full of a sense of his own rank and valour , felt the blood burning in his veins and his head buzzing with the effect of the marvellous liquor . 
On the threshold a man approached him . 
He wore a strange oriental costume -- a white tunic , striped with broad red bands , and on his head a high headdress of woven camel 's hair , and a towering Persian tiara . 
Scuda halted . 
The visage of the Mede was finely cut , lengthy and meagre , and yellow of hue rather than olive . 
The narrow and piercing eyes sparkled maliciously , but all his movements were calm and majestic . 
He was one of those wandering magicians who haughtily declared themselves Chaldeans , seers , and mathematicians . 
He announced to the tribune that his name was Nogodarès . 
Sojourning by chance with Syrax , he was travelling from the distant Hyrcania towards the coasts of the Ionian sea , to meet the celebrated warlock philosopher , Maximus of Ephesus . 
The magician begged for authority to prove his art and to divine the happy fortune of the tribune . 
The shutters were closed . 
The Mede was preparing something on the ground ; suddenly a slight crackling was heard ; everybody was silent and a flame rose in a long red tongue amidst wafted flakes of white smoke , which filled the room . 
Nogodarès put his pale lips to a double flute , and played a languid , plaintive air , like the funeral songs of the Lydians . 
The flame grew yellow -- grew fainter , then sparkled anew in pale flashes . 
The sorcerer threw into the fire a handful of dried herbs . 
They evaporated in a penetrating aroma which brought on the senses an indefinable melancholy , like the perfume of half-withered grasses , on some misty evening , in the arid plains of Arachosia and Drangiana . 
Obeying the plaintive call of the flute , a huge serpent slid out of a black box placed at the feet of the magician , and slowly , with a sound as of parchments rubbed together , unwound its glittering and metallic coils . 
The wizard chanted in a broken voice , which seemed to come from afar , and several times repeated the same syllables , '' Mara , mara , mara ! '' 
The serpent coiled itself round his thin body and caressingly , with a tender hissing , brought its flat green head and brilliant carbuncled eyes close to the ear of the enchanter . 
A whistling , and the forked sting flashed , as if the reptile had murmured its secret to its master , who now threw the flute upon the ground . 
The flame filled anew the room with thick smoke , this time diffusing an odour choking as if exhaled from the tomb . 
The flame went out . 
Darkness and fear possessed all present ; everybody felt it difficult to breathe . 
But when the open shutters allowed the leaden light of the dusk to enter , there remained no trace of the snake or of the black box . 
Notwithstanding this , everybody 's face was livid . 
Nogodarès approached the tribune -- `` Rejoice ! 
Favour -- great and speedy favour -- awaits thee from thy great master Augustus Constantius ! '' 
During several moments he scrutinised the hand of Scuda narrowly . 
Then , stooping to the level of his ear , muttered , so as to be heard by none but the tribune -- `` This hand is dyed with blood -- the blood of a great prince ! '' 
Scuda grew afraid . 
`` What dost thou dare to say , cursed hound of a Chaldean ? 
I am a loyal servant . '' 
But the other probed him with his searching eyes and half ironically responded -- `` What dost thou fear ? 
Given a few years ... . 
And is glory won without the spilling of blood ? '' 
Pride and joy filled the heart of Scuda when at the head of his soldiery he quitted the tavern . 
He drew near the sacred fountain , crossed himself , and quaffed that virtuous water , invoking in a fervent prayer St. Cosmas and St. Damian , that the prediction of Nogodarès should not fall fruitless . 
Then he vaulted upon his haughty Cappadocian charger and gave the legionaries the order `` March . '' 
The standard-bearer raised the ensign above his bared head . 
It was the image of a large dragon , fixed upon a lance , with gaping jaws of silver and the rest of its body formed of coloured silk . 
Unable to withstand the wish to parade before the crowd assembled at the door of the inn , and although conscious of peril , intoxicated with wine and pride , the tribune stretched his sword up the misty road , and in a loud voice commanded -- `` To Macellum ! '' 
A hum of astonishment ran through the crowd . 
The names of Julian and of Gallus were uttered . 
The legionary who led the column raised his skyward-twisted horn , sounded it , and the echoing note of the Roman trumpet vibrated away amongst the mountains . 
A profound obscurity reigned in the great sleeping-chamber of Macellum , an ancient palace of Cappadocian princes . 
The bed of the young Julian was very hard , -- a wooden pallet , laid with a panther-skin . 
So the young Julian himself willed it , being bred in the austere principles of the Stoics by Mardonius , his tutor , a passionate disciple of ancient philosophy . 
Julian was not asleep . 
The wind , blowing in fierce gusts , howled like an imprisoned beast between the chinks of the walls . 
Then all fell back again into silence , and in the intent pause large drops of rain could be heard splashing from the height of the roof upon the ringing flagstones . 
The keen ear of Julian detected at moments the rustling of the rapid flight of a bat . 
He distinguished , too , the regular breathing of his brother , a delicate and girlish lad , who slept upon a soft bed under mouldy hangings , the last trace of luxury in this deserted castle . 
In the next room could be heard the heavy snore of Mardonius . 
Suddenly , the door of the secret staircase in the wall turned softly upon its hinges . 
A bright light dazzled Julian . 
Labda , an old slave , entered , carrying in her hand a metallic lamp . 
`` Nurse , I 'm afraid ! 
Do n't take the lamp away ... '' The old woman placed the lamp in a stone niche above the head of Julian . 
`` Can you not sleep ? 
You are not in pain ? 
Are you hungry ? 
That old sinner Mardonius always keeps you fasting . 
I 've brought you cakes of honey . 
They 're good ... . 
Taste ! '' 
Making Julian eat was the favourite occupation of Labda ; but she dared not indulge in it by day -- dreading the severe Mardonius -- and so brought her delicacies mysteriously under cover of night . 
Labda , who was purblind and could scarcely drag her limbs along , always wore the black religious habit . 
Although a devout Christian , she was regarded as being in reality a Thessalian sorceress . 
The grimmest superstitions , old and new , fused in her brain into a strange religion not far removed from madness . 
She mingled prayers with spells , Olympian gods with demons , Christian rites with the black arts . 
Her body was behung with crosses , and amulets carved out of the bones of the dead ; and scapularies , containing the ashes of martyrs , swung from her shoulders . 
The old woman felt for Julian a pious affection , regarding him as the sole and legitimate successor of Constantine the Great , and holding Constantius , the reigning Emperor , a murderer and a usurper . 
Labda knew better than anybody the family tree and traditions of the race of the Flavii . 
She remembered the grandfather of Julian , Constantius Chlorus . 
The murderous mysteries of the Court lingered on , ineffaceable , in her memory ; and many a time at night would she tell them to Julian , keeping nothing back , so that he , at the narrative of events which his childish brain could not yet comprehend , felt his heart gripped by fear and indignation . 
With dull eyes , in a low monotonous listless sing-song , Labda , looking like one of the Fates , would recite these gruesome epic tales of a few years ago , as if they had been so many legends of remotest antiquity . 
Placing the lamp in a stone niche , Labda blessed Julian , with a sign of the cross ; ascertained that the amulet of amber was safe on his breast , and , pronouncing some charms to exorcise ill spirits , vanished . 
A heavy half-slumber fell upon Julian . 
It was warm ; great drops of rain , descending in silence as into the bottom of a sonorous vessel , lulled him into languor . 
He knew not whether he was awake or asleep ; whether it was the breathing of the wind or Labda which was murmuring at his ear the terrible secrets of his family . 
All that he had learnt from her , and all that he had seen in infancy , fused into a single fearful dream . 
... He sees the dead body of the great Emperor upon a splendid bier . 
The corpse is painted ; and the head adorned by the deftest of barbers with an ingenious dress of false hair . 
Julian , brought thither to kiss the hand of his uncle for the last time , is afraid . 
The purple , the diadem , with its stones glittering under the flame of torches , dazzle him . 
Through the heavy Arabian perfumes , for the first time in his life he comes into contact with the odour of a corpse . 
But bishops , eunuchs , generals , acclaim the Emperor as if he were alive ; and the ambassadors bow down before him and return thanks , observing all the punctilious ceremony of diplomatic etiquette . 
Scribes read out the edicts , the laws , the decrees of the senate , and implore the approval of the dead man ; a flattering murmur surges to and fro among the multitudes ; they declare that he , the Emperor , is so great that by a special mercy of Providence he reigns after death . 
The child knows that he whom all glorify has killed his own son , a brave young man , whose only fault lay in the people 's too great love of him . 
This son had been slandered by his stepmother , who loved him with an unholy love , and had taken her revenge upon him thus as Phædra upon Hippolytus . 
Afterwards the wife of Constantine had been surprised in adulterous intimacy with a slave of the Imperial stables and had been stifled in a bath heated to a white heat . 
And so on , corpse , upon corpse , victim after victim . 
Finally , tormented by conscience , Constantine the Great had implored priests to shrive his soul from guilt . 
He was refused . 
Thereupon the Bishop Ozius succeeded in convincing him that one religion only possessed the power of purifying from sins like his . 
And therefore it had come to pass that now the sumptuous Labarum , the standard bearing wrought in precious stones the monogram of Christ , glittered above the catafalque of the parricide . 
Julian strove to awake , to open his eyes , and could not . 
Ringing drops fell continually , like heavy tears , and the wind blew on : but it seemed to him that it was Labda , the old Fate , babbling near him with her toothless gums the terrible tales of the Flavii . 
Julian dreamed again . 
He was in the subterranean vaults of Constantius Chlorus , surrounded by porphyry sarcophagi containing the ashes of kings . 
Labda is hiding him in one of the darkest corners and has wrapped in her cloak the sickly Gallus , who is shivering with fever . 
Suddenly , above their heads in the palace , groanings resound from room to room . 
Julian recognises the voice of his father ; struggles to answer him -- to run to his aid -- but Labda holds back the child , murmuring , `` Quiet ! 
quiet ! 
or they will be upon us ! '' 
and hides him under her chlamys . 
Hasty steps clatter upon the staircase -- come nearer and nearer still ; the door bursts into shivers and the soldiers of Cæsar , disguised as monks , invade the vault . 
The Bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia directs the search ; and coats of mail glitter under the black robes of the searchers . 
`` In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost , answer -- who is there ? '' 
Labda is crouching in a corner , still locking the children to her breast . 
Again comes the solemn cry -- `` In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost -- who is there ? '' 
The legionaries , sword in hand , explore every hole and corner ; Labda throws herself at their feet ; shows them the sickly Gallus and Julian , defenceless -- `` Fear God ! 
what harm can a six-year-old innocent like this do to the Emperor ? '' 
And the legionaries force all the kneeling three to kiss the cross which Eusebius holds out to them , and to take the oath of faithfulness to the new Emperor . 
Julian remembers the great cross of cypress-wood . 
There was an enamelled picture of Christ on it . 
On the dark base of the wood stains of fresh blood were still visible , imprinted by the fingers of the cross-bearing assassin . 
Was it the blood of the father of Julian , or of one of his six cousins , Dalmatius , Hannibal , Nepotian , Constantine the Younger , or of the others ? 
The murderer , in order to ascend the throne , had taken six corpses in his stride , doing each deed in the name of the Crucified . 
And still round the tyrant , day after day , rose the cloud of victims , a multitude which no man could number . 
Julian awoke full of fears . 
The rain had ceased and the wind fallen . 
The lamp burned steadily in its niche . 
Julian sat up on his bed , listening in the silence to the beatings of his own heart . 
The hush seemed curiously insupportable . 
Suddenly , voices and steps resounded from room to room , reverberated along the high arcades of Macellum as formerly along the vaults of the Flavii . 
Julian shivered . 
It seemed to him that he was dreaming still . 
The steps approached ; the voices became distinct . 
The lad cried out , `` Gallus , awake ! 
Mardonius , do n't you hear something ? '' 
Gallus awoke . 
Barefooted , his grey hair dishevelled , and clothed in a short sleeping-tunic , Mardonius , his face bloated , yellow and wrinkled like an old woman 's , rushed towards the secret door . 
`` The soldiers of the Prefect ! 
... Dress ! 
... We must fly . '' 
He was too late . 
The grinding of iron bolts told that the door was being shut from the outside . 
The stone columns of the public staircase flushed with the light of torches , illumining the purple dragon of a standard-bearer and the cross upon the breastplates of legionaries . 
`` In the name of the most orthodox and blessed Augustus , Constantius Imperator ! 
I , Marcus Scuda , Tribune of the Fretensian Legion , take under my safeguard Julian and Gallus , sons of the Patrician , Julius Flavius ! '' 
Mardonius , with drawn sword , stood in a warlike attitude in front of the closed door of the chamber , barring the way of the soldiers . 
This glaive was rusty and useless , and served the old tutor only to show , during his lessons in the Iliad , how Hector used to fight Achilles . 
At this moment Mardonius , although he would have been incapable of killing a hen , was brandishing the sword in the face of Publius , according to the most correct traditions of Homeric warfare . 
Publius , who was drunk , flew into a passion : `` Get out of my way , windbag ! 
Clear out , I tell you , if you do n't want me to slit you ! '' 
He seized Mardonius by the throat and hurled him against the wall . 
Scuda ran to the door of the chamber and opened it . 
For the first time in his life he beheld the two last descendants of Constantius Chlorus . 
Gallus seemed tall and strong , but his skin was fine and white as a young girl 's ; his eyes , of a wan blue , were indolent and listless ; his flaxen hair , the distinguishing trait of the house of Constantine , spread in curls over his powerful neck . 
But in spite of his masculine appearance , downy beard , and eighteen years , Gallus at that moment looked a child . 
His lips trembled , he blinked sleep-swollen eyelids , and , crossing himself , continually whispered : `` Lord , have mercy upon me ! '' 
Julian was a thin child , sickly and pale , with irregular features , thick glossy black hair , too long a nose , and a too prominent lower lip . 
But his eyes were astonishing . 
Large , strange , and variable , they shone with a brightness rare in a child 's eyes , and an almost morbid or insane concentration . 
Publius , who in his youth had often seen Constantine the Great , mused -- `` That little rascal will be like his uncle ! '' 
In the presence of the soldiers fear abandoned Julian . 
He was only conscious of anger . 
With closed teeth , the panther-skin of his bed flung over his shoulder , he gazed at Scuda fixedly , his lower lip trembling with bridled rage . 
In his right hand , hidden by the fur , he gripped the handle of a slim Persian dagger given him by Labda ; it was tipped with the keenest of poisons . 
`` A true wolf 's cub ! '' 
said one of the legionaries , pointing out Julian to his companion . 
Scuda was about to cross the threshold of the chamber , when a wild chance of safety flashed upon Mardonius . 
Throwing aside his tragic sword , he seized the mantle of the tribune , and began to scream in a shrill feminine voice : `` Do you know what you 're doing , rascals ? 
How dare you insult an envoy of Constantius ? 
It is I who am charged to conduct these two young princes to Court . 
The august Emperor has restored them to his favour . 
Here is the order from Contantinople ! '' 
`` What is he saying ? 
... what order is it ? '' 
Scuda stared at Mardonius . 
His faded and wrinkled visage was unmistakably that of a eunuch ; and the tribune knew well what special favour eunuchs enjoyed at Court . 
Mardonius hunted in a drawer , lit on a roll of parchment , held it out to the tribune , who unrolled it and immediately grew pale . 
He only read the first lines , but saw the name of the Emperor , who referred to himself in the edict as Our Eternity , -- Nostra æternitas , -- but remarked neither the date nor the year . 
When he perceived , swinging from the parchment , the great Imperial seal of dark green wax , attached by golden threads , his eyes clouded ; he felt his knees give way -- `` Pardon , there is some mistake ... '' `` Away with you ! 
away with you at once ! 
the Emperor shall know everything ! '' 
retorted Mardonius , hastily snatching the decree from the trembling hands of Scuda . 
`` Do n't ruin us ! 
We are all brothers , we 're all sinners ! 
I entreat you in the name of Christ ! '' 
`` I know what acts you commit , in the name of Christ ! 
Go ! 
Go at once . '' 
The tribune gave the order to retire . 
A single drunken legionary tried , by fair means or foul , to hustle Mardonius ; but they overbore the rioter by main force . 
When the sound of steps died away , and Mardonius was assured that all peril was over , he was seized by a wild fit of laughter which shook the whole of his soft fleshy person . 
Forgetting all tutorial dignity , the old man in his short night tunic began to dance , crying out gleefully -- `` Children , children ! 
Glory to Hermes ! 
We 've hoodwinked them cleverly ! 
That edict was annulled three years ago ! 
Ah , the idiots , the idiots ! '' 
At the breaking of dawn , Julian fell into a deep sleep . 
He awoke late , refreshed and light-hearted , when the sun was shining brightly into the room through the great iron-clamped window . 
Their lesson in doctrinal theology was taught to the lads in the morning by an Arian priest . 
Long and dry as a lath , he had green eyes , damp and bony hands . 
This monk , who was named Eutropius , had the disagreeable habit of gently licking the hollow of his palm , smoothing his grey hair , and immediately afterwards making his finger-joints crack . 
Julian knew that one movement would inevitably follow the other , and used to get madly irritated . 
Eutropius wore an old black cassock , full of stains and patches . 
He used to say that he wore it out of humility , but , as a matter of fact , he did it from miserliness . 
Such was the instructor chosen by Eusebius of Nicomedia , the religious guardian of Julian . 
This monk suspected in his pupil a certain yeast of moral perversity , which , unless cured , would draw upon Julian eternal damnation . 
And Eutropius used to talk continually of the grateful feelings the boy should show towards his benefactor the Emperor Constantius . 
Whether he was explaining the text of the Bible , expounding Arian dogmas , or interpreting an apostolic parable , all lessons were conducted to the same conclusion , the `` root of holy obedience and filial docility . '' 
And when the Arian monk spoke of the benefits granted to Julian by the Emperor , the child would fix upon him his deep glance ; but although each knew the intimate thoughts of the other , never did pupil and professor exchange a word upon the subject . 
Only if Julian stopped , forgetting some text , or became confused in the chronological list of Old Testament patriarchs , or repeated badly the prayer he had learned by heart , Eutropius would silently gaze at him , take his ear caressingly between two fingers , and two long and sharp finger nails would slowly pierce the flesh . 
Eutropius , despite his morose look , was endowed with a certain ironical gaiety . 
He gave his pupils the most affectionate of nicknames , while ridiculing their imperial origin . 
When , after pinching Julian 's ear , he saw him grow pale , not with pain but with rage , he would whisper in humility -- `` Your Majesty does not deign to feel anger against Eutropius , his humble and unlearned slave ? '' 
and , licking the palm of his hand , he would smooth the grey locks of his temples , crack his long fingers , and add that it was wholesome sometimes to give naughty , idle little boys a whipping ; that form of instruction being often mentioned in Holy Writ as the most effective means of enlightening the souls of the dark and disobedient . 
He used only to say it to tame the diabolic pride of Julian , who , moreover , was well aware that Eutropius would never dare to put his threat into execution . 
The monk himself was convinced that the child would rather die than undergo such a humiliation . 
But the tutor , nevertheless , loved to discourse upon the topic often and long . 
At the end of the lesson , during the explanation of a text , Julian once mentioned the earth 's antipodes , about which he had heard Mardonius speaking . 
He had done this with the secret intention of annoying the monk , but Eutropius became jocular . 
`` Who 's been talking to you about ` antipodes , ' my angel ? 
Little sinner , how you do make me laugh ! 
That old fool of a Plato did , I know , write something about it . 
But are you actually wise enough to believe that men walk about on their heads ? '' 
Eutropius would launch forth into accusations of heresy against the philosophers . 
Was it not a scandal to imagine that mankind -- created after the image of God -- could walk about upside down , and so bring Heaven into contempt ? 
And when Julian , insulted by insults to his favourite philosophers , argued that the earth was shaped like a globe , Eutropius became serious and lost his temper , purple with fury and stamping his feet -- `` It 's that heathen , Mardonius , who teaches you these godless lies ! '' 
When he got angry he would splutter and shower the hearer with his spittle , which Julian believed must be venomous . 
Exasperated , the monk would savagely attack all the Greek sages . 
Wounded to the quick by the suggestions of Julian , forgetting that his pupil was a mere child , he burst into serious harangues , accusing Pythagoras of being mad , impudent , audacious , affirming that the atrocious `` Utopias '' of Plato were not fit to read , and that the instruction of Socrates was clean against reason . 
`` Read what Diogenes Lærtius says of Socrates ! 
You will see that not only was he a money-lender , but that he practised vices which no decent man can name . '' 
Epicurus , above all , excited the whole of his rancour ; the beastliness with which he plunged into pleasures of all kinds , the brutality with which he used to satisfy his sensual desires , were proof enough that he was less than human . 
Resuming something of his habitual calm , Eutropius on this particular day betook himself to explaining some hair-splitting scholastic distinction of the Arian dogma , and waxed wroth with the same heat against the orthodox oecumenical Church , which he considered heretical . 
From the splendid and desolate garden a warm breeze came in through the open window . 
Julian feigned to listen to Eutropius . 
Really he was dreaming of a very different person , his well-loved teacher Mardonius . 
He recollected his wise lectures ; his readings of Homer and Hesiod -- how different from these monkish lessons ! 
Mardonius did not read Homer ; following the custom of the ancient rhapsodists , he used to chant the poems , to the great amusement of Labda , who was wont to say that he bayed like a dog at the moon . 
And in fact he did appear absurd to folk who heard him for the first time . 
The eunuch would punctiliously scan each foot of the hexameter , beating time with his hand . 
And while his yellow and wrinkled visage remained intensely rapt , his shrill feminine voice streamed on from strophe to strophe . 
Julian never remarked the ugliness of the old man , seeing only the throbbing passion of a soul thrilled by grandeur and beauty . 
His listener trembled , while the divine hexameters rose and shouted like waves . 
He saw the farewells of Andromache and Hector ; the wanderings of Ulysses , weeping for Ithaca on the melancholy and sterile beach of Calypso 's island . 
Delicious sorrow seized the heart of Julian ; pains of yearning for Hellas , the country of the gods , eternally beautiful , land of all beauty-worshippers . 
Tears shook in the voice of the teacher , and rolled down his withered cheeks . 
Sometimes Mardonius would talk with the boy of goodness , of the austerity of virtue , of the death of heroes for freedom 's sake . 
Little indeed , oh ! 
how little , did these lessons resemble those given by Eutropius . 
Mardonius used also to narrate the life of Socrates ; and when he came to the `` Apology , '' delivered by the philosopher before his death to the people of Athens , the old master would rise , and triumphantly declaim the speech from memory , a calm irony lighting his face . 
These were less the phrases of a man accused , than the ringing tones of a judge addressing the people . 
`` Socrates does not ask for pardon . 
All the power , all the laws of a government are absolutely nothing beside the liberty of the soul of man . 
Yes ! 
the Athenians can kill a man without taking from him the freedom and the happiness of his immortal soul . '' 
And when this barbarian , this ex-slave from the banks of the Borysthenes , pronounced the word `` liberty '' it seemed to Julian that the word contained such superhuman power that beside it even the Homeric pictures lost lustre . 
Fixing on his master his great wide , haunting eyes , the lad shook with enthusiasm . 
The cold touch of a hand at his ear drew Julian from his dreams . 
The lesson of the catechist was finished . 
On his knees he recited the prayer of thanksgiving ; then escaping from Eutropius he ran to his room , took down a book , and hastened to a solitary nook in the garden to read at ease the Symposium of Plato , the pagan , a book forbidden above all others . 
On the stairs Julian met the monk , who was departing -- `` Wait , my dear boy ! 
What book is your Majesty carrying ? '' 
Julian stared at him and tranquilly tendered the volume . 
On the parchment binding Eutropius read the title , written in great capitals , `` The Epistles of St. Paul the Apostle , '' and gave back the book unopened . 
`` That 's all right ! 
Remember that I have to answer for your soul to God and to the sublime Emperor . 
Do n't read heretical books , especially none of those frivolous philosophers whom I have to-day condemned . '' 
It was the habitual trick of the boy to wrap dangerous books in innocent bindings . 
Julian from his infancy had learnt dissimulation , and even took pleasure in deceiving others , especially Eutropius . 
He dissembled and lied needlessly and habitually , prompted by deep-seated anger and revenge . 
To Mardonius alone his behaviour was always open and gracious . 
Intrigues , scandals , gossipings , suspicions continually arose at Macellum among the numberless idle servants . 
The whole pack of varletry , in the hope of Court favour , subjected the two disgraced young princes to espionage by night and day . 
Long as Julian could remember , death was an hourly expectation . 
Little by little he had accustomed himself to perpetual fear , being quite aware that neither in the house nor garden could he take a step or make a gesture unperceived by a thousand intent but invisible eyes . 
Hearing and understanding much of the toils about him , the boy was forced to feign ignorance . 
At one time it was the conversation between Eutropius and a spy sent by the Emperor Constantius , in which the monk named Julian and Gallus `` the imperial scourges '' ; at another time , in the gallery under the kitchen windows , it was the meditation of a cook , furious at some insolence on the part of Gallus . 
She was saying to the washer-up of the dishes , `` God save my soul , Priscilla , but what I ca n't make out is , why they have n't strangled them before ! '' 
To-day , when Julian , after his lesson in theology , went out of the house and perceived the greenness of the trees , he breathed more freely . 
The two peaks of Mount Argæus , covered with snow , sparkled against blue sky . 
The neighbourhood of glaciers made the air refreshingly cool ; garden alleys stretched hither and thither into the distance ; glistening dark-green foliage of oaks formed thick vaultings ; here and there a ray filtered through the branches of plane-trees . 
Only one side of the garden was not walled in , for in that direction lay a chasm . 
At the foot of the plateau on which the castle stood , a dead plain stretched as far as Anti-Taurus , and from this plain fierce heat rose in mist , while in the garden fresh streams were running and little waterfalls tinkling through thickets of oleanders . 
A century before the date of which we are speaking Macellum had been the favourite domain and pleasure-house of the luxurious and half-mad Ariarathes , king of Cappadocia . 
Julian took his way towards an isolated grotto , hard by the precipice , in which a statue of the god Pan , playing the flute , stood over a little sacrificial altar . 
Outside the grotto , a lion 's mouth jetted water into a stone basin , and a curtain of roses masked the entrance while letting through its branches a view of the undulating hills and the plain , far down and drowned in misty blue . 
The perfume of roses filled the little cave , and the air there would have been oppressive had it not been cooled by a stream channelled in the rocky floor . 
The wind scattered the turf with yellow petals of roses , and flung them floating on the water of the basin . 
From the dark and warm place of shelter could be heard the humming of bees . 
There Julian , stretched on the moss , used to read the Banquet of Plato , understanding nothing of many of the passages ; but their beauty had for him a double relish because it was a fruit forbidden . 
When his reading was done , Julian wrapped the book anew in the binding of the `` Epistles of the Apostle Paul , '' went up to the altar of Pan , gazed at the joyous god as at an old accomplice , and , thrusting his hand into a heap of dried leaves , drew from the interior of the altar , which was cracked and covered with a piece of board , a small object carefully enveloped in cloth . 
It was his own handiwork -- a delightful little Liburnian trireme , or galley with three banks of oars . 
He set it swimming in the basin ; the galley rocked on the miniature waves . 
The model was complete , -- three masts , rigging , oars , gilded prow , and sails made of a fragment of purple silk , the gift of Labda . 
Nothing was wanting but to fix the rudder , and the boy began the task . 
From time to time , while planing a piece of board , he would look into the distance , at the hills outlined in mist through the hedge of roses . 
Beside his plaything Julian soon forgot all vexations , all hates , and the eternal fear of death . 
In this little cave he imagined himself a shipwrecked sailor . 
He was the wily Ulysses in some solitary cavern facing the ocean , building a ship in which he might win back again to Ithaca . 
But down yonder , there among the hills , where the houses of Cæsarea shone white as the sea-foam , a little cross , glittering high above the roof of the basilica , irritated him still . 
That everlasting cross ! 
Could he never be free of it , even here in his own cave ? 
He would resolve not to see it , and stooping , redoubled his attention to the galley . 
`` Julian ! '' 
a voice cried ; `` Julian , Julian ! 
Where in the world is he ? 
