The soothsayer looked at the hierophant ; the hierophant at the soothsayer . 
`` Wait ! '' 
said the priest of Eleusis . 
`` Dare ! '' 
said Nogodarès . 
Julian stood between the two , in perplexity scrutinising both . 
The faces of the augurs remained impenetrable . 
`` What is to be done ? '' 
he murmured to himself . 
Then he remembered , and exclaimed joyfully : `` One moment ! 
I have an ancient book in my library , Concerning Contradiction in Auguries ; we shall see ! '' 
He hurried to the library ; but in a passage he encountered the bishop Dorotheus , in sacerdotal dress , bearing the crucifix and the sacred Viaticum . 
`` What is this ? '' 
asked Julian . 
`` The Viaticum for your wife , who is dying , O Cæsar ! '' 
Dorotheus looked with severity at the robes of Julian , his pale face , and his blood-stained hands . 
`` Your wife , '' continued the bishop , `` desires to see you before her death . 
Will you come ? '' 
`` Yes ! 
... yes ! 
later ! 
... O gods ! 
... another ill omen . '' 
He entered the library and began to rummage among the parchments . 
Suddenly he heard a voice murmuring distinctly in his ear : `` Dare ! 
dare ! 
dare ! '' 
`` Maximus , it is thou ! '' 
exclaimed Julian , wheeling round . 
There was no one in the dark apartment . 
Julian 's heart beat so strongly that he pressed his hand against his side ; a cold sweat stood on his forehead . 
`` This -- this is what I was waiting for ! '' 
murmured Julian . 
`` The voice was ` his ' ; now , all doubt is over ! 
... I will go ! '' 
The barred gates had given way with a crash . 
Legionaries were pouring into the atrium , thrilling the old palace with their cries , while the crimson glare of the torches shone through the chinks of shutters like the light of a conflagration . 
Not a minute was to be lost . 
Casting away his white robes , Julian donned his armour , paludamentum , war cloak , and helmet , buckled on his sword , and ran down the principal staircase leading to the entrance . 
He opened the door and presented himself to the soldiers with a calm and unshaken demeanour . 
All doubts had disappeared . 
While in action his will never vacillated ; but never up to that day had he been conscious of such a fulness of inward force , such clearness and self-possession of mind . 
In a moment the crowd felt that supremacy . 
The pale face of Julian was imperial and awe-striking , and at a gesture from him the mob was silenced . 
Julian spoke to the soldiers , asking them to restore order ; he would neither abandon them nor permit that they should be taken from Gaul ; on that head he would convince his well-beloved brother , the Emperor Constantius . 
`` Down with Constantius ! '' 
interrupted the legionaries . 
`` Down with him who slew his brother ! 
Thou art our Emperor ! 
Glory to Augustus Julian , the Invincible ! '' 
Admirably did Julian affect surprise , and , as if startled , lowered his eyes and turned aside his head with a deprecating gesture of his lifted palms , as putting away from him so criminal a gift . 
The shouts redoubled . 
`` What is this ? '' 
said Julian , feigning dismay . 
`` You are ruining me and you are ruining yourselves . 
Do you think that I can betray my sovereign ? '' 
`` Yes ! 
your brother 's murderer ! '' 
shouted the men . 
`` Silence ! '' 
answered Julian , striding towards the crowd . 
`` Do you not know that we are sworn ... ? '' 
Every movement was a hypocritical ruse . 
When the soldiers surged round him he drew his sword from its sheath and pointed it against his own breast as if to fall on it . 
`` Bravest of the brave ! 
better die for Cæsar than betray him ! '' 
But the men , seizing his hands , disarmed him , and many , falling at his feet , kissed them , weeping -- `` Ah ! 
we are willing to die for you ! '' 
Others stretched out their hands , groaning -- `` Have pity on us ; be our Augustus ! '' 
The heart of Julian was thrilled . 
He loved these rough faces , the barrack-atmosphere , and the unrivalled enthusiasm in which he felt his own power . 
He saw that the mutiny was dangerous and in earnest , observing that the legionaries did not interrupt each other , but shouted unanimously , and became suddenly hushed , as if their action had been concerted beforehand . 
There was either a deafening hubbub , or absolute silence . 
Finally , Julian , with an effort that might well have been thought sincere -- `` My children ! 
my dear comrades ! 
behold me ... I am yours in life and in death . 
I can refuse you nothing ! '' 
`` Crown him ! 
The diadem ! '' 
they cried , triumphantly . 
But no diadem was to be found . 
Strombix proposed -- `` Let Augustus order that his wife 's necklet of pearls be brought here ! '' 
Julian answered that a woman 's ornament would be unfitting , and an ill presage with which to inaugurate a reign . 
But the men were unsatisfied . 
They insisted on seeing a sign of regality shining on the head of their chosen , to make him their Emperor indeed . 
One of the legionaries snatched from his war-horse the phaleræ , or forehead trapping , with its string of metal disks , for the crowning of Augustus . 
But neither did this please him , for the ornament stank with the sweat of the horse . 
Everyone cast about to find another decoration , and at last the standard-bearer of the Petulant legion , the Sarmatian Aragaris , pulled from his neck the metal chain denoting his rank , and Julian wound it twice round his own head . 
This chain made him Emperor of Rome . 
`` Hoist him on a shield ! 
on a shield ! '' 
shouted the soldiery . 
Aragaris tendered his round buckler . 
Hundreds of arms heaved the Emperor . 
He saw a sea of helmeted heads , and heard , like the rolling of thunder , the exultant cry -- `` Glory to Julian , the divine Augustus ! '' 
It seemed the will of destiny . 
One by one the torches were extinguished . 
The clamour died away ; and the eastern sky was barred with soft white bands . 
The dark and dull mass of the palace-towers became clear in all its ugliness ; a single lighted window was still visible . 
Julian guessed that this must be the light in the cell where Helena lay dying . 
And when at dawn the wearied army dispersed , he went to the bedside of his wife . 
It was too late . 
The dead woman lay quietly on her virgin couch ; the lips severely closed . 
Julian felt no remorse , but painful curiosity moved him as he gazed at the dark face of his wife , wondering -- `` What was that last desire ? 
What did she wish to say to me ? '' 
The Emperor Constantius meantime was passing at Antioch a somewhat melancholy period . 
At night he had alarming visions and kept six lamps burning in his chamber till daybreak in the vain endeavour to relieve his fears of darkness . 
Hour after hour would he lie motionless and moody , starting at the least sound . 
Once he dreamed he saw his father , Constantine the Great , holding a sturdy and mischievous child in his arms . 
Constantius took the child and placed him on his right hand , attempting the while to hold in his left a great ball of crystal . 
But the child in wilfulness pushed the globe , which fell and broke ; and its fragments , piercing like needles , buried themselves in the body of Constantius , darting with intolerable pain , burning , and hissing into his brain , eyes , and heart . 
The Emperor awoke , bathed in a cold perspiration . 
He consulted sorcerers , diviners , celebrated magicians . 
Troops were assembled at Antioch for a campaign against Julian . 
Sometimes after a moody fit of immobility the Emperor was seized with an impulse to action ; the greater number of Court officials found this haste unreasonable , and confided to each other their fears as to the mental state of the august sovereign . 
The autumn was reaching its end when he left Antioch . 
At noon , about three miles from the city , near the village of Hypocephalus , the Emperor saw an unknown mutilated body lying on the road . 
Facing the south the corpse was stretched to the right of Constantius , who was on horseback . 
The head was separated from the body . 
The Emperor grew pale and turned away . 
None of the riders round him uttered a word , all being aware that the omen was an evil one . 
In the town of Tarsus in Cilicia , Constantius had shivering fits and felt weakness , but he paid them no attention nor consulted leeches , believing that riding in the hot sun over the steep mountains would produce reaction and relief . 
He rode towards the little town of Mopsucrenam at the foot of Mount Tarsus , the last halting-place before crossing the Cilician border . 
On the way he suffered several times from violent giddiness , which obliged him to dismount and lie down in a litter . 
Subsequently the eunuch Eusebius tells how , when lying in the palanquin , the Emperor took from his bosom and tenderly kissed a precious stone on which was engraven the profile of the late Empress Eusebia Aurelia . 
At one of the cross-roads he asked whither one of the ways led , and when he was told to the abandoned palace of the kings of Cappadocia , at Macellum , his brow clouded . 
Mopsucrenam was reached at night-fall . 
Constantius was weary and full of gloom . 
Hardly had he entered the house which had been prepared when one of the courtiers , against the command of Eusebius , thoughtlessly announced to the Emperor that two couriers from the southern provinces were awaiting him . 
Constantius ordered them to be admitted , in spite of the supplications of Eusebius , his favourite chamberlain , who advised him to postpone business till the morrow . 
The Emperor declared that he felt better , and suffered from nothing but a slight pain at the nape of his neck . 
The first courier , trembling and livid , was ushered in . 
`` Tell me all , immediately ! '' 
exclaimed Constantius , dismayed at the man 's expression . 
The courier then narrated the audacious movements of Julian , who , before the assembled army , had torn up the Imperial rescript . 
Gaul , Pannonia , Aquitania , had submitted to Julian , and the traitorous army was advancing to encounter Constantius , with all the legions to be gathered from those provinces . 
The Emperor stood up , his face disfigured by fury , and , seizing the messenger by the throat , shook him . 
`` You lie , caitiff ! 
You lie ! 
You lie ! 
... There is still a God in heaven to shield the kings of the earth ... and He will not permit , do you understand ! 
... Fools ! 
... He will not permit ... '' He had a spasm of weakness , and covered his eyes with his hand ; the courier , more dead than alive , slunk to the door . 
`` To-morrow , '' stammered Constantius wildly ; `` to-morrow we absolutely must set out ! 
... by forced marches , direct ... as the crow flies ... over the mountains ... . 
We absolutely must go to Constantinople . '' 
Eusebius approached him , with the humblest of bows -- `` Divine Augustus ! 
The Lord God has granted you , you His chosen , victory over your enemies . 
You have annihilated Magnentius , Constantius , Vetranio , Gallus . 
You will crush this impious -- '' But Constantius , wagging his head without listening , muttered -- `` Then He exists not ; if it is all true , and I am single-handed , alone ! 
Who dares to say that ` He ' exists , when such crimes can be accomplished ! 
I 've been thinking so a long time ... '' He cast a dull look on the courtiers present and said -- `` Call in the other . '' 
A physician came up -- a courtier-like person , with a clean-shaven rosy face , an Armenian who assumed the airs of a Roman patrician . 
He observed respectfully that too keen emotion might be harmful to the Emperor , that he should rest ... . 
Constantius waved him away like an irritating fly . 
The second courier was shown in . 
He was Cintula , the tribune of the Imperial stables , who had escaped from Lutetia . 
He brought the terrible news that the inhabitants of Sirmium -LSB- 7 -RSB- had opened their doors to Julian , and welcomed him as the saviour of the country . 
In two days he would debouch on the great Roman road leading to Constantinople . 
-LSB- 7 -RSB- On the Save , at no great distance from Belgrade . 
The Emperor either did not hear , or did not understand , the last words of the messenger . 
His face became strangely rigid . 
He made a gesture of dismissal to all present . 
Eusebius alone remained to talk the business over with him . 
In another quarter of an hour Constantius ordered that he should be assisted to his chamber , and made several steps . 
Then a cry escaped him ; he pressed his hands to his head , as if he suddenly felt terrible pain . 
Courtiers ran to support him . 
The Emperor did not lose consciousness . 
By his face and movements , and the veins , standing out like whipcord on his forehead , it was evident that he was making fearful efforts to speak . 
Finally he stammered slowly , word by word , as if being throttled by an iron collar -- `` I -- want -- to -- speak -- and -- I -- can not ! '' 
Those were his last words ; paralysis had stricken the whole of his right side . 
His arm and leg fell inert . 
He was carried to bed , but his eyes were wakeful and intelligent , and he struggled to utter something -- some important order perhaps . 
From his lips came only confused sounds , like weak lowings . 
No one understood what he wanted , and the invalid fixed his clear gaze in turn on each present . 
Eunuchs , courtiers , generals , slaves , thronged round the dying man , helplessly desirous of doing his last behest . 
At moments the clear eye became angered and the lowing hoarse . 
At last Eusebius understood , and brought wax and tablets . 
At the sight of these a flash of joy was seen on the Emperor 's face . 
He gripped the steel stylus awkwardly , like a child . 
After some struggles , he succeeded in tracing a few letters on the soft wax , and the courtiers with difficulty deciphered the word '' Baptism . '' 
Constantius fixed his supplicating look on Eusebius , and everybody wondered at not having understood before . 
He was desirous of being baptised before death , having , like his father Constantine , always postponed this sacrament to the last , in the belief that he could then miraculously cleanse his soul and leave it whiter than snow . 
A messenger was despatched for the bishop . 
There proved to be none in Mopsucrenam , and recourse was had to the Arian priest of the basilica . 
He was a timid man , with a bird-like face , red-nosed , with a goat 's beard , and a provincial manner . 
When disturbed by the messengers , Father Nymphodion was enjoying his tenth wine-cup , and seemed in too cheerful a mood . 
It was impossible to make clear to him the matter in hand , and he grew angry at what he believed to be raillery . 
But when at length convinced that fate had designated him to baptise an Emperor he nearly lost his reason . 
When he entered the chamber of the sick man , the Emperor gazed on the trembling priest with such humility that it was evident he feared to die , and was eager to hasten the ceremony . 
Meantime the town had been scoured in vain for a basin of gold or silver . 
It is true that a jewelled one was available , but it had served for the bacchic mysteries of Dionysus ; and the common copper basin used by the parishioners of the basilica was therefore preferable . 
This copper basin was brought to the bed and warm water poured into it . 
The doctor was about to feel its temperature , but the Emperor made a brusque movement and groaned , lest the water should be sullied . 
The dying man 's tunic was taken off . 
Strong arms of legionaries raised him , like a child , and immersed him . 
The wasted face of Constantius , his eyes fixed and wide open , stared at the cross fixed above the Labarum , the golden standard of Constantine . 
It was an obstinate and vacuous stare , as of children when they see some dazzling object and can not turn away from it . 
The ceremony did not soothe the sick man , who seemed to have forgotten everything . 
Volition came into his eyes for the last time when Eusebius again stretched out to him the waxen tablet , but Constantius , unable to write , only traced with his finger the name '' Julian . '' 
Did he desire to pardon his enemy or to bequeath his vengeance ? 
For three days he lay in the extremity of death ; courtiers murmured to each other that this was evidently some special punishment of God , who would not permit him to die . 
But they referred to him always as `` The Divine Augustus , '' `` His Holiness , '' and `` The Eternal . '' 
His sufferings must have been great ; the low moaning turned into a steady death-rattle , which went on day and night . 
Courtiers came in and went out , eagerly hoping for the end . 
The eunuch Eusebius alone never left his master . 
Many a crime had this eunuch upon his conscience ; all the tangled threads of reports , espials , and ecclesiastical broils were gathered in his hands . 
But he alone in the palace proved his love to his master , and at night when everyone was sleeping , or had withdrawn , worn out by the task of nursing , Eusebius remained by the bedside , arranging pillows , cooling the dry lips with ice , or kneeling at the feet of the Emperor in prayer . 
When none saw , Eusebius would gently lift the purple coverlet and weepingly kiss the feet , now pale and benumbed . 
Once it seemed to him that Constantius noticed this caress and thanked him with a look . 
Something fraternal and tender passed between the two cruel , ill-starred , and solitary men . 
Eusebius closed the eyes of the Emperor ; the Church recited over him , before the body was committed to the tomb -- `` Rise again , O king of the earth ! 
Answer the summons of thy coming Judge , the King of kings ! '' 
Not far from Succi , a mountainous defile in the Hæmus range -LSB- 8 -RSB- between Moesia and Thrace , two men were making their way along a narrow path , at night , through a forest of beeches . 
They were the Emperor Julian and Maximus the enchanter . 
The full moon was shining in a clear sky , and strangely illuminating the gold and purple of autumn foliage . 
From time to time a wan yellow leaf would fall swirling with a slight rustle . 
The air was full of moisture and the musty smell of a tardy autumn -- that soft , chill melancholy odour which puts men in mind of death . 
The soft masses of leaves made a brushing sound under the feet of the travellers , and round them in the silent woods burned the magnificent obsequies of the departing year . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- The Balkans . 
`` Master , '' asked Julian , `` why is not that divine lightness mine , that gaiety which used to make so splendid the men of Hellas ? '' 
`` You are not a man of Hellas . '' 
Julian sighed -- `` Alas , our ancestors were barbarians , Medes ; and the sluggish blood of the North flows in my veins . 
It is true , I am no son of the Hellenes ! '' 
`` My friend , Hellas has never existed , '' murmured Maximus , with his old bewitching smile . 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
asked Julian . 
`` The Hellas that you love has never existed . '' 
`` Do you mean to say that my faith is futile ? '' 
`` We are only to believe , '' answered Maximus , `` in what is not , but shall be . 
Your Hellas shall exist , shall be the reign , the kingdom of divine men , men daring all things , fearing none . '' 
`` Fearing none ! 
... Master , powerful enchantments are thine ... . 
Deliver my soul from fear ! '' 
`` Fear of what ? '' 
`` I can not say , but from childhood I have been afraid -- afraid of life , of death , of myself , of the mystery in all things , of the darkness ... . 
I had an old nurse , Labda , like a Parca , a Fate , who used to spin me terrible tales of my family , the Flavii . 
These mad old-wives ' tales keep singing in my ears still , at night , when I am alone . 
They will ruin me some day ... I wish to be free , as one of the old Hellenes ... and I have no gladness in me ... . 
Sometimes I think I am a coward , Master ! 
... Master , save me ! 
Deliver me from that eternal fear , these consuming darknesses ! '' 
`` Ah , I have long known the need of your soul , '' said Maximus , gravely , `` and from this very day I will cleanse you from this Galilean corruption -- slay the shadow of Golgotha in the radiance of Mithra -- warm afresh your body , frozen at baptism , in the hot blood of the Sun-god ! 
... My son , rejoice ! 
for I will give you such freedom , such joy as no man on earth has yet possessed ! '' 
They issued from the wood , and followed a narrow path , hewn through the rock , above a chasm in which a torrent ran seething . 
Stones , loosened by their feet , rolled echoing down and plunged into the water . 
High over the forest they saw the distant snow-covered summits of Mount Rhodope . 
Julian and Maximus at last reached and entered the mouth of a cave . 
It was the temple of the Sun-god Mithra , where mysteries , forbidden by the Roman laws , were performed . 
In this cavern there was no sign of splendour ; the bleak walls were engraven with cabalistic signs of Zoroastrian religion , triangles , enlaced circles , winged beasts , and constellations . 
Here and there the vaulted obscurity was relieved by dull flames of torches or the form of an initiating priest in strange and sweeping robes . 
Julian was arrayed in the Olympian robe , embroidered with Indian monsters , stars , suns , and hyperborean dragons . 
He held a flambeau in his right hand . 
Maximus had acquainted him with the responses to be made to his initiator , and Julian had learned them by heart , although their meaning hitherto was unintelligible to him . 
With Maximus he went down rock-hewn steps into a long and deep foss . 
Here the air was already humid and stifling ; but to make it more so , overhead a wooden trap-door , riddled with holes like a strainer , was lowered across , from edge to edge . 
The trampling of hoofs resounded , and the sacrificers placed three black bulls , three white bulls , and a red bull with gilded hoofs and horns on the trap above the two men . 
Then the initiators , intoning a hymn which mingled with the bellowing of the beasts , felled with axes one bull after another . 
They fell on their knees and struggled , the wooden framework trembled under their weight , while the farthest vaults of the cavern resounded to the cries of the red bull , which was hailed as the god Mithra . 
Percolating through the holes in the trap , the blood fell in a hot shower upon the head of Julian . 
This slaying of the bull consecrated to the Sun was the supreme mystery of the Pagans . 
Throwing off his outer clothes and standing in his white tunic only , Julian offered head , breast , and all his limbs to the terrible trickling rain . 
Then Maximus , shaking the torch overhead , cried -- `` Let thy soul be steeped in the expiating blood of thy god , the Sun , in the purest blood of the ever radiant heart of thy god , the Sun ; let it be cleansed in his morning and in his evening light ! 
Dost thou , O mortal , still hold anything in fear ? '' 
`` Yes , '' was the response . 
`` Let thy soul become a parcel of thy god , the Sun ! 
The quenchless and inviolable Mithra takes thee to himself ! 
Dost thou still fear anything , O mortal ? '' 
`` I fear nothing more on the earth , '' answered Julian , who was now streaming with blood from head to foot . 
`` I am even as He is ! '' 
`` Take this crown , '' said Maximus , placing a wreath of acanthus-leaves on the head of Julian , with the point of his sword . 
But the catechumen flung the coronal upon the ground with a cry -- `` The Sun only is my crown , the Sun alone ! '' 
Then he stamped on the acanthus , and lifting his arms skyward repeated a third time -- `` Now , until death , my crown is the Sun ! '' 
The mystery was over . 
Maximus kissed the initiate . 
On the face of the old man as he did so hovered a gleam of strange significance . 
While they were retracing their steps through the beech-forest the Emperor spoke to the enchanter -- `` Maximus , I think you are hiding from me some secret deeper yet . '' 
He turned towards the old man his pale face , on which , as was the custom , the traces of the sacred blood were not yet wiped away . 
`` What do you wish to know , Julian ? '' 
`` What lot shall fall to me ? '' 
`` You will conquer . '' 
`` And Constantius ? '' 
`` Constantius is no more . '' 
`` What mean you ? '' 
`` Wait ! 
the Sun shall reveal your glory ! '' 
Julian dared not question further . 
Both men regained the camp in silence . 
In Julian 's tent a courier from Asia Minor , the tribune Cintula , stood waiting . 
He knelt and kissed the edge of the Imperial paludamentum -- `` Glory to the divine Augustus Julian ! '' 
`` Do you come with a message from Constantius ? '' 
`` Constantius is no more ! '' 
`` What say you ? '' 
Julian trembled and threw a glance at Maximus , whose face remained inscrutable . 
`` By the will of God , '' continued Cintula , `` your enemy departed this life in the town of Mopsucrenam , not far from Macellum . '' 
That evening the army assembled on a hill . 
The death of Constantius was already made known to them . 
Augustus Claudius Flavius Julian took his station on a hillock so that all the soldiers could see him ; crownless , weaponless , unarmoured , and enswathed head to foot in purple . 
To conceal the traces of the blood , which might not be washed off , he had enveloped his head and veiled his face in the purple silk . 
In this attire he bore the appearance rather of a sacrificial priest than of an emperor . 
Behind him rose the ruddy forest wrapping the base of Mount Hæmus . 
Above his head hung , like a golden banner , the yellow branches of a maple . 
Far as the eye could see , the plain of Thrace lay below , crossed by the white marble pavement of the Roman road stretching victoriously away to the Propontic Sea . 
Julian gazed at his army . 
When the legions moved their stations , red flashes from the sunset were reflected upon burnished helmets , breastplates , and eagles ; the lances above the cohorts seemed like lighted tapers . 
By Julian 's side was Maximus , who spoke in Cæsar 's ear -- `` Look forth upon this sight of glory ! 
your hour is come ! 
Act now ! '' 
The magician pointed to the Christian banner , the Labarum , with its crest of the monogram of Christ , the flag made on the pattern of that fiery standard bearing the inscription , `` Through this shalt thou conquer , '' which Constantine the Great had seen miraculous in the heavens . 
The troops made no stir . 
Julian in a clear and solemn voice addressed them -- `` Comrades , our work is finished . 
Now we will go to Constantinople ! 
Give thanks to the Olympians , who have given us the victory ! '' 
These words were only heard by the first ranks , but there were numerous Christians among them . 
These were roused by the last startling expression . 
`` Lord have mercy on us ! 
what is it he says ? '' 
cried one . 
`` Do you see that old man with the white beard ? '' 
said another to his comrade . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` That 's the Devil , who , in the body of Maximus the enchanter , is tempting Cæsar ! '' 
But the more distant ranks , who had not heard Julian 's words , cried -- `` Glory to Augustus Julian ! 
Glory ! 
Glory ! '' 
and louder and louder yet from outskirts of the hill , as far as they were covered by the legions , arose a cry repeated by thousands of voices -- `` Glory ! 
... Glory ! 
... '' Mountains , air , earth , and forest trembled with the voice of the multitude . 
`` Look , look ! '' 
murmured the dismayed Christians ; `` the Labarum is being lowered ! '' 
And in fact the holy banner was being veiled before the Emperor . 
A military blacksmith came down from the wood with a brazier and red-hot pincers . 
Julian , whose face , in spite of the ruddy gleams of the purple and the sun , was dark with strong emotion , wrenched the golden cross , with its monogram of precious stones , from the staff of the Labarum . 
Pearls , emeralds , and rubies were scattered on the ground , and the glittering cross buried in the earth , stamped under the sandal of the Roman Cæsar . 
From a casket Maximus immediately drew forth a little silver statue of the Sun-god , Mithra-Helios ; and the smith in a few instants soldered it to the staff of the Labarum . 
Before the army had recovered from its astonishment and fear , Constantine 's sacred banner rose above the head of the Emperor , crowned with the image of Apollo . 
An old soldier , who was a devout Christian , turned away and veiled his eyes to avoid seeing the sight of horror . 
`` Sacrilege ! 
sacrilege ! '' 
he muttered , turning pale . 
`` Woe , woe , upon us ! '' 
groaned another ; `` Satan has entoiled our Emperor ! '' 
Julian knelt before the standard and , stretching out his arms to the little silver image , exclaimed -- `` Glory to the invincible Sun , king of all gods ! 
... Augustus worships the eternal Helios ; god of light , god of reason , god of the gladness and joy upon Olympus ! '' 
The last rays of sunset lighted the bold beauty of the god of Delphi , and rayed his head . 
The legionaries stood in silence , save that in the wood the dry leaves could be heard falling . 
The conflagration of the sunset , the purple of the sacrificial king , the withered woods , all these breathed a magnificence as of sumptuous obsequies . 
One of the men in the front rank muttered a single word so distinctly that it reached Julian 's ear , and thrilled him -- '' Anti-Christ ! '' 
Hard by the stables , in the Hippodrome of Constantinople , there was a room which served as a sort of common den for grooms , women-riders , actors , and charioteers . 
Even in daytime lamps were kept burning in this stifling resort , where the air smelt strongly of dung-heap and stable . 
When the curtain at the door was lifted a dazzling flood of light invaded this den ; and in the sunny distance could be seen empty tiers of seats , and the magnificent staircase joining the Imperial box to the apartments of Constantine 's palace . 
Egyptian obelisks also were seen in the arena and in the centre , on the yellow sand , a gigantic sacrificial altar of marvellous workmanship , wrought of three entwined serpents of bronze , bearing on their flat heads a Delphian tripod . 
Crackings of whips , shouts of riders , snortings of horses , came from the arena , and the muffled sound of wheels on the soft sand went by like a rushing of wings . 
No races were going on , but merely the preparatory exercise for the races which were to take place a few days later . 
In one corner of the stable a naked athlete , rubbed over with oil and covered with dust , a girdle of leather round his hips , was raising and lowering dumb-bells . 
Throwing back his shaggy head , he arched his back till the joints cracked , and at every effort his face grew crimson and the veins of his neck swelled . 
Preceded by slaves , a young Byzantine woman of patrician rank approached the athlete . 
She was dressed in a morning robe of delicate hues ; and a veil thrown over her head covered her aristocratic and slightly-faded features . 
She was a zealous Christian , widow of a Roman senator ; beloved of monks for her generous donations to monasteries , and abounding charity . 
At first she concealed her escapades , but soon perceived that to combine the love of the church with the love of the circus was quite the fashion . 
Everybody knew that Stratonice detested the coxcombs of Constantinople , curled and painted , nervous and capricious as she was herself ; it was her temperament and fancy to mingle the most costly perfumes of Arabia with the enervating heat of circus and stable . 
Hot tears of repentance , fervent confessions to tactful confessors , were of no avail ; and this little woman , frail and delicate as some ivory trinket , cared for nothing but the coarse caresses of a certain famous circus-rider . 
Stratonice was watching the exercises of the gymnast with a practised eye , while he , preserving a stupid expression on his beefy face , paid her not the slightest attention . 
She muttered something to her slave , with simple wonder admiring the powerful back and the terrible Herculean muscles rolling under the red skin of the shoulders , when , bending with deep inhalations , like the wind of a forge , he raised the iron weights above his handsome tawny head . 
The curtain was lifted . 
The crowd of spectators recoiled , and two Cappadocian mares , a white and a black , pushed into the stables , ridden by a young horsewoman , who , with a guttural cry , adroitly leapt from one beast to another , and thence to the ground . 
She was solidly-built , hale and sprightly as her mares , and upon her bare body shone fine drops of sweat . 
Zephirinus , the elegant sub-deacon of the Basilica of the Holy Apostles , smilingly hastened towards her . 
A great lover of the circus , a frequenter of races and racing-stables , this young man would wager heavy sums for the blue -LRB- veneta -RRB- against the green -LRB- prasina -RRB- . 
With his red-heeled morocco boots , his painted eyes , and curled hair , Zephirinus had much more the appearance of a young girl than of a servant of the church . 
Behind him stood a slave , burdened with packets of pretty stuffs and boxes , purchases of every kind from famous shops . 
`` Krokala , here are the perfumes you asked for the day before yesterday . '' 
The sub-deacon offered the equestrienne a flask sealed with blue wax . 
`` I 've been hunting in shops all the morning , and have only found it in one . 
It is pure nard , and arrived yesterday from Apamea ! '' 
`` And what purchases are these ? '' 
demanded Krokala . 
`` Oh , the silks in fashion ! 
... ornaments -- sets of jewels ! '' 
`` All of them for your -- ? '' 
`` Yes , all for my most noble sister , the devout matron Bezilla ; one must help one 's near relatives ! 
She trusts nobody 's taste but mine for choosing stuffs . 
From early morning I am under her orders . 
My head goes round , but I do n't complain . 
No ! 
... No ! 
... Bezilla is so good ... such a holy woman ! '' 
`` Unfortunately old , '' laughed Krokala . 
`` Here , boy , wipe the sweat off the black mare with fresh fig leaves . '' 
`` Old age also has its virtues , '' replied the sub-deacon , gently rubbing together his white hands ; they were loaded with rings . 
Then he whispered in Krokala 's ear : `` This evening ? '' 
`` I 'm not sure ... perhaps . 
Are you going to bring me something ? '' 
`` You need n't be afraid , Krokala , I wo n't come empty-handed ! 
There 's a piece of stuff ... a quite marvellous pattern . '' 
He kissed two of his fingers , adding : `` Something perfectly dazzling ! '' 
`` Where did you pick it up ? '' 
`` Oh , at Pyrmix 's of course , near the baths . 
For what do you take me ? 
