I 've cloudberry wine . 
Hey , von Sohn , do n't lose your chance . '' 
He went out , shouting and gesticulating . 
It was at that moment Rakitin saw him and pointed him out to Alyosha . 
`` Alexey ! '' 
his father shouted , from far off , catching sight of him . 
`` You come home to me to‐day , for good , and bring your pillow and mattress , and leave no trace behind . '' 
Alyosha stood rooted to the spot , watching the scene in silence . 
Meanwhile , Fyodor Pavlovitch had got into the carriage , and Ivan was about to follow him in grim silence without even turning to say good‐by to Alyosha . 
But at this point another almost incredible scene of grotesque buffoonery gave the finishing touch to the episode . 
Maximov suddenly appeared by the side of the carriage . 
He ran up , panting , afraid of being too late . 
Rakitin and Alyosha saw him running . 
He was in such a hurry that in his impatience he put his foot on the step on which Ivan 's left foot was still resting , and clutching the carriage he kept trying to jump in . 
`` I am going with you ! '' 
he kept shouting , laughing a thin mirthful laugh with a look of reckless glee in his face . 
`` Take me , too . '' 
`` There ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , delighted . 
`` Did I not say he was von Sohn . 
It is von Sohn himself , risen from the dead . 
Why , how did you tear yourself away ? 
What did you vonsohn there ? 
And how could you get away from the dinner ? 
You must be a brazen‐faced fellow ! 
I am that myself , but I am surprised at you , brother ! 
Jump in , jump in ! 
Let him pass , Ivan . 
It will be fun . 
He can lie somewhere at our feet . 
Will you lie at our feet , von Sohn ? 
Or perch on the box with the coachman . 
Skip on to the box , von Sohn ! '' 
But Ivan , who had by now taken his seat , without a word gave Maximov a violent punch in the breast and sent him flying . 
It was quite by chance he did not fall . 
`` Drive on ! '' 
Ivan shouted angrily to the coachman . 
`` Why , what are you doing , what are you about ? 
Why did you do that ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch protested . 
But the carriage had already driven away . 
Ivan made no reply . 
`` Well , you are a fellow , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said again . 
After a pause of two minutes , looking askance at his son , `` Why , it was you got up all this monastery business . 
You urged it , you approved of it . 
Why are you angry now ? '' 
`` You 've talked rot enough . 
You might rest a bit now , '' Ivan snapped sullenly . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was silent again for two minutes . 
`` A drop of brandy would be nice now , '' he observed sententiously , but Ivan made no response . 
`` You shall have some , too , when we get home . '' 
Ivan was still silent . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch waited another two minutes . 
`` But I shall take Alyosha away from the monastery , though you will dislike it so much , most honored Karl von Moor . '' 
Ivan shrugged his shoulders contemptuously , and turning away stared at the road . 
And they did not speak again all the way home . 
The Karamazovs ' house was far from being in the center of the town , but it was not quite outside it . 
It was a pleasant‐looking old house of two stories , painted gray , with a red iron roof . 
It was roomy and snug , and might still last many years . 
There were all sorts of unexpected little cupboards and closets and staircases . 
There were rats in it , but Fyodor Pavlovitch did not altogether dislike them . 
`` One does n't feel so solitary when one 's left alone in the evening , '' he used to say . 
It was his habit to send the servants away to the lodge for the night and to lock himself up alone . 
The lodge was a roomy and solid building in the yard . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch used to have the cooking done there , although there was a kitchen in the house ; he did not like the smell of cooking , and , winter and summer alike , the dishes were carried in across the courtyard . 
The house was built for a large family ; there was room for five times as many , with their servants . 
But at the time of our story there was no one living in the house but Fyodor Pavlovitch and his son Ivan . 
And in the lodge there were only three servants : old Grigory , and his old wife Marfa , and a young man called Smerdyakov . 
Of these three we must say a few words . 
Of old Grigory we have said something already . 
He was firm and determined and went blindly and obstinately for his object , if once he had been brought by any reasons -LRB- and they were often very illogical ones -RRB- to believe that it was immutably right . 
He was honest and incorruptible . 
His wife , Marfa Ignatyevna , had obeyed her husband 's will implicitly all her life , yet she had pestered him terribly after the emancipation of the serfs . 
She was set on leaving Fyodor Pavlovitch and opening a little shop in Moscow with their small savings . 
But Grigory decided then , once for all , that `` the woman 's talking nonsense , for every woman is dishonest , '' and that they ought not to leave their old master , whatever he might be , for `` that was now their duty . '' 
`` Do you understand what duty is ? '' 
he asked Marfa Ignatyevna . 
`` I understand what duty means , Grigory Vassilyevitch , but why it 's our duty to stay here I never shall understand , '' Marfa answered firmly . 
`` Well , do n't understand then . 
But so it shall be . 
And you hold your tongue . '' 
And so it was . 
They did not go away , and Fyodor Pavlovitch promised them a small sum for wages , and paid it regularly . 
Grigory knew , too , that he had an indisputable influence over his master . 
It was true , and he was aware of it . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was an obstinate and cunning buffoon , yet , though his will was strong enough `` in some of the affairs of life , '' as he expressed it , he found himself , to his surprise , extremely feeble in facing certain other emergencies . 
He knew his weaknesses and was afraid of them . 
There are positions in which one has to keep a sharp look out . 
And that 's not easy without a trustworthy man , and Grigory was a most trustworthy man . 
Many times in the course of his life Fyodor Pavlovitch had only just escaped a sound thrashing through Grigory 's intervention , and on each occasion the old servant gave him a good lecture . 
But it was n't only thrashings that Fyodor Pavlovitch was afraid of . 
There were graver occasions , and very subtle and complicated ones , when Fyodor Pavlovitch could not have explained the extraordinary craving for some one faithful and devoted , which sometimes unaccountably came upon him all in a moment . 
It was almost a morbid condition . 
Corrupt and often cruel in his lust , like some noxious insect , Fyodor Pavlovitch was sometimes , in moments of drunkenness , overcome by superstitious terror and a moral convulsion which took an almost physical form . 
`` My soul 's simply quaking in my throat at those times , '' he used to say . 
At such moments he liked to feel that there was near at hand , in the lodge if not in the room , a strong , faithful man , virtuous and unlike himself , who had seen all his debauchery and knew all his secrets , but was ready in his devotion to overlook all that , not to oppose him , above all , not to reproach him or threaten him with anything , either in this world or in the next , and , in case of need , to defend him -- from whom ? 
From somebody unknown , but terrible and dangerous . 
What he needed was to feel that there was another man , an old and tried friend , that he might call him in his sick moments merely to look at his face , or , perhaps , exchange some quite irrelevant words with him . 
And if the old servant were not angry , he felt comforted , and if he were angry , he was more dejected . 
It happened even -LRB- very rarely however -RRB- that Fyodor Pavlovitch went at night to the lodge to wake Grigory and fetch him for a moment . 
When the old man came , Fyodor Pavlovitch would begin talking about the most trivial matters , and would soon let him go again , sometimes even with a jest . 
And after he had gone , Fyodor Pavlovitch would get into bed with a curse and sleep the sleep of the just . 
Something of the same sort had happened to Fyodor Pavlovitch on Alyosha 's arrival . 
Alyosha `` pierced his heart '' by `` living with him , seeing everything and blaming nothing . '' 
Moreover , Alyosha brought with him something his father had never known before : a complete absence of contempt for him and an invariable kindness , a perfectly natural unaffected devotion to the old man who deserved it so little . 
All this was a complete surprise to the old profligate , who had dropped all family ties . 
It was a new and surprising experience for him , who had till then loved nothing but `` evil . '' 
When Alyosha had left him , he confessed to himself that he had learnt something he had not till then been willing to learn . 
I have mentioned already that Grigory had detested Adelaïda Ivanovna , the first wife of Fyodor Pavlovitch and the mother of Dmitri , and that he had , on the contrary , protected Sofya Ivanovna , the poor `` crazy woman , '' against his master and any one who chanced to speak ill or lightly of her . 
His sympathy for the unhappy wife had become something sacred to him , so that even now , twenty years after , he could not bear a slighting allusion to her from any one , and would at once check the offender . 
Externally , Grigory was cold , dignified and taciturn , and spoke , weighing his words , without frivolity . 
It was impossible to tell at first sight whether he loved his meek , obedient wife ; but he really did love her , and she knew it . 
Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish ; she was probably , indeed , cleverer than her husband , or , at least , more prudent than he in worldly affairs , and yet she had given in to him in everything without question or complaint ever since her marriage , and respected him for his spiritual superiority . 
It was remarkable how little they spoke to one another in the course of their lives , and only of the most necessary daily affairs . 
The grave and dignified Grigory thought over all his cares and duties alone , so that Marfa Ignatyevna had long grown used to knowing that he did not need her advice . 
She felt that her husband respected her silence , and took it as a sign of her good sense . 
He had never beaten her but once , and then only slightly . 
Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch 's marriage with Adelaïda Ivanovna , the village girls and women -- at that time serfs -- were called together before the house to sing and dance . 
They were beginning `` In the Green Meadows , '' when Marfa , at that time a young woman , skipped forward and danced `` the Russian Dance , '' not in the village fashion , but as she had danced it when she was a servant in the service of the rich Miüsov family , in their private theater , where the actors were taught to dance by a dancing master from Moscow . 
Grigory saw how his wife danced , and , an hour later , at home in their cottage he gave her a lesson , pulling her hair a little . 
But there it ended : the beating was never repeated , and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing . 
God had not blessed them with children . 
One child was born but it died . 
Grigory was fond of children , and was not ashamed of showing it . 
When Adelaïda Ivanovna had run away , Grigory took Dmitri , then a child of three years old , combed his hair and washed him in a tub with his own hands , and looked after him for almost a year . 
Afterwards he had looked after Ivan and Alyosha , for which the general 's widow had rewarded him with a slap in the face ; but I have already related all that . 
The only happiness his own child had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth . 
When it was born , he was overwhelmed with grief and horror . 
The baby had six fingers . 
Grigory was so crushed by this , that he was not only silent till the day of the christening , but kept away in the garden . 
It was spring , and he spent three days digging the kitchen garden . 
The third day was fixed for christening the baby : mean‐time Grigory had reached a conclusion . 
Going into the cottage where the clergy were assembled and the visitors had arrived , including Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was to stand god father , he suddenly announced that the baby `` ought not to be christened at all . '' 
He announced this quietly , briefly , forcing out his words , and gazing with dull intentness at the priest . 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked the priest with good‐humored surprise . 
`` Because it 's a dragon , '' muttered Grigory . 
`` A dragon ? 
What dragon ? '' 
Grigory did not speak for some time . 
`` It 's a confusion of nature , '' he muttered vaguely , but firmly , and obviously unwilling to say more . 
They laughed , and of course christened the poor baby . 
Grigory prayed earnestly at the font , but his opinion of the new‐born child remained unchanged . 
Yet he did not interfere in any way . 
As long as the sickly infant lived he scarcely looked at it , tried indeed not to notice it , and for the most part kept out of the cottage . 
But when , at the end of a fortnight , the baby died of thrush , he himself laid the child in its little coffin , looked at it in profound grief , and when they were filling up the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and bowed down to the earth . 
He did not for years afterwards mention his child , nor did Marfa speak of the baby before him , and , even if Grigory were not present , she never spoke of it above a whisper . 
Marfa observed that , from the day of the burial , he devoted himself to `` religion , '' and took to reading the Lives of the Saints , for the most part sitting alone and in silence , and always putting on his big , round , silver‐rimmed spectacles . 
He rarely read aloud , only perhaps in Lent . 
He was fond of the Book of Job , and had somehow got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of `` the God‐fearing Father Isaac the Syrian , '' which he read persistently for years together , understanding very little of it , but perhaps prizing and loving it the more for that . 
Of late he had begun to listen to the doctrines of the sect of Flagellants settled in the neighborhood . 
He was evidently shaken by them , but judged it unfitting to go over to the new faith . 
His habit of theological reading gave him an expression of still greater gravity . 
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism . 
And the birth of his deformed child , and its death , had , as though by special design , been accompanied by another strange and marvelous event , which , as he said later , had left a `` stamp '' upon his soul . 
It happened that , on the very night after the burial of his child , Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new‐born baby . 
She was frightened and waked her husband . 
He listened and said he thought it was more like some one groaning , `` it might be a woman . '' 
He got up and dressed . 
It was a rather warm night in May . 
As he went down the steps , he distinctly heard groans coming from the garden . 
But the gate from the yard into the garden was locked at night , and there was no other way of entering it , for it was enclosed all round by a strong , high fence . 
Going back into the house , Grigory lighted a lantern , took the garden key , and taking no notice of the hysterical fears of his wife , who was still persuaded that she heard a child crying , and that it was her own baby crying and calling for her , went into the garden in silence . 
There he heard at once that the groans came from the bath‐house that stood near the garden gate , and that they were the groans of a woman . 
Opening the door of the bath‐house , he saw a sight which petrified him . 
An idiot girl , who wandered about the streets and was known to the whole town by the nickname of Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya -LRB- Stinking Lizaveta -RRB- , had got into the bath house and had just given birth to a child . 
She lay dying with the baby beside her . 
She said nothing , for she had never been able to speak . 
But her story needs a chapter to itself . 
There was one circumstance which struck Grigory particularly , and confirmed a very unpleasant and revolting suspicion . 
This Lizaveta was a dwarfish creature , `` not five foot within a wee bit , '' as many of the pious old women said pathetically about her , after her death . 
Her broad , healthy , red face had a look of blank idiocy and the fixed stare in her eyes was unpleasant , in spite of their meek expression . 
She wandered about , summer and winter alike , barefooted , wearing nothing but a hempen smock . 
Her coarse , almost black hair curled like lamb 's wool , and formed a sort of huge cap on her head . 
It was always crusted with mud , and had leaves , bits of stick , and shavings clinging to it , as she always slept on the ground and in the dirt . 
Her father , a homeless , sickly drunkard , called Ilya , had lost everything and lived many years as a workman with some well‐to‐do tradespeople . 
Her mother had long been dead . 
Spiteful and diseased , Ilya used to beat Lizaveta inhumanly whenever she returned to him . 
But she rarely did so , for every one in the town was ready to look after her as being an idiot , and so specially dear to God . 
Ilya 's employers , and many others in the town , especially of the tradespeople , tried to clothe her better , and always rigged her out with high boots and sheepskin coat for the winter . 
But , although she allowed them to dress her up without resisting , she usually went away , preferably to the cathedral porch , and taking off all that had been given her -- kerchief , sheepskin , skirt or boots -- she left them there and walked away barefoot in her smock as before . 
It happened on one occasion that a new governor of the province , making a tour of inspection in our town , saw Lizaveta , and was wounded in his tenderest susceptibilities . 
And though he was told she was an idiot , he pronounced that for a young woman of twenty to wander about in nothing but a smock was a breach of the proprieties , and must not occur again . 
But the governor went his way , and Lizaveta was left as she was . 
At last her father died , which made her even more acceptable in the eyes of the religious persons of the town , as an orphan . 
In fact , every one seemed to like her ; even the boys did not tease her , and the boys of our town , especially the schoolboys , are a mischievous set . 
She would walk into strange houses , and no one drove her away . 
Every one was kind to her and gave her something . 
If she were given a copper , she would take it , and at once drop it in the alms‐jug of the church or prison . 
If she were given a roll or bun in the market , she would hand it to the first child she met . 
Sometimes she would stop one of the richest ladies in the town and give it to her , and the lady would be pleased to take it . 
She herself never tasted anything but black bread and water . 
If she went into an expensive shop , where there were costly goods or money lying about , no one kept watch on her , for they knew that if she saw thousands of roubles overlooked by them , she would not have touched a farthing . 
She scarcely ever went to church . 
She slept either in the church porch or climbed over a hurdle -LRB- there are many hurdles instead of fences to this day in our town -RRB- into a kitchen garden . 
She used at least once a week to turn up `` at home , '' that is at the house of her father 's former employers , and in the winter went there every night , and slept either in the passage or the cowhouse . 
People were amazed that she could stand such a life , but she was accustomed to it , and , although she was so tiny , she was of a robust constitution . 
Some of the townspeople declared that she did all this only from pride , but that is hardly credible . 
She could hardly speak , and only from time to time uttered an inarticulate grunt . 
How could she have been proud ? 
It happened one clear , warm , moonlight night in September -LRB- many years ago -RRB- five or six drunken revelers were returning from the club at a very late hour , according to our provincial notions . 
They passed through the `` back way , '' which led between the back gardens of the houses , with hurdles on either side . 
This way leads out on to the bridge over the long , stinking pool which we were accustomed to call a river . 
Among the nettles and burdocks under the hurdle our revelers saw Lizaveta asleep . 
They stopped to look at her , laughing , and began jesting with unbridled licentiousness . 
It occurred to one young gentleman to make the whimsical inquiry whether any one could possibly look upon such an animal as a woman , and so forth ... . 
They all pronounced with lofty repugnance that it was impossible . 
But Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was among them , sprang forward and declared that it was by no means impossible , and that , indeed , there was a certain piquancy about it , and so on ... . 
It is true that at that time he was overdoing his part as a buffoon . 
He liked to put himself forward and entertain the company , ostensibly on equal terms , of course , though in reality he was on a servile footing with them . 
It was just at the time when he had received the news of his first wife 's death in Petersburg , and , with crape upon his hat , was drinking and behaving so shamelessly that even the most reckless among us were shocked at the sight of him . 
The revelers , of course , laughed at this unexpected opinion ; and one of them even began challenging him to act upon it . 
The others repelled the idea even more emphatically , although still with the utmost hilarity , and at last they went on their way . 
Later on , Fyodor Pavlovitch swore that he had gone with them , and perhaps it was so , no one knows for certain , and no one ever knew . 
But five or six months later , all the town was talking , with intense and sincere indignation , of Lizaveta 's condition , and trying to find out who was the miscreant who had wronged her . 
Then suddenly a terrible rumor was all over the town that this miscreant was no other than Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Who set the rumor going ? 
Of that drunken band five had left the town and the only one still among us was an elderly and much respected civil councilor , the father of grown‐up daughters , who could hardly have spread the tale , even if there had been any foundation for it . 
But rumor pointed straight at Fyodor Pavlovitch , and persisted in pointing at him . 
Of course this was no great grievance to him : he would not have troubled to contradict a set of tradespeople . 
In those days he was proud , and did not condescend to talk except in his own circle of the officials and nobles , whom he entertained so well . 
At the time , Grigory stood up for his master vigorously . 
He provoked quarrels and altercations in defense of him and succeeded in bringing some people round to his side . 
`` It 's the wench 's own fault , '' he asserted , and the culprit was Karp , a dangerous convict , who had escaped from prison and whose name was well known to us , as he had hidden in our town . 
This conjecture sounded plausible , for it was remembered that Karp had been in the neighborhood just at that time in the autumn , and had robbed three people . 
But this affair and all the talk about it did not estrange popular sympathy from the poor idiot . 
She was better looked after than ever . 
A well‐to‐do merchant 's widow named Kondratyev arranged to take her into her house at the end of April , meaning not to let her go out until after the confinement . 
They kept a constant watch over her , but in spite of their vigilance she escaped on the very last day , and made her way into Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden . 
How , in her condition , she managed to climb over the high , strong fence remained a mystery . 
Some maintained that she must have been lifted over by somebody ; others hinted at something more uncanny . 
The most likely explanation is that it happened naturally -- that Lizaveta , accustomed to clambering over hurdles to sleep in gardens , had somehow managed to climb this fence , in spite of her condition , and had leapt down , injuring herself . 
Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta , while he ran to fetch an old midwife who lived close by . 
They saved the baby , but Lizaveta died at dawn . 
Grigory took the baby , brought it home , and making his wife sit down , put it on her lap . 
`` A child of God -- an orphan is akin to all , '' he said , `` and to us above others . 
Our little lost one has sent us this , who has come from the devil 's son and a holy innocent . 
Nurse him and weep no more . '' 
So Marfa brought up the child . 
He was christened Pavel , to which people were not slow in adding Fyodorovitch -LRB- son of Fyodor -RRB- . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not object to any of this , and thought it amusing , though he persisted vigorously in denying his responsibility . 
The townspeople were pleased at his adopting the foundling . 
Later on , Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surname for the child , calling him Smerdyakov , after his mother 's nickname . 
So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch 's second servant , and was living in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our story begins . 
He was employed as cook . 
I ought to say something of this Smerdyakov , but I am ashamed of keeping my readers ' attention so long occupied with these common menials , and I will go back to my story , hoping to say more of Smerdyakov in the course of it . 
Alyosha remained for some time irresolute after hearing the command his father shouted to him from the carriage . 
But in spite of his uneasiness he did not stand still . 
That was not his way . 
He went at once to the kitchen to find out what his father had been doing above . 
Then he set off , trusting that on the way he would find some answer to the doubt tormenting him . 
I hasten to add that his father 's shouts , commanding him to return home `` with his mattress and pillow '' did not frighten him in the least . 
He understood perfectly that those peremptory shouts were merely `` a flourish '' to produce an effect . 
In the same way a tradesman in our town who was celebrating his name‐day with a party of friends , getting angry at being refused more vodka , smashed up his own crockery and furniture and tore his own and his wife 's clothes , and finally broke his windows , all for the sake of effect . 
Next day , of course , when he was sober , he regretted the broken cups and saucers . 
Alyosha knew that his father would let him go back to the monastery next day , possibly even that evening . 
Moreover , he was fully persuaded that his father might hurt any one else , but would not hurt him . 
Alyosha was certain that no one in the whole world ever would want to hurt him , and , what is more , he knew that no one could hurt him . 
This was for him an axiom , assumed once for all without question , and he went his way without hesitation , relying on it . 
But at that moment an anxiety of a different sort disturbed him , and worried him the more because he could not formulate it . 
It was the fear of a woman , of Katerina Ivanovna , who had so urgently entreated him in the note handed to him by Madame Hohlakov to come and see her about something . 
This request and the necessity of going had at once aroused an uneasy feeling in his heart , and this feeling had grown more and more painful all the morning in spite of the scenes at the hermitage and at the Father Superior 's . 
He was not uneasy because he did not know what she would speak of and what he must answer . 
And he was not afraid of her simply as a woman . 
Though he knew little of women , he had spent his life , from early childhood till he entered the monastery , entirely with women . 
He was afraid of that woman , Katerina Ivanovna . 
He had been afraid of her from the first time he saw her . 
He had only seen her two or three times , and had only chanced to say a few words to her . 
He thought of her as a beautiful , proud , imperious girl . 
It was not her beauty which troubled him , but something else . 
And the vagueness of his apprehension increased the apprehension itself . 
The girl 's aims were of the noblest , he knew that . 
She was trying to save his brother Dmitri simply through generosity , though he had already behaved badly to her . 
Yet , although Alyosha recognized and did justice to all these fine and generous sentiments , a shiver began to run down his back as soon as he drew near her house . 
He reflected that he would not find Ivan , who was so intimate a friend , with her , for Ivan was certainly now with his father . 
Dmitri he was even more certain not to find there , and he had a foreboding of the reason . 
And so his conversation would be with her alone . 
He had a great longing to run and see his brother Dmitri before that fateful interview . 
Without showing him the letter , he could talk to him about it . 
But Dmitri lived a long way off , and he was sure to be away from home too . 
Standing still for a minute , he reached a final decision . 
Crossing himself with a rapid and accustomed gesture , and at once smiling , he turned resolutely in the direction of his terrible lady . 
He knew her house . 
If he went by the High Street and then across the market‐place , it was a long way round . 
Though our town is small , it is scattered , and the houses are far apart . 
And meanwhile his father was expecting him , and perhaps had not yet forgotten his command . 
He might be unreasonable , and so he had to make haste to get there and back . 
So he decided to take a short cut by the back‐way , for he knew every inch of the ground . 
This meant skirting fences , climbing over hurdles , and crossing other people 's back‐yards , where every one he met knew him and greeted him . 
In this way he could reach the High Street in half the time . 
He had to pass the garden adjoining his father 's , and belonging to a little tumbledown house with four windows . 
The owner of this house , as Alyosha knew , was a bedridden old woman , living with her daughter , who had been a genteel maid‐servant in generals ' families in Petersburg . 
Now she had been at home a year , looking after her sick mother . 
She always dressed up in fine clothes , though her old mother and she had sunk into such poverty that they went every day to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and bread , which Marfa gave readily . 
Yet , though the young woman came up for soup , she had never sold any of her dresses , and one of these even had a long train -- a fact which Alyosha had learned from Rakitin , who always knew everything that was going on in the town . 
He had forgotten it as soon as he heard it , but now , on reaching the garden , he remembered the dress with the train , raised his head , which had been bowed in thought , and came upon something quite unexpected . 
Over the hurdle in the garden , Dmitri , mounted on something , was leaning forward , gesticulating violently , beckoning to him , obviously afraid to utter a word for fear of being overheard . 
Alyosha ran up to the hurdle . 
`` It 's a good thing you looked up . 
I was nearly shouting to you , '' Mitya said in a joyful , hurried whisper . 
`` Climb in here quickly ! 
How splendid that you 've come ! 
I was just thinking of you ! '' 
Alyosha was delighted too , but he did not know how to get over the hurdle . 
Mitya put his powerful hand under his elbow to help him jump . 
Tucking up his cassock , Alyosha leapt over the hurdle with the agility of a bare legged street urchin . 
`` Well done ! 
Now come along , '' said Mitya in an enthusiastic whisper . 
`` Where ? '' 
whispered Alyosha , looking about him and finding himself in a deserted garden with no one near but themselves . 
The garden was small , but the house was at least fifty paces away . 
`` There 's no one here . 
Why do you whisper ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Why do I whisper ? 
Deuce take it ! '' 
cried Dmitri at the top of his voice . 
`` You see what silly tricks nature plays one . 
I am here in secret , and on the watch . 
I 'll explain later on , but , knowing it 's a secret , I began whispering like a fool , when there 's no need . 
Let us go . 
Over there . 
Till then be quiet . 
I want to kiss you . 
Glory to God in the world , Glory to God in me ... I was just repeating that , sitting here , before you came . '' 
The garden was about three acres in extent , and planted with trees only along the fence at the four sides . 
There were apple‐trees , maples , limes and birch‐trees . 
The middle of the garden was an empty grass space , from which several hundredweight of hay was carried in the summer . 
The garden was let out for a few roubles for the summer . 
There were also plantations of raspberries and currants and gooseberries laid out along the sides ; a kitchen garden had been planted lately near the house . 
Dmitri led his brother to the most secluded corner of the garden . 
There , in a thicket of lime‐trees and old bushes of black currant , elder , snowball‐tree , and lilac , there stood a tumble‐down green summer‐house , blackened with age . 
Its walls were of lattice‐work , but there was still a roof which could give shelter . 
God knows when this summer‐house was built . 
There was a tradition that it had been put up some fifty years before by a retired colonel called von Schmidt , who owned the house at that time . 
It was all in decay , the floor was rotting , the planks were loose , the woodwork smelled musty . 
In the summer‐house there was a green wooden table fixed in the ground , and round it were some green benches upon which it was still possible to sit . 
Alyosha had at once observed his brother 's exhilarated condition , and on entering the arbor he saw half a bottle of brandy and a wineglass on the table . 
`` That 's brandy , '' Mitya laughed . 
`` I see your look : ` He 's drinking again ! ' 
Distrust the apparition . 
Distrust the worthless , lying crowd , And lay aside thy doubts . 
I 'm not drinking , I 'm only ` indulging , ' as that pig , your Rakitin , says . 
He 'll be a civil councilor one day , but he 'll always talk about ` indulging . ' 
Sit down . 
I could take you in my arms , Alyosha , and press you to my bosom till I crush you , for in the whole world -- in reality -- in re‐al i‐ty -- -LRB- can you take it in ? -RRB- 
I love no one but you ! '' 
He uttered the last words in a sort of exaltation . 
`` No one but you and one ` jade ' I have fallen in love with , to my ruin . 
But being in love does n't mean loving . 
You may be in love with a woman and yet hate her . 
Remember that ! 
I can talk about it gayly still . 
Sit down here by the table and I 'll sit beside you and look at you , and go on talking . 
You shall keep quiet and I 'll go on talking , for the time has come . 
But on reflection , you know , I 'd better speak quietly , for here -- here -- you can never tell what ears are listening . 
I will explain everything ; as they say , ` the story will be continued . ' 
Why have I been longing for you ? 
Why have I been thirsting for you all these days , and just now ? 
-LRB- It 's five days since I 've cast anchor here . -RRB- 
Because it 's only to you I can tell everything ; because I must , because I need you , because to‐morrow I shall fly from the clouds , because to‐morrow life is ending and beginning . 
Have you ever felt , have you ever dreamt of falling down a precipice into a pit ? 
That 's just how I 'm falling , but not in a dream . 
And I 'm not afraid , and do n't you be afraid . 
At least , I am afraid , but I enjoy it . 
It 's not enjoyment though , but ecstasy . 
Damn it all , whatever it is ! 
A strong spirit , a weak spirit , a womanish spirit -- whatever it is ! 
Let us praise nature : you see what sunshine , how clear the sky is , the leaves are all green , it 's still summer ; four o'clock in the afternoon and the stillness ! 
Where were you going ? '' 
`` I was going to father 's , but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna 's first . '' 
`` To her , and to father ! 
Oo ! 
what a coincidence ! 
Why was I waiting for you ? 
Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and even in my ribs ? 
Why , to send you to father and to her , Katerina Ivanovna , so as to have done with her and with father . 
To send an angel . 
I might have sent any one , but I wanted to send an angel . 
And here you are on your way to see father and her . '' 
`` Did you really mean to send me ? '' 
cried Alyosha with a distressed expression . 
`` Stay ! 
You knew it ! 
And I see you understand it all at once . 
But be quiet , be quiet for a time . 
Do n't be sorry , and do n't cry . '' 
Dmitri stood up , thought a moment , and put his finger to his forehead . 
`` She 's asked you , written to you a letter or something , that 's why you 're going to her ? 
You would n't be going except for that ? '' 
`` Here is her note . '' 
Alyosha took it out of his pocket . 
Mitya looked through it quickly . 
`` And you were going the back‐way ! 
Oh , gods , I thank you for sending him by the back‐way , and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly old fishermen in the fable ! 
Listen , Alyosha , listen , brother ! 
Now I mean to tell you everything , for I must tell some one . 
An angel in heaven I 've told already ; but I want to tell an angel on earth . 
You are an angel on earth . 
You will hear and judge and forgive . 
