There were many of the faithful in long white robes , every face serenely happy . 
Myrrha , kneeling with eyes full of love , was gazing at the Good Shepherd pictured on the ceiling of the chamber . 
In the catacombs early Christian customs had been revived , so that after the liturgy all present , looking on themselves as brothers and sisters , gave each other the kiss of peace . 
Arsinoë following the general example with a smile kissed Anatolius . 
Then all four climbed again toward the upper storeys , whence they could take their way to the secret retreat of Juventinus , an old pagan tomb , a columbarium , lying at some distance from the Appian Way . 
There , while waiting for the ship which was to take him to Egypt , the land of holy anchorites , he was living hidden from the searches of his mother and of government officials . 
He lodged with Didimus , a good old man from the Lower Thebaïd , to whom Juventinus gave blind and unquestioning obedience . 
Here they found Didimus squatting on his heels , weaving basket-work . 
The moon-rays , filtering through a narrow opening , glinted on his white hair and long beard . 
From top to bottom of the walls of the columbarium were little niches like pigeons ' nests , and each of these contained a mortuary urn . 
Myrrha , of whom the old man was very fond , kissed his withered hand respectfully , and prayed him to tell her some story about the hermit fathers of the desert . 
Nothing pleased her better than these wonderful and terrible tales by Didimus . 
The company grouped themselves round the white-headed old man , Myrrha watching him with feverish eyes and feeble hands clasped to her heaving breast . 
Nothing was heard save his voice and the distant hum of Rome , when suddenly , at the inner door communicating with the catacomb , a knock was heard . 
Juventinus rose , went to the door and asked , without opening it -- `` Who is there ? '' 
No answer came , but a still gentler knock as of entreaty . 
With great precaution Juventinus held the door ajar , shuddered and recoiled . 
A woman of tall stature came into the columbarium . 
Long white vestments enveloped her and a veil hid her face . 
Her gait was that of one recovering from an illness or of a very old woman . 
With a sudden movement she raised the veil and Juventinus cried -- `` My mother ! '' 
Didimus rose , a severe expression on his countenance . 
The woman threw herself at the feet of her son and kissed them , grey tresses falling dishevelled over her lean and haggard face , which bore traces of high patrician beauty . 
Juventinus took the head of his mother between his hands and kissed it . 
`` Juventinus ! '' 
the old man called . 
The young man made no response . 
His mother , as if they had been completely alone , murmured hastily and joyously -- `` O my son , I thought I should never see you again ; I would have set out for Alexandria -- O I would have found you even in the desert ! 
But now all is over , is it not ? 
Tell me that you will not go ! 
Wait until I die ! 
Afterwards do what you will ... '' The old man resumed -- `` Do you hear me , Juventinus ? '' 
`` Old man , '' answered the patrician mother , `` you will not carry off a son from her that bore him ! 
... Listen , if it must be so , I will deny the faith of my fathers ; I will believe in the Crucified ! 
... I will become a nun ! '' 
`` Ah , pagan ! 
thou canst not understand the law of Christ . 
A mother can not be a nun , nor can a nun be still a mother . '' 
`` I have borne him in anguish ; he is mine ! '' 
`` It is not the soul , but the body , that you love . '' 
The patrician woman cast at Didimus a look full of hatred . 
`` Be then accursed for your lying speeches , '' she exclaimed ; `` accursed , you stealers of children -- tempters of the guileless ! 
ye black-robed fearers of the celestial light -- slaves of the Crucified ! 
destroyers of all beauty and joy ! '' 
Her face changed ; she drew her son yet closer , and said chokingly -- `` I know thee , my son ! 
thou wilt not go ... thou canst not ... '' Old Didimus , cross in hand , stood at the open door leading to the catacombs . 
He said solemnly -- `` For the last time , and in the name of God , I order you , my son , to follow me and to leave her . '' 
Then the patrician relaxed her hold of Juventinus , and faltered -- `` Then go ! 
Let it be so ... . 
Leave me , if thou canst ! '' 
Tears flowed no longer down her furrowed cheeks ; her arms fell rigid , with a heart-broken gesture , to her sides . 
She waited . 
All were silent . 
`` O Lord , help me ... inspire me ! '' 
Juventinus prayed in terrible distress . 
`` He who will follow Me , and will not hate father and mother , wife and children , brother and sister , and even his own life , can never be My disciple ! '' 
These words were recited by Didimus , turning for the last time towards Juventinus -- `` Remain in the world ! 
Thou hast rejected Christ ! 
Be accursed in this age and in the age to come ! '' 
`` No , no ! 
Cast me not out , father ! 
I am on your side . 
Lord , here am I , '' exclaimed Juventinus following his master . 
His mother made no arresting movement ; not a muscle of her face stirred ; but when the noise of his footsteps died away a hoarse sob heaved her breast and she fell into a swoon . 
`` Open -- in the name of the most holy Emperor Constantius ! '' 
It was the summons of soldiery sent by the prefect to hunt the Sabæan rebels , on the denunciation of the patrician mother of Juventinus . 
With a powerful lever the soldiers attempted to prise open the door of the columbarium , shaking the edifice on its foundations . 
The little silver urns vibrated plaintively under the blows . 
Half of the door gave way . 
Anatolius , Myrrha , and Arsinoë rushed into the inner gallery . 
The Christians hurried along the narrow passages like ants disturbed in their mound , making for all the secret outlets communicating with the quarry . 
But Arsinoë and Myrrha , unfamiliar with the exact situation of the galleries , lost their way in the labyrinth and at last reached the lowest floor of all at a depth of fifty cubits under ground . 
It became difficult to breathe ; muddy water lay under foot . 
The flame of the lamps became dim and almost blew out . 
Putrid miasmas filled the air . 
Myrrha felt her head swim and gradually lost consciousness . 
Anatolius took her in his arms . 
At every step they feared to encounter the legionaries ; all the outlets might be blocked and sealed up ; they were running the risk of being buried alive . 
At last they heard the voice of Juventinus calling -- `` Here ! 
here ! '' 
Bent double , he was carrying the old Didimus on his back . 
At the end of a few minutes they reached a secret door opening on the Campagna . 
On returning to the house , Arsinoë quickly undressed Myrrha and put her to bed , still in a dead faint . 
Kneeling by her side the elder sister long kissed and chafed the thin , yellow , and inert hands . 
A pang of agonising presentiment shot through her heart . 
The face of the sleeper bore a strange expression . 
Never had it reflected so bodiless a charm . 
All the little body seemed transparent and frail as the sides of an alabaster jar illumined by an inner fire . 
Late one evening in a marshy wood not far from the Rhine , between the fortified post , Tres Tabernæ and the Roman town of Argentoratum , -LSB- 1 -RSB- conquered a short time previously by the Alemanni , two soldiers who had lost their way were slouching along . 
One named Aragaris , an awkward and red-headed giant , a Sarmatian in the Roman service ; the other Strombix , a lean and frowning little Syrian . 
-LSB- 1 -RSB- Strasburg . 
The spaces between the trunks of trees were densely dark . 
A fine rain was falling through warm air . 
The birches diffused an odour of damp leaves , and far off a cuckoo was calling . 
At every crack of the branches the startled Strombix began to quake and seized the fist of his companion . 
`` Oh , cousin ! 
cousin ! '' 
He used to call Aragaris cousin , not through blood relationship , but for friendship 's sake . 
They had been taken into the Roman army from opposite ends of the world . 
The northern barbarian , a huge guzzler but a chaste liver , despised the voluptuous and timid Syrian who was so frugal in his eating and drinking . 
But while mocking him he pitied him as a child . 
`` Cousin ! '' 
wailed Strombix . 
`` Well , what is it ? 
Ca n't you be quiet ? '' 
`` Are there bears in this wood ? '' 
`` Yes ! '' 
answered Aragaris sullenly . 
`` And suppose we met one , eh ? '' 
`` We should knock him on the head , sell his skin , and go and drink . '' 
`` And suppose the bear , instead of being killed ... '' `` Poltroon ! 
it is n't difficult to see that you 're a Christian ! '' 
`` Why must a Christian be a coward ? '' 
said Strombix with a vexed air . 
`` You 've told me yourself that in your Book it is written whosoever smiteth thee on thy right cheek turn to him the other also . '' 
`` True . '' 
`` Well , I 'm right ; and if so , to my thinking you must n't go to wars ; the enemy will strike you on one cheek and you turn him round the other . 
You 're a set of cowards , I say . '' 
`` The Cæsar Julian 's a Christian , and he is n't a coward ! '' 
retorted Strombix . 
`` I know , my boy , '' continued Aragaris , `` that you can pardon enemies when you have to fight them , poor chicken ! 
Your belly is no bigger than my fist . 
With a clove in it you 're fed up for the whole day ; and so your blood is no better than marsh-water ! '' 
`` Ah , cousin ! 
cousin ! '' 
observed Strombix reproachfully , `` why did you talk about food ? 
Now I 've got another gnawing ache in my stomach . 
Give me a little garlic ! 
There 's some left in your bag . '' 
`` If I give you what there 's left we shall both starve to-morrow in this forest ! '' 
`` Ah , but if you do n't give me some now , I shall fall from weakness and you will be obliged to carry me . '' 
`` Well , stuff and swill , dog ! '' 
`` And a little bread too , '' begged Strombix . 
Aragaris gave him , with an oath , his last ration of biscuit . 
He himself had eaten overnight enough for two days , of fat pork and bean pottage . 
`` Attention ! 
Hark ! '' 
he said halting . 
`` There 's a trumpet ! 
We 're not far from the camp . 
We must steer round to the north ... . 
I do n't mind bears , '' added Aragaris thoughtfully , `` but that centurion ... '' The soldiers had nicknamed this hated centurion `` Cedo Alteram , '' because he used to cry out gleefully every time he broke the rod with which he was striking a delinquent , Cedo alteram ! 
that is to say , `` Give us another ! '' 
`` I 'm certain , '' said the barbarian -- `` I 'll wager that Cedo Alteram will tan my back as a tanner whacks a bullock 's hide . 
It 's abominable , my friend , abominable . '' 
The worthy pair were now stragglers behind the army , because Aragaris according to his custom had got dead drunk in a plundered village and Strombix had been thrashed . 
The little Syrian had made a fruitless attempt to obtain the favours of a handsome Frankish girl . 
This sixteen-year-old-beauty , daughter of a barbarian killed in the fight , had administered to him two such blows that he had fallen on his back and had then fairly stamped upon him . 
`` She was n't a girl but a devil , '' declared Strombix . 
`` I hardly took hold of her and she nearly broke every rib in my body . '' 
The note of the trumpet became more and more distinct . 
Aragaris , sniffing the wind like a blood-hound , noticed the smell of smoke ; the bivouacs must be but a short way off . 
The night became pitch dark . 
They could hardly make out the road ; the path was lost in marshes in which they leapt from tussock to tussock . 
Fog began to rise . 
Suddenly from a great yew , with branches from which moss hung like long grey beards , something fled away with a harsh cry . 
Strombix crouched down with fear . 
It was a black cock . 
They finally lost their bearings . 
Strombix climbed a tree . 
`` The bivouacs lie northwards -- not far off . 
There 's a wide river below . '' 
`` The Rhine , the Rhine ! '' 
exclaimed Aragaris . 
`` Now go ahead ! '' 
They slid down through the birches and aspen trees a hundred years old . 
`` Cousin , I 'm drowning ! '' 
yelled Strombix . 
`` Somebody 's hauling me by the feet ! '' 
`` Where are you ? '' 
With great difficulty Aragaris extricated him , and , swearing , took him on his shoulders . 
Under his feet the Sarmatian felt the stems of faggots laid down by the Romans . 
This causeway of faggot work led to the great road hewn not long before through the forest by the army of Severus , Julian 's general . 
The barbarians , according to their custom , had blocked and encumbered the track with enormous trunks of trees . 
These trunks had to be clambered over . 
Sometimes rotten , moss-covered , and crumbling under foot , and sometimes hard and slippery with rain , they made the march most difficult ; and it was by roads like these , always in fear of an attack , that the army of about thirteen thousand men had to move . 
That army every Imperial general except Severus had traitorously abandoned . 
Strombix was cursing his comrade -- `` I wo n't go a step farther , heathen ! 
I 'd rather lie down on the dead leaves and die ; at least I should not see your damned visage -- huh ! 
Unbeliever ! 
It 's easy to see that you do n't wear the cross ! 
Is it a Christian 's business to drag along a road like this , and what are we pushing on to ? 
The rods of the centurion . 
I wo n't go a step farther . '' 
Aragaris hauled him on by main force , and , when the road became more practicable , carried shoulder-high the whimsical companion who kept abusing and pummelling him all the time and shortly fell soundly asleep on those mighty pagan shoulders . 
At midnight they reached the gates of the Roman camp . 
Everything was still . 
The drawbridge had long been raised . 
The friends had to sleep in the wood near the hinder gate , usually called the Decumanal . 
At dawn the trumpet sounded . 
The nightingale had been singing in the misty wood ; he ceased , frightened by the warlike notes . 
Aragaris snuffed the smell of soup and woke Strombix . 
They made their way into the camp and sat down near the cauldrons . 
In the principal tent near the Pretorian gate the Cæsar Julian was keeping watch . 
From the day on which he had been nominated Cæsar at Milan thanks to the protection of the Empress Eusebia , Julian had applied himself with zeal to soldierly exercises . 
He not only used to study the art of war under the direction of Severus , but desired moreover to master every detail of the work of the rank and file . 
Within sound of the trumpet , in barracks , on the Campus Martius in company with new recruits , during whole days he would learn to march , to use the bow and sling , to leap ditches , and to run under the heavy weight of full marching order . 
He became also an adept in swordsmanship . 
The blood of the race of Constantine , a race of austere and obstinate warriors , woke in the young man and overcame his monkish hypocrisy . 
`` Alack ! 
divine Iamblicus and Plato ! 
if you could only see what your pupil is becoming ! '' 
he would sometimes exclaim , wiping the sweat from his brow . 
And pointing to his armour he would add -- `` Do n't you think , Severus , that this steel sits as badly on a pupil of philosophers as a war-saddle on an ox ? '' 
Severus would only reply by a mischievous smile ; he knew that these sighings and complaints were not sincere , and that in reality Julian was delighted with his military progress . 
In a few months he had been so transformed and hardened into manhood that it was not easy to recognise in him the `` little Greek '' of the Court of Constantius . 
His eyes alone had not changed , still shining with a strange and unforgettable keenness which had in it something of fever . 
Julian felt himself growing stronger every day , not only physically , but morally also . 
For the first time in his existence he felt the happiness that comes from the love of simple and common folk . 
From the first it had gratified the legionaries to see a real Cæsar , cousin of the Augustus , learning soldiering in barracks , with no repugnance for the coarse fare of soldiers . 
Austere faces of the veterans would light up with grim tenderness as they watched young Cæsar , and remembering their own youth wondered at his rapid progress . 
Julian used to hail them , listen to their gossip over old campaigns , and advice about fastening the breastplate so that the straps might chafe less and the best way of holding the foot while marching to avoid over-fatigue . 
The rumour went round that the Emperor Constantius had sent the inexperienced young man among the barbarians of Gaul to get killed , that he himself might be rid of a rival . 
It was said that the generals , following the hints of Imperial eunuchs , had abandoned and betrayed the young Cæsar accordingly . 
All this increased the affection of the legions for Julian . 
Skilled in the arts of winning favour , acquired during his monkish education , Julian cautiously used every means to strengthen the love felt towards himself and to deepen the unpopularity of the Emperor . 
Before the soldiers he would speak of his brother Constantius with meaning humility , lowering his eyes and affecting the aspect of a victim . 
It was the easier for him to captivate the warriors by fearlessness , inasmuch as death in battle seemed to him a thing to be desired . 
The kind of death to which Gallus had been subjected formed no part of his designs . 
Julian had organised his life after the austere example of ancient conquerors . 
His stoic education by the tutor Mardonius helped him to endure total absence of comfort . 
He allowed himself less sleep than the meanest soldier , and lay not on a bed but upon a coarse rough carpet , like that called in popular parlance suburra . 
The first part of the night was devoted to sleep , the second to the business of state and war , the third to the Muses . 
For Julian 's favourite books were never left behind when he was campaigning . 
He inspired himself with Marcus Aurelius , Plutarch , Suetonius , and Cato the elder ; and by day he endeavoured to put in practice what he had mused over with them by night . 
On the memorable morning before the battle of Argentoratum , when he heard the reveillé at dawn , Julian quickly donned complete armour , and ordered his charger to be brought round . 
While waiting he withdrew into the inmost part of the tent . 
There was ensconced a lovely statuette of the winged Mercury , bearing the caduceus -- the god of movement , gaiety , success . 
Julian bowed before the image and threw some grains of incense on a little tripod . 
According to the direction of the smoke the Cæsar , who flattered himself that he understood the divining art , sought to ascertain the influence of the day . 
Overnight he had heard a raven crying three times -- a bad omen . 
Julian was so convinced that his unexpected military success in Gaul was due to some supernatural power that from day to day he became more superstitious . 
When issuing from the tent he stumbled over the wooden beam at the threshold . 
The face of the Cæsar darkened . 
All the omens were unfavourable ; he inwardly resolved to postpone the battle till the morrow . 
The army began its march . 
The road through the forest was painful . 
Masses of trees embarrassed every step . 
The day promised to be a very hot one . 
The army had only done half its journey , and there remained more than one and twenty Roman miles to cover to reach the camp of the German barbarians -LRB- Alemanni -RRB- which lay on the left bank of the Rhine in a great plain , near the town Argentoratum . 
The soldiers were worn out . 
As soon as they had crossed the forest and reached open ground Julian assembled them round himself in a great circle , like spectators in an amphitheatre , so as himself to be the centre of the centurions and cohorts , extending from him like the spokes of a huge wheel . 
This was the custom of the Roman army , so that the greatest possible number could hear the words of their general . 
Julian explained to the legions in a few brief and simple sentences that fatigue might prevent success , that it would be safer to camp for that night in the field where they were , to rest , and attack the barbarians the following morning , with vigour renewed . 
Discontented murmurs ran through the army ; the rank and file struck their shields with lances -- a sign of impatience -- clamouring that Julian should lead them without delay to the field of battle . 
The Cæsar understood by the general expression on faces around him that in resisting he would commit a grave mistake . 
He felt in the crowd that thrill of ferocity with which he was so familiar , which was so indispensable to victory , and by the least maladroitness so easily to be changed into mutiny . 
He leapt on horseback and gave the signal to continue the march . 
Peals of enthusiasm answered him and the army moved off . 
When the sun was beginning to sink they reached the plain of Argentoratum . 
There the Rhine was shining between low hills . 
To the south rose the sombre mass of the Vosges Mountains , and swallows were sweeping over the surface of the majestic German river . 
Suddenly , on the nearest hill , three riders appeared ; they were the Alemanni . 
The Romans halted , and disposed themselves in battle-order . 
Julian , surrounded by six hundred steel-clad horsemen , the Clibanarii , commanded the horsemen of the right wing . 
On the left extended the infantry , under the orders of Severus . 
Julian himself was also under the command of this general . 
The barbarians opposed their cavalry to that of Julian . 
At their head rode the Alemannic king Chlodomir . 
Fronting Severus , Agenaric , the young nephew of Chlodomir , led the German infantry . 
War-horns , trumpets , and fifes resounded ; ensigns and flags inscribed with the names of cohorts , the purple dragons and Roman eagles , assembled at the head of the legions . 
In the van strode axe-bearers , chief centurions , and primipilares , men bred to victory . 
Their regular and heavy tread shook the earth . 
Suddenly the foot soldiers of Severus halted . 
The barbarians , who had been lurking in a trench , sprang from their ambuscade and attacked the Romans . 
Julian from a distance saw the confusion that ensued and galloped up to restore order . 
He attempted to calm the soldiers , speaking hastily now to one cohort , now to another , in something of the concise style of Julius Cæsar . 
When he uttered the words , '' Exurgamus viri fortes '' or '' Advenit , socii , justem pugnandi jam tempus , '' this young man of twenty-two was thinking with pride : `` At last I am like such and such a famous soldier ! '' 
Even in the very fire of action he never forgot his books , and rejoiced to enact over again familiar scenes of Livy , Plutarch , and Sallust . 
The well-tried Severus restrained his ardour , and , while giving a certain liberty to Julian , retained the general direction of the action . 
Arrows whizzed and barbarian javelins , dragging long cords ; and war-engines flung huge stones hundreds of yards . 
The Romans now found themselves face to face at last with the terrible and mysterious inhabitants of the North , about whom so many incredible legends were afloat . 
Some wore bear-skins on their backs , and on their shaggy heads the gaping jaws of wolves . 
Others had their helms adorned with the horns of stag and bull . 
The Alemanni were so contemptuous of death that , keeping only lance and sword , they frequently flung themselves into battle stark naked . 
Their reddish hair was knotted on the top of their heads and fell back on the neck in a thick mass or plaited mane . 
They wore long sweeping broad moustaches and their skins were deeply bronzed . 
A great number were so savage that , unfamiliar with the use of steel , they fought with bone-tipped lances dipped in violent poison . 
A scratch from this primitive barb was sufficient to produce a slow death in terrible agony . 
From head to foot , instead of armour they wore thin scales pared from the hoofs of horses and sewn on linen , a kind of horny mail . 
In this array the barbarians seemed strange monsters , clad in birds ' feathers and fish scales . 
There were also Saxons with pale blue eyes , men for whom the sea had no terrors , but who feared the land . 
The foremost primipilares , locking their shields together , formed a compact wall of steel , and advanced steadily , slowly , almost invulnerable to blows . 
The Alemanni rushed upon this wall with ferocious cries , like the hoarse growls of bears . 
The main fight began , breast against breast , shield against shield . 
Dust was so thick over the plain that the sun was darkened . 
At this moment on the right wing the iron-clad horses of the Clibanarii began rearing and taking fright . 
The stampede threatened to crush the legions of the rearguard . 
Through the cloud of arrows and lances , the fire-coloured scarf of the gigantic king Chlodomir was shining in bright sunlight . 
Julian in the nick of time galloped up on his black charger , bespattered with foam . 
He grasped the situation . 
The barbarian foot-soldiers , placed for the purpose between their horsemen , were slipping under the legs of the Roman horses , and disembowelling them ; the horses fell , dragging down in their fall the cataphracti , or men in scale-armour , who , overwhelmed under its weight , were unable to rise . 
Julian placed himself directly behind the flying horsemen ; it was a question of either stemming the flight or being crushed himself . 
The tribune of the Clibanarii came into collision with him . 
Pale with shame and terror , he recognised Julian . 
Julian 's forehead flushed purple , he forgot his classical books , leaned over , seized the flying man by the throat , and shouted with a voice which appeared to himself strangely savage -- `` Coward ! '' 
Then he faced the tribune round to the enemy . 
The cataphracti halted , glanced at the purple dragon , the Imperial ensign , and remained motionless . 
In a moment the mass of iron recoiled and swept back anew against the barbarians . 
The fight became a wild confusion . 
A lance struck Julian full in the breast ; he owed his safety to his breastplate . 
An arrow hissed by his ear , grazing his cheek with its feathers . 
Severus now sent the legions of the Cornuti and Brakathi , half-savage allies of the Romans , to succour the wavering cavalry . 
They were wont to sing their war-hymn , the Barrith , only when their blood was up in the joy of battle , intoning it in a low and plaintive voice . 
The first notes were calm as the nocturnal sighing of woods ; but little by little the Barrith became louder , more solemn , and terrible , until at last , raising a furious and deafening roar like a stormy sea , all the singers were beside themselves . 
Julian ceased to see or understand the surge of battle round him ; he was conscious only of intolerable thirst and a sharp aching in the bones of his sword hand ; he had lost all reckoning of time . 
But Severus kept all his presence of mind , and directed the fight with incomparable skill . 
Perplexed and heart-broken , Julian perceived the orange scarf of Chlodomir in the midst of the legions ; the barbarians had penetrated obliquely into the centre of the Roman army . 
Julian thought `` All is lost ! '' 
He remembered the unfavourable presages of the morning and addressed a last prayer to the gods of Olympus -- `` Come , help me ! 
For who is there but I to restore you to power upon earth ? '' 
In the centre of the army were stationed the old veterans of the Petulant legion , so called on account of their rashness . 
Severus counted on them , and his reliance was not in vain . 
One of them shouted -- '' Viri fortissimi ! 
Bravest of the brave , let us not betray Rome and our Cæsar ! 
Let us die for Julian ! 
Glory and prosperity to Cæsar Julian ! '' 
`` For Rome ... for Rome ... '' stern voices responded , and these tried legions , grown grey under the flag , once again went to meet death , steady and cheery . 
The inspiring breath of great Rome swept over the whole army . 
Julian , his eyes full of enthusiastic tears , rode towards the veterans to die along with them . 
Again he felt the force of sheer affection , the force of the people lifting him on its wings to carry him to victory . 
Then terror seized the barbaric masses ; they trembled , broke , and fled ; and the eagles of the legions , their rapacious beaks and outspread wings glittering in the sun , swooped down again amongst the routed tribes , proclaiming the victory of the Eternal City . 
The Alemanni and Franks perished fighting to the last gasp . 
Kneeling in a pool of blood , the savage would wield his sword or lance with a slackening hand , but in his troubled eyes were to be seen neither fear nor despair , only thirst for vengeance and contempt for his conquerors . 
Even those who were left for dead arose , half-crushed , and fixed their teeth in the legs of their enemies . 
Six thousand barbarians fell in that battle or were drowned in the Rhine . 
The same evening , as Julian Cæsar stood on the hill , enveloped by the rays of the setting sun , King Chlodomir , who had been made prisoner on the bank of the river , was led before him . 
He was breathing with difficulty , his face livid and sweating , his enormous hands bound behind his back . 
He knelt down before his conqueror , and the young Cæsar of twenty-two laid his slight hand upon the shaggy head . 
It was the time of vintage ; all day songs had been echoing along the hill-sides around the pleasant Gulf of Naples . 
In the favourite country of the Romans , at Baiæ , famous for its sulphur-baths , Baiæ of which the Augustan poets used to say , Nullus in orbe sinus Baiis prælucet amoenis , -- idle folk were delighting in the country and Nature ; there fairer and more voluptuous than man . 
It was an inviolate corner of that charming country , where the imaginations of Horace , Propertius , and Tibullus lingered yet . 
Not a single shadow of the monkish age had yet dulled that sunny littoral between Vesuvius and Cape Misenum . 
Christianity it is true was not denied there ; but it was smilingly put by . 
Feminine sinners there were not yet repentant . 
On the contrary honest women grew shy of virtue as old-fashioned . 
When news of the Sibyl 's prophecies arrived , menacing the decrepit world with earthquake , or when came news of fresh crimes and bigotries of Constantius , or of Persians invading the East , or barbarians threatening the North , the lucky inhabitants of Baiæ , closing their eyes , inhaled their delicious breeze full of the odour of Falernian half-crushed in the wine-press , and consoled themselves with an epigram . 
To forget the misfortunes of Rome and soothsay about the end of the world , all that they needed was to send each other gifts of pretty verses -- Calet unda , friget æthra , Simul innatat choreis Amathusium renidens Salis arbitræ et vaporis , Flos siderum Dione ! 
On the faces of the gayest Epicureans could be seen something at once senile and puerile . 
Neither the fresh salt water of the sea bath nor the warm sulphurous springs of Baiæ could completely cure the bodies of these withered and chilly young men , bald and old at twenty , not through their own debauches , but through sins of their ancestors ; youths on whom women , wisdom , and literature had begun to pall ; witty and impotent young men , in whose veins ran the blood of too late a generation . 
In one of the most flowery and pleasant nooks between Baiæ and Puteoli and under the dark slopes of the Apennine , rose the white marble walls of a villa . 
Near the wide window , opening directly on the sea , so that from the chamber sky and sea alone were visible , Myrrha was lying on a bed . 
The doctors had not understood her malady ; but Arsinoë , who watched her sister day by day losing strength and vitality , had brought her from Rome to the sea-coast . 
Notwithstanding her illness Myrrha would clean and arrange her chamber with her own hands , in imitation of nuns and hermits ; and would herself bring water , and attempt to wash linen , and do her own cookery . 
For weeks , and to the very last stage of her illness , she obstinately refused to go to bed , spending whole nights in prayer . 
One day the terrified Arsinoë found a hair-shirt on the weak body of her sister . 
Myrrha had taken all articles of luxury from her little chamber , stripping it of curtains and ornaments , and leaving nothing but a bed and a coarse wooden crucifix . 
The bare-walled room was `` her cell . '' 
She also fasted strictly and Arsinoë found it difficult to oppose the gentle obstinacy of her will . 
From the life of Arsinoë all listlessness had disappeared . 
She wavered continually between hope of restoring Myrrha to health and despair at losing her . 
And although she could not love her sister more passionately than before , yet , dominated by the fear of their eternal separation , she understood her own love more clearly . 
Sometimes , with motherly pity , Arsinoë would gaze upon that wasted face , and the little body in which so fierce a fire was burning . 
When the sick girl refused wine and food prescribed by the physician , Arsinoë would say in vexation -- `` Do you think I am blind , Myrrha ? 
Are you trying to kill yourself ? '' 
`` Are not life and death equal in our eyes ? '' 
answered the young girl , with such earnestness that Arsinoë could only reply -- `` You do not love me ! 
... '' But Myrrha used to say caressingly -- `` Beloved , you do not know how much I love you ! 
Oh , if you could only ... '' The invalid would never finish the sentence , nor ask her sister if she held the faith . 
But in her sad glance at Arsinoë , as if not daring utterance , Arsinoë read reproach . 
Nevertheless , she was herself unwilling to speak about that faith , not having the courage to communicate her doubt , for fear of perhaps robbing her sister of the mad hope of immortality . 
Myrrha weakened from day to day , waning like the wax of a taper ; but from day to day grew more joyous and more calm . 
Juventinus , who had quitted Rome lest his mother should follow him , was waiting at Naples with Didimus for the departure of the ship for Alexandria . 
He came to see the sisters every evening . 
He used to read aloud the Gospels and tell legends of the saints ... . 
Oh , how Myrrha longed to journey to those dark caves and live near those great and holy lives ! 
The desert to her appeared not dull and sterile , but flowery , a wondrous earthly paradise , lighted by a light such as shone on no other region . 
Indoors she grew stifled ; and sometimes , fevered by the pains of sickness , and languishing after the Thebaïd , she used to watch the white sails of ships disappear in the distance and stretch out her pale hands towards them . 
Oh , to flee after them and breathe the pure air and silence of the desert ! 
Many a time she would try to rise , declaring she felt better , would soon be well , and in secret kept hoping that they would allow her to set sail with Didimus and Juventinus , on the ship for Alexandria . 
Anatolius , Arsinoë 's faithful admirer , was also living at Baiæ . 
The young Epicurean used to organise delightful excursions in his gilded galley from the Bay to the Pæstan Gulf , with gay companions and pretty women . 
What he loved most was to see the purple sails bowing over the sleepy sea ; hues of twilight melting on the cliffs of Capreæ and Ischia , looking like enormous amethysts lying in the water . 
It pleased him to ridicule his friends about their faith . 
The fragrance of wines and the intoxicating kisses of courtesans pleased him also . 
But every time he went into Myrrha 's quiet little cell he would become aware that another side of life also lay open to him . 
The innocent grace and the pale countenance of the young girl touched him deeply . 
He longed to believe in anything in which she believed : the gentle Galilean , and the miracle of immortality . 
He would listen to the tales of Juventinus , and the life of desert anchorites he , too , thought sublime . 
Anatolius observed with surprise that for himself truth existed both in the intoxication of life and in its renunciation ; both in the triumph of matter and in the triumph of soul ; both in chastity and in voluptuousness . 
His intelligence remained clear , and his conscience without remorse . 
Even doubt had for him its pleasure , like a kind of new game . 
These deep and gentle waves of opinion , transitions from Christianity to Paganism , lulled his soul rather than distressed it . 
One evening Myrrha fell asleep before the open window . 
On awakening , she said to Juventinus with a bright smile -- `` I 've had a strange dream ... '' `` What was it ? '' 
`` I do n't remember . 
But it was happy . 
Do you think that the whole world will gain salvation ? '' 
`` All the righteous ; sinners will be punished . '' 
`` Righteous ? 
sinners ? 
... That is not my idea , '' answered Myrrha , still smiling , as if she was trying to remember the dream . 
`` Do you know , Juventinus , that all , all shall be saved , and that God will not suffer one to be lost ! '' 
`` So the great master Origen believed . 
He used to say , ` My Saviour can not rejoice so long as I am in iniquity . ' 
But that is a heresy ... '' Myrrha , not listening , went on -- `` Yes ! 
yes ! 
that must be so . 
I understand it at last . 
All shall be saved , to the very last . 
