
The wicket opened.

"Turnkey," said he, removing his cap politely, "will you have
the kindness to admit me, and give me a lodging for the night?"

A voice replied:--

"The prison is not an inn.  Get yourself arrested, and you will
be admitted."

The wicket closed again.

He entered a little street in which there were many gardens. 
Some of them are enclosed only by hedges, which lends a cheerful
aspect to the street.  In the midst of these gardens and hedges
he caught sight of a small house of a single story, the window
of which was lighted up.  He peered through the pane as he had
done at the public house.  Within was a large whitewashed room,
with a bed draped in printed cotton stuff, and a cradle in one corner,
a few wooden chairs, and a double-barrelled gun hanging on the wall. 
A table was spread in the centre of the room.  A copper lamp
illuminated the tablecloth of coarse white linen, the pewter
jug shining like silver, and filled with wine, and the brown,
smoking soup-tureen. At this table sat a man of about forty,
with a merry and open countenance, who was dandling a little child
on his knees.  Close by a very young woman was nursing another child. 
The father was laughing, the child was laughing, the mother
was smiling.

The stranger paused a moment in revery before this tender
and calming spectacle.  What was taking place within him? 
He alone could have told.  It is probable that he thought that
this joyous house would be hospitable, and that, in a place
where he beheld so much happiness, he would find perhaps a little pity.

He tapped on the pane with a very small and feeble knock.

They did not hear him.

He tapped again.

He heard the woman say, "It seems to me, husband, that some one
is knocking."

"No," replied the husband.

He tapped a third time.

The husband rose, took the lamp, and went to the door, which he opened.

He was a man of lofty stature, half peasant, half artisan. 
He wore a huge leather apron, which reached to his left shoulder,
and which a hammer, a red handkerchief, a powder-horn, and all
sorts of objects which were upheld by the girdle, as in a pocket,
caused to bulge out.  He carried his head thrown backwards;
his shirt, widely opened and turned back, displayed his bull neck,
white and bare.  He had thick eyelashes, enormous black whiskers,
prominent eyes, the lower part of his face like a snout;
and besides all this, that air of being on his own ground,
which is indescribable.

"Pardon me, sir," said the wayfarer, "Could you, in consideration
of payment, give me a plate of soup and a corner of that shed
yonder in the garden, in which to sleep?  Tell me; can you? 
For money?"

"Who are you?" demanded the master of the house.

The man replied:  "I have just come from Puy-Moisson. I have
walked all day long.  I have travelled twelve leagues.  Can you?--
if I pay?"

"I would not refuse," said the peasant, "to lodge any respectable
man who would pay me.  But why do you not go to the inn?"

"There is no room."

"Bah!  Impossible.  This is neither a fair nor a market day. 
Have you been to Labarre?"

"Yes."

"Well?"

The traveller replied with embarrassment:  "I do not know. 
He did not receive me."

"Have you been to What's-his-name's, in the Rue Chaffaut?"

The stranger's embarrassment increased; he stammered, "He did
not receive me either."

The peasant's countenance assumed an expression of distrust;
he surveyed the newcomer from head to feet, and suddenly exclaimed,
with a sort of shudder:--

"Are you the man?--"

He cast a fresh glance upon the stranger, took three steps backwards,
placed the lamp on the table, and took his gun down from the wall.

Meanwhile, at the words, Are you the man? the woman had risen,
had clasped her two children in her arms, and had taken refuge
precipitately behind her husband, staring in terror at the stranger,
with her bosom uncovered, and with frightened eyes, as she murmured
in a low tone, "Tso-maraude."[1]


[1] Patois of the French Alps:  chat de maraude, rascally marauder.


All this took place in less time than it requires to picture it
to one's self.  After having scrutinized the man for several moments,
as one scrutinizes a viper, the master of the house returned
to the door and said:--

"Clear out!"

"For pity's sake, a glass of water," said the man.

"A shot from my gun!" said the peasant.

Then he closed the door violently, and the man heard him shoot
two large bolts.  A moment later, the window-shutter was closed,
and the sound of a bar of iron which was placed against it was
audible outside.

Night continued to fall.  A cold wind from the Alps was blowing. 
By the light of the expiring day the stranger perceived,
in one of the gardens which bordered the street, a sort of hut,
which seemed to him to be built of sods.  He climbed over the wooden
fence resolutely, and found himself in the garden.  He approached
the hut; its door consisted of a very low and narrow aperture,
and it resembled those buildings which road-laborers construct for
themselves along the roads.  He thought without doubt, that it was,
in fact, the dwelling of a road-laborer; he was suffering from cold
and hunger, but this was, at least, a shelter from the cold. 
This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night.  He threw
himself flat on his face, and crawled into the hut.  It was warm there,
and he found a tolerably good bed of straw.  He lay, for a moment,
stretched out on this bed, without the power to make a movement,
so fatigued was he.  Then, as the knapsack on his back was in
his way, and as it furnished, moreover, a pillow ready to his hand,
he set about unbuckling one of the straps.  At that moment,
a ferocious growl became audible.  He raised his eyes.  The head
of an enormous dog was outlined in the darkness at the entrance of
the hut.

It was a dog's kennel.

He was himself vigorous and formidable; he armed himself with his staff,
made a shield of his knapsack, and made his way out of the kennel
in the best way he could, not without enlarging the rents in his rags.

He left the garden in the same manner, but backwards, being obliged,
in order to keep the dog respectful, to have recourse to that
manoeuvre with his stick which masters in that sort of fencing
designate as la rose couverte.

When he had, not without difficulty, repassed the fence, and found
himself once more in the street, alone, without refuge, without shelter,
without a roof over his head, chased even from that bed of straw
and from that miserable kennel, he dropped rather than seated himself
on a stone, and it appears that a passer-by heard him exclaim,
"I am not even a dog!"

He soon rose again and resumed his march.  He went out of the town,
hoping to find some tree or haystack in the fields which would afford
him shelter.

He walked thus for some time, with his head still drooping. 
When he felt himself far from every human habitation, he raised
his eyes and gazed searchingly about him.  He was in a field. 
Before him was one of those low hills covered with close-cut stubble,
which, after the harvest, resemble shaved heads.

The horizon was perfectly black.  This was not alone the obscurity
of night; it was caused by very low-hanging clouds which seemed
to rest upon the hill itself, and which were mounting and filling
the whole sky.  Meanwhile, as the moon was about to rise, and as
there was still floating in the zenith a remnant of the brightness
of twilight, these clouds formed at the summit of the sky a sort
of whitish arch, whence a gleam of light fell upon the earth.

The earth was thus better lighted than the sky, which produces
a particularly sinister effect, and the hill, whose contour was poor
and mean, was outlined vague and wan against the gloomy horizon. 
The whole effect was hideous, petty, lugubrious, and narrow.

There was nothing in the field or on the hill except a deformed tree,
which writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer.

This man was evidently very far from having those delicate habits
of intelligence and spirit which render one sensible to the mysterious
aspects of things; nevertheless, there was something in that sky,
in that hill, in that plain, in that tree, which was so profoundly
desolate, that after a moment of immobility and revery he turned
back abruptly.  There are instants when nature seems hostile.

He retraced his steps; the gates of D---- were closed.  D----, which had
sustained sieges during the wars of religion, was still surrounded
in 1815 by ancient walls flanked by square towers which have been
demolished since.  He passed through a breach and entered the town again.

It might have been eight o'clock in the evening.  As he was not
acquainted with the streets, he recommenced his walk at random.

In this way he came to the prefecture, then to the seminary. 
As he passed through the Cathedral Square, he shook his fist at
the church.

At the corner of this square there is a printing establishment. 
It is there that the proclamations of the Emperor and of the Imperial
Guard to the army, brought from the Island of Elba and dictated
by Napoleon himself, were printed for the first time.

Worn out with fatigue, and no longer entertaining any hope,
he lay down on a stone bench which stands at the doorway of this
printing office.

At that moment an old woman came out of the church.  She saw the man
stretched out in the shadow.  "What are you doing there, my friend?"
said she.

He answered harshly and angrily:  "As you see, my good woman,
I am sleeping."  The good woman, who was well worthy the name,
in fact, was the Marquise de R----

"On this bench?" she went on.

"I have had a mattress of wood for nineteen years," said the man;
"to-day I have a mattress of stone."

"You have been a soldier?"

"Yes, my good woman, a soldier."

"Why do you not go to the inn?"

"Because I have no money."

"Alas!" said Madame de R----, "I have only four sous in my purse."

"Give it to me all the same."

The man took the four sous.  Madame de R---- continued:  "You cannot
obtain lodgings in an inn for so small a sum.  But have you tried? 
It is impossible for you to pass the night thus.  You are cold
and hungry, no doubt.  Some one might have given you a lodging out
of charity."

"I have knocked at all doors."

"Well?"

"I have been driven away everywhere."

The "good woman" touched the man's arm, and pointed out to him
on the other side of the street a small, low house, which stood
beside the Bishop's palace.

"You have knocked at all doors?"

"Yes."

"Have you knocked at that one?"

"No."

"Knock there."




PRUDENCE COUNSELLED TO WISDOM.


That evening, the Bishop of D----, after his promenade through the town,
remained shut up rather late in his room.  He was busy over a great
work on Duties, which was never completed, unfortunately.  He was
carefully compiling everything that the Fathers and the doctors
have said on this important subject.  His book was divided into
two parts:  firstly, the duties of all; secondly, the duties
of each individual, according to the class to which he belongs. 
The duties of all are the great duties.  There are four of these. 
Saint Matthew points them out:  duties towards God (Matt. vi.);
duties towards one's self (Matt. v.  29, 30); duties towards one's
neighbor (Matt. vii.  12); duties towards animals (Matt. vi. 
20, 25). As for the other duties the Bishop found them pointed out
and prescribed elsewhere:  to sovereigns and subjects, in the Epistle
to the Romans; to magistrates, to wives, to mothers, to young men,
by Saint Peter; to husbands, fathers, children and servants,
in the Epistle to the Ephesians; to the faithful, in the Epistle
to the Hebrews; to virgins, in the Epistle to the Corinthians. 
Out of these precepts he was laboriously constructing a harmonious whole,
which he desired to present to souls.

At eight o'clock he was still at work, writing with a good deal
of inconvenience upon little squares of paper, with a big book open
on his knees, when Madame Magloire entered, according to her wont,
to get the silver-ware from the cupboard near his bed.  A moment later,
the Bishop, knowing that the table was set, and that his sister
was probably waiting for him, shut his book, rose from his table,
and entered the dining-room.

The dining-room was an oblong apartment, with a fireplace,
which had a door opening on the street (as we have said),
and a window opening on the garden.

Madame Magloire was, in fact, just putting the last touches
to the table.

As she performed this service, she was conversing
with Mademoiselle Baptistine.

A lamp stood on the table; the table was near the fireplace. 
A wood fire was burning there.

One can easily picture to one's self these two women, both of whom
were over sixty years of age.  Madame Magloire small, plump, vivacious;
Mademoiselle Baptistine gentle, slender, frail, somewhat taller
than her brother, dressed in a gown of puce-colored silk, of the
fashion of 1806, which she had purchased at that date in Paris,
and which had lasted ever since.  To borrow vulgar phrases,
which possess the merit of giving utterance in a single word to an idea
which a whole page would hardly suffice to express, Madame Magloire
had the air of a peasant, and Mademoiselle Baptistine that of a lady. 
Madame Magloire wore a white quilted cap, a gold Jeannette cross
on a velvet ribbon upon her neck, the only bit of feminine jewelry
that there was in the house, a very white fichu puffing out from a gown
of coarse black woollen stuff, with large, short sleeves, an apron
of cotton cloth in red and green checks, knotted round the waist
with a green ribbon, with a stomacher of the same attached by two pins
at the upper corners, coarse shoes on her feet, and yellow stockings,
like the women of Marseilles.  Mademoiselle Baptistine's gown
was cut on the patterns of 1806, with a short waist, a narrow,
sheath-like skirt, puffed sleeves, with flaps and buttons. 
She concealed her gray hair under a frizzed wig known as the baby wig. 
Madame Magloire had an intelligent, vivacious, and kindly air;
the two corners of her mouth unequally raised, and her upper lip,
which was larger than the lower, imparted to her a rather crabbed
and imperious look.  So long as Monseigneur held his peace,
she talked to him resolutely with a mixture of respect and freedom;
but as soon as Monseigneur began to speak, as we have seen,
she obeyed passively like her mistress.  Mademoiselle Baptistine did
not even speak.  She confined herself to obeying and pleasing him. 
She had never been pretty, even when she was young; she had large,
blue, prominent eyes, and a long arched nose; but her whole visage,
her whole person, breathed forth an ineffable goodness, as we stated
in the beginning.  She had always been predestined to gentleness;
but faith, charity, hope, those three virtues which mildly warm the soul,
had gradually elevated that gentleness to sanctity.  Nature had made
her a lamb, religion had made her an angel.  Poor sainted virgin! 
Sweet memory which has vanished!

Mademoiselle Baptistine has so often narrated what passed at
the episcopal residence that evening, that there are many people
now living who still recall the most minute details.

At the moment when the Bishop entered, Madame Magloire was talking
with considerable vivacity.  She was haranguing Mademoiselle Baptistine
on a subject which was familiar to her and to which the Bishop was
also accustomed.  The question concerned the lock upon the entrance door.

It appears that while procuring some provisions for supper,
Madame Magloire had heard things in divers places.  People had spoken
of a prowler of evil appearance; a suspicious vagabond had arrived
who must be somewhere about the town, and those who should take it
into their heads to return home late that night might be subjected
to unpleasant encounters.  The police was very badly organized,
moreover, because there was no love lost between the Prefect and
the Mayor, who sought to injure each other by making things happen. 
It behooved wise people to play the part of their own police,
and to guard themselves well, and care must be taken to duly close,
bar and barricade their houses, and to fasten the doors well.

Madame Magloire emphasized these last words; but the Bishop had just
come from his room, where it was rather cold.  He seated himself
in front of the fire, and warmed himself, and then fell to thinking
of other things.  He did not take up the remark dropped with design
by Madame Magloire.  She repeated it.  Then Mademoiselle Baptistine,
desirous of satisfying Madame Magloire without displeasing her brother,
ventured to say timidly:--

"Did you hear what Madame Magloire is saying, brother?"

"I have heard something of it in a vague way," replied the Bishop. 
Then half-turning in his chair, placing his hands on his knees,
and raising towards the old servant woman his cordial face,
which so easily grew joyous, and which was illuminated from below
by the firelight,--"Come, what is the matter?  What is the matter? 
Are we in any great danger?"

Then Madame Magloire began the whole story afresh, exaggerating it
a little without being aware of the fact.  It appeared that
a Bohemian, a bare-footed vagabond, a sort of dangerous mendicant,
was at that moment in the town.  He had presented himself at Jacquin
Labarre's to obtain lodgings, but the latter had not been willing
to take him in.  He had been seen to arrive by the way of the
boulevard Gassendi and roam about the streets in the gloaming. 
A gallows-bird with a terrible face.

"Really!" said the Bishop.

This willingness to interrogate encouraged Madame Magloire;
it seemed to her to indicate that the Bishop was on the point
of becoming alarmed; she pursued triumphantly:--

"Yes, Monseigneur.  That is how it is.  There will be some sort
of catastrophe in this town to-night. Every one says so.  And withal,
the police is so badly regulated" (a useful repetition). "The idea
of living in a mountainous country, and not even having lights
in the streets at night!  One goes out.  Black as ovens, indeed! 
And I say, Monseigneur, and Mademoiselle there says with me--"

"I," interrupted his sister, "say nothing.  What my brother does
is well done."

Madame Magloire continued as though there had been no protest:--

"We say that this house is not safe at all; that if Monseigneur
will permit, I will go and tell Paulin Musebois, the locksmith,
to come and replace the ancient locks on the doors; we have them,
and it is only the work of a moment; for I say that nothing is more
terrible than a door which can be opened from the outside with a latch
by the first passer-by; and I say that we need bolts, Monseigneur,
if only for this night; moreover, Monseigneur has the habit of always
saying `come in'; and besides, even in the middle of the night,
O mon Dieu! there is no need to ask permission."

At that moment there came a tolerably violent knock on the door.

"Come in," said the Bishop.




THE HEROISM OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE.


The door opened.

It opened wide with a rapid movement, as though some one had given
it an energetic and resolute push.

A man entered.

We already know the man.  It was the wayfarer whom we have seen
wandering about in search of shelter.

He entered, advanced a step, and halted, leaving the door open
behind him.  He had his knapsack on his shoulders, his cudgel
in his hand, a rough, audacious, weary, and violent expression in
his eyes.  The fire on the hearth lighted him up.  He was hideous. 
It was a sinister apparition.

Madame Magloire had not even the strength to utter a cry. 
She trembled, and stood with her mouth wide open.

Mademoiselle Baptistine turned round, beheld the man entering,
and half started up in terror; then, turning her head by degrees
towards the fireplace again, she began to observe her brother,
and her face became once more profoundly calm and serene.

The Bishop fixed a tranquil eye on the man.

As he opened his mouth, doubtless to ask the new-comer what he desired,
the man rested both hands on his staff, directed his gaze at the old
man and the two women, and without waiting for the Bishop to speak,
he said, in a loud voice:--

"See here.  My name is Jean Valjean.  I am a convict from the galleys. 
I have passed nineteen years in the galleys.  I was liberated four
days ago, and am on my way to Pontarlier, which is my destination. 
I have been walking for four days since I left Toulon.  I have
travelled a dozen leagues to-day on foot.  This evening, when I
arrived in these parts, I went to an inn, and they turned me out,
because of my yellow passport, which I had shown at the town-hall.
I had to do it.  I went to an inn.  They said to me, `Be off,'
at both places.  No one would take me.  I went to the prison;
the jailer would not admit me.  I went into a dog's kennel;
the dog bit me and chased me off, as though he had been a man. 
One would have said that he knew who I was.  I went into the fields,
intending to sleep in the open air, beneath the stars.  There were
no stars.  I thought it was going to rain, and I re-entered
the town, to seek the recess of a doorway.  Yonder, in the square,
I meant to sleep on a stone bench.  A good woman pointed out your
house to me, and said to me, `Knock there!'  I have knocked. 
What is this place?  Do you keep an inn?  I have money--savings. 
One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous, which I earned
in the galleys by my labor, in the course of nineteen years. 
I will pay.  What is that to me?  I have money.  I am very weary;
twelve leagues on foot; I am very hungry.  Are you willing that I
should remain?"

"Madame Magloire," said the Bishop, "you will set another place."

The man advanced three paces, and approached the lamp which was on
the table.  "Stop," he resumed, as though he had not quite understood;
