naked to the waist, to a stake, and the child kept at a distance;
her breast swelled with milk and her heart with anguish;
the little one, hungry and pale, beheld that breast and cried
and agonized; the executioner said to the woman, a mother and a nurse,
`Abjure!' giving her her choice between the death of her infant
and the death of her conscience.  What say you to that torture
of Tantalus as applied to a mother?  Bear this well in mind sir: 
the French Revolution had its reasons for existence; its wrath will
be absolved by the future; its result is the world made better. 
From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the
human race.  I abridge, I stop, I have too much the advantage;
moreover, I am dying."

And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop, the conventionary concluded
his thoughts in these tranquil words:--

"Yes, the brutalities of progress are called revolutions. 
When they are over, this fact is recognized,--that the human race
has been treated harshly, but that it has progressed."

The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered
all the inmost intrenchments of the Bishop.  One remained, however,
and from this intrenchment, the last resource of Monseigneur
Bienvenu's resistance, came forth this reply, wherein appeared
nearly all the harshness of the beginning:--

"Progress should believe in God.  Good cannot have an impious servitor. 
He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race."

The former representative of the people made no reply.  He was seized
with a fit of trembling.  He looked towards heaven, and in his glance
a tear gathered slowly.  When the eyelid was full, the tear trickled
down his livid cheek, and he said, almost in a stammer, quite low,
and to himself, while his eyes were plunged in the depths:--

"O thou!  O ideal!  Thou alone existest!"

The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock.

After a pause, the old man raised a finger heavenward and said:--

"The infinite is.  He is there.  If the infinite had no person,
person would be without limit; it would not be infinite;
in other words, it would not exist.  There is, then, an _I_. 
That _I_ of the infinite is God."

The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice,
and with the shiver of ecstasy, as though he beheld some one. 
When he had spoken, his eyes closed.  The effort had exhausted him. 
It was evident that he had just lived through in a moment the
few hours which had been left to him.  That which he had said
brought him nearer to him who is in death.  The supreme moment
was approaching.

The Bishop understood this; time pressed; it was as a priest that
he had come:  from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to
extreme emotion; he gazed at those closed eyes, he took that wrinkled,
aged and ice-cold hand in his, and bent over the dying man.

"This hour is the hour of God.  Do you not think that it would
be regrettable if we had met in vain?"

The conventionary opened his eyes again.  A gravity mingled
with gloom was imprinted on his countenance.

"Bishop," said he, with a slowness which probably arose more
from his dignity of soul than from the failing of his strength,
"I have passed my life in meditation, study, and contemplation. 
I was sixty years of age when my country called me and commanded
me to concern myself with its affairs.  I obeyed.  Abuses existed,
I combated them; tyrannies existed, I destroyed them; rights and
principles existed, I proclaimed and confessed them.  Our territory
was invaded, I defended it; France was menaced, I offered my breast. 
I was not rich; I am poor.  I have been one of the masters of
the state; the vaults of the treasury were encumbered with specie
to such a degree that we were forced to shore up the walls,
which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of gold
and silver; I dined in Dead Tree Street, at twenty-two sous. 
I have succored the oppressed, I have comforted the suffering. 
I tore the cloth from the altar, it is true; but it was to bind up
the wounds of my country.  I have always upheld the march forward
of the human race, forward towards the light, and I have sometimes
resisted progress without pity.  I have, when the occasion offered,
protected my own adversaries, men of your profession.  And there
is at Peteghem, in Flanders, at the very spot where the Merovingian
kings had their summer palace, a convent of Urbanists, the Abbey
of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu, which I saved in 1793.  I have done
my duty according to my powers, and all the good that I was able. 
After which, I was hunted down, pursued, persecuted, blackened,
jeered at, scorned, cursed, proscribed.  For many years past,
I with my white hair have been conscious that many people think they
have the right to despise me; to the poor ignorant masses I present
the visage of one damned.  And I accept this isolation of hatred,
without hating any one myself.  Now I am eighty-six years old;
I am on the point of death.  What is it that you have come to ask
of me?"

"Your blessing," said the Bishop.

And he knelt down.

When the Bishop raised his head again, the face of the conventionary
had become august.  He had just expired.

The Bishop returned home, deeply absorbed in thoughts which
cannot be known to us.  He passed the whole night in prayer. 
On the following morning some bold and curious persons attempted
to speak to him about member of the Convention G----; he contented
himself with pointing heavenward.

From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feeling
towards all children and sufferers.

Any allusion to "that old wretch of a G----" caused him to fall
into a singular preoccupation.  No one could say that the passage
of that soul before his, and the reflection of that grand conscience
upon his, did not count for something in his approach to perfection.

This "pastoral visit" naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur
of comment in all the little local coteries.

"Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place
for a bishop?  There was evidently no conversion to be expected. 
All those revolutionists are backsliders.  Then why go there? 
What was there to be seen there?  He must have been very curious indeed
to see a soul carried off by the devil."

One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks
herself spiritual, addressed this sally to him, "Monseigneur,
people are inquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red
cap!"--"Oh! oh! that's a coarse color," replied the Bishop. 
"It is lucky that those who despise it in a cap revere it in a hat."




A RESTRICTION


We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves, were we to conclude
from this that Monseigneur Welcome was "a philosophical bishop,"
or a "patriotic cure."  His meeting, which may almost be designated
as his union, with conventionary G----, left behind it in his mind
a sort of astonishment, which rendered him still more gentle. 
That is all.

Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician,
this is, perhaps, the place to indicate very briefly what his
attitude was in the events of that epoch, supposing that Monseigneur
Bienvenu ever dreamed of having an attitude.

Let us, then, go back a few years.

Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate,
the Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire, in company with many
other bishops.  The arrest of the Pope took place, as every one knows,
on the night of the 5th to the 6th of July, 1809; on this occasion,
M. Myriel was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops
of France and Italy convened at Paris.  This synod was held at
Notre-Dame, and assembled for the first time on the 15th of June,
1811, under the presidency of Cardinal Fesch.  M. Myriel was one
of the ninety-five bishops who attended it.  But he was present
only at one sitting and at three or four private conferences. 
Bishop of a mountain diocese, living so very close to nature,
in rusticity and deprivation, it appeared that he imported among
these eminent personages, ideas which altered the temperature
of the assembly.  He very soon returned to D---- He was interrogated
as to this speedy return, and he replied:  "I embarrassed them. 
The outside air penetrated to them through me.  I produced on them
the effect of an open door."

On another occasion he said, "What would you have?  Those gentlemen
are princes.  I am only a poor peasant bishop."

The fact is that he displeased them.  Among other strange things,
it is said that he chanced to remark one evening, when he found
himself at the house of one of his most notable colleagues:  "What
beautiful clocks!  What beautiful carpets!  What beautiful liveries! 
They must be a great trouble.  I would not have all those superfluities,
crying incessantly in my ears:  `There are people who are hungry! 
There are people who are cold!  There are poor people!  There are
poor people!'"

Let us remark, by the way, that the hatred of luxury is not
an intelligent hatred.  This hatred would involve the hatred of
the arts.  Nevertheless, in churchmen, luxury is wrong, except in
connection with representations and ceremonies.  It seems to reveal
habits which have very little that is charitable about them. 
An opulent priest is a contradiction.  The priest must keep close
to the poor.  Now, can one come in contact incessantly night and day
with all this distress, all these misfortunes, and this poverty,
without having about one's own person a little of that misery,
like the dust of labor?  Is it possible to imagine a man near a brazier
who is not warm?  Can one imagine a workman who is working near
a furnace, and who has neither a singed hair, nor blackened nails,
nor a drop of sweat, nor a speck of ashes on his face?  The first
proof of charity in the priest, in the bishop especially, is poverty.

This is, no doubt, what the Bishop of D---- thought.

It must not be supposed, however, that he shared what we call the "ideas
of the century" on certain delicate points.  He took very little part
in the theological quarrels of the moment, and maintained silence
on questions in which Church and State were implicated; but if he
had been strongly pressed, it seems that he would have been found
to be an ultramontane rather than a gallican.  Since we are making
a portrait, and since we do not wish to conceal anything, we are
forced to add that he was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline. 
Beginning with 1813, he gave in his adherence to or applauded all
hostile manifestations.  He refused to see him, as he passed through
on his return from the island of Elba, and he abstained from ordering
public prayers for the Emperor in his diocese during the Hundred Days.

Besides his sister, Mademoiselle Baptistine, he had two brothers,
one a general, the other a prefect.  He wrote to both with tolerable
frequency.  He was harsh for a time towards the former, because,
holding a command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation
at Cannes, the general had put himself at the head of twelve hundred
men and had pursued the Emperor as though the latter had been a person
whom one is desirous of allowing to escape.  His correspondence
with the other brother, the ex-prefect, a fine, worthy man who
lived in retirement at Paris, Rue Cassette, remained more affectionate.

Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit, his hour
of bitterness, his cloud.  The shadow of the passions of the moment
traversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things. 
Certainly, such a man would have done well not to entertain any
political opinions.  Let there be no mistake as to our meaning: 
we are not confounding what is called "political opinions" with the
grand aspiration for progress, with the sublime faith, patriotic,
democratic, humane, which in our day should be the very foundation
of every generous intellect.  Without going deeply into questions
which are only indirectly connected with the subject of this book,
we will simply say this:  It would have been well if Monseigneur
Bienvenu had not been a Royalist, and if his glance had never been,
for a single instant, turned away from that serene contemplation
in which is distinctly discernible, above the fictions and the hatreds
of this world, above the stormy vicissitudes of human things,
the beaming of those three pure radiances, truth, justice, and charity.

While admitting that it was not for a political office that God
created Monseigneur Welcome, we should have understood and admired
his protest in the name of right and liberty, his proud opposition,
his just but perilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon. 
But that which pleases us in people who are rising pleases us less
in the case of people who are falling.  We only love the fray
so long as there is danger, and in any case, the combatants
of the first hour have alone the right to be the exterminators
of the last.  He who has not been a stubborn accuser in prosperity
should hold his peace in the face of ruin.  The denunciator
of success is the only legitimate executioner of the fall. 
As for us, when Providence intervenes and strikes, we let it work. 
1812 commenced to disarm us.  In 1813 the cowardly breach of silence
of that taciturn legislative body, emboldened by catastrophe,
possessed only traits which aroused indignation.  And it was a crime
to applaud, in 1814, in the presence of those marshals who betrayed;
in the presence of that senate which passed from one dunghill
to another, insulting after having deified; in the presence of that
idolatry which was loosing its footing and spitting on its idol,--
it was a duty to turn aside the head.  In 1815, when the supreme
disasters filled the air, when France was seized with a shiver
at their sinister approach, when Waterloo could be dimly discerned
opening before Napoleon, the mournful acclamation of the army
and the people to the condemned of destiny had nothing laughable
in it, and, after making all allowance for the despot, a heart
like that of the Bishop of D----, ought not perhaps to have failed
to recognize the august and touching features presented by the embrace
of a great nation and a great man on the brink of the abyss.

With this exception, he was in all things just, true, equitable,
intelligent, humble and dignified, beneficent and kindly,
which is only another sort of benevolence.  He was a priest,
a sage, and a man.  It must be admitted, that even in the political
views with which we have just reproached him, and which we are
disposed to judge almost with severity, he was tolerant and easy,
more so, perhaps, than we who are speaking here.  The porter of
the town-hall had been placed there by the Emperor.  He was an old
non-commissioned officer of the old guard, a member of the Legion
of Honor at Austerlitz, as much of a Bonapartist as the eagle. 
This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderate remarks,
which the law then stigmatized as seditious speeches.  After the
imperial profile disappeared from the Legion of Honor, he never
dressed himself in his regimentals, as he said, so that he should
not be obliged to wear his cross.  He had himself devoutly removed
the imperial effigy from the cross which Napoleon had given him;
this made a hole, and he would not put anything in its place. 
"I will die," he said, "rather than wear the three frogs upon
my heart!"  He liked to scoff aloud at Louis XVIII.  "The gouty
old creature in English gaiters!" he said; "let him take himself
off to Prussia with that queue of his."  He was happy to combine
in the same imprecation the two things which he most detested,
Prussia and England.  He did it so often that he lost his place. 
There he was, turned out of the house, with his wife and children,
and without bread.  The Bishop sent for him, reproved him gently,
and appointed him beadle in the cathedral.

In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had, by dint
of holy deeds and gentle manners, filled the town of D----
with a sort of tender and filial reverence.  Even his conduct
towards Napoleon had been accepted and tacitly pardoned, as it were,
by the people, the good and weakly flock who adored their emperor,
but loved their bishop.




THE SOLITUDE OF MONSEIGNEUR WELCOME


A bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of
little abbes, just as a general is by a covey of young officers. 
This is what that charming Saint Francois de Sales calls somewhere "les
pretres blancs-becs," callow priests.  Every career has its aspirants,
who form a train for those who have attained eminence in it. 
There is no power which has not its dependents.  There is no fortune
which has not its court.  The seekers of the future eddy around
the splendid present.  Every metropolis has its staff of officials. 
Every bishop who possesses the least influence has about him
his patrol of cherubim from the seminary, which goes the round,
and maintains good order in the episcopal palace, and mounts guard
over monseigneur's smile.  To please a bishop is equivalent to getting
one's foot in the stirrup for a sub-diaconate. It is necessary to walk
one's path discreetly; the apostleship does not disdain the canonship.

Just as there are bigwigs elsewhere, there are big mitres in the Church. 
These are the bishops who stand well at Court, who are rich,
well endowed, skilful, accepted by the world, who know how to pray,
no doubt, but who know also how to beg, who feel little scruple
at making a whole diocese dance attendance in their person,
who are connecting links between the sacristy and diplomacy,
who are abbes rather than priests, prelates rather than bishops. 
Happy those who approach them!  Being persons of influence,
they create a shower about them, upon the assiduous and the favored,
and upon all the young men who understand the art of pleasing,
of large parishes, prebends, archidiaconates, chaplaincies,
and cathedral posts, while awaiting episcopal honors.  As they
advance themselves, they cause their satellites to progress also;
it is a whole solar system on the march.  Their radiance casts a gleam
of purple over their suite.  Their prosperity is crumbled up behind
the scenes, into nice little promotions.  The larger the diocese
of the patron, the fatter the curacy for the favorite.  And then,
there is Rome.  A bishop who understands how to become an archbishop,
an archbishop who knows how to become a cardinal, carries you
with him as conclavist; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction,
you receive the pallium, and behold! you are an auditor, then a
papal chamberlain, then monsignor, and from a Grace to an Eminence
is only a step, and between the Eminence and the Holiness there is
but the smoke of a ballot.  Every skull-cap may dream of the tiara. 
The priest is nowadays the only man who can become a king in a
regular manner; and what a king! the supreme king.  Then what a
nursery of aspirations is a seminary!  How many blushing choristers,
how many youthful abbes bear on their heads Perrette's pot of milk! 
Who knows how easy it is for ambition to call itself vocation?
in good faith, perchance, and deceiving itself, devotee that
it is.

Monseigneur Bienvenu, poor, humble, retiring, was not accounted
among the big mitres.  This was plain from the complete absence
of young priests about him.  We have seen that he "did not take"
in Paris.  Not a single future dreamed of engrafting itself on
this solitary old man.  Not a single sprouting ambition committed
the folly of putting forth its foliage in his shadow.  His canons
and grand-vicars were good old men, rather vulgar like himself,
walled up like him in this diocese, without exit to a cardinalship,
and who resembled their bishop, with this difference, that they
were finished and he was completed.  The impossibility of growing
great under Monseigneur Bienvenu was so well understood, that no
sooner had the young men whom he ordained left the seminary than they
got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix or of Auch,
and went off in a great hurry.  For, in short, we repeat it,
men wish to be pushed.  A saint who dwells in a paroxysm of abnegation
is a dangerous neighbor; he might communicate to you, by contagion,
an incurable poverty, an anchylosis of the joints, which are useful
in advancement, and in short, more renunciation than you desire;
and this infectious virtue is avoided.  Hence the isolation of
Monseigneur Bienvenu.  We live in the midst of a gloomy society. 
Success; that is the lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope
of corruption.

Be it said in passing, that success is a very hideous thing.  Its false
resemblance to merit deceives men.  For the masses, success has almost
the same profile as supremacy.  Success, that Menaechmus of talent,
has one dupe,--history.  Juvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it. 
In our day, a philosophy which is almost official has entered into
its service, wears the livery of success, and performs the service
of its antechamber.  Succeed:  theory.  Prosperity argues capacity. 
Win in the lottery, and behold! you are a clever man.  He who
triumphs is venerated.  Be born with a silver spoon in your mouth!
everything lies in that.  Be lucky, and you will have all the rest;
be happy, and people will think you great.  Outside of five or six
immense exceptions, which compose the splendor of a century,
contemporary admiration is nothing but short-sightedness. Gilding
is gold.  It does no harm to be the first arrival by pure chance,
so long as you do arrive.  The common herd is an old Narcissus who
adores himself, and who applauds the vulgar herd.  That enormous ability
by virtue of which one is Moses, Aeschylus, Dante, Michael Angelo,
or Napoleon, the multitude awards on the spot, and by acclamation,
to whomsoever attains his object, in whatsoever it may consist. 
Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy:  let a false
Corneille compose Tiridate; let a eunuch come to possess a harem;
let a military Prudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of
an epoch; let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army
of the Sambre-and-Meuse, and construct for himself, out of this
cardboard, sold as leather, four hundred thousand francs of income;
let a pork-packer espouse usury, and cause it to bring forth seven
or eight millions, of which he is the father and of which it is
the mother; let a preacher become a bishop by force of his nasal drawl;
let the steward of a fine family be so rich on retiring from service
that he is made minister of finances,--and men call that Genius,
just as they call the face of Mousqueton Beauty, and the mien
of Claude Majesty.  With the constellations of space they confound
the stars of the abyss which are made in the soft mire of the puddle
by the feet of ducks.




WHAT HE BELIEVED


We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D---- on the score
of orthodoxy.  In the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves
in no mood but respect.  The conscience of the just man should
be accepted on his word.  Moreover, certain natures being given,
we admit the possible development of all beauties of human virtue
in a belief that differs from our own.

What did he think of this dogma, or of that mystery?  These secrets
of the inner tribunal of the conscience are known only to the tomb,
where souls enter naked.  The point on which we are certain is,
that the difficulties of faith never resolved themselves into
hypocrisy in his case.  No decay is possible to the diamond. 
He believed to the extent of his powers.  "Credo in Patrem,"
he often exclaimed.  Moreover, he drew from good works that amount
of satisfaction which suffices to the conscience, and which whispers
to a man, "Thou art with God!"

The point which we consider it our duty to note is, that outside
of and beyond his faith, as it were, the Bishop possessed an excess
of love.  In was in that quarter, quia multum amavit,--because he
loved much--that he was regarded as vulnerable by "serious men,"
"grave persons" and "reasonable people"; favorite locutions of our
sad world where egotism takes its word of command from pedantry. 
What was this excess of love?  It was a serene benevolence
which overflowed men, as we have already pointed out, and which,
on occasion, extended even to things.  He lived without disdain. 
He was indulgent towards God's creation.  Every man, even the best,
has within him a thoughtless harshness which he reserves for animals. 
The Bishop of D---- had none of that harshness, which is peculiar
to many priests, nevertheless.  He did not go as far as the Brahmin,
but he seemed to have weighed this saying of Ecclesiastes:  "Who knoweth
whither the soul of the animal goeth?"  Hideousness of aspect,
deformity of instinct, troubled him not, and did not arouse
his indignation.  He was touched, almost softened by them. 
It seemed as though he went thoughtfully away to seek beyond
the bounds of life which is apparent, the cause, the explanation,
or the excuse for them.  He seemed at times to be asking God to
commute these penalties.  He examined without wrath, and with the
eye of a linguist who is deciphering a palimpsest, that portion
of chaos which still exists in nature.  This revery sometimes
caused him to utter odd sayings.  One morning he was in his garden,
and thought himself alone, but his sister was walking behind him,
unseen by him:  suddenly he paused and gazed at something on the ground;
it was a large, black, hairy, frightful spider.  His sister heard
him say:--

"Poor beast!  It is not its fault!"

Why not mention these almost divinely childish sayings of kindness? 
Puerile they may be; but these sublime puerilities were peculiar
to Saint Francis d'Assisi and of Marcus Aurelius.  One day he
sprained his ankle in his effort to avoid stepping on an ant. 
Thus lived this just man.  Sometimes he fell asleep in his garden,
and then there was nothing more venerable possible.

Monseigneur Bienvenu had formerly been, if the stories anent
his youth, and even in regard to his manhood, were to be believed,
a passionate, and, possibly, a violent man.  His universal suavity
was less an instinct of nature than the result of a grand conviction
which had filtered into his heart through the medium of life,
and had trickled there slowly, thought by thought; for, in a character,
as in a rock, there may exist apertures made by drops of water. 
These hollows are uneffaceable; these formations are indestructible.

In 1815, as we think we have already said, he reached his seventy-fifth
birthday, but he did not appear to be more than sixty.  He was
not tall; he was rather plump; and, in order to combat this tendency,
he was fond of taking long strolls on foot; his step was firm,
and his form was but slightly bent, a detail from which we do not
pretend to draw any conclusion.  Gregory XVI., at the age of eighty,
held himself erect and smiling, which did not prevent him from
being a bad bishop.  Monseigneur Welcome had what the people term
a "fine head," but so amiable was he that they forgot that it was fine.

When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of his charms,
and of which we have already spoken, people felt at their ease with him,
and joy seemed to radiate from his whole person.  His fresh and
ruddy complexion, his very white teeth, all of which he had preserved,
and which were displayed by his smile, gave him that open and easy
air which cause the remark to be made of a man, "He's a good fellow";
