
He implores the expanse, the waves, the seaweed, the reef;
they are deaf.  He beseeches the tempest; the imperturbable tempest
obeys only the infinite.

Around him darkness, fog, solitude, the stormy and nonsentient tumult,
the undefined curling of those wild waters.  In him horror and fatigue. 
Beneath him the depths.  Not a point of support.  He thinks
of the gloomy adventures of the corpse in the limitless shadow. 
The bottomless cold paralyzes him.  His hands contract convulsively;
they close, and grasp nothingness.  Winds, clouds, whirlwinds, gusts,
useless stars!  What is to be done?  The desperate man gives up;
he is weary, he chooses the alternative of death; he resists not;
he lets himself go; he abandons his grip; and then he tosses forevermore
in the lugubrious dreary depths of engulfment.

Oh, implacable march of human societies!  Oh, losses of men and of
souls on the way!  Ocean into which falls all that the law lets slip! 
Disastrous absence of help!  Oh, moral death!

The sea is the inexorable social night into which the penal laws
fling their condemned.  The sea is the immensity of wretchedness.

The soul, going down stream in this gulf, may become a corpse. 
Who shall resuscitate it?




NEW TROUBLES


When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys,
when Jean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words, Thou art free!
the moment seemed improbable and unprecedented; a ray of vivid light,
a ray of the true light of the living, suddenly penetrated within him. 
But it was not long before this ray paled.  Jean Valjean had been
dazzled by the idea of liberty.  He had believed in a new life. 
He very speedily perceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow
passport is provided.

And this was encompassed with much bitterness.  He had calculated
that his earnings, during his sojourn in the galleys, ought to amount
to a hundred and seventy-one francs.  It is but just to add that he had
forgotten to include in his calculations the forced repose of Sundays
and festival days during nineteen years, which entailed a diminution
of about eighty francs.  At all events, his hoard had been reduced
by various local levies to the sum of one hundred and nine francs
fifteen sous, which had been counted out to him on his departure. 
He had understood nothing of this, and had thought himself wronged. 
Let us say the word--robbed.

On the day following his liberation, he saw, at Grasse, in front
of an orange-flower distillery, some men engaged in unloading bales. 
He offered his services.  Business was pressing; they were accepted. 
He set to work.  He was intelligent, robust, adroit; he did his best;
the master seemed pleased.  While he was at work, a gendarme passed,
observed him, and demanded his papers.  It was necessary to show him
the yellow passport.  That done, Jean Valjean resumed his labor. 
A little while before he had questioned one of the workmen
as to the amount which they earned each day at this occupation;
he had been told thirty sous.  When evening arrived, as he was
forced to set out again on the following day, he presented himself
to the owner of the distillery and requested to be paid.  The owner
did not utter a word, but handed him fifteen sous.  He objected. 
He was told, "That is enough for thee."  He persisted.  The master
looked him straight between the eyes, and said to him "Beware of
the prison."

There, again, he considered that he had been robbed.

Society, the State, by diminishing his hoard, had robbed him wholesale. 
Now it was the individual who was robbing him at retail.

Liberation is not deliverance.  One gets free from the galleys,
but not from the sentence.

That is what happened to him at Grasse.  We have seen in what manner
he was received at D----




THE MAN AROUSED


As the Cathedral clock struck two in the morning, Jean Valjean awoke.

What woke him was that his bed was too good.  It was nearly twenty
years since he had slept in a bed, and, although he had not undressed,
the sensation was too novel not to disturb his slumbers.

He had slept more than four hours.  His fatigue had passed away. 
He was accustomed not to devote many hours to repose.

He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him;
then he closed them again, with the intention of going to sleep
once more.

When many varied sensations have agitated the day, when various matters
preoccupy the mind, one falls asleep once, but not a second time. 
Sleep comes more easily than it returns.  This is what happened
to Jean Valjean.  He could not get to sleep again, and he fell
to thinking.

He was at one of those moments when the thoughts which one has in one's
mind are troubled.  There was a sort of dark confusion in his brain. 
His memories of the olden time and of the immediate present floated
there pell-mell and mingled confusedly, losing their proper forms,
becoming disproportionately large, then suddenly disappearing,
as in a muddy and perturbed pool.  Many thoughts occurred to him;
but there was one which kept constantly presenting itself afresh,
and which drove away all others.  We will mention this thought at once: 
he had observed the six sets of silver forks and spoons and the ladle
which Madame Magloire had placed on the table.

Those six sets of silver haunted him.--They were there.--A few
paces distant.--Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach
the one in which he then was, the old servant-woman had been in the
act of placing them in a little cupboard near the head of the bed.--
He had taken careful note of this cupboard.--On the right, as you
entered from the dining-room.--They were solid.--And old silver.--
From the ladle one could get at least two hundred francs.--
Double what he had earned in nineteen years.--It is true that he
would have earned more if "the administration had not robbed him."

His mind wavered for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there
was certainly mingled some struggle.  Three o'clock struck.  He opened
his eyes again, drew himself up abruptly into a sitting posture,
stretched out his arm and felt of his knapsack, which he had thrown
down on a corner of the alcove; then he hung his legs over the edge
of the bed, and placed his feet on the floor, and thus found himself,
almost without knowing it, seated on his bed.

He remained for a time thoughtfully in this attitude, which would
have been suggestive of something sinister for any one who had seen
him thus in the dark, the only person awake in that house where all
were sleeping.  All of a sudden he stooped down, removed his shoes
and placed them softly on the mat beside the bed; then he resumed
his thoughtful attitude, and became motionless once more.

Throughout this hideous meditation, the thoughts which we have above
indicated moved incessantly through his brain; entered, withdrew,
re-entered, and in a manner oppressed him; and then he thought, also,
without knowing why, and with the mechanical persistence of revery,
of a convict named Brevet, whom he had known in the galleys, and whose
trousers had been upheld by a single suspender of knitted cotton. 
The checkered pattern of that suspender recurred incessantly to his mind.

He remained in this situation, and would have so remained indefinitely,
even until daybreak, had not the clock struck one--the half
or quarter hour.  It seemed to him that that stroke said to him,
"Come on!"

He rose to his feet, hesitated still another moment, and listened;
all was quiet in the house; then he walked straight ahead,
with short steps, to the window, of which he caught a glimpse. 
The night was not very dark; there was a full moon, across which
coursed large clouds driven by the wind.  This created, outdoors,
alternate shadow and gleams of light, eclipses, then bright openings
of the clouds; and indoors a sort of twilight.  This twilight,
sufficient to enable a person to see his way, intermittent on
account of the clouds, resembled the sort of livid light which falls
through an air-hole in a cellar, before which the passersby come
and go.  On arriving at the window, Jean Valjean examined it. 
It had no grating; it opened in the garden and was fastened,
according to the fashion of the country, only by a small pin. 
He opened it; but as a rush of cold and piercing air penetrated
the room abruptly, he closed it again immediately.  He scrutinized
the garden with that attentive gaze which studies rather than looks. 
The garden was enclosed by a tolerably low white wall, easy to climb. 
Far away, at the extremity, he perceived tops of trees, spaced at
regular intervals, which indicated that the wall separated the garden
from an avenue or lane planted with trees.

Having taken this survey, he executed a movement like that of a man
who has made up his mind, strode to his alcove, grasped his knapsack,
opened it, fumbled in it, pulled out of it something which he placed
on the bed, put his shoes into one of his pockets, shut the whole
thing up again, threw the knapsack on his shoulders, put on his cap,
drew the visor down over his eyes, felt for his cudgel, went and
placed it in the angle of the window; then returned to the bed,
and resolutely seized the object which he had deposited there. 
It resembled a short bar of iron, pointed like a pike at one end. 
It would have been difficult to distinguish in that darkness
for what employment that bit of iron could have been designed. 
Perhaps it was a lever; possibly it was a club.

In the daytime it would have been possible to recognize it as nothing
more than a miner's candlestick.  Convicts were, at that period,
sometimes employed in quarrying stone from the lofty hills which
environ Toulon, and it was not rare for them to have miners' tools at
their command.  These miners' candlesticks are of massive iron,
terminated at the lower extremity by a point, by means of which
they are stuck into the rock.

He took the candlestick in his right hand; holding his breath
and trying to deaden the sound of his tread, he directed his
steps to the door of the adjoining room, occupied by the Bishop,
as we already know.

On arriving at this door, he found it ajar.  The Bishop had not
closed it.




WHAT HE DOES


Jean Valjean listened.  Not a sound.

He gave the door a push.

He pushed it gently with the tip of his finger, lightly, with the
furtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering.

The door yielded to this pressure, and made an imperceptible
and silent movement, which enlarged the opening a little.

He waited a moment; then gave the door a second and a bolder push.

It continued to yield in silence.  The opening was now large enough
to allow him to pass.  But near the door there stood a little table,
which formed an embarrassing angle with it, and barred the entrance.

Jean Valjean recognized the difficulty.  It was necessary, at any cost,
to enlarge the aperture still further.

He decided on his course of action, and gave the door a third push,
more energetic than the two preceding.  This time a badly oiled hinge
suddenly emitted amid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry.

Jean Valjean shuddered.  The noise of the hinge rang in his ears
with something of the piercing and formidable sound of the trump
of the Day of Judgment.

In the fantastic exaggerations of the first moment he almost imagined
that that hinge had just become animated, and had suddenly assumed
a terrible life, and that it was barking like a dog to arouse every one,
and warn and to wake those who were asleep.  He halted, shuddering,
bewildered, and fell back from the tips of his toes upon his heels. 
He heard the arteries in his temples beating like two forge hammers,
and it seemed to him that his breath issued from his breast with
the roar of the wind issuing from a cavern.  It seemed impossible
to him that the horrible clamor of that irritated hinge should not
have disturbed the entire household, like the shock of an earthquake;
the door, pushed by him, had taken the alarm, and had shouted;
the old man would rise at once; the two old women would shriek out;
people would come to their assistance; in less than a quarter of an
hour the town would be in an uproar, and the gendarmerie on hand. 
For a moment he thought himself lost.

He remained where he was, petrified like the statue of salt,
not daring to make a movement.  Several minutes elapsed.  The door
had fallen wide open.  He ventured to peep into the next room. 
Nothing had stirred there.  He lent an ear.  Nothing was moving
in the house.  The noise made by the rusty hinge had not awakened
any one.

This first danger was past; but there still reigned a frightful
tumult within him.  Nevertheless, he did not retreat.  Even when he
had thought himself lost, he had not drawn back.  His only thought
now was to finish as soon as possible.  He took a step and entered
the room.

This room was in a state of perfect calm.  Here and there vague
and confused forms were distinguishable, which in the daylight were
papers scattered on a table, open folios, volumes piled upon a stool,
an arm-chair heaped with clothing, a prie-Dieu, and which at that hour
were only shadowy corners and whitish spots.  Jean Valjean advanced
with precaution, taking care not to knock against the furniture. 
He could hear, at the extremity of the room, the even and tranquil
breathing of the sleeping Bishop.

He suddenly came to a halt.  He was near the bed.  He had arrived
there sooner than he had thought for.

Nature sometimes mingles her effects and her spectacles with our
actions with sombre and intelligent appropriateness, as though she
desired to make us reflect.  For the last half-hour a large cloud
had covered the heavens.  At the moment when Jean Valjean paused
in front of the bed, this cloud parted, as though on purpose,
and a ray of light, traversing the long window, suddenly illuminated
the Bishop's pale face.  He was sleeping peacefully.  He lay in
his bed almost completely dressed, on account of the cold of the
Basses-Alps, in a garment of brown wool, which covered his arms to
the wrists.  His head was thrown back on the pillow, in the careless
attitude of repose; his hand, adorned with the pastoral ring,
and whence had fallen so many good deeds and so many holy actions,
was hanging over the edge of the bed.  His whole face was illumined
with a vague expression of satisfaction, of hope, and of felicity. 
It was more than a smile, and almost a radiance.  He bore upon his
brow the indescribable reflection of a light which was invisible. 
The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a mysterious heaven.

A reflection of that heaven rested on the Bishop.

It was, at the same time, a luminous transparency, for that heaven
was within him.  That heaven was his conscience.

At the moment when the ray of moonlight superposed itself, so to speak,
upon that inward radiance, the sleeping Bishop seemed as in a glory. 
It remained, however, gentle and veiled in an ineffable half-light. That
moon in the sky, that slumbering nature, that garden without a quiver,
that house which was so calm, the hour, the moment, the silence,
added some solemn and unspeakable quality to the venerable repose
of this man, and enveloped in a sort of serene and majestic aureole
that white hair, those closed eyes, that face in which all was hope
and all was confidence, that head of an old man, and that slumber
of an infant.

There was something almost divine in this man, who was thus august,
without being himself aware of it.

Jean Valjean was in the shadow, and stood motionless, with his iron
candlestick in his hand, frightened by this luminous old man. 
Never had he beheld anything like this.  This confidence terrified him. 
The moral world has no grander spectacle than this:  a troubled and
uneasy conscience, which has arrived on the brink of an evil action,
contemplating the slumber of the just.

That slumber in that isolation, and with a neighbor like himself,
had about it something sublime, of which he was vaguely but
imperiously conscious.

No one could have told what was passing within him, not even himself. 
In order to attempt to form an idea of it, it is necessary to think
of the most violent of things in the presence of the most gentle. 
Even on his visage it would have been impossible to distinguish
anything with certainty.  It was a sort of haggard astonishment. 
He gazed at it, and that was all.  But what was his thought? 
It would have been impossible to divine it.  What was evident was,
that he was touched and astounded.  But what was the nature of this
emotion?

His eye never quitted the old man.  The only thing which was clearly to be
inferred from his attitude and his physiognomy was a strange indecision. 
One would have said that he was hesitating between the two abysses,--
the one in which one loses one's self and that in which one saves
one's self.  He seemed prepared to crush that skull or to kiss that hand.

At the expiration of a few minutes his left arm rose slowly towards
his brow, and he took off his cap; then his arm fell back with the
same deliberation, and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more,
his cap in his left hand, his club in his right hand, his hair
bristling all over his savage head.

The Bishop continued to sleep in profound peace beneath that
terrifying gaze.

The gleam of the moon rendered confusedly visible the crucifix
over the chimney-piece, which seemed to be extending its arms
to both of them, with a benediction for one and pardon for the other.

Suddenly Jean Valjean replaced his cap on his brow; then stepped
rapidly past the bed, without glancing at the Bishop, straight to
the cupboard, which he saw near the head; he raised his iron
candlestick as though to force the lock; the key was there;
he opened it; the first thing which presented itself to him was
the basket of silverware; he seized it, traversed the chamber with
long strides, without taking any precautions and without troubling
himself about the noise, gained the door, re-entered the oratory,
opened the window, seized his cudgel, bestrode the window-sill
of the ground-floor, put the silver into his knapsack, threw away
the basket, crossed the garden, leaped over the wall like a tiger,
and fled.




THE BISHOP WORKS


The next morning at sunrise Monseigneur Bienvenu was strolling
in his garden.  Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation.

"Monseigneur, Monseigneur!" she exclaimed, "does your Grace know
where the basket of silver is?"

"Yes," replied the Bishop.

"Jesus the Lord be blessed!" she resumed; "I did not know what had
become of it."

The Bishop had just picked up the basket in a flower-bed. He
presented it to Madame Magloire.

"Here it is."

"Well!" said she.  "Nothing in it!  And the silver?"

"Ah," returned the Bishop, "so it is the silver which troubles you? 
I don't know where it is."

"Great, good God!  It is stolen!  That man who was here last night
has stolen it."

In a twinkling, with all the vivacity of an alert old woman,
Madame Magloire had rushed to the oratory, entered the alcove,
and returned to the Bishop.  The Bishop had just bent down,
and was sighing as he examined a plant of cochlearia des Guillons,
which the basket had broken as it fell across the bed.  He rose up
at Madame Magloire's cry.

"Monseigneur, the man is gone!  The silver has been stolen!"

As she uttered this exclamation, her eyes fell upon a corner of
the garden, where traces of the wall having been scaled were visible. 
The coping of the wall had been torn away.

"Stay! yonder is the way he went.  He jumped over into
Cochefilet Lane.  Ah, the abomination!  He has stolen our silver!"

The Bishop remained silent for a moment; then he raised his grave eyes,
and said gently to Madame Magloire:--

"And, in the first place, was that silver ours?"

Madame Magloire was speechless.  Another silence ensued; then the
Bishop went on:--

"Madame Magloire, I have for a long time detained that silver wrongfully. 
It belonged to the poor.  Who was that man?  A poor man, evidently."

"Alas!  Jesus!" returned Madame Magloire.  "It is not for my sake,
nor for Mademoiselle's. It makes no difference to us.  But it is
for the sake of Monseigneur.  What is Monseigneur to eat with now?"

The Bishop gazed at her with an air of amazement.

"Ah, come!  Are there no such things as pewter forks and spoons?"

Madame Magloire shrugged her shoulders.

"Pewter has an odor."

"Iron forks and spoons, then."

Madame Magloire made an expressive grimace.

"Iron has a taste."

"Very well," said the Bishop; "wooden ones then."

A few moments later he was breakfasting at the very table at which Jean
Valjean had sat on the previous evening.  As he ate his breakfast,
Monseigneur Welcome remarked gayly to his sister, who said nothing,
and to Madame Magloire, who was grumbling under her breath,
that one really does not need either fork or spoon, even of wood,
in order to dip a bit of bread in a cup of milk.

"A pretty idea, truly," said Madame Magloire to herself, as she
went and came, "to take in a man like that! and to lodge him close
to one's self!  And how fortunate that he did nothing but steal! 
Ah, mon Dieu! it makes one shudder to think of it!"

As the brother and sister were about to rise from the table,
there came a knock at the door.

"Come in," said the Bishop.

The door opened.  A singular and violent group made its appearance
on the threshold.  Three men were holding a fourth man by the collar. 
The three men were gendarmes; the other was Jean Valjean.

A brigadier of gendarmes, who seemed to be in command of the group,
was standing near the door.  He entered and advanced to the Bishop,
making a military salute.

"Monseigneur--" said he.

At this word, Jean Valjean, who was dejected and seemed overwhelmed,
raised his head with an air of stupefaction.

"Monseigneur!" he murmured.  "So he is not the cure?"

"Silence!" said the gendarme.  "He is Monseigneur the Bishop."

In the meantime, Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced as quickly
as his great age permitted.

"Ah! here you are!" he exclaimed, looking at Jean Valjean. 
"I am glad to see you.  Well, but how is this?  I gave you
the candlesticks too, which are of silver like the rest,
and for which you can certainly get two hundred francs. 
Why did you not carry them away with your forks and spoons?"

Jean Valjean opened his eyes wide, and stared at the venerable Bishop
with an expression which no human tongue can render any account of.

"Monseigneur," said the brigadier of gendarmes, "so what this man
said is true, then?  We came across him.  He was walking like a man
who is running away.  We stopped him to look into the matter. 
He had this silver--"

"And he told you," interposed the Bishop with a smile, "that it
had been given to him by a kind old fellow of a priest with whom
he had passed the night?  I see how the matter stands.  And you
have brought him back here?  It is a mistake."
