"that's not it.  Did you hear?  I am a galley-slave; a convict. 
I come from the galleys."  He drew from his pocket a large sheet
of yellow paper, which he unfolded.  "Here's my passport.  Yellow,
as you see.  This serves to expel me from every place where I go. 
Will you read it?  I know how to read.  I learned in the galleys. 
There is a school there for those who choose to learn.  Hold, this is
what they put on this passport:  `Jean Valjean, discharged convict,
native of'--that is nothing to you--`has been nineteen years
in the galleys:  five years for house-breaking and burglary;
fourteen years for having attempted to escape on four occasions. 
He is a very dangerous man.'  There!  Every one has cast me out. 
Are you willing to receive me?  Is this an inn?  Will you give me
something to eat and a bed?  Have you a stable?"

"Madame Magloire," said the Bishop, "you will put white sheets on
the bed in the alcove."  We have already explained the character
of the two women's obedience.

Madame Magloire retired to execute these orders.

The Bishop turned to the man.

"Sit down, sir, and warm yourself.  We are going to sup
in a few moments, and your bed will be prepared while you are supping."

At this point the man suddenly comprehended.  The expression
of his face, up to that time sombre and harsh, bore the imprint
of stupefaction, of doubt, of joy, and became extraordinary. 
He began stammering like a crazy man:--

"Really?  What!  You will keep me?  You do not drive me forth? 
A convict!  You call me sir!  You do not address me as thou? 
`Get out of here, you dog!' is what people always say to me.  I felt sure
that you would expel me, so I told you at once who I am.  Oh, what a
good woman that was who directed me hither!  I am going to sup! 
A bed with a mattress and sheets, like the rest of the world! a bed! 
It is nineteen years since I have slept in a bed!  You actually do
not want me to go!  You are good people.  Besides, I have money. 
I will pay well.  Pardon me, monsieur the inn-keeper, but what is
your name?  I will pay anything you ask.  You are a fine man. 
You are an inn-keeper, are you not?"

"I am," replied the Bishop, "a priest who lives here."

"A priest!" said the man.  "Oh, what a fine priest!  Then you are
not going to demand any money of me?  You are the cure, are you
not? the cure of this big church?  Well!  I am a fool, truly! 
I had not perceived your skull-cap."

As he spoke, he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner,
replaced his passport in his pocket, and seated himself. 
Mademoiselle Baptistine gazed mildly at him.  He continued:

"You are humane, Monsieur le Cure; you have not scorned me. 
A good priest is a very good thing.  Then you do not require me
to pay?"

"No," said the Bishop; "keep your money.  How much have you? 
Did you not tell me one hundred and nine francs?"

"And fifteen sous," added the man.

"One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous.  And how long did it
take you to earn that?"

"Nineteen years."

"Nineteen years!"

The Bishop sighed deeply.

The man continued:  "I have still the whole of my money. 
In four days I have spent only twenty-five sous, which I earned
by helping unload some wagons at Grasse.  Since you are an abbe,
I will tell you that we had a chaplain in the galleys.  And one day
I saw a bishop there.  Monseigneur is what they call him.  He was
the Bishop of Majore at Marseilles.  He is the cure who rules over
the other cures, you understand.  Pardon me, I say that very badly;
but it is such a far-off thing to me!  You understand what we are! 
He said mass in the middle of the galleys, on an altar.  He had a
pointed thing, made of gold, on his head; it glittered in the bright
light of midday.  We were all ranged in lines on the three sides,
with cannons with lighted matches facing us.  We could not see
very well.  He spoke; but he was too far off, and we did not hear. 
That is what a bishop is like."

While he was speaking, the Bishop had gone and shut the door,
which had remained wide open.

Madame Magloire returned.  She brought a silver fork and spoon,
which she placed on the table.

"Madame Magloire," said the Bishop, "place those things as near
the fire as possible."  And turning to his guest:  "The night wind
is harsh on the Alps.  You must be cold, sir."

Each time that he uttered the word sir, in his voice which was so gently
grave and polished, the man's face lighted up.  Monsieur to a convict
is like a glass of water to one of the shipwrecked of the Medusa. 
Ignominy thirsts for consideration.

"This lamp gives a very bad light," said the Bishop.

Madame Magloire understood him, and went to get the two silver
candlesticks from the chimney-piece in Monseigneur's bed-chamber,
and placed them, lighted, on the table.

"Monsieur le Cure," said the man, "you are good; you do not despise me. 
You receive me into your house.  You light your candles for me. 
Yet I have not concealed from you whence I come and that I am an
unfortunate man."

The Bishop, who was sitting close to him, gently touched his hand. 
"You could not help telling me who you were.  This is not my house;
it is the house of Jesus Christ.  This door does not demand of him
who enters whether he has a name, but whether he has a grief. 
You suffer, you are hungry and thirsty; you are welcome. 
And do not thank me; do not say that I receive you in my house. 
No one is at home here, except the man who needs a refuge. 
I say to you, who are passing by, that you are much more at home
here than I am myself.  Everything here is yours.  What need have I
to know your name?  Besides, before you told me you had one which
I knew."

The man opened his eyes in astonishment.

"Really?  You knew what I was called?"

"Yes," replied the Bishop, "you are called my brother."

"Stop, Monsieur le Cure," exclaimed the man.  "I was very hungry
when I entered here; but you are so good, that I no longer know
what has happened to me."

The Bishop looked at him, and said,--

"You have suffered much?"

"Oh, the red coat, the ball on the ankle, a plank to sleep on,
heat, cold, toil, the convicts, the thrashings, the double
chain for nothing, the cell for one word; even sick and in bed,
still the chain!  Dogs, dogs are happier!  Nineteen years!  I am
forty-six. Now there is the yellow passport.  That is what it is like."

"Yes," resumed the Bishop, "you have come from a very sad place. 
Listen.  There will be more joy in heaven over the tear-bathed face
of a repentant sinner than over the white robes of a hundred just men. 
If you emerge from that sad place with thoughts of hatred and of wrath
against mankind, you are deserving of pity; if you emerge with thoughts
of good-will and of peace, you are more worthy than any one of us."

In the meantime, Madame Magloire had served supper:  soup, made with
water, oil, bread, and salt; a little bacon, a bit of mutton, figs, a
fresh cheese, and a large loaf of rye bread.  She had, of her own accord,
added to the Bishop's ordinary fare a bottle of his old Mauves wine.

The Bishop's face at once assumed that expression of gayety which is
peculiar to hospitable natures.  "To table!" he cried vivaciously. 
As was his custom when a stranger supped with him, he made the man
sit on his right.  Mademoiselle Baptistine, perfectly peaceable
and natural, took her seat at his left.

The Bishop asked a blessing; then helped the soup himself,
according to his custom.  The man began to eat with avidity.

All at once the Bishop said:  "It strikes me there is something
missing on this table."

Madame Magloire had, in fact, only placed the three sets of forks
and spoons which were absolutely necessary.  Now, it was the usage
of the house, when the Bishop had any one to supper, to lay out the
whole six sets of silver on the table-cloth--an innocent ostentation. 
This graceful semblance of luxury was a kind of child's play,
which was full of charm in that gentle and severe household,
which raised poverty into dignity.

Madame Magloire understood the remark, went out without saying a word,
and a moment later the three sets of silver forks and spoons demanded
by the Bishop were glittering upon the cloth, symmetrically arranged
before the three persons seated at the table.




DETAILS CONCERNING THE CHEESE-DAIRIES OF PONTARLIER.


Now, in order to convey an idea of what passed at that table,
we cannot do better than to transcribe here a passage from one
of Mademoiselle Baptistine's letters to Madame Boischevron,
wherein the conversation between the convict and the Bishop
is described with ingenious minuteness.


". . . This man paid no attention to any one.  He ate with the
voracity of a starving man.  However, after supper he said:

"`Monsieur le Cure of the good God, all this is far too good for me;
but I must say that the carters who would not allow me to eat with
them keep a better table than you do.'

"Between ourselves, the remark rather shocked me.  My brother replied:--

"`They are more fatigued than I.'

"`No,' returned the man, `they have more money.  You are poor;
I see that plainly.  You cannot be even a curate.  Are you really
a cure?  Ah, if the good God were but just, you certainly ought
to be a cure!'

"`The good God is more than just,' said my brother.

"A moment later he added:--

"`Monsieur Jean Valjean, is it to Pontarlier that you are going?'

"`With my road marked out for me.'

"I think that is what the man said.  Then he went on:--

"`I must be on my way by daybreak to-morrow. Travelling is hard. 
If the nights are cold, the days are hot.'

"`You are going to a good country,' said my brother.  `During the
Revolution my family was ruined.  I took refuge in Franche-Comte
at first, and there I lived for some time by the toil of my hands. 
My will was good.  I found plenty to occupy me.  One has only to choose. 
There are paper mills, tanneries, distilleries, oil factories,
watch factories on a large scale, steel mills, copper works,
twenty iron foundries at least, four of which, situated at Lods,
at Chatillon, at Audincourt, and at Beure, are tolerably large.'

"I think I am not mistaken in saying that those are the names which
my brother mentioned.  Then he interrupted himself and addressed me:--

"`Have we not some relatives in those parts, my dear sister?'

"I replied,--

"`We did have some; among others, M. de Lucenet, who was captain
of the gates at Pontarlier under the old regime.'

"`Yes,' resumed my brother; `but in '93, one had no longer
any relatives, one had only one's arms.  I worked.  They have,
in the country of Pontarlier, whither you are going, Monsieur Valjean,
a truly patriarchal and truly charming industry, my sister. 
It is their cheese-dairies, which they call fruitieres.'

"Then my brother, while urging the man to eat, explained to him,
with great minuteness, what these fruitieres of Pontarlier were;
that they were divided into two classes:  the big barns which belong
to the rich, and where there are forty or fifty cows which produce
from seven to eight thousand cheeses each summer, and the associated
fruitieres, which belong to the poor; these are the peasants of
mid-mountain, who hold their cows in common, and share the proceeds. 
`They engage the services of a cheese-maker, whom they call the grurin;
the grurin receives the milk of the associates three times a day,
and marks the quantity on a double tally.  It is towards the end
of April that the work of the cheese-dairies begins; it is towards
the middle of June that the cheese-makers drive their cows to
the mountains.'

"The man recovered his animation as he ate.  My brother made him
drink that good Mauves wine, which he does not drink himself,
because he says that wine is expensive.  My brother imparted all these
details with that easy gayety of his with which you are acquainted,
interspersing his words with graceful attentions to me.  He recurred
frequently to that comfortable trade of grurin, as though he wished
the man to understand, without advising him directly and harshly,
that this would afford him a refuge.  One thing struck me. 
This man was what I have told you.  Well, neither during supper,
nor during the entire evening, did my brother utter a single word,
with the exception of a few words about Jesus when he entered,
which could remind the man of what he was, nor of what my brother was. 
To all appearances, it was an occasion for preaching him a little sermon,
and of impressing the Bishop on the convict, so that a mark of the
passage might remain behind.  This might have appeared to any one else
who had this, unfortunate man in his hands to afford a chance to nourish
his soul as well as his body, and to bestow upon him some reproach,
seasoned with moralizing and advice, or a little commiseration,
with an exhortation to conduct himself better in the future. 
My brother did not even ask him from what country he came,
nor what was his history.  For in his history there is a fault,
and my brother seemed to avoid everything which could remind him
of it.  To such a point did he carry it, that at one time, when my
brother was speaking of the mountaineers of Pontarlier, who exercise
a gentle labor near heaven, and who, he added, are happy because
they are innocent, he stopped short, fearing lest in this remark
there might have escaped him something which might wound the man. 
By dint of reflection, I think I have comprehended what was passing
in my brother's heart.  He was thinking, no doubt, that this man,
whose name is Jean Valjean, had his misfortune only too vividly
present in his mind; that the best thing was to divert him from it,
and to make him believe, if only momentarily, that he was a person
like any other, by treating him just in his ordinary way.  Is not
this indeed, to understand charity well?  Is there not, dear Madame,
something truly evangelical in this delicacy which abstains from sermon,
from moralizing, from allusions? and is not the truest pity,
when a man has a sore point, not to touch it at all?  It has seemed
to me that this might have been my brother's private thought. 
In any case, what I can say is that, if he entertained all these ideas,
he gave no sign of them; from beginning to end, even to me he
was the same as he is every evening, and he supped with this Jean
Valjean with the same air and in the same manner in which he would
have supped with M. Gedeon le Provost, or with the curate of
the parish.

"Towards the end, when he had reached the figs, there came a knock
at the door.  It was Mother Gerbaud, with her little one in her arms. 
My brother kissed the child on the brow, and borrowed fifteen sous
which I had about me to give to Mother Gerbaud.  The man was not paying
much heed to anything then.  He was no longer talking, and he seemed
very much fatigued.  After poor old Gerbaud had taken her departure,
my brother said grace; then he turned to the man and said to him,
`You must be in great need of your bed.'  Madame Magloire cleared
the table very promptly.  I understood that we must retire,
in order to allow this traveller to go to sleep, and we both went
up stairs.  Nevertheless, I sent Madame Magloire down a moment later,
to carry to the man's bed a goat skin from the Black Forest,
which was in my room.  The nights are frigid, and that keeps one warm. 
It is a pity that this skin is old; all the hair is falling out. 
My brother bought it while he was in Germany, at Tottlingen, near the
sources of the Danube, as well as the little ivory-handled knife
which I use at table.

"Madame Magloire returned immediately.  We said our prayers in the
drawing-room, where we hang up the linen, and then we each retired
to our own chambers, without saying a word to each other."




TRANQUILLITY


After bidding his sister good night, Monseigneur Bienvenu took
one of the two silver candlesticks from the table, handed the
other to his guest, and said to him,--

"Monsieur, I will conduct you to your room."

The man followed him.

As might have been observed from what has been said above,
the house was so arranged that in order to pass into the oratory
where the alcove was situated, or to get out of it, it was necessary
to traverse the Bishop's bedroom.

At the moment when he was crossing this apartment, Madame Magloire was
putting away the silverware in the cupboard near the head of the bed. 
This was her last care every evening before she went to bed.

The Bishop installed his guest in the alcove.  A fresh white bed had
been prepared there.  The man set the candle down on a small table.

"Well," said the Bishop, "may you pass a good night.  To-morrow morning,
before you set out, you shall drink a cup of warm milk from our cows."

"Thanks, Monsieur l'Abbe," said the man.

Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace, when all
of a sudden, and without transition, he made a strange movement,
which would have frozen the two sainted women with horror,
had they witnessed it.  Even at this day it is difficult for us
to explain what inspired him at that moment.  Did he intend to
convey a warning or to throw out a menace?  Was he simply obeying
a sort of instinctive impulse which was obscure even to himself? 
He turned abruptly to the old man, folded his arms, and bending
upon his host a savage gaze, he exclaimed in a hoarse voice:--

"Ah! really!  You lodge me in your house, close to yourself like this?"

He broke off, and added with a laugh in which there lurked
something monstrous:--

"Have you really reflected well?  How do you know that I have not
been an assassin?"

The Bishop replied:--

"That is the concern of the good God."

Then gravely, and moving his lips like one who is praying or talking
to himself, he raised two fingers of his right hand and bestowed
his benediction on the man, who did not bow, and without turning
his head or looking behind him, he returned to his bedroom.

When the alcove was in use, a large serge curtain drawn from
wall to wall concealed the altar.  The Bishop knelt before this
curtain as he passed and said a brief prayer.  A moment later he
was in his garden, walking, meditating, contemplating, his heart
and soul wholly absorbed in those grand and mysterious things
which God shows at night to the eyes which remain open.

As for the man, he was actually so fatigued that he did not even profit
by the nice white sheets.  Snuffing out his candle with his nostrils
after the manner of convicts, he dropped, all dressed as he was,
upon the bed, where he immediately fell into a profound sleep.

Midnight struck as the Bishop returned from his garden to his apartment.

A few minutes later all were asleep in the little house.




JEAN VALJEAN


Towards the middle of the night Jean Valjean woke.

Jean Valjean came from a poor peasant family of Brie.  He had not learned
to read in his childhood.  When he reached man's estate, he became
a tree-pruner at Faverolles.  His mother was named Jeanne Mathieu;
his father was called Jean Valjean or Vlajean, probably a sobriquet,
and a contraction of viola Jean, "here's Jean."

Jean Valjean was of that thoughtful but not gloomy disposition
which constitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures. 
On the whole, however, there was something decidedly sluggish
and insignificant about Jean Valjean in appearance, at least. 
He had lost his father and mother at a very early age.  His mother
had died of a milk fever, which had not been properly attended to. 
His father, a tree-pruner, like himself, had been killed by a fall
from a tree.  All that remained to Jean Valjean was a sister older
than himself,--a widow with seven children, boys and girls. 
This sister had brought up Jean Valjean, and so long as she had a
husband she lodged and fed her young brother.

The husband died.  The eldest of the seven children was eight
years old.  The youngest, one.

Jean Valjean had just attained his twenty-fifth year.  He took
the father's place, and, in his turn, supported the sister who had
brought him up.  This was done simply as a duty and even a little
churlishly on the part of Jean Valjean.  Thus his youth had been spent
in rude and ill-paid toil.  He had never known a "kind woman friend"
in his native parts.  He had not had the time to fall in love.

He returned at night weary, and ate his broth without uttering a word. 
His sister, mother Jeanne, often took the best part of his repast
from his bowl while he was eating,--a bit of meat, a slice of bacon,
the heart of the cabbage,--to give to one of her children. 
As he went on eating, with his head bent over the table and almost
into his soup, his long hair falling about his bowl and concealing
his eyes, he had the air of perceiving nothing and allowing it. 
There was at Faverolles, not far from the Valjean thatched cottage,
on the other side of the lane, a farmer's wife named Marie-Claude;
the Valjean children, habitually famished, sometimes went to borrow
from Marie-Claude a pint of milk, in their mother's name, which they
drank behind a hedge or in some alley corner, snatching the jug
from each other so hastily that the little girls spilled it on
their aprons and down their necks.  If their mother had known of
this marauding, she would have punished the delinquents severely. 
Jean Valjean gruffly and grumblingly paid Marie-Claude for the
pint of milk behind their mother's back, and the children were
not punished.

In pruning season he earned eighteen sous a day; then he hired out
as a hay-maker, as laborer, as neat-herd on a farm, as a drudge. 
He did whatever he could.  His sister worked also but what could she
do with seven little children?  It was a sad group enveloped in misery,
which was being gradually annihilated.  A very hard winter came. 
Jean had no work.  The family had no bread.  No bread literally. 
Seven children!

One Sunday evening, Maubert Isabeau, the baker on the Church
Square at Faverolles, was preparing to go to bed, when he heard
a violent blow on the grated front of his shop.  He arrived in time
to see an arm passed through a hole made by a blow from a fist,
through the grating and the glass.  The arm seized a loaf of bread
and carried it off.  Isabeau ran out in haste; the robber fled at
the full speed of his legs.  Isabeau ran after him and stopped him. 
The thief had flung away the loaf, but his arm was still bleeding. 
It was Jean Valjean.

This took place in 1795.  Jean Valjean was taken before the tribunals
of the time for theft and breaking and entering an inhabited
house at night.  He had a gun which he used better than any one
else in the world, he was a bit of a poacher, and this injured
his case.  There exists a legitimate prejudice against poachers. 
The poacher, like the smuggler, smacks too strongly of the brigand. 
Nevertheless, we will remark cursorily, there is still an abyss
between these races of men and the hideous assassin of the towns. 
The poacher lives in the forest, the smuggler lives in the mountains
or on the sea.  The cities make ferocious men because they make
corrupt men.  The mountain, the sea, the forest, make savage men;
they develop the fierce side, but often without destroying the
humane side.

Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty.  The terms of the Code
were explicit.  There occur formidable hours in our civilization;
there are moments when the penal laws decree a shipwreck. 
What an ominous minute is that in which society draws back and
consummates the irreparable abandonment of a sentient being! 
Jean Valjean was condemned to five years in the galleys.

On the 22d of April, 1796, the victory of Montenotte, won by the
general-in-chief of the army of Italy, whom the message of the
Directory to the Five Hundred, of the 2d of Floreal, year IV., calls
