who had thrown his brother's head into the fountain of the
Flower-Market.

They had begun to feel anxious at the Naval Department, on account
of the lack of news from that fatal frigate, The Medusa, which was
destined to cover Chaumareix with infamy and Gericault with glory. 
Colonel Selves was going to Egypt to become Soliman-Pasha. The palace
of Thermes, in the Rue de La Harpe, served as a shop for a cooper. 
On the platform of the octagonal tower of the Hotel de Cluny,
the little shed of boards, which had served as an observatory to Messier,
the naval astronomer under Louis XVI., was still to be seen. 
The Duchesse de Duras read to three or four friends her unpublished
Ourika, in her boudoir furnished by X. in sky-blue satin.  The N's
were scratched off the Louvre.  The bridge of Austerlitz had abdicated,
and was entitled the bridge of the King's Garden [du Jardin du Roi],
a double enigma, which disguised the bridge of Austerlitz and the
Jardin des Plantes at one stroke.  Louis XVIII., much preoccupied
while annotating Horace with the corner of his finger-nail, heroes
who have become emperors, and makers of wooden shoes who have
become dauphins, had two anxieties,--Napoleon and Mathurin Bruneau. 
The French Academy had given for its prize subject, The Happiness
procured through Study.  M. Bellart was officially eloquent. 
In his shadow could be seen germinating that future advocate-general
of Broe, dedicated to the sarcasms of Paul-Louis Courier. 
There was a false Chateaubriand, named Marchangy, in the interim,
until there should be a false Marchangy, named d'Arlincourt.
Claire d'Albe and Malek-Adel were masterpieces; Madame Cottin
was proclaimed the chief writer of the epoch.  The Institute
had the academician, Napoleon Bonaparte, stricken from its list
of members.  A royal ordinance erected Angouleme into a naval school;
for the Duc d'Angouleme, being lord high admiral, it was evident
that the city of Angouleme had all the qualities of a seaport;
otherwise the monarchical principle would have received a wound. 
In the Council of Ministers the question was agitated whether
vignettes representing slack-rope performances, which adorned
Franconi's advertising posters, and which attracted throngs of
street urchins, should be tolerated.  M. Paer, the author of Agnese,
a good sort of fellow, with a square face and a wart on his cheek,
directed the little private concerts of the Marquise de Sasenaye
in the Rue Ville l'Eveque. All the young girls were singing the
Hermit of Saint-Avelle, with words by Edmond Geraud.  The Yellow
Dwarf was transferred into Mirror.  The Cafe Lemblin stood up for
the Emperor, against the Cafe Valois, which upheld the Bourbons. 
The Duc de Berri, already surveyed from the shadow by Louvel,
had just been married to a princess of Sicily.  Madame de Stael had
died a year previously.  The body-guard hissed Mademoiselle Mars. 
The grand newspapers were all very small.  Their form was restricted,
but their liberty was great.  The Constitutionnel was constitutional. 
La Minerve called Chateaubriand Chateaubriant.  That t made the good
middle-class people laugh heartily at the expense of the great writer. 
In journals which sold themselves, prostituted journalists,
insulted the exiles of 1815.  David had no longer any talent,
Arnault had no longer any wit, Carnot was no longer honest, Soult had
won no battles; it is true that Napoleon had no longer any genius. 
No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sent to an exile by post
very rarely reached him, as the police made it their religious
duty to intercept them.  This is no new fact; Descartes complained
of it in his exile.  Now David, having, in a Belgian publication,
shown some displeasure at not receiving letters which had been
written to him, it struck the royalist journals as amusing;
and they derided the prescribed man well on this occasion. 
What separated two men more than an abyss was to say, the regicides,
or to say the voters; to say the enemies, or to say the allies;
to say Napoleon, or to say Buonaparte.  All sensible people were
agreed that the era of revolution had been closed forever by King
Louis XVIII., surnamed "The Immortal Author of the Charter." 
On the platform of the Pont-Neuf, the word Redivivus was carved
on the pedestal that awaited the statue of Henry IV.  M. Piet,
in the Rue Therese, No. 4, was making the rough draft of his privy
assembly to consolidate the monarchy.  The leaders of the Right
said at grave conjunctures, "We must write to Bacot."  MM.  Canuel,
O'Mahoney, and De Chappedelaine were preparing the sketch,
to some extent with Monsieur's approval, of what was to become
later on "The Conspiracy of the Bord de l'Eau"--of the waterside. 
L'Epingle Noire was already plotting in his own quarter. 
Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff.  M. Decazes, who was
liberal to a degree, reigned.  Chateaubriand stood every morning at
his window at No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique, clad in footed trousers,
and slippers, with a madras kerchief knotted over his gray hair,
with his eyes fixed on a mirror, a complete set of dentist's instruments
spread out before him, cleaning his teeth, which were charming,
while he dictated The Monarchy according to the Charter to M. Pilorge,
his secretary.  Criticism, assuming an authoritative tone,
preferred Lafon to Talma.  M. de Feletez signed himself A.;
M. Hoffmann signed himself Z. Charles Nodier wrote Therese Aubert. 
Divorce was abolished.  Lyceums called themselves colleges. 
The collegians, decorated on the collar with a golden fleur-de-lys,
fought each other apropos of the King of Rome.  The counter-police
of the chateau had denounced to her Royal Highness Madame, the portrait,
everywhere exhibited, of M. the Duc d'Orleans, who made a better
appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general of hussars than
M. the Duc de Berri, in his uniform of colonel-general of dragoons--
a serious inconvenience.  The city of Paris was having the dome
of the Invalides regilded at its own expense.  Serious men asked
themselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such or such an occasion;
M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points from M. Clausel
de Coussergues; M. de Salaberry was not satisfied.  The comedian Picard,
who belonged to the Academy, which the comedian Moliere had not been
able to do, had The Two Philiberts played at the Odeon, upon whose
pediment the removal of the letters still allowed THEATRE OF THE
EMPRESS to be plainly read.  People took part for or against Cugnet
de Montarlot.  Fabvier was factious; Bavoux was revolutionary. 
The Liberal, Pelicier, published an edition of Voltaire, with the
following title:  Works of Voltaire, of the French Academy. 
"That will attract purchasers," said the ingenious editor.  The general
opinion was that M. Charles Loyson would be the genius of the century;
envy was beginning to gnaw at him--a sign of glory; and this verse was
composed on him:--


     "Even when Loyson steals, one feels that he has paws."


As Cardinal Fesch refused to resign, M. de Pins, Archbishop of Amasie,
administered the diocese of Lyons.  The quarrel over the valley
of Dappes was begun between Switzerland and France by a memoir
from Captain, afterwards General Dufour.  Saint-Simon, ignored,
was erecting his sublime dream.  There was a celebrated Fourier
at the Academy of Science, whom posterity has forgotten; and in
some garret an obscure Fourier, whom the future will recall. 
Lord Byron was beginning to make his mark; a note to a poem
by Millevoye introduced him to France in these terms:  a certain
Lord Baron.  David d'Angers was trying to work in marble.  The Abbe
Caron was speaking, in terms of praise, to a private gathering of
seminarists in the blind alley of Feuillantines, of an unknown priest,
named Felicite-Robert, who, at a latter date, became Lamennais. 
A thing which smoked and clattered on the Seine with the noise of
a swimming dog went and came beneath the windows of the Tuileries,
from the Pont Royal to the Pont Louis XV.; it was a piece of mechanism
which was not good for much; a sort of plaything, the idle dream
of a dream-ridden inventor; an utopia--a steamboat.  The Parisians
stared indifferently at this useless thing.  M. de Vaublanc,
the reformer of the Institute by a coup d'etat, the distinguished
author of numerous academicians, ordinances, and batches of members,
after having created them, could not succeed in becoming one himself. 
The Faubourg Saint-Germain and the pavilion de Marsan wished to
have M. Delaveau for prefect of police, on account of his piety. 
Dupuytren and Recamier entered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre
of the School of Medicine, and threatened each other with their fists
on the subject of the divinity of Jesus Christ.  Cuvier, with one
eye on Genesis and the other on nature, tried to please bigoted
reaction by reconciling fossils with texts and by making mastodons
flatter Moses.

M. Francois de Neufchateau, the praiseworthy cultivator of the memory
of Parmentier, made a thousand efforts to have pomme de terre
[potato] pronounced parmentiere, and succeeded therein not at all. 
The Abbe Gregoire, ex-bishop, ex-conventionary, ex-senator, had passed,
in the royalist polemics, to the state of "Infamous Gregoire." 
The locution of which we have made use--passed to the state of--has been
condemned as a neologism by M. Royer Collard.  Under the third arch
of the Pont de Jena, the new stone with which, the two years previously,
the mining aperture made by Blucher to blow up the bridge had been
stopped up, was still recognizable on account of its whiteness. 
Justice summoned to its bar a man who, on seeing the Comte d'Artois
enter Notre Dame, had said aloud:  "Sapristi!  I regret the time
when I saw Bonaparte and Talma enter the Bel Sauvage, arm in arm." 
A seditious utterance.  Six months in prison.  Traitors showed
themselves unbuttoned; men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve
of battle made no secret of their recompense, and strutted immodestly
in the light of day, in the cynicism of riches and dignities;
deserters from Ligny and Quatre-Bras, in the brazenness of their
well-paid turpitude, exhibited their devotion to the monarchy in the
most barefaced manner.

This is what floats up confusedly, pell-mell, for the year 1817,
and is now forgotten.  History neglects nearly all these particulars,
and cannot do otherwise; the infinity would overwhelm it. 
Nevertheless, these details, which are wrongly called trivial,--
there are no trivial facts in humanity, nor little leaves
in vegetation,--are useful.  It is of the physiognomy of the
years that the physiognomy of the centuries is composed. 
In this year of 1817 four young Parisians arranged "a fine farce."




A DOUBLE QUARTETTE


These Parisians came, one from Toulouse, another from Limoges,
the third from Cahors, and the fourth from Montauban; but they
were students; and when one says student, one says Parisian: 
to study in Paris is to be born in Paris.

These young men were insignificant; every one has seen such faces;
four specimens of humanity taken at random; neither good nor bad,
neither wise nor ignorant, neither geniuses nor fools; handsome,
with that charming April which is called twenty years.  They were
four Oscars; for, at that epoch, Arthurs did not yet exist. 
Burn for him the perfumes of Araby! exclaimed romance. 
Oscar advances.  Oscar, I shall behold him!  People had just
emerged from Ossian; elegance was Scandinavian and Caledonian;
the pure English style was only to prevail later, and the first
of the Arthurs, Wellington, had but just won the battle of Waterloo.

These Oscars bore the names, one of Felix Tholomyes, of Toulouse;
the second, Listolier, of Cahors; the next, Fameuil, of Limoges;
the last, Blachevelle, of Montauban.  Naturally, each of them
had his mistress.  Blachevelle loved Favourite, so named because
she had been in England; Listolier adored Dahlia, who had taken
for her nickname the name of a flower; Fameuil idolized Zephine,
an abridgment of Josephine; Tholomyes had Fantine, called the Blonde,
because of her beautiful, sunny hair.

Favourite, Dahlia, Zephine, and Fantine were four ravishing young women,
perfumed and radiant, still a little like working-women, and not yet
entirely divorced from their needles; somewhat disturbed by intrigues,
but still retaining on their faces something of the serenity
of toil, and in their souls that flower of honesty which survives
the first fall in woman.  One of the four was called the young,
because she was the youngest of them, and one was called the old;
the old one was twenty-three. Not to conceal anything, the three
first were more experienced, more heedless, and more emancipated
into the tumult of life than Fantine the Blonde, who was still
in her first illusions.

Dahlia, Zephine, and especially Favourite, could not have said as much. 
There had already been more than one episode in their romance,
though hardly begun; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph
in the first chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second,
and Gustave in the third.  Poverty and coquetry are two fatal counsellors;
one scolds and the other flatters, and the beautiful daughters
of the people have both of them whispering in their ear, each on
its own side.  These badly guarded souls listen.  Hence the falls
which they accomplish, and the stones which are thrown at them. 
They are overwhelmed with splendor of all that is immaculate
and inaccessible.  Alas! what if the Jungfrau were hungry?

Favourite having been in England, was admired by Dahlia and Zephine. 
She had had an establishment of her own very early in life. 
Her father was an old unmarried professor of mathematics, a brutal man
and a braggart, who went out to give lessons in spite of his age. 
This professor, when he was a young man, had one day seen a chambermaid's
gown catch on a fender; he had fallen in love in consequence of
this accident.  The result had been Favourite.  She met her father
from time to time, and he bowed to her.  One morning an old woman
with the air of a devotee, had entered her apartments, and had said
to her, "You do not know me, Mamemoiselle?"  "No." "I am your mother." 
Then the old woman opened the sideboard, and ate and drank,
had a mattress which she owned brought in, and installed herself. 
This cross and pious old mother never spoke to Favourite, remained hours
without uttering a word, breakfasted, dined, and supped for four,
and went down to the porter's quarters for company, where she spoke
ill of her daughter.

It was having rosy nails that were too pretty which had drawn
Dahlia to Listolier, to others perhaps, to idleness.  How could
she make such nails work?  She who wishes to remain virtuous must
not have pity on her hands.  As for Zephine, she had conquered
Fameuil by her roguish and caressing little way of saying "Yes, sir."

The young men were comrades; the young girls were friends. 
Such loves are always accompanied by such friendships.

Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things; the proof
of this is that, after making all due allowances for these
little irregular households, Favourite, Zephine, and Dahlia
were philosophical young women, while Fantine was a good girl.

Good! some one will exclaim; and Tholomyes?  Solomon would reply
that love forms a part of wisdom.  We will confine ourselves
to saying that the love of Fantine was a first love, a sole love,
a faithful love.

She alone, of all the four, was not called "thou" by a single
one of them.

Fantine was one of those beings who blossom, so to speak,
from the dregs of the people.  Though she had emerged from the most
unfathomable depths of social shadow, she bore on her brow the sign
of the anonymous and the unknown.  She was born at M. sur M. Of
what parents?  Who can say?  She had never known father or mother. 
She was called Fantine.  Why Fantine?  She had never borne any
other name.  At the epoch of her birth the Directory still existed. 
She had no family name; she had no family; no baptismal name;
the Church no longer existed.  She bore the name which pleased the first
random passer-by, who had encountered her, when a very small child,
running bare-legged in the street.  She received the name as she
received the water from the clouds upon her brow when it rained. 
She was called little Fantine.  No one knew more than that.  This human
creature had entered life in just this way.  At the age of ten,
Fantine quitted the town and went to service with some farmers in
the neighborhood.  At fifteen she came to Paris "to seek her fortune." 
Fantine was beautiful, and remained pure as long as she could. 
She was a lovely blonde, with fine teeth.  She had gold and pearls
for her dowry; but her gold was on her head, and her pearls were in
her mouth.

She worked for her living; then, still for the sake of her living,--
for the heart, also, has its hunger,--she loved.

She loved Tholomyes.

An amour for him; passion for her.  The streets of the Latin quarter,
filled with throngs of students and grisettes, saw the beginning
of their dream.  Fantine had long evaded Tholomyes in the mazes
of the hill of the Pantheon, where so many adventurers twine
and untwine, but in such a way as constantly to encounter him again. 
There is a way of avoiding which resembles seeking.  In short,
the eclogue took place.

Blachevelle, Listolier, and Fameuil formed a sort of group
of which Tholomyes was the head.  It was he who possessed the wit.

Tholomyes was the antique old student; he was rich; he had an income
of four thousand francs; four thousand francs! a splendid scandal
on Mount Sainte-Genevieve. Tholomyes was a fast man of thirty,
and badly preserved.  He was wrinkled and toothless, and he had
the beginning of a bald spot, of which he himself said with sadness,
the skull at thirty, the knee at forty.  His digestion was mediocre,
and he had been attacked by a watering in one eye.  But in proportion
as his youth disappeared, gayety was kindled; he replaced his teeth
with buffooneries, his hair with mirth, his health with irony, his weeping
eye laughed incessantly.  He was dilapidated but still in flower. 
His youth, which was packing up for departure long before its time,
beat a retreat in good order, bursting with laughter, and no one saw
anything but fire.  He had had a piece rejected at the Vaudeville. 
He made a few verses now and then.  In addition to this he doubted
everything to the last degree, which is a vast force in the eyes
of the weak.  Being thus ironical and bald, he was the leader. 
Iron is an English word.  Is it possible that irony is derived
from it?

One day Tholomyes took the three others aside, with the gesture
of an oracle, and said to them:--

"Fantine, Dahlia, Zephine, and Favourite have been teasing us
for nearly a year to give them a surprise.  We have promised them
solemnly that we would.  They are forever talking about it to us, to me
in particular, just as the old women in Naples cry to Saint Januarius,
`Faccia gialluta, fa o miracolo, Yellow face, perform thy miracle,'
so our beauties say to me incessantly, `Tholomyes, when will you bring
forth your surprise?'  At the same time our parents keep writing to us. 
Pressure on both sides.  The moment has arrived, it seems to me;
let us discuss the question."

Thereupon, Tholomyes lowered his voice and articulated something
so mirthful, that a vast and enthusiastic grin broke out upon the four
mouths simultaneously, and Blachevelle exclaimed, "That is an idea."

A smoky tap-room presented itself; they entered, and the remainder
of their confidential colloquy was lost in shadow.

The result of these shades was a dazzling pleasure party which took
place on the following Sunday, the four young men inviting the four
young girls.




FOUR AND FOUR


It is hard nowadays to picture to one's self what a pleasure-trip of
students and grisettes to the country was like, forty-five years ago. 
The suburbs of Paris are no longer the same; the physiognomy of what
may be called circumparisian life has changed completely in the
last half-century; where there was the cuckoo, there is the railway car;
where there was a tender-boat, there is now the steamboat; people speak
of Fecamp nowadays as they spoke of Saint-Cloud in those days. 
The Paris of 1862 is a city which has France for its outskirts.

The four couples conscientiously went through with all the country
follies possible at that time.  The vacation was beginning, and it
was a warm, bright, summer day.  On the preceding day, Favourite,
the only one who knew how to write, had written the following
to Tholomyes in the name of the four:  "It is a good hour to emerge
from happiness."  That is why they rose at five o'clock in the morning. 
Then they went to Saint-Cloud by the coach, looked at the dry cascade
and exclaimed, "This must be very beautiful when there is water!" 
They breakfasted at the Tete-Noir, where Castaing had not yet been;
they treated themselves to a game of ring-throwing under the
quincunx of trees of the grand fountain; they ascended Diogenes'
lantern, they gambled for macaroons at the roulette establishment
of the Pont de Sevres, picked bouquets at Pateaux, bought reed-pipes
at Neuilly, ate apple tarts everywhere, and were perfectly happy.

The young girls rustled and chatted like warblers escaped from
their cage.  It was a perfect delirium.  From time to time they
bestowed little taps on the young men.  Matutinal intoxication of life!
adorable years! the wings of the dragonfly quiver.  Oh, whoever you
may be, do you not remember?  Have you rambled through the brushwood,
holding aside the branches, on account of the charming head
which is coming on behind you?  Have you slid, laughing, down a
slope all wet with rain, with a beloved woman holding your hand,
and crying, "Ah, my new boots! what a state they are in!"

Let us say at once that that merry obstacle, a shower, was lacking
in the case of this good-humored party, although Favourite had said
as they set out, with a magisterial and maternal tone, "The slugs
are crawling in the paths,--a sign of rain, children."

All four were madly pretty.  A good old classic poet, then famous,
a good fellow who had an Eleonore, M. le Chevalier de Labouisse,
as he strolled that day beneath the chestnut-trees of Saint-Cloud,
saw them pass about ten o'clock in the morning, and exclaimed,
"There is one too many of them," as he thought of the Graces. 
Favourite, Blachevelle's friend, the one aged three and twenty,
the old one, ran on in front under the great green boughs,
jumped the ditches, stalked distractedly over bushes, and presided
over this merry-making with the spirit of a young female faun. 
Zephine and Dahlia, whom chance had made beautiful in such a way
that they set each off when they were together, and completed
each other, never left each other, more from an instinct of coquetry
than from friendship, and clinging to each other, they assumed
English poses; the first keepsakes had just made their appearance,
melancholy was dawning for women, as later on, Byronism dawned for men;
and the hair of the tender sex began to droop dolefully.  Zephine and
Dahlia had their hair dressed in rolls.  Listolier and Fameuil,
who were engaged in discussing their professors, explained to Fantine
the difference that existed between M. Delvincourt and M. Blondeau.

Blachevelle seemed to have been created expressly to carry Favourite's
single-bordered, imitation India shawl of Ternaux's manufacture,
on his arm on Sundays.

Tholomyes followed, dominating the group.  He was very gay, but one felt
the force of government in him; there was dictation in his joviality;
his principal ornament was a pair of trousers of elephant-leg pattern
of nankeen, with straps of braided copper wire; he carried a stout
rattan worth two hundred francs in his hand, and, as he treated
himself to everything, a strange thing called a cigar in his mouth. 
Nothing was sacred to him; he smoked.

"That Tholomyes is astounding!" said the others, with veneration. 
"What trousers!  What energy!"

As for Fantine, she was a joy to behold.  Her splendid teeth had
evidently received an office from God,--laughter.  She preferred
to carry her little hat of sewed straw, with its long white strings,
in her hand rather than on her head.  Her thick blond hair,
which was inclined to wave, and which easily uncoiled, and which it
was necessary to fasten up incessantly, seemed made for the flight
of Galatea under the willows.  Her rosy lips babbled enchantingly. 
The corners of her mouth voluptuously turned up, as in the antique masks
of Erigone, had an air of encouraging the audacious; but her long,
shadowy lashes drooped discreetly over the jollity of the lower
part of the face as though to call a halt.  There was something
indescribably harmonious and striking about her entire dress. 
She wore a gown of mauve barege, little reddish brown buskins,
whose ribbons traced an X on her fine, white, open-worked stockings,
and that sort of muslin spencer, a Marseilles invention, whose name,
canezou, a corruption of the words quinze aout, pronounced after the
fashion of the Canebiere, signifies fine weather, heat, and midday. 
The three others, less timid, as we have already said, wore low-necked
dresses without disguise, which in summer, beneath flower-adorned
hats, are very graceful and enticing; but by the side of these
audacious outfits, blond Fantine's canezou, with its transparencies,
its indiscretion, and its reticence, concealing and displaying
at one and the same time, seemed an alluring godsend of decency,
and the famous Court of Love, presided over by the Vicomtesse de Cette,
with the sea-green eyes, would, perhaps, have awarded the prize for
coquetry to this canezou, in the contest for the prize of modesty. 
The most ingenious is, at times, the wisest.  This does happen.

Brilliant of face, delicate of profile, with eyes of a deep blue,
heavy lids, feet arched and small, wrists and ankles admirably formed,
a white skin which, here and there allowed the azure branching
of the veins to be seen, joy, a cheek that was young and fresh,
the robust throat of the Juno of AEgina, a strong and supple nape
of the neck, shoulders modelled as though by Coustou, with a
voluptuous dimple in the middle, visible through the muslin; a gayety
cooled by dreaminess; sculptural and exquisite--such was Fantine;
and beneath these feminine adornments and these ribbons one could
divine a statue, and in that statue a soul.

Fantine was beautiful, without being too conscious of it. 
Those rare dreamers, mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently
confront everything with perfection, would have caught a glimpse
in this little working-woman, through the transparency of her
Parisian grace, of the ancient sacred euphony.  This daughter of
the shadows was thoroughbred.  She was beautiful in the two ways--
style and rhythm.  Style is the form of the ideal; rhythm is its movement.

We have said that Fantine was joy; she was also modesty.

To an observer who studied her attentively, that which breathed from
her athwart all the intoxication of her age, the season, and her
love affair, was an invincible expression of reserve and modesty. 
She remained a little astonished.  This chaste astonishment
is the shade of difference which separates Psyche from Venus. 
Fantine had the long, white, fine fingers of the vestal virgin who
stirs the ashes of the sacred fire with a golden pin.  Although she
would have refused nothing to Tholomyes, as we shall have more than
ample opportunity to see, her face in repose was supremely virginal;
a sort of serious and almost austere dignity suddenly overwhelmed
her at certain times, and there was nothing more singular and
disturbing than to see gayety become so suddenly extinct there,
and meditation succeed to cheerfulness without any transition state. 
This sudden and sometimes severely accentuated gravity resembled the
disdain of a goddess.  Her brow, her nose, her chin, presented that
equilibrium of outline which is quite distinct from equilibrium
of proportion, and from which harmony of countenance results;
in the very characteristic interval which separates the base of the nose
from the upper lip, she had that imperceptible and charming fold,
a mysterious sign of chastity, which makes Barberousse fall in love
with a Diana found in the treasures of Iconia.

Love is a fault; so be it.  Fantine was innocence floating high
