and to win paradise, which he represented as charming and desirable. 
Among the audience there was a wealthy retired merchant, who was
somewhat of a usurer, named M. Geborand, who had amassed two millions
in the manufacture of coarse cloth, serges, and woollen galloons. 
Never in his whole life had M. Geborand bestowed alms on any poor wretch. 
After the delivery of that sermon, it was observed that he gave a sou
every Sunday to the poor old beggar-women at the door of the cathedral. 
There were six of them to share it.  One day the Bishop caught sight
of him in the act of bestowing this charity, and said to his sister,
with a smile, "There is M. Geborand purchasing paradise for
a sou."

When it was a question of charity, he was not to be rebuffed even
by a refusal, and on such occasions he gave utterance to remarks
which induced reflection.  Once he was begging for the poor in a
drawing-room of the town; there was present the Marquis de Champtercier,
a wealthy and avaricious old man, who contrived to be, at one
and the same time, an ultra-royalist and an ultra-Voltairian. This
variety of man has actually existed.  When the Bishop came to him,
he touched his arm, "You must give me something, M. le Marquis." 
The Marquis turned round and answered dryly, "I have poor people
of my own, Monseigneur."  "Give them to me," replied the Bishop.

One day he preached the following sermon in the cathedral:--


"My very dear brethren, my good friends, there are thirteen hundred
and twenty thousand peasants' dwellings in France which have but
three openings; eighteen hundred and seventeen thousand hovels which
have but two openings, the door and one window; and three hundred
and forty-six thousand cabins besides which have but one opening,
the door.  And this arises from a thing which is called the tax
on doors and windows.  Just put poor families, old women and little
children, in those buildings, and behold the fevers and maladies
which result!  Alas!  God gives air to men; the law sells it to them. 
I do not blame the law, but I bless God.  In the department
of the Isere, in the Var, in the two departments of the Alpes,
the Hautes, and the Basses, the peasants have not even wheelbarrows;
they transport their manure on the backs of men; they have no candles,
and they burn resinous sticks, and bits of rope dipped in pitch. 
That is the state of affairs throughout the whole of the hilly
country of Dauphine.  They make bread for six months at one time;
they bake it with dried cow-dung. In the winter they break this
bread up with an axe, and they soak it for twenty-four hours,
in order to render it eatable.  My brethren, have pity! behold
the suffering on all sides of you!"

Born a Provencal, he easily familiarized himself with the dialect of
the south.  He said, "En be! moussu, ses sage?" as in lower Languedoc;
"Onte anaras passa?" as in the Basses-Alpes; "Puerte un bouen moutu
embe un bouen fromage grase," as in upper Dauphine.  This pleased
the people extremely, and contributed not a little to win him
access to all spirits.  He was perfectly at home in the thatched
cottage and in the mountains.  He understood how to say the grandest
things in the most vulgar of idioms.  As he spoke all tongues,
he entered into all hearts.

Moreover, he was the same towards people of the world and towards
the lower classes.  He condemned nothing in haste and without
taking circumstances into account.  He said, "Examine the road
over which the fault has passed."

Being, as he described himself with a smile, an ex-sinner, he had none
of the asperities of austerity, and he professed, with a good deal
of distinctness, and without the frown of the ferociously virtuous,
a doctrine which may be summed up as follows:--

"Man has upon him his flesh, which is at once his burden
and his temptation.  He drags it with him and yields to it. 
He must watch it, cheek it, repress it, and obey it only at the
last extremity.  There may be some fault even in this obedience;
but the fault thus committed is venial; it is a fall, but a fall
on the knees which may terminate in prayer.

"To be a saint is the exception; to be an upright man is the rule. 
Err, fall, sin if you will, but be upright.

"The least possible sin is the law of man.  No sin at all is the
dream of the angel.  All which is terrestrial is subject to sin. 
Sin is a gravitation."

When he saw everyone exclaiming very loudly, and growing angry
very quickly, "Oh! oh!" he said, with a smile; "to all appearance,
this is a great crime which all the world commits.  These are
hypocrisies which have taken fright, and are in haste to make
protest and to put themselves under shelter."

He was indulgent towards women and poor people, on whom the burden
of human society rest.  He said, "The faults of women, of children,
of the feeble, the indigent, and the ignorant, are the fault
of the husbands, the fathers, the masters, the strong, the rich,
and the wise."

He said, moreover, "Teach those who are ignorant as many things
as possible; society is culpable, in that it does not afford
instruction gratis; it is responsible for the night which it produces. 
This soul is full of shadow; sin is therein committed.  The guilty
one is not the person who has committed the sin, but the person
who has created the shadow."

It will be perceived that he had a peculiar manner of his own
of judging things:  I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel.

One day he heard a criminal case, which was in preparation and on
the point of trial, discussed in a drawing-room. A wretched man,
being at the end of his resources, had coined counterfeit money,
out of love for a woman, and for the child which he had had by her. 
Counterfeiting was still punishable with death at that epoch. 
The woman had been arrested in the act of passing the first false
piece made by the man.  She was held, but there were no proofs
except against her.  She alone could accuse her lover, and destroy
him by her confession.  She denied; they insisted.  She persisted in
her denial.  Thereupon an idea occurred to the attorney for the crown. 
He invented an infidelity on the part of the lover, and succeeded,
by means of fragments of letters cunningly presented, in persuading
the unfortunate woman that she had a rival, and that the man was
deceiving her.  Thereupon, exasperated by jealousy, she denounced
her lover, confessed all, proved all.

The man was ruined.  He was shortly to be tried at Aix with
his accomplice.  They were relating the matter, and each one was
expressing enthusiasm over the cleverness of the magistrate. 
By bringing jealousy into play, he had caused the truth to burst
forth in wrath, he had educed the justice of revenge.  The Bishop
listened to all this in silence.  When they had finished, he inquired,--

"Where are this man and woman to be tried?"

"At the Court of Assizes."

He went on, "And where will the advocate of the crown be tried?"

A tragic event occurred at D---- A man was condemned to death
for murder.  He was a wretched fellow, not exactly educated,
not exactly ignorant, who had been a mountebank at fairs, and a writer
for the public.  The town took a great interest in the trial. 
On the eve of the day fixed for the execution of the condemned man,
the chaplain of the prison fell ill.  A priest was needed to attend
the criminal in his last moments.  They sent for the cure. 
It seems that he refused to come, saying, "That is no affair
of mine.  I have nothing to do with that unpleasant task, and with
that mountebank:  I, too, am ill; and besides, it is not my place." 
This reply was reported to the Bishop, who said, "Monsieur le Cure
is right:  it is not his place; it is mine."

He went instantly to the prison, descended to the cell of the
"mountebank," called him by name, took him by the hand, and spoke to him. 
He passed the entire day with him, forgetful of food and sleep,
praying to God for the soul of the condemned man, and praying the
condemned man for his own.  He told him the best truths, which are
also the most simple.  He was father, brother, friend; he was bishop
only to bless.  He taught him everything, encouraged and consoled him. 
The man was on the point of dying in despair.  Death was an abyss to him. 
As he stood trembling on its mournful brink, he recoiled with horror. 
He was not sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent. 
His condemnation, which had been a profound shock, had, in a manner,
broken through, here and there, that wall which separates us
from the mystery of things, and which we call life.  He gazed
incessantly beyond this world through these fatal breaches,
and beheld only darkness.  The Bishop made him see light.

On the following day, when they came to fetch the unhappy wretch,
the Bishop was still there.  He followed him, and exhibited himself
to the eyes of the crowd in his purple camail and with his episcopal
cross upon his neck, side by side with the criminal bound with cords.

He mounted the tumbril with him, he mounted the scaffold with him. 
The sufferer, who had been so gloomy and cast down on the preceding day,
was radiant.  He felt that his soul was reconciled, and he hoped
in God.  The Bishop embraced him, and at the moment when the knife
was about to fall, he said to him:  "God raises from the dead him
whom man slays; he whom his brothers have rejected finds his Father
once more.  Pray, believe, enter into life:  the Father is there." 
When he descended from the scaffold, there was something in his look
which made the people draw aside to let him pass.  They did not know
which was most worthy of admiration, his pallor or his serenity. 
On his return to the humble dwelling, which he designated,
with a smile, as his palace, he said to his sister, "I have just
officiated pontifically."

Since the most sublime things are often those which are the
least understood, there were people in the town who said,
when commenting on this conduct of the Bishop, "It is affectation."

This, however, was a remark which was confined to the drawing-rooms.
The populace, which perceives no jest in holy deeds, was touched,
and admired him.

As for the Bishop, it was a shock to him to have beheld the guillotine,
and it was a long time before he recovered from it.

In fact, when the scaffold is there, all erected and prepared,
it has something about it which produces hallucination. 
One may feel a certain indifference to the death penalty,
one may refrain from pronouncing upon it, from saying yes or no,
so long as one has not seen a guillotine with one's own eyes: 
but if one encounters one of them, the shock is violent;
one is forced to decide, and to take part for or against. 
Some admire it, like de Maistre; others execrate it, like Beccaria. 
The guillotine is the concretion of the law; it is called vindicte;
it is not neutral, and it does not permit you to remain neutral. 
He who sees it shivers with the most mysterious of shivers. 
All social problems erect their interrogation point around
this chopping-knife. The scaffold is a vision.  The scaffold
is not a piece of carpentry; the scaffold is not a machine;
the scaffold is not an inert bit of mechanism constructed of wood,
iron and cords.

It seems as though it were a being, possessed of I know not what
sombre initiative; one would say that this piece of carpenter's
work saw, that this machine heard, that this mechanism understood,
that this wood, this iron, and these cords were possessed of will. 
In the frightful meditation into which its presence casts the soul
the scaffold appears in terrible guise, and as though taking part in
what is going on.  The scaffold is the accomplice of the executioner;
it devours, it eats flesh, it drinks blood; the scaffold is a sort
of monster fabricated by the judge and the carpenter, a spectre
which seems to live with a horrible vitality composed of all the death
which it has inflicted.

Therefore, the impression was terrible and profound; on the day
following the execution, and on many succeeding days, the Bishop
appeared to be crushed.  The almost violent serenity of the
funereal moment had disappeared; the phantom of social justice
tormented him.  He, who generally returned from all his deeds
with a radiant satisfaction, seemed to be reproaching himself. 
At times he talked to himself, and stammered lugubrious monologues
in a low voice.  This is one which his sister overheard one evening
and preserved:  "I did not think that it was so monstrous. 
It is wrong to become absorbed in the divine law to such a degree
as not to perceive human law.  Death belongs to God alone. 
By what right do men touch that unknown thing?"

In course of time these impressions weakened and probably vanished. 
Nevertheless, it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoided
passing the place of execution.

M. Myriel could be summoned at any hour to the bedside of the sick
and dying.  He did not ignore the fact that therein lay his greatest
duty and his greatest labor.  Widowed and orphaned families had
no need to summon him; he came of his own accord.  He understood
how to sit down and hold his peace for long hours beside the man
who had lost the wife of his love, of the mother who had lost
her child.  As he knew the moment for silence he knew also the moment
for speech.  Oh, admirable consoler!  He sought not to efface sorrow
by forgetfulness, but to magnify and dignify it by hope.  He said:--

"Have a care of the manner in which you turn towards the dead. 
Think not of that which perishes.  Gaze steadily.  You will perceive
the living light of your well-beloved dead in the depths of heaven." 
He knew that faith is wholesome.  He sought to counsel and calm
the despairing man, by pointing out to him the resigned man,
and to transform the grief which gazes upon a grave by showing him
the grief which fixes its gaze upon a star.





MONSEIGNEUR BIENVENU MADE HIS CASSOCKS LAST TOO LONG


The private life of M. Myriel was filled with the same thoughts
as his public life.  The voluntary poverty in which the Bishop
of D---- lived, would have been a solemn and charming sight
for any one who could have viewed it close at hand.

Like all old men, and like the majority of thinkers, he slept little. 
This brief slumber was profound.  In the morning he meditated for an hour,
then he said his mass, either at the cathedral or in his own house. 
His mass said, he broke his fast on rye bread dipped in the milk
of his own cows.  Then he set to work.

A Bishop is a very busy man:  he must every day receive the
secretary of the bishopric, who is generally a canon, and nearly
every day his vicars-general. He has congregations to reprove,
privileges to grant, a whole ecclesiastical library to examine,--
prayer-books, diocesan catechisms, books of hours, etc.,--charges
to write, sermons to authorize, cures and mayors to reconcile,
a clerical correspondence, an administrative correspondence;
on one side the State, on the other the Holy See; and a thousand
matters of business.

What time was left to him, after these thousand details of business,
and his offices and his breviary, he bestowed first on the necessitous,
the sick, and the afflicted; the time which was left to him from
the afflicted, the sick, and the necessitous, he devoted to work. 
Sometimes he dug in his garden; again, he read or wrote.  He had
but one word for both these kinds of toil; he called them gardening. 
"The mind is a garden," said he.

Towards mid-day, when the weather was fine, he went forth and took
a stroll in the country or in town, often entering lowly dwellings. 
He was seen walking alone, buried in his own thoughts, his eyes
cast down, supporting himself on his long cane, clad in his wadded
purple garment of silk, which was very warm, wearing purple stockings
inside his coarse shoes, and surmounted by a flat hat which allowed
three golden tassels of large bullion to droop from its three points.

It was a perfect festival wherever he appeared.  One would have said
that his presence had something warming and luminous about it. 
The children and the old people came out to the doorsteps for the Bishop
as for the sun.  He bestowed his blessing, and they blessed him. 
They pointed out his house to any one who was in need of anything.

Here and there he halted, accosted the little boys and girls,
and smiled upon the mothers.  He visited the poor so long as he
had any money; when he no longer had any, he visited the rich.

As he made his cassocks last a long while, and did not wish to
have it noticed, he never went out in the town without his wadded
purple cloak.  This inconvenienced him somewhat in summer.

On his return, he dined.  The dinner resembled his breakfast.

At half-past eight in the evening he supped with his sister,
Madame Magloire standing behind them and serving them at table. 
Nothing could be more frugal than this repast.  If, however, the Bishop
had one of his cures to supper, Madame Magloire took advantage
of the opportunity to serve Monseigneur with some excellent fish
from the lake, or with some fine game from the mountains.  Every cure
furnished the pretext for a good meal:  the Bishop did not interfere. 
With that exception, his ordinary diet consisted only of vegetables
boiled in water, and oil soup.  Thus it was said in the town,
when the Bishop does not indulge in the cheer of a cure, he indulges
in the cheer of a trappist.

After supper he conversed for half an hour with Mademoiselle Baptistine
and Madame Magloire; then he retired to his own room and set to writing,
sometimes on loose sheets, and again on the margin of some folio. 
He was a man of letters and rather learned.  He left behind him
five or six very curious manuscripts; among others, a dissertation
on this verse in Genesis, In the beginning, the spirit of God
floated upon the waters.  With this verse he compares three texts: 
the Arabic verse which says, The winds of God blew; Flavius Josephus
who says, A wind from above was precipitated upon the earth;
and finally, the Chaldaic paraphrase of Onkelos, which renders it,
A wind coming from God blew upon the face of the waters. 
In another dissertation, he examines the theological works of Hugo,
Bishop of Ptolemais, great-grand-uncle to the writer of this book,
and establishes the fact, that to this bishop must be attributed
the divers little works published during the last century, under the
pseudonym of Barleycourt.

Sometimes, in the midst of his reading, no matter what the book
might be which he had in his hand, he would suddenly fall into
a profound meditation, whence he only emerged to write a few
lines on the pages of the volume itself.  These lines have often
no connection whatever with the book which contains them.  We now
have under our eyes a note written by him on the margin of a quarto
entitled Correspondence of Lord Germain with Generals Clinton,
Cornwallis, and the Admirals on the American station.  Versailles,
Poincot, book-seller; and Paris, Pissot, bookseller, Quai des Augustins.

Here is the note:--

"Oh, you who are!

"Ecclesiastes calls you the All-powerful; the Maccabees call you
the Creator; the Epistle to the Ephesians calls you liberty;
Baruch calls you Immensity; the Psalms call you Wisdom and Truth;
John calls you Light; the Books of Kings call you Lord; Exodus calls
you Providence; Leviticus, Sanctity; Esdras, Justice; the creation
calls you God; man calls you Father; but Solomon calls you Compassion,
and that is the most beautiful of all your names."

Toward nine o'clock in the evening the two women retired and betook
themselves to their chambers on the first floor, leaving him alone
until morning on the ground floor.

It is necessary that we should, in this place, give an exact idea
of the dwelling of the Bishop of D----




WHO GUARDED HIS HOUSE FOR HIM


The house in which he lived consisted, as we have said, of a ground floor,
and one story above; three rooms on the ground floor, three chambers
on the first, and an attic above.  Behind the house was a garden,
a quarter of an acre in extent.  The two women occupied the first floor;
the Bishop was lodged below.  The first room, opening on the street,
served him as dining-room, the second was his bedroom, and the
third his oratory.  There was no exit possible from this oratory,
except by passing through the bedroom, nor from the bedroom,
without passing through the dining-room. At the end of the suite,
in the oratory, there was a detached alcove with a bed, for use
in cases of hospitality.  The Bishop offered this bed to country
curates whom business or the requirements of their parishes brought
to D----

The pharmacy of the hospital, a small building which had been added
to the house, and abutted on the garden, had been transformed into
a kitchen and cellar.  In addition to this, there was in the garden
a stable, which had formerly been the kitchen of the hospital,
and in which the Bishop kept two cows.  No matter what the quantity
of milk they gave, he invariably sent half of it every morning
to the sick people in the hospital.  "I am paying my tithes,"
he said.

His bedroom was tolerably large, and rather difficult to warm
in bad weather.  As wood is extremely dear at D----, he hit upon
the idea of having a compartment of boards constructed in the
cow-shed. Here he passed his evenings during seasons of severe cold: 
he called it his winter salon.

In this winter salon, as in the dining-room, there was no other furniture
than a square table in white wood, and four straw-seated chairs. 
In addition to this the dining-room was ornamented with an
antique sideboard, painted pink, in water colors.  Out of a similar
sideboard, properly draped with white napery and imitation lace,
the Bishop had constructed the altar which decorated his oratory.

His wealthy penitents and the sainted women of D---- had more than
once assessed themselves to raise the money for a new altar for
Monseigneur's oratory; on each occasion he had taken the money and
had given it to the poor.  "The most beautiful of altars," he said,
"is the soul of an unhappy creature consoled and thanking God."

In his oratory there were two straw prie-Dieu, and there was
an arm-chair, also in straw, in his bedroom.  When, by chance,
he received seven or eight persons at one time, the prefect,
or the general, or the staff of the regiment in garrison, or several
pupils from the little seminary, the chairs had to be fetched from
the winter salon in the stable, the prie-Dieu from the oratory,
and the arm-chair from the bedroom:  in this way as many as eleven
chairs could be collected for the visitors.  A room was dismantled
for each new guest.

It sometimes happened that there were twelve in the party;
the Bishop then relieved the embarrassment of the situation by
standing in front of the chimney if it was winter, or by strolling
in the garden if it was summer.

There was still another chair in the detached alcove, but the straw
was half gone from it, and it had but three legs, so that it was of
service only when propped against the wall.  Mademoiselle Baptistine
had also in her own room a very large easy-chair of wood, which had
formerly been gilded, and which was covered with flowered pekin;
but they had been obliged to hoist this bergere up to the first story
through the window, as the staircase was too narrow; it could not,
therefore, be reckoned among the possibilities in the way of furniture.

Mademoiselle Baptistine's ambition had been to be able to purchase
a set of drawing-room furniture in yellow Utrecht velvet,
stamped with a rose pattern, and with mahogany in swan's neck style,
with a sofa.  But this would have cost five hundred francs at least,
and in view of the fact that she had only been able to lay by forty-two
francs and ten sous for this purpose in the course of five years,
she had ended by renouncing the idea.  However, who is there who has
attained his ideal?

Nothing is more easy to present to the imagination than the Bishop's
bedchamber.  A glazed door opened on the garden; opposite this was
the bed,--a hospital bed of iron, with a canopy of green serge; in the
shadow of the bed, behind a curtain, were the utensils of the toilet,
which still betrayed the elegant habits of the man of the world: 
there were two doors, one near the chimney, opening into the oratory;
the other near the bookcase, opening into the dining-room. The bookcase
was a large cupboard with glass doors filled with books; the chimney
was of wood painted to represent marble, and habitually without fire. 
In the chimney stood a pair of firedogs of iron, ornamented above
with two garlanded vases, and flutings which had formerly been
silvered with silver leaf, which was a sort of episcopal luxury;
above the chimney-piece hung a crucifix of copper, with the silver
worn off, fixed on a background of threadbare velvet in a wooden
frame from which the gilding had fallen; near the glass door
a large table with an inkstand, loaded with a confusion of papers
and with huge volumes; before the table an arm-chair of straw;
in front of the bed a prie-Dieu, borrowed from the oratory.

Two portraits in oval frames were fastened to the wall on each side
of the bed.  Small gilt inscriptions on the plain surface of the cloth
at the side of these figures indicated that the portraits represented,
one the Abbe of Chaliot, bishop of Saint Claude; the other, the Abbe
Tourteau, vicar-general of Agde, abbe of Grand-Champ, order of Citeaux,
diocese of Chartres.  When the Bishop succeeded to this apartment,
after the hospital patients, he had found these portraits there,
and had left them.  They were priests, and probably donors--two reasons
for respecting them.  All that he knew about these two persons was,
that they had been appointed by the king, the one to his bishopric,
the other to his benefice, on the same day, the 27th of April,
1785.  Madame Magloire having taken the pictures down to dust,
the Bishop had discovered these particulars written in whitish
ink on a little square of paper, yellowed by time, and attached
to the back of the portrait of the Abbe of Grand-Champ with four wafers.

At his window he had an antique curtain of a coarse woollen stuff,
which finally became so old, that, in order to avoid the expense
of a new one, Madame Magloire was forced to take a large seam
in the very middle of it.  This seam took the form of a cross. 
The Bishop often called attention to it:  "How delightful that is!"
he said.

All the rooms in the house, without exception, those on the ground
floor as well as those on the first floor, were white-washed,
which is a fashion in barracks and hospitals.

