and of an old man, "He is a fine man."  That, it will be recalled,
was the effect which he produced upon Napoleon.  On the first encounter,
and to one who saw him for the first time, he was nothing, in fact,
but a fine man.  But if one remained near him for a few hours,
and beheld him in the least degree pensive, the fine man became
gradually transfigured, and took on some imposing quality,
I know not what; his broad and serious brow, rendered august
by his white locks, became august also by virtue of meditation;
majesty radiated from his goodness, though his goodness ceased not
to be radiant; one experienced something of the emotion which one
would feel on beholding a smiling angel slowly unfold his wings,
without ceasing to smile.  Respect, an unutterable respect,
penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your heart, and one felt
that one had before him one of those strong, thoroughly tried,
and indulgent souls where thought is so grand that it can no longer
be anything but gentle.

As we have seen, prayer, the celebration of the offices of religion,
alms-giving, the consolation of the afflicted, the cultivation
of a bit of land, fraternity, frugality, hospitality, renunciation,
confidence, study, work, filled every day of his life.  Filled is
exactly the word; certainly the Bishop's day was quite full to the brim,
of good words and good deeds.  Nevertheless, it was not complete
if cold or rainy weather prevented his passing an hour or two in his
garden before going to bed, and after the two women had retired. 
It seemed to be a sort of rite with him, to prepare himself for
slumber by meditation in the presence of the grand spectacles of the
nocturnal heavens.  Sometimes, if the two old women were not asleep,
they heard him pacing slowly along the walks at a very advanced
hour of the night.  He was there alone, communing with himself,
peaceful, adoring, comparing the serenity of his heart with the
serenity of the ether, moved amid the darkness by the visible
splendor of the constellations and the invisible splendor of God,
opening his heart to the thoughts which fall from the Unknown. 
At such moments, while he offered his heart at the hour when
nocturnal flowers offer their perfume, illuminated like a lamp amid
the starry night, as he poured himself out in ecstasy in the midst
of the universal radiance of creation, he could not have told himself,
probably, what was passing in his spirit; he felt something take
its flight from him, and something descend into him.  Mysterious
exchange of the abysses of the soul with the abysses of the universe!

He thought of the grandeur and presence of God; of the future eternity,
that strange mystery; of the eternity past, a mystery still
more strange; of all the infinities, which pierced their way into
all his senses, beneath his eyes; and, without seeking to comprehend
the incomprehensible, he gazed upon it.  He did not study God;
he was dazzled by him.  He considered those magnificent conjunctions
of atoms, which communicate aspects to matter, reveal forces by
verifying them, create individualities in unity, proportions in extent,
the innumerable in the infinite, and, through light, produce beauty. 
These conjunctions are formed and dissolved incessantly;
hence life and death.

He seated himself on a wooden bench, with his back against a
decrepit vine; he gazed at the stars, past the puny and stunted
silhouettes of his fruit-trees. This quarter of an acre,
so poorly planted, so encumbered with mean buildings and sheds,
was dear to him, and satisfied his wants.

What more was needed by this old man, who divided the leisure
of his life, where there was so little leisure, between gardening
in the daytime and contemplation at night?  Was not this narrow
enclosure, with the heavens for a ceiling, sufficient to enable
him to adore God in his most divine works, in turn?  Does not this
comprehend all, in fact? and what is there left to desire beyond it? 
A little garden in which to walk, and immensity in which to dream. 
At one's feet that which can be cultivated and plucked; over head
that which one can study and meditate upon:  some flowers on earth,
and all the stars in the sky.




WHAT HE THOUGHT


One last word.

Since this sort of details might, particularly at the present moment,
and to use an expression now in fashion, give to the Bishop of D----
a certain "pantheistical" physiognomy, and induce the belief,
either to his credit or discredit, that he entertained one of
those personal philosophies which are peculiar to our century,
which sometimes spring up in solitary spirits, and there take on a form
and grow until they usurp the place of religion, we insist upon it,
that not one of those persons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would
have thought himself authorized to think anything of the sort. 
That which enlightened this man was his heart.  His wisdom was made
of the light which comes from there.

No systems; many works.  Abstruse speculations contain vertigo; no,
there is nothing to indicate that he risked his mind in apocalypses. 
The apostle may be daring, but the bishop must be timid.  He would
probably have felt a scruple at sounding too far in advance certain
problems which are, in a manner, reserved for terrible great minds. 
There is a sacred horror beneath the porches of the enigma;
those gloomy openings stand yawning there, but something
tells you, you, a passer-by in life, that you must not enter. 
Woe to him who penetrates thither!

Geniuses in the impenetrable depths of abstraction and pure
speculation, situated, so to speak, above all dogmas, propose their
ideas to God.  Their prayer audaciously offers discussion. 
Their adoration interrogates.  This is direct religion, which is
full of anxiety and responsibility for him who attempts its steep cliffs.

Human meditation has no limits.  At his own risk and peril, it analyzes
and digs deep into its own bedazzlement.  One might almost say,
that by a sort of splendid reaction, it with it dazzles nature;
the mysterious world which surrounds us renders back what it
has received; it is probable that the contemplators are contemplated. 
However that may be, there are on earth men who--are they men?--
perceive distinctly at the verge of the horizons of revery the
heights of the absolute, and who have the terrible vision of the
infinite mountain.  Monseigneur Welcome was one of these men;
Monseigneur Welcome was not a genius.  He would have feared those
sublimities whence some very great men even, like Swedenborg and Pascal,
have slipped into insanity.  Certainly, these powerful reveries
have their moral utility, and by these arduous paths one approaches
to ideal perfection.  As for him, he took the path which shortens,--
the Gospel's.

He did not attempt to impart to his chasuble the folds of Elijah's mantle;
he projected no ray of future upon the dark groundswell of events;
he did not see to condense in flame the light of things; he had
nothing of the prophet and nothing of the magician about him. 
This humble soul loved, and that was all.

That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration
is probable:  but one can no more pray too much than one can
love too much; and if it is a heresy to pray beyond the texts,
Saint Theresa and Saint Jerome would be heretics.

He inclined towards all that groans and all that expiates. 
The universe appeared to him like an immense malady; everywhere he
felt fever, everywhere he heard the sound of suffering, and,
without seeking to solve the enigma, he strove to dress the wound. 
The terrible spectacle of created things developed tenderness in him;
he was occupied only in finding for himself, and in inspiring others
with the best way to compassionate and relieve.  That which exists
was for this good and rare priest a permanent subject of sadness
which sought consolation.

There are men who toil at extracting gold; he toiled at the extraction
of pity.  Universal misery was his mine.  The sadness which reigned
everywhere was but an excuse for unfailing kindness.  Love each other;
he declared this to be complete, desired nothing further, and that was
the whole of his doctrine.  One day, that man who believed himself
to be a "philosopher," the senator who has already been alluded to,
said to the Bishop:  "Just survey the spectacle of the world: 
all war against all; the strongest has the most wit.  Your love
each other is nonsense."--"Well," replied Monseigneur Welcome,
without contesting the point, "if it is nonsense, the soul should shut
itself up in it, as the pearl in the oyster."  Thus he shut himself up,
he lived there, he was absolutely satisfied with it, leaving on one side
the prodigious questions which attract and terrify, the fathomless
perspectives of abstraction, the precipices of metaphysics--all those
profundities which converge, for the apostle in God, for the atheist
in nothingness; destiny, good and evil, the way of being against being,
the conscience of man, the thoughtful somnambulism of the animal,
the transformation in death, the recapitulation of existences
which the tomb contains, the incomprehensible grafting of successive
loves on the persistent _I_, the essence, the substance, the Nile,
and the Ens, the soul, nature, liberty, necessity; perpendicular problems,
sinister obscurities, where lean the gigantic archangels of the
human mind; formidable abysses, which Lucretius, Manou, Saint Paul,
Dante, contemplate with eyes flashing lightning, which seems
by its steady gaze on the infinite to cause stars to blaze forth there.

Monseigneur Bienvenu was simply a man who took note of the exterior
of mysterious questions without scrutinizing them, and without
troubling his own mind with them, and who cherished in his own
soul a grave respect for darkness.






THE EVENING OF A DAY OF WALKING


Early in the month of October, 1815, about an hour before sunset,
a man who was travelling on foot entered the little town of D----
The few inhabitants who were at their windows or on their thresholds
at the moment stared at this traveller with a sort of uneasiness. 
It was difficult to encounter a wayfarer of more wretched appearance. 
He was a man of medium stature, thickset and robust, in the prime
of life.  He might have been forty-six or forty-eight years old. 
A cap with a drooping leather visor partly concealed his face,
burned and tanned by sun and wind, and dripping with perspiration. 
His shirt of coarse yellow linen, fastened at the neck by a small
silver anchor, permitted a view of his hairy breast:  he had a cravat
twisted into a string; trousers of blue drilling, worn and threadbare,
white on one knee and torn on the other; an old gray, tattered blouse,
patched on one of the elbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on
with twine; a tightly packed soldier knapsack, well buckled and
perfectly new, on his back; an enormous, knotty stick in his hand;
iron-shod shoes on his stockingless feet; a shaved head and a long
beard.

The sweat, the heat, the journey on foot, the dust, added I know
not what sordid quality to this dilapidated whole.  His hair was
closely cut, yet bristling, for it had begun to grow a little,
and did not seem to have been cut for some time.

No one knew him.  He was evidently only a chance passer-by. Whence
came he?  From the south; from the seashore, perhaps, for he made his
entrance into D---- by the same street which, seven months previously,
had witnessed the passage of the Emperor Napoleon on his way
from Cannes to Paris.  This man must have been walking all day. 
He seemed very much fatigued.  Some women of the ancient market town
which is situated below the city had seen him pause beneath the trees
of the boulevard Gassendi, and drink at the fountain which stands
at the end of the promenade.  He must have been very thirsty: 
for the children who followed him saw him stop again for a drink,
two hundred paces further on, at the fountain in the market-place.

On arriving at the corner of the Rue Poichevert, he turned to the left,
and directed his steps toward the town-hall. He entered, then came
out a quarter of an hour later.  A gendarme was seated near the door,
on the stone bench which General Drouot had mounted on the 4th
of March to read to the frightened throng of the inhabitants of D----
the proclamation of the Gulf Juan.  The man pulled off his cap
and humbly saluted the gendarme.

The gendarme, without replying to his salute, stared attentively
at him, followed him for a while with his eyes, and then entered
the town-hall.

There then existed at D---- a fine inn at the sign of the Cross
of Colbas.  This inn had for a landlord a certain Jacquin Labarre,
a man of consideration in the town on account of his relationship
to another Labarre, who kept the inn of the Three Dauphins in Grenoble,
and had served in the Guides.  At the time of the Emperor's landing,
many rumors had circulated throughout the country with regard to this
inn of the Three Dauphins.  It was said that General Bertrand,
disguised as a carter, had made frequent trips thither in the month
of January, and that he had distributed crosses of honor to the
soldiers and handfuls of gold to the citizens.  The truth is,
that when the Emperor entered Grenoble he had refused to install
himself at the hotel of the prefecture; he had thanked the mayor,
saying, "I am going to the house of a brave man of my acquaintance";
and he had betaken himself to the Three Dauphins.  This glory
of the Labarre of the Three Dauphins was reflected upon the Labarre
of the Cross of Colbas, at a distance of five and twenty leagues. 
It was said of him in the town, "That is the cousin of the man
of Grenoble."

The man bent his steps towards this inn, which was the best in
the country-side. He entered the kitchen, which opened on a level
with the street.  All the stoves were lighted; a huge fire blazed
gayly in the fireplace.  The host, who was also the chief cook,
was going from one stew-pan to another, very busily superintending
an excellent dinner designed for the wagoners, whose loud talking,
conversation, and laughter were audible from an adjoining apartment. 
Any one who has travelled knows that there is no one who indulges
in better cheer than wagoners.  A fat marmot, flanked by white
partridges and heather-cocks, was turning on a long spit before
the fire; on the stove, two huge carps from Lake Lauzet and a trout
from Lake Alloz were cooking.

The host, hearing the door open and seeing a newcomer enter,
said, without raising his eyes from his stoves:--

"What do you wish, sir?"

"Food and lodging," said the man.

"Nothing easier," replied the host.  At that moment he turned his head,
took in the traveller's appearance with a single glance, and added,
"By paying for it."

The man drew a large leather purse from the pocket of his blouse,
and answered, "I have money."

"In that case, we are at your service," said the host.

The man put his purse back in his pocket, removed his knapsack from
his back, put it on the ground near the door, retained his stick
in his hand, and seated himself on a low stool close to the fire. 
D---- is in the mountains.  The evenings are cold there in October.

But as the host went back and forth, he scrutinized the traveller.

"Will dinner be ready soon?" said the man.

"Immediately," replied the landlord.

While the newcomer was warming himself before the fire, with his back
turned, the worthy host, Jacquin Labarre, drew a pencil from his pocket,
then tore off the corner of an old newspaper which was lying on a small
table near the window.  On the white margin he wrote a line or two,
folded it without sealing, and then intrusted this scrap of paper
to a child who seemed to serve him in the capacity both of scullion
and lackey.  The landlord whispered a word in the scullion's ear,
and the child set off on a run in the direction of the town-hall.

The traveller saw nothing of all this.

Once more he inquired, "Will dinner be ready soon?"

"Immediately," responded the host.

The child returned.  He brought back the paper.  The host unfolded
it eagerly, like a person who is expecting a reply.  He seemed to
read it attentively, then tossed his head, and remained thoughtful
for a moment.  Then he took a step in the direction of the traveller,
who appeared to be immersed in reflections which were not very serene.

"I cannot receive you, sir," said he.

The man half rose.

"What!  Are you afraid that I will not pay you?  Do you want me
to pay you in advance?  I have money, I tell you."

"It is not that."

"What then?"

"You have money--"

"Yes," said the man.

"And I," said the host, "have no room."

The man resumed tranquilly, "Put me in the stable."

"I cannot."

"Why?"

"The horses take up all the space."

"Very well!" retorted the man; "a corner of the loft then, a truss
of straw.  We will see about that after dinner."

"I cannot give you any dinner."

This declaration, made in a measured but firm tone, struck the
stranger as grave.  He rose.

"Ah! bah!  But I am dying of hunger.  I have been walking since sunrise. 
I have travelled twelve leagues.  I pay.  I wish to eat."

"I have nothing," said the landlord.

The man burst out laughing, and turned towards the fireplace
and the stoves:  "Nothing! and all that?"

"All that is engaged."

"By whom?"

"By messieurs the wagoners."

"How many are there of them?"

"Twelve."

"There is enough food there for twenty."

"They have engaged the whole of it and paid for it in advance."

The man seated himself again, and said, without raising his voice,
"I am at an inn; I am hungry, and I shall remain."

Then the host bent down to his ear, and said in a tone which made
him start, "Go away!"

At that moment the traveller was bending forward and thrusting
some brands into the fire with the iron-shod tip of his staff;
he turned quickly round, and as he opened his mouth to reply,
the host gazed steadily at him and added, still in a low voice: 
"Stop! there's enough of that sort of talk.  Do you want me to tell
you your name?  Your name is Jean Valjean.  Now do you want me to tell
you who you are?  When I saw you come in I suspected something;
I sent to the town-hall, and this was the reply that was sent to me. 
Can you read?"

So saying, he held out to the stranger, fully unfolded, the paper
which had just travelled from the inn to the town-hall, and from
the town-hall to the inn.  The man cast a glance upon it. 
The landlord resumed after a pause.

"I am in the habit of being polite to every one.  Go away!"

The man dropped his head, picked up the knapsack which he had
deposited on the ground, and took his departure.

He chose the principal street.  He walked straight on at a venture,
keeping close to the houses like a sad and humiliated man. 
He did not turn round a single time.  Had he done so, he would have
seen the host of the Cross of Colbas standing on his threshold,
surrounded by all the guests of his inn, and all the passers-by in
the street, talking vivaciously, and pointing him out with his finger;
and, from the glances of terror and distrust cast by the group,
he might have divined that his arrival would speedily become an event
for the whole town.

He saw nothing of all this.  People who are crushed do not look
behind them.  They know but too well the evil fate which follows them.

Thus he proceeded for some time, walking on without ceasing,
traversing at random streets of which he knew nothing, forgetful of
his fatigue, as is often the case when a man is sad.  All at once
he felt the pangs of hunger sharply.  Night was drawing near. 
He glanced about him, to see whether he could not discover some shelter.

The fine hostelry was closed to him; he was seeking some very humble
public house, some hovel, however lowly.

Just then a light flashed up at the end of the streets; a pine
branch suspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against
the white sky of the twilight.  He proceeded thither.

It proved to be, in fact, a public house.  The public house
which is in the Rue de Chaffaut.

The wayfarer halted for a moment, and peeped through the window into
the interior of the low-studded room of the public house, illuminated by
a small lamp on a table and by a large fire on the hearth.  Some men
were engaged in drinking there.  The landlord was warming himself. 
An iron pot, suspended from a crane, bubbled over the flame.

The entrance to this public house, which is also a sort of an inn,
is by two doors.  One opens on the street, the other upon a small yard
filled with manure.  The traveller dare not enter by the street door. 
He slipped into the yard, halted again, then raised the latch timidly
and opened the door.

"Who goes there?" said the master.

"Some one who wants supper and bed."

"Good.  We furnish supper and bed here."

He entered.  All the men who were drinking turned round. 
The lamp illuminated him on one side, the firelight on the other. 
They examined him for some time while he was taking off his knapsack.

The host said to him, "There is the fire.  The supper is cooking
in the pot.  Come and warm yourself, comrade."

He approached and seated himself near the hearth.  He stretched
out his feet, which were exhausted with fatigue, to the fire;
a fine odor was emitted by the pot.  All that could be distinguished
of his face, beneath his cap, which was well pulled down,
assumed a vague appearance of comfort, mingled with that other
poignant aspect which habitual suffering bestows.

It was, moreover, a firm, energetic, and melancholy profile. 
This physiognomy was strangely composed; it began by seeming humble,
and ended by seeming severe.  The eye shone beneath its lashes
like a fire beneath brushwood.

One of the men seated at the table, however, was a fishmonger who,
before entering the public house of the Rue de Chaffaut,
had been to stable his horse at Labarre's. It chanced that he
had that very morning encountered this unprepossessing stranger
on the road between Bras d'Asse and--I have forgotten the name. 
I think it was Escoublon.  Now, when he met him, the man, who then
seemed already extremely weary, had requested him to take him
on his crupper; to which the fishmonger had made no reply except
by redoubling his gait.  This fishmonger had been a member half
an hour previously of the group which surrounded Jacquin Labarre,
and had himself related his disagreeable encounter of the morning
to the people at the Cross of Colbas.  From where he sat he made
an imperceptible sign to the tavern-keeper. The tavern-keeper went
to him.  They exchanged a few words in a low tone.  The man had
again become absorbed in his reflections.

The tavern-keeper returned to the fireplace, laid his hand abruptly
on the shoulder of the man, and said to him:--

"You are going to get out of here."

The stranger turned round and replied gently, "Ah!  You know?--"

"Yes."

"I was sent away from the other inn."

"And you are to be turned out of this one."

"Where would you have me go?"

"Elsewhere."

The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed.

As he went out, some children who had followed him from the Cross
of Colbas, and who seemed to be lying in wait for him, threw stones
at him.  He retraced his steps in anger, and threatened them
with his stick:  the children dispersed like a flock of birds.

He passed before the prison.  At the door hung an iron chain
attached to a bell.  He rang.
