However, in their latter years, Madame Magloire discovered beneath
the paper which had been washed over, paintings, ornamenting the
apartment of Mademoiselle Baptistine, as we shall see further on. 
Before becoming a hospital, this house had been the ancient
parliament house of the Bourgeois.  Hence this decoration. 
The chambers were paved in red bricks, which were washed every week,
with straw mats in front of all the beds.  Altogether, this dwelling,
which was attended to by the two women, was exquisitely clean from top
to bottom.  This was the sole luxury which the Bishop permitted. 
He said, "That takes nothing from the poor."

It must be confessed, however, that he still retained from his
former possessions six silver knives and forks and a soup-ladle,
which Madame Magloire contemplated every day with delight,
as they glistened splendidly upon the coarse linen cloth. 
And since we are now painting the Bishop of D---- as he was in reality,
we must add that he had said more than once, "I find it difficult
to renounce eating from silver dishes."

To this silverware must be added two large candlesticks of
massive silver, which he had inherited from a great-aunt. These
candlesticks held two wax candles, and usually figured on the Bishop's
chimney-piece. When he had any one to dinner, Madame Magloire
lighted the two candles and set the candlesticks on the table.

In the Bishop's own chamber, at the head of his bed, there was
a small cupboard, in which Madame Magloire locked up the six
silver knives and forks and the big spoon every night. 
But it is necessary to add, that the key was never removed.

The garden, which had been rather spoiled by the ugly buildings
which we have mentioned, was composed of four alleys in cross-form,
radiating from a tank.  Another walk made the circuit of the garden,
and skirted the white wall which enclosed it.  These alleys left
behind them four square plots rimmed with box.  In three of these,
Madame Magloire cultivated vegetables; in the fourth, the Bishop
had planted some flowers; here and there stood a few fruit-trees.
Madame Magloire had once remarked, with a sort of gentle malice: 
"Monseigneur, you who turn everything to account, have, nevertheless, one
useless plot.  It would be better to grow salads there than bouquets." 
"Madame Magloire," retorted the Bishop, "you are mistaken. 
The beautiful is as useful as the useful."  He added after a pause,
"More so, perhaps."

This plot, consisting of three or four beds, occupied the Bishop almost
as much as did his books.  He liked to pass an hour or two there,
trimming, hoeing, and making holes here and there in the earth,
into which he dropped seeds.  He was not as hostile to insects
as a gardener could have wished to see him.  Moreover, he made no
pretensions to botany; he ignored groups and consistency; he made not
the slightest effort to decide between Tournefort and the natural method;
he took part neither with the buds against the cotyledons, nor with
Jussieu against Linnaeus.  He did not study plants; he loved flowers. 
He respected learned men greatly; he respected the ignorant still more;
and, without ever failing in these two respects, he watered his
flower-beds every summer evening with a tin watering-pot painted green.

The house had not a single door which could be locked.  The door
of the dining-room, which, as we have said, opened directly on the
cathedral square, had formerly been ornamented with locks and bolts
like the door of a prison.  The Bishop had had all this ironwork removed,
and this door was never fastened, either by night or by day,
with anything except the latch.  All that the first passerby had
to do at any hour, was to give it a push.  At first, the two women
had been very much tried by this door, which was never fastened,
but Monsieur de D---- had said to them, "Have bolts put on your rooms,
if that will please you."  They had ended by sharing his confidence,
or by at least acting as though they shared it.  Madame Magloire
alone had frights from time to time.  As for the Bishop, his thought
can be found explained, or at least indicated, in the three lines
which he wrote on the margin of a Bible, "This is the shade
of difference:  the door of the physician should never be shut,
the door of the priest should always be open."

On another book, entitled Philosophy of the Medical Science,
he had written this other note:  "Am not I a physician like them? 
I also have my patients, and then, too, I have some whom I call
my unfortunates."

Again he wrote:  "Do not inquire the name of him who asks a shelter
of you.  The very man who is embarrassed by his name is the one
who needs shelter."

It chanced that a worthy cure, I know not whether it was the cure
of Couloubroux or the cure of Pompierry, took it into his head
to ask him one day, probably at the instigation of Madame Magloire,
whether Monsieur was sure that he was not committing an indiscretion,
to a certain extent, in leaving his door unfastened day and night,
at the mercy of any one who should choose to enter, and whether,
in short, he did not fear lest some misfortune might occur
in a house so little guarded.  The Bishop touched his shoulder,
with gentle gravity, and said to him, "Nisi Dominus custodierit domum,
in vanum vigilant qui custodiunt eam," Unless the Lord guard the house,
in vain do they watch who guard it.

Then he spoke of something else.

He was fond of saying, "There is a bravery of the priest as well
as the bravery of a colonel of dragoons,--only," he added,
"ours must be tranquil."




CRAVATTE


It is here that a fact falls naturally into place, which we must
not omit, because it is one of the sort which show us best what sort
of a man the Bishop of D---- was.

After the destruction of the band of Gaspard Bes, who had infested
the gorges of Ollioules, one of his lieutenants, Cravatte, took refuge
in the mountains.  He concealed himself for some time with his bandits,
the remnant of Gaspard Bes's troop, in the county of Nice;
then he made his way to Piedmont, and suddenly reappeared in France,
in the vicinity of Barcelonette.  He was first seen at Jauziers,
then at Tuiles.  He hid himself in the caverns of the Joug-de-l'Aigle,
and thence he descended towards the hamlets and villages through
the ravines of Ubaye and Ubayette.

He even pushed as far as Embrun, entered the cathedral one night,
and despoiled the sacristy.  His highway robberies laid waste the
country-side. The gendarmes were set on his track, but in vain. 
He always escaped; sometimes he resisted by main force.  He was a
bold wretch.  In the midst of all this terror the Bishop arrived. 
He was making his circuit to Chastelar.  The mayor came to meet him,
and urged him to retrace his steps.  Cravatte was in possession
of the mountains as far as Arche, and beyond; there was danger even
with an escort; it merely exposed three or four unfortunate gendarmes
to no purpose.

"Therefore," said the Bishop, "I intend to go without escort."

"You do not really mean that, Monseigneur!" exclaimed the mayor.

"I do mean it so thoroughly that I absolutely refuse any gendarmes,
and shall set out in an hour."

"Set out?"

"Set out."

"Alone?"

"Alone."

"Monseigneur, you will not do that!"

"There exists yonder in the mountains," said the Bishop, "a tiny
community no bigger than that, which I have not seen for three years. 
They are my good friends, those gentle and honest shepherds.  They own
one goat out of every thirty that they tend.  They make very pretty
woollen cords of various colors, and they play the mountain airs
on little flutes with six holes.  They need to be told of the good
God now and then.  What would they say to a bishop who was afraid? 
What would they say if I did not go?"

"But the brigands, Monseigneur?"

"Hold," said the Bishop, "I must think of that.  You are right. 
I may meet them.  They, too, need to be told of the good God."

"But, Monseigneur, there is a band of them!  A flock of wolves!"

"Monsieur le maire, it may be that it is of this very flock
of wolves that Jesus has constituted me the shepherd.  Who knows
the ways of Providence?"

"They will rob you, Monseigneur."

"I have nothing."

"They will kill you."

"An old goodman of a priest, who passes along mumbling his prayers? 
Bah!  To what purpose?"

"Oh, mon Dieu! what if you should meet them!"

"I should beg alms of them for my poor."

"Do not go, Monseigneur.  In the name of Heaven!  You are risking
your life!"

"Monsieur le maire," said the Bishop, "is that really all? 
I am not in the world to guard my own life, but to guard souls."

They had to allow him to do as he pleased.  He set out, accompanied
only by a child who offered to serve as a guide.  His obstinacy
was bruited about the country-side, and caused great consternation.

He would take neither his sister nor Madame Magloire.  He traversed
the mountain on mule-back, encountered no one, and arrived safe
and sound at the residence of his "good friends," the shepherds. 
He remained there for a fortnight, preaching, administering the sacrament,
teaching, exhorting.  When the time of his departure approached,
he resolved to chant a Te Deum pontifically.  He mentioned it to
the cure.  But what was to be done?  There were no episcopal ornaments. 
They could only place at his disposal a wretched village sacristy, with
a few ancient chasubles of threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace.

"Bah!" said the Bishop.  "Let us announce our Te Deum from the pulpit,
nevertheless, Monsieur le Cure.  Things will arrange themselves."

They instituted a search in the churches of the neighborhood. 
All the magnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have
sufficed to clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly.

While they were thus embarrassed, a large chest was brought and
deposited in the presbytery for the Bishop, by two unknown horsemen,
who departed on the instant.  The chest was opened; it contained
a cope of cloth of gold, a mitre ornamented with diamonds,
an archbishop's cross, a magnificent crosier,--all the pontifical
vestments which had been stolen a month previously from the treasury
of Notre Dame d'Embrun. In the chest was a paper, on which
these words were written, "From Cravatte to Monseigneur Bienvenu."

"Did not I say that things would come right of themselves?" said
the Bishop.  Then he added, with a smile, "To him who contents himself
with the surplice of a curate, God sends the cope of an archbishop."

"Monseigneur," murmured the cure, throwing back his head with a smile. 
"God--or the Devil."

The Bishop looked steadily at the cure, and repeated
with authority, "God!"

When he returned to Chastelar, the people came out to stare at him
as at a curiosity, all along the road.  At the priest's house in
Chastelar he rejoined Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire,
who were waiting for him, and he said to his sister:  "Well! was
I in the right?  The poor priest went to his poor mountaineers
with empty hands, and he returns from them with his hands full. 
I set out bearing only my faith in God; I have brought back the
treasure of a cathedral."

That evening, before he went to bed, he said again:  "Let us
never fear robbers nor murderers.  Those are dangers from without,
petty dangers.  Let us fear ourselves.  Prejudices are the real robbers;
vices are the real murderers.  The great dangers lie within ourselves. 
What matters it what threatens our head or our purse!  Let us think
only of that which threatens our soul."

Then, turning to his sister:  "Sister, never a precaution on the part
of the priest, against his fellow-man. That which his fellow does,
God permits.  Let us confine ourselves to prayer, when we think
that a danger is approaching us.  Let us pray, not for ourselves,
but that our brother may not fall into sin on our account."

However, such incidents were rare in his life.  We relate those
of which we know; but generally he passed his life in doing the
same things at the same moment.  One month of his year resembled
one hour of his day.

As to what became of "the treasure" of the cathedral of Embrun,
we should be embarrassed by any inquiry in that direction. 
It consisted of very handsome things, very tempting things,
and things which were very well adapted to be stolen for the benefit
of the unfortunate.  Stolen they had already been elsewhere. 
Half of the adventure was completed; it only remained to impart
a new direction to the theft, and to cause it to take a short trip
in the direction of the poor.  However, we make no assertions
on this point.  Only, a rather obscure note was found among
the Bishop's papers, which may bear some relation to this matter,
and which is couched in these terms, "The question is, to decide
whether this should be turned over to the cathedral or to the hospital."




PHILOSOPHY AFTER DRINKING


The senator above mentioned was a clever man, who had made
his own way, heedless of those things which present obstacles,
and which are called conscience, sworn faith, justice, duty:  he had
marched straight to his goal, without once flinching in the line
of his advancement and his interest.  He was an old attorney,
softened by success; not a bad man by any means, who rendered
all the small services in his power to his sons, his sons-in-law,
his relations, and even to his friends, having wisely seized upon,
in life, good sides, good opportunities, good windfalls. 
Everything else seemed to him very stupid.  He was intelligent,
and just sufficiently educated to think himself a disciple of Epicurus;
while he was, in reality, only a product of Pigault-Lebrun. He
laughed willingly and pleasantly over infinite and eternal things,
and at the "Crotchets of that good old fellow the Bishop." 
He even sometimes laughed at him with an amiable authority in the
presence of M. Myriel himself, who listened to him.

On some semi-official occasion or other, I do not recollect what,
Count*** [this senator] and M. Myriel were to dine with the prefect. 
At dessert, the senator, who was slightly exhilarated, though still
perfectly dignified, exclaimed:--

"Egad, Bishop, let's have a discussion.  It is hard for a senator and
a bishop to look at each other without winking.  We are two augurs. 
I am going to make a confession to you.  I have a philosophy of my own."

"And you are right," replied the Bishop.  "As one makes one's philosophy,
so one lies on it.  You are on the bed of purple, senator."

The senator was encouraged, and went on:--

"Let us be good fellows."

"Good devils even," said the Bishop.

"I declare to you," continued the senator, "that the Marquis
d'Argens, Pyrrhon, Hobbes, and M. Naigeon are no rascals. 
I have all the philosophers in my library gilded on the edges."

"Like yourself, Count," interposed the Bishop.

The senator resumed:--

"I hate Diderot; he is an ideologist, a declaimer, and a revolutionist,
a believer in God at bottom, and more bigoted than Voltaire. 
Voltaire made sport of Needham, and he was wrong, for Needham's
eels prove that God is useless.  A drop of vinegar in a spoonful
of flour paste supplies the fiat lux.  Suppose the drop to be larger
and the spoonful bigger; you have the world.  Man is the eel. 
Then what is the good of the Eternal Father?  The Jehovah hypothesis
tires me, Bishop.  It is good for nothing but to produce shallow people,
whose reasoning is hollow.  Down with that great All, which torments me! 
Hurrah for Zero which leaves me in peace!  Between you and me,
and in order to empty my sack, and make confession to my pastor,
as it behooves me to do, I will admit to you that I have good sense. 
I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus, who preaches renunciation and
sacrifice to the last extremity.  'Tis the counsel of an avaricious
man to beggars.  Renunciation; why?  Sacrifice; to what end? 
I do not see one wolf immolating himself for the happiness of
another wolf.  Let us stick to nature, then.  We are at the top;
let us have a superior philosophy.  What is the advantage of
being at the top, if one sees no further than the end of other
people's noses?  Let us live merrily.  Life is all.  That man has
another future elsewhere, on high, below, anywhere, I don't believe;
not one single word of it.  Ah! sacrifice and renunciation are
recommended to me; I must take heed to everything I do; I must
cudgel my brains over good and evil, over the just and the unjust,
over the fas and the nefas.  Why?  Because I shall have to render
an account of my actions.  When?  After death.  What a fine dream! 
After my death it will be a very clever person who can catch me. 
Have a handful of dust seized by a shadow-hand, if you can. 
Let us tell the truth, we who are initiated, and who have raised
the veil of Isis:  there is no such thing as either good or evil;
there is vegetation.  Let us seek the real.  Let us get to the bottom
of it.  Let us go into it thoroughly.  What the deuce! let us go
to the bottom of it!  We must scent out the truth; dig in the
earth for it, and seize it.  Then it gives you exquisite joys. 
Then you grow strong, and you laugh.  I am square on the bottom,
I am.  Immortality, Bishop, is a chance, a waiting for dead
men's shoes.  Ah! what a charming promise! trust to it, if you like! 
What a fine lot Adam has!  We are souls, and we shall be angels,
with blue wings on our shoulder-blades. Do come to my assistance: 
is it not Tertullian who says that the blessed shall travel from star
to star?  Very well.  We shall be the grasshoppers of the stars. 
And then, besides, we shall see God.  Ta, ta, ta!  What twaddle all
these paradises are!  God is a nonsensical monster.  I would not say
that in the Moniteur, egad! but I may whisper it among friends. 
Inter pocula.  To sacrifice the world to paradise is to let
slip the prey for the shadow.  Be the dupe of the infinite! 
I'm not such a fool.  I am a nought.  I call myself Monsieur le
Comte Nought, senator.  Did I exist before my birth?  No. Shall I exist
after death?  No. What am I?  A little dust collected in an organism. 
What am I to do on this earth?  The choice rests with me: 
suffer or enjoy.  Whither will suffering lead me?  To nothingness;
but I shall have suffered.  Whither will enjoyment lead me? 
To nothingness; but I shall have enjoyed myself.  My choice is made. 
One must eat or be eaten.  I shall eat.  It is better to be the tooth
than the grass.  Such is my wisdom.  After which, go whither I
push thee, the grave-digger is there; the Pantheon for some of us: 
all falls into the great hole.  End.  Finis.  Total liquidation. 
This is the vanishing-point. Death is death, believe me. 
I laugh at the idea of there being any one who has anything to tell
me on that subject.  Fables of nurses; bugaboo for children;
Jehovah for men.  No; our to-morrow is the night.  Beyond the tomb
there is nothing but equal nothingness.  You have been Sardanapalus,
you have been Vincent de Paul--it makes no difference.  That is
the truth.  Then live your life, above all things.  Make use of
your _I_ while you have it.  In truth, Bishop, I tell you that I
have a philosophy of my own, and I have my philosophers.  I don't
let myself be taken in with that nonsense.  Of course, there must
be something for those who are down,--for the barefooted beggars,
knife-grinders, and miserable wretches.  Legends, chimeras, the soul,
immortality, paradise, the stars, are provided for them to swallow. 
They gobble it down.  They spread it on their dry bread. 
He who has nothing else has the good.  God.  That is the least
he can have.  I oppose no objection to that; but I reserve
Monsieur Naigeon for myself.  The good God is good for the
populace."

The Bishop clapped his hands.

"That's talking!" he exclaimed.  "What an excellent and really
marvellous thing is this materialism!  Not every one who wants it
can have it.  Ah! when one does have it, one is no longer a dupe,
one does not stupidly allow one's self to be exiled like Cato,
nor stoned like Stephen, nor burned alive like Jeanne d'Arc. Those
who have succeeded in procuring this admirable materialism have the joy
of feeling themselves irresponsible, and of thinking that they can devour
everything without uneasiness,--places, sinecures, dignities, power,
whether well or ill acquired, lucrative recantations, useful treacheries,
savory capitulations of conscience,--and that they shall enter
the tomb with their digestion accomplished.  How agreeable that is! 
I do not say that with reference to you, senator.  Nevertheless, it is
impossible for me to refrain from congratulating you.  You great
lords have, so you say, a philosophy of your own, and for yourselves,
which is exquisite, refined, accessible to the rich alone,
good for all sauces, and which seasons the voluptuousness of
life admirably.  This philosophy has been extracted from the depths,
and unearthed by special seekers.  But you are good-natured princes,
and you do not think it a bad thing that belief in the good
God should constitute the philosophy of the people, very much
as the goose stuffed with chestnuts is the truffled turkey of the poor."




THE BROTHER AS DEPICTED BY THE SISTER


In order to furnish an idea of the private establishment of the Bishop
of D----, and of the manner in which those two sainted women subordinated
their actions, their thoughts, their feminine instincts even,
which are easily alarmed, to the habits and purposes of the Bishop,
without his even taking the trouble of speaking in order to explain them,
we cannot do better than transcribe in this place a letter from
Mademoiselle Baptistine to Madame the Vicomtess de Boischevron,
the friend of her childhood.  This letter is in our possession.


                                        D----, Dec. 16, 18--.
MY GOOD MADAM:  Not a day passes without our speaking of you. 
It is our established custom; but there is another reason besides. 
Just imagine, while washing and dusting the ceilings and walls,
Madam Magloire has made some discoveries; now our two chambers hung
with antique paper whitewashed over, would not discredit a chateau
in the style of yours.  Madam Magloire has pulled off all the paper. 
There were things beneath.  My drawing-room, which contains no furniture,
and which we use for spreading out the linen after washing,
is fifteen feet in height, eighteen square, with a ceiling which
was formerly painted and gilded, and with beams, as in yours. 
This was covered with a cloth while this was the hospital. 
And the woodwork was of the era of our grandmothers.  But my room
is the one you ought to see.  Madam Magloire has discovered,
under at least ten thicknesses of paper pasted on top, some paintings,
which without being good are very tolerable.  The subject is
Telemachus being knighted by Minerva in some gardens, the name
of which escapes me.  In short, where the Roman ladies repaired
on one single night.  What shall I say to you?  I have Romans,
and Roman ladies [here occurs an illegible word], and the whole train. 
Madam Magloire has cleaned it all off; this summer she is going
to have some small injuries repaired, and the whole revarnished,
and my chamber will be a regular museum.  She has also found in a
corner of the attic two wooden pier-tables of ancient fashion. 
They asked us two crowns of six francs each to regild them,
but it is much better to give the money to the poor; and they
are very ugly besides, and I should much prefer a round table
of mahogany.

I am always very happy.  My brother is so good.  He gives all he
has to the poor and sick.  We are very much cramped.  The country
is trying in the winter, and we really must do something for those
who are in need.  We are almost comfortably lighted and warmed. 
You see that these are great treats.

My brother has ways of his own.  When he talks, he says that a bishop
ought to be so.  Just imagine! the door of our house is never fastened. 
Whoever chooses to enter finds himself at once in my brother's room. 
He fears nothing, even at night.  That is his sort of bravery,
he says.

He does not wish me or Madame Magloire feel any fear for him. 
He exposes himself to all sorts of dangers, and he does not like to
have us even seem to notice it.  One must know how to understand him.

He goes out in the rain, he walks in the water, he travels in winter. 
He fears neither suspicious roads nor dangerous encounters,
nor night.

Last year he went quite alone into a country of robbers.  He would
not take us.  He was absent for a fortnight.  On his return nothing
had happened to him; he was thought to be dead, but was perfectly well,
and said, "This is the way I have been robbed!"  And then he opened
a trunk full of jewels, all the jewels of the cathedral of Embrun,
which the thieves had given him.

When he returned on that occasion, I could not refrain from
scolding him a little, taking care, however, not to speak except
when the carriage was making a noise, so that no one might hear me.

At first I used to say to myself, "There are no dangers which will
stop him; he is terrible."  Now I have ended by getting used to it. 
I make a sign to Madam Magloire that she is not to oppose him. 
He risks himself as he sees fit.  I carry off Madam Magloire,
I enter my chamber, I pray for him and fall asleep.  I am at ease,
because I know that if anything were to happen to him, it would
be the end of me.  I should go to the good God with my brother
