Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish ; she was probably , indeed , cleverer than her husband , or , at least , more prudent than he in worldly affairs , and yet she had given in to him in everything without question or complaint ever since her marriage , and respected him for his spiritual superiority . 
It was remarkable how little they spoke to one another in the course of their lives , and only of the most necessary daily affairs . 
The grave and dignified Grigory thought over all his cares and duties alone , so that Marfa Ignatyevna had long grown used to knowing that he did not need her advice . 
She felt that her husband respected her silence , and took it as a sign of her good sense . 
He had never beaten her but once , and then only slightly . 
Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch 's marriage with Adelaida Ivanovna , the village girls and women - at that time serfs - were called together before the house to sing and dance . 
They were beginning `` In the Green Meadows , '' when Marfa , at that time a young woman , skipped forward and danced `` the Russian Dance , '' not in the village fashion , but as she had danced it when she was a servant in the service of the rich Miusov family , in their private theatre , where the actors were taught to dance by a dancing master from Moscow . 
Grigory saw how his wife danced , and , an hour later , at home in their cottage he gave her a lesson , pulling her hair a little . 
But there it ended : the beating was never repeated , and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing . 
God had not blessed them with children . 
One child was born but it died . 
Grigory was fond of children , and was not ashamed of showing it . 
When Adelaida Ivanovna had run away , Grigory took Dmitri , then a child of three years old , combed his hair and washed him in a tub with his own hands , and looked after him for almost a year . 
Afterwards he had looked after Ivan and Alyosha , for which the general 's widow had rewarded him with a slap in the face ; but I have already related all that . 
The only happiness his own child had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth . 
When it was born , he was overwhelmed with grief and horror . 
The baby had six fingers . 
Grigory was so crushed by this , that he was not only silent till the day of the christening , but kept away in the garden . 
It was spring , and he spent three days digging the kitchen garden . 
The third day was fixed for christening the baby : meantime Grigory had reached a conclusion . 
Going into the cottage where the clergy were assembled and the visitors had arrived , including Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was to stand godfather , he suddenly announced that the baby `` ought not to be christened at all . '' 
He announced this quietly , briefly , forcing out his words , and gazing with dull intentness at the priest . 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked the priest with good-humoured surprise . 
`` Because it 's a dragon , '' muttered Grigory . 
`` A dragon ? 
What dragon ? '' 
Grigory did not speak for some time . 
`` It 's a confusion of nature , '' he muttered vaguely , but firmly , and obviously unwilling to say more . 
They laughed , and , of course , christened the poor baby . 
Grigory prayed earnestly at the font , but his opinion of the new-born child remained unchanged . 
Yet he did not interfere in any way . 
As long as the sickly infant lived he scarcely looked at it , tried indeed not to notice it , and for the most part kept out of the cottage . 
But when , at the end of a fortnight , the baby died of thrush , he himself laid the child in its little coffin , looked at it in profound grief , and when they were filling up the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and bowed down to the earth . 
He did not for years afterwards mention his child , nor did Marfa speak of the baby before him , and , even if Grigory were not present , she never spoke of it above a whisper . 
Marfa observed that , from the day of the burial , he devoted himself to `` religion , '' and took to reading the Lives of the Saints , for the most part sitting alone and in silence , and always putting on his big , round , silver-rimmed spectacles . 
He rarely read aloud , only perhaps in Lent . 
He was fond of the Book of Job , and had somehow got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of `` the God fearing Father Isaac the Syrian , which he read persistently for years together , understanding very little of it , but perhaps prizing and loving it the more for that . 
Of late he had begun to listen to the doctrines of the sect of Flagellants settled in the neighbourhood . 
He was evidently shaken by them , but judged it unfitting to go over to the new faith . 
His habit of theological reading gave him an expression of still greater gravity . 
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism . 
And the birth of his deformed child , and its death , had , as though by special design , been accompanied by another strange and marvellous event , which , as he said later , had left a `` stamp '' upon his soul . 
It happened that , on the very night after the burial of his child , Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new-born baby . 
She was frightened and waked her husband . 
He listened and said he thought it was more like someone groaning , `` it might be a woman . '' 
He got up and dressed . 
It was a rather warm night in May . 
As he went down the steps , he distinctly heard groans coming from the garden . 
But the gate from the yard into the garden was locked at night , and there was no other way of entering it , for it was enclosed all round by a strong , high fence . 
Going back into the house , Grigory lighted a lantern , took the garden key , and taking no notice of the hysterical fears of his wife , who was still persuaded that she heard a child crying , and that it was her own baby crying and calling for her , went into the garden in silence . 
There he heard at once that the groans came from the bath-house that stood near the garden gate , and that they were the groans of a woman . 
Opening the door of the bath-house , he saw a sight which petrified him . 
An idiot girl , who wandered about the streets and was known to the whole town by the nickname of Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya -LRB- Stinking Lizaveta -RRB- , had got into the bath-house and had just given birth to a child . 
She lay dying with the baby beside her . 
She said nothing , for she had never been able to speak . 
But her story needs a chapter to itself . 
Lizaveta THERE was one circumstance which struck Grigory particularly , and confirmed a very unpleasant and revolting suspicion . 
This Lizaveta was a dwarfish creature , `` not five foot within a wee bit , '' as many of the pious old women said pathetically about her , after her death . 
Her broad , healthy , red face had a look of blank idiocy and the fixed stare in her eyes was unpleasant , in spite of their meek expression . 
She wandered about , summer and winter alike , barefooted , wearing nothing but a hempen smock . 
Her coarse , almost black hair curled like lamb 's wool , and formed a sort of huge cap on her head . 
It was always crusted with mud , and had leaves ; bits of stick , and shavings clinging to it , as she always slept on the ground and in the dirt . 
Her father , a homeless , sickly drunkard , called Ilya , had lost everything and lived many years as a workman with some well-to-do tradespeople . 
Her mother had long been dead . 
Spiteful and diseased , Ilya used to beat Lizaveta inhumanly whenever she returned to him . 
But she rarely did so , for everyone in the town was ready to look after her as being an idiot , and so specially dear to God . 
Ilya 's employers , and many others in the town , especially of the tradespeople , tried to clothe her better , and always rigged her out with high boots and sheepskin coat for the winter . 
But , although she allowed them to dress her up without resisting , she usually went away , preferably to the cathedral porch , and taking off all that had been given her - kerchief , sheepskin , skirt or boots - she left them there and walked away barefoot in her smock as before . 
It happened on one occasion that a new governor of the province , making a tour of inspection in our town , saw Lizaveta , and was wounded in his tenderest susceptibilities . 
And though he was told she was an idiot , he pronounced that for a young woman of twenty to wander about in nothing but a smock was a breach of the proprieties , and must not occur again . 
But the governor went his way , and Lizaveta was left as she was . 
At last her father died , which made her even more acceptable in the eyes of the religious persons of the town , as an orphan . 
In fact , everyone seemed to like her ; even the boys did not tease her , and the boys of our town , especially the schoolboys , are a mischievous set . 
She would walk into strange houses , and no one drove her away . 
Everyone was kind to her and gave her something . 
If she were given a copper , she would take it , and at once drop it in the alms-jug of the church or prison . 
If she were given a roll or bun in the market , she would hand it to the first child she met . 
Sometimes she would stop one of the richest ladies in the town and give it to her , and the lady would be pleased to take it . 
She herself never tasted anything but black bread and water . 
If she went into an expensive shop , where there were costly goods or money lying about , no one kept watch on her , for they knew that if she saw thousands of roubles overlooked by them , she would not have touched a farthing . 
She scarcely ever went to church . 
She slept either in the church porch or climbed over a hurdle -LRB- there are many hurdles instead of fences to this day in our town -RRB- into a kitchen garden . 
She used at least once a week to turn up `` at home , '' that is at the house of her father 's former employers , and in the winter went there every night , and slept either in the passage or the cow-house . 
People were amazed that she could stand such a life , but she was accustomed to it , and , although she was so tiny , she was of a robust constitution . 
Some of the townspeople declared that she did all this only from pride , but that is hardly credible . 
She could hardly speak , and only from time to time uttered an inarticulate grunt . 
How could she have been proud ? 
It happened one clear , warm , moonlight night in September -LRB- many years ago -RRB- five or six drunken revellers were returning from the club at a very late hour , according to our provincial notions . 
They passed through the `` backway , '' which led between the back gardens of the houses , with hurdles on either side . 
This way leads out on to the bridge over the long , stinking pool which we were accustomed to call a river . 
Among the nettles and burdocks under the hurdle our revellers saw Lizaveta asleep . 
They stopped to look at her , laughing , and began jesting with unbridled licentiousness . 
It occurred to one young gentleman to make the whimsical inquiry whether anyone could possibly look upon such an animal as a woman , and so forth ... . 
They all pronounced with lofty repugnance that it was impossible . 
But Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was among them , sprang forward and declared that it was by no means impossible , and that , indeed , there was a certain piquancy about it , and so on ... . 
It is true that at that time he was overdoing his part as a buffoon . 
He liked to put himself forward and entertain the company , ostensibly on equal terms , of course , though in reality he was on a servile footing with them . 
It was just at the time when he had received the news of his first wife 's death in Petersburg , and , with crape upon his hat , was drinking and behaving so shamelessly that even the most reckless among us were shocked at the sight of him . 
The revellers , of course , laughed at this unexpected opinion ; and one of them even began challenging him to act upon it . 
The others repelled the idea even more emphatically , although still with the utmost hilarity , and at last they went on their way . 
Later on , Fyodor Pavlovitch swore that he had gone with them , and perhaps it was so , no one knows for certain , and no one ever knew . 
But five or six months later , all the town was talking , with intense and sincere indignation , of Lizaveta 's condition , and trying to find out who was the miscreant who had wronged her . 
Then suddenly a terrible rumour was all over the town that this miscreant was no other than Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Who set the rumour going ? 
Of that drunken band five had left the town and the only one still among us was an elderly and much respected civil councillor , the father of grown-up daughters , who could hardly have spread the tale , even if there had been any foundation for it . 
But rumour pointed straight at Fyodor Pavlovitch , and persisted in pointing at him . 
Of course this was no great grievance to him : he would not have troubled to contradict a set of tradespeople . 
In those days he was proud , and did not condescend to talk except in his own circle of the officials and nobles , whom he entertained so well . 
At the time , Grigory stood up for his master vigorously . 
He provoked quarrels and altercations in defence of him and succeeded in bringing some people round to his side . 
`` It 's the wench 's own fault , '' he asserted , and the culprit was Karp , a dangerous convict , who had escaped from prison and whose name was well known to us , as he had hidden in our town . 
This conjecture sounded plausible , for it was remembered that Karp had been in the neighbourhood just at that time in the autumn , and had robbed three people . 
But this affair and all the talk about it did not estrange popular sympathy from the poor idiot . 
She was better looked after than ever . 
A well-to-do merchants 's widow named Kondratyev arranged to take her into her house at the end of April , meaning not to let her go out until after the confinement . 
They kept a constant watch over her , but in spite of their vigilance she escaped on the very last day , and made her way into Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden . 
How , in her condition , she managed to climb over the high , strong fence remained a mystery . 
Some maintained that she must have been lifted over by somebody ; others hinted at something more uncanny . 
The most likely explanation is that it happened naturally - that Lizaveta , accustomed to clambering over hurdles to sleep in gardens , had somehow managed to climb this fence , in spite of her condition , and had leapt down , injuring herself . 
Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta , while he ran to fetch an old midwife who lived close by . 
They saved the baby , but Lizaveta died at dawn . 
Grigory took the baby , brought it home , and making his wife sit down , put it on her lap . 
`` A child of God - an orphan is akin to all , '' he said , `` and to us above others . 
Our little lost one has sent us this , who has come from the devil 's son and a holy innocent . 
Nurse him and weep no more . '' 
So Marfa brought up the child . 
He was christened Pavel , to which people were not slow in adding Fyodorovitch -LRB- son of Fyodor -RRB- . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not object to any of this , and thought it amusing , though he persisted vigorously in denying his responsibility . 
The townspeople were pleased at his adopting the foundling . 
Later on , Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surname for the child , calling him Smerdyakov , after his mother 's nickname . 
So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch 's second servant , and was living in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our story begins . 
He was employed as cook . 
I ought to say something of this Smerdyakov , but I am ashamed of keeping my readers ' attention so long occupied with these common menials , and I will go back to my story , hoping to say more of Smerdyakov in the course of it . 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - in Verse ALYOSHA remained for some time irresolute after hearing the command his father shouted to him from the carriage . 
But in spite of his uneasiness he did not stand still . 
That was not his way . 
He went at once to the kitchen to find out what his father had been doing above . 
Then he set off , trusting that on the way he would find some answer to the doubt tormenting him . 
I hasten to add that his father 's shouts , commanding him to return home `` with his mattress and pillow '' did not frighten him in the least . 
He understood perfectly that those peremptory shouts were merely `` a flourish '' to produce an effect . 
In the same way a tradesman in our town who was celebrating his name-day with a party of friends , getting angry at being refused more vodka , smashed up his own crockery and furniture and tore his own and his wife 's clothes , and finally broke his windows , all for the sake of effect . 
Next day , of course , when he was sober , he regretted the broken cups and saucers . 
Alyosha knew that his father would let him go back to the monastery next day , possibly even that evening . 
Moreover , he was fully persuaded that his father might hurt anyone else , but would not hurt him . 
Alyosha was certain that no one in the whole world ever would want to hurt him , and , what is more , he knew that no one could hurt him . 
This was for him an axiom , assumed once for all without question , and he went his way without hesitation , relying on it . 
But at that moment an anxiety of sort disturbed him , and worried him the more because he could not formulate it . 
It was the fear of a woman , of Katerina Ivanovna , who had so urgently entreated him in the note handed to him by Madame Hohlakov to come and see her about something . 
This request and the necessity of going had at once aroused an uneasy feeling in his heart , and this feeling had grown more and more painful all the morning in spite of the scenes at the hermitage and at the Father Superior 's . 
He was not uneasy because he did not know what she would speak of and what he must answer . 
And he was not afraid of her simply as a woman . 
Though he knew little of women , he spent his life , from early childhood till he entered the monastery , entirely with women . 
He was afraid of that woman , Katerina Ivanovna . 
He had been afraid of her from the first time he saw her . 
He had only seen her two or three times , and had only chanced to say a few words to her . 
He thought of her as a beautiful , proud , imperious girl . 
It was not her beauty which troubled him , but something else . 
And the vagueness of his apprehension increased the apprehension itself . 
The girl 's aims were of the noblest , he knew that . 
She was trying to save his brother Dmitri simply through generosity , though he had already behaved badly to her . 
Yet , although Alyosha recognised and did justice to all these fine and generous sentiments , a shiver began to run down his back as soon as he drew near her house . 
He reflected that he would not find Ivan , who was so intimate a friend , with her , for Ivan was certainly now with his father . 
Dmitri he was even more certain not to find there , and he had a foreboding of the reason . 
And so his conversation would be with her alone . 
He had a great longing to run and see his brother Dmitri before that fateful interview . 
Without showing him the letter , he could talk to him about it . 
But Dmitri lived a long way off , and he was sure to be away from home too . 
Standing still for a minute , he reached a final decision . 
Crossing himself with a rapid and accustomed gesture , and at once smiling , he turned resolutely in the direction of his terrible lady . 
He knew her house . 
If he went by the High Street and then across the market-place , it was a long way round . 
Though our town is small , it is scattered , and the houses are far apart . 
And meanwhile his father was expecting him , and perhaps had not yet forgotten his command . 
He might be unreasonable , and so he had to make haste to get there and back . 
So he decided to take a short cut by the backway , for he knew every inch of the ground . 
This meant skirting fences , climbing over hurdles , and crossing other people 's back-yards , where everyone he met knew him and greeted him . 
In this way he could reach the High Street in half the time . 
He had to pass the garden adjoining his father 's , and belonging to a little tumbledown house with four windows . 
The owner of this house , as Alyosha knew , was a bedridden old woman , living with her daughter , who had been a genteel maid-servant in generals ' families in Petersburg . 
Now she had been at home a year , looking after her sick mother . 
She always dressed up in fine clothes , though her old mother and she had sunk into such poverty that they went every day to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and bread , which Marfa gave readily . 
Yet , though the young woman came up for soup , she had never sold any of her dresses , and one of these even had a long train - a fact which Alyosha had learned from Rakitin , who always knew everything that was going on in the town . 
He had forgotten it as soon as he heard it , but now , on reaching the garden , he remembered the dress with the train , raised his head , which had been bowed in thought , and came upon something quite unexpected . 
Over the hurdle in the garden , Dmitri , mounted on something , was leaning forward , gesticulating violently , beckoning to him , obviously afraid to utter a word for fear of being overheard . 
Alyosha ran up to the hurdle . 
`` It 's a good thing you looked up . 
I was nearly shouting to you , '' Mitya said in a joyful , hurried whisper . 
`` Climb in here quickly ! 
How splendid that you 've come ! 
I was just thinking of you '' Alyosha was delighted too , but he did not know how to get over the hurdle . 
Mitya put his powerful hand under his elbow to help him jump . 
Tucking up his cassock , Alyosha leapt over the hurdle with the agility of a bare-legged street urchin . 
`` Well done ! 
Now come along , '' said Mitya in an enthusiastic whisper . 
`` Where ? '' 
whispered Alyosha , looking about him and finding himself in a deserted garden with no one near but themselves . 
The garden was small , but the house was at least fifty paces away . 
`` There 's no one here . 
Why do you whisper ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Why do I whisper ? 
Deuce take it '' cried Dmitri at the top of his voice . 
`` You see what silly tricks nature plays one . 
I am here in secret , and on the watch . 
I 'll explain later on , but , knowing it 's a secret , I began whispering like a fool , when there 's no need . 
Let us go . 
Over there . 
Till then be quiet . 
I want to kiss you . 
Glory to God in the world , Glory to God in me ... I was just repeating that , sitting here , before you came . '' 
The garden was about three acres in extent , and planted with trees only along the fence at the four sides . 
There were apple-trees , maples , limes and birch-trees . 
The middle of the garden was an empty grass space , from which several hundredweight of hay was carried in the summer . 
The garden was let out for a few roubles for the summer . 
There were also plantations of raspberries and currants and gooseberries laid out along the sides ; a kitchen garden had been planted lately near the house . 
Dmitri led his brother to the most secluded corner of the garden . 
There , in a thicket of lime-trees and old bushes of black currant , elder , snowball-tree , and lilac , there stood a tumbledown green summer-house ; blackened with age . 
Its walls were of lattice-work , but there was still a roof which could give shelter . 
God knows when this summer-house was built . 
There was a tradition that it had been put up some fifty years before by a retired colonel called von Schmidt , who owned the house at that time . 
It was all in decay , the floor was rotting , the planks were loose , the woodwork smelled musty . 
In the summer-house there was a green wooden table fixed in the ground , and round it were some green benches upon which it was still possible to sit . 
Alyosha had at once observed his brother 's exhilarated condition , and on entering the arbour he saw half a bottle of brandy and a wineglass on the table . 
`` That 's brandy , '' Mitya laughed . 
`` I see your look : ` He 's drinking again '' Distrust the apparition . 
Distrust the worthless , lying crowd , And lay aside thy doubts . 
I 'm not drinking , I 'm only ` indulging , ' as that pig , your Rakitin , says . 
He 'll be a civil councillor one day , but he 'll always talk about ` indulging . ' 
Sit down . 
I could take you in my arms , Alyosha , and press you to my bosom till I crush you , for in the whole world - in reality - in real-i-ty - -LRB- can you take it in ? -RRB- 
I love no one but you ! 
He uttered the last words in a sort of exaltation . 
`` No one but you and one ` jade ' I have fallen in love with , to my ruin . 
But being in love does n't mean loving . 
You may be in love with a woman and yet hate her . 
Remember that ! 
I can talk about it gaily still . 
Sit down here by the table and I 'll sit beside you and look at you , and go on talking . 
You shall keep quiet and I 'll go on talking , for the time has come . 
But on reflection , you know , I 'd better speak quietly , for here - here - you can never tell what ears are listening . 
I will explain everything ; as they say , ` the story will be continued . ' 
Why have I been longing for you ? 
Why have I been thirsting for you all these days , and just now ? 
-LRB- It 's five days since I 've cast anchor here . -RRB- 
Because it 's only to you I can tell everything ; because I must , because I need you , because to-morrow I shall fly from the clouds , because to-morrow life is ending and beginning . 
Have you ever felt , have you ever dreamt of falling down a precipice into a pit ? 
That 's just how I 'm falling , but not in a dream . 
And I 'm not afraid , and do n't you be afraid . 
At least , I am afraid , but I enjoy it . 
It 's not enjoyment though , but ecstasy . 
Damn it all , whatever it is ! 
A strong spirit , a weak spirit , a womanish spirit - what , ever it is ! 
Let us praise nature : you see what sunshine , how clear the sky is , the leaves are all green , it 's still summer ; four o'clock in the afternoon and the stillness ! 
Where were you going ? '' 
`` I was going to father 's , but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna 's first . '' 
`` To her , and to father ! 
Oo ! 
what a coincidence ! 
Why was I waiting for you ? 
Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and even in my ribs ? 
Why , to send you to father and to her , Katerina Ivanovna , so as to have done with her and with father . 
To send an angel . 
I might have sent anyone , but I wanted to send an angel . 
And here you are on your way to see father and her . '' 
`` Did you really mean to send me ? '' 
cried Alyosha with a distressed expression . 
`` Stay ! 
You knew it And I see you understand it all at once . 
But be quiet , be quiet for a time . 
Do n't be sorry , and do n't cry . '' 
Dmitri stood up , thought a moment , and put his finger to his forehead . 
`` She 's asked you , written to you a letter or something , that 's why you 're going to her ? 
You would n't be going except for that ? '' 
`` Here is her note . '' 
Alyosha took it out of his pocket . 
Mitya looked through it quickly . 
`` And you were going the backway ! 
Oh , gods , I thank you for sending him by the backway , and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly old fishermen in the fable ! 
Listen , Alyosha , listen , brother ! 
Now I mean to tell you everything , for I must tell someone . 
An angel in heaven I 've told already ; but I want to tell an angel on earth . 
You are an angel on earth . 
You will hear and judge and forgive . 
And that 's what I need , that someone above me should forgive . 
Listen ! 
If two people break away from everything on earth and fly off into the unknown , or at least one of them , and before flying off or going to ruin he comes to someone else and says , ` Do this for me ' - some favour never asked before that could only be asked on one 's deathbed - would that other refuse , if he were a friend or a brother ? '' 
`` I will do it , but tell me what it is , and make haste , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Make haste ! 
H 'm ! 
... Do n't be in a hurry , Alyosha , you hurry and worry yourself . 
There 's no need to hurry now . 
Now the world has taken a new turning . 
Ah , Alyosha , what a pity you ca n't understand ecstasy . 
But what am I saying to him ? 
As though you did n't understand it . 
What an ass I am ! 
What am I saying ? 
` Be noble , O man ! ' 
- who says that ? '' 
Alyosha made up his mind to wait . 
He felt that , perhaps , indeed , his work lay here . 
Mitya sank into thought for a moment , with his elbow on the table and his head in his hand . 
Both were silent . 
`` Alyosha , '' said Mitya , `` you 're the only one who wo n't laugh . 
I should like to begin - my confession - with Schiller 's Hymn to Joy , An die Freude ! 
I do n't know German , I only know it 's called that . 
Do n't think I 'm talking nonsense because I 'm drunk . 
I 'm not a bit drunk . 
Brandy 's all very well , but I need two bottles to make me drunk : Silenus with his rosy phiz Upon his stumbling ass . 
But I 've not drunk a quarter of a bottle , and I 'm not Silenus . 
I 'm not Silenus , though I am strong , * for I 've made a decision once for all . 
Forgive me the pun ; you 'll have to forgive me a lot more than puns to-day . 
Do n't be uneasy . 
I 'm not spinning it out . 
I 'm talking sense , and I 'll come to the point in a minute . 
I wo n't keep you in suspense . 
Stay , how does it go ? '' 
* In Russian , silen . 
He raised his head , thought a minute , and began with enthusiasm : Wild and fearful in his cavern Hid the naked troglodyte , And the homeless nomad wandered Laying waste the fertile plain . 
Menacing with spear and arrow In the woods the hunter strayed ... . 
Woe to all poor wretches stranded On those cruel and hostile shores ! 
From the peak of high Olympus Came the mother Ceres down , Seeking in those savage regions Her lost daughter Proserpine . 
But the Goddess found no refuge , Found no kindly welcome there , And no temple bearing witness To the worship of the gods . 
From the fields and from the vineyards Came no fruits to deck the feasts , Only flesh of bloodstained victims Smouldered on the altar-fires , And where'er the grieving goddess Turns her melancholy gaze , Sunk in vilest degradation Man his loathsomeness displays Mitya broke into sobs and seized Alyosha 's hand . 
`` My dear , my dear , in degradation , in degradation now , too . 
There 's a terrible amount of suffering for man on earth , a terrible lot of trouble . 
Do n't think I 'm only a brute in an officer 's uniform , wallowing in dirt and drink . 
I hardly think of anything but of that degraded man - if only I 'm not lying . 
I pray God I 'm not lying and showing off . 
I think about that man because I am that man myself . 
Would he purge his soul from vileness And attain to light and worth , He must turn and cling for ever To his ancient Mother Earth . 
But the difficulty is how am I to cling for ever to Mother Earth . 
I do n't kiss her . 
I do n't cleave to her bosom . 
Am I to become a peasant or a shepherd ? 
I go on and I do n't know whether I 'm going to shame or to light and joy . 
That 's the trouble , for everything in the world is a riddle ! 
And whenever I 've happened to sink into the vilest degradation -LRB- and it 's always been happening -RRB- I always read that poem about Ceres and man . 
Has it reformed me ? 
Never ! 
For I 'm a Karamazov . 
For when I do leap into the pit , I go headlong with my heels up , and am pleased to be falling in that degrading attitude , and pride myself upon it . 
And in the very depths of that degradation I begin a hymn of praise . 
Let me be accursed . 
Let me be vile and base , only let me kiss the hem of the veil in which my God is shrouded . 
Though I may be following the devil , I am Thy son , O Lord , and I love Thee , and I feel the joy without which the world can not stand . 
Joy everlasting fostereth The soul of all creation , It is her secret ferment fires The cup of life with flame . 
'T is at her beck the grass hath turned Each blade towards the light And solar systems have evolved From chaos and dark night , Filling the realms of boundless space Beyond the sage 's sight . 
At bounteous Nature 's kindly breast , All things that breathe drink Joy , And birds and beasts and creeping things All follow where She leads . 
Her gifts to man are friends in need , The wreath , the foaming must , To angels - vision of God 's throne , To insects - sensual lust . 
But enough poetry ! 
I am in tears ; let me cry . 
It may be foolishness that everyone would laugh at . 
But you wo n't laugh . 
Your eyes are shining , too . 
Enough poetry . 
I want to tell you now about the insects to whom God gave ` sensual lust . ' 
To insects - sensual lust . 
I am that insect , brother , and it is said of me specially . 
All we Karamazovs are such insects , and , angel as you are , that insect lives in you , too , and will stir up a tempest in your blood . 
Tempests , because sensual lust is a tempest worse than a tempest ! 
Beauty is a terrible and awful thing ! 
It is terrible because it has not been fathomed and never can be fathomed , for God sets us nothing but riddles . 
Here the boundaries meet and all contradictions exist side by side . 
I am a cultivated man , brother , but I 've thought a lot about this . 
It 's terrible what mysteries there are ! 
Too many riddles weigh men down on earth . 
We must solve them as we can , and try to keep a dry skin in the water . 
Beauty ! 
I ca n't endure the thought that a man of lofty mind and heart begins with the ideal of the Madonna and ends with the ideal of Sodom . 
What 's still more awful is that a man with the ideal of Sodom in his soul does not renounce the ideal of the Madonna , and his heart may be on fire with that ideal , genuinely on fire , just as in his days of youth and innocence . 
Yes , man is broad , too broad , indeed . 
I 'd have him narrower . 
The devil only knows what to make of it ! 
What to the mind is shameful is beauty and nothing else to the heart . 
Is there beauty in Sodom ? 
Believe me , that for the immense mass of mankind beauty is found in Sodom . 
Did you know that secret ? 
The awful thing is that beauty is mysterious as well as terrible . 
God and the devil are fighting there and the battlefield is the heart of man . 
But a man always talks of his own ache . 
Listen , now to come to facts . '' 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - In Anecdote `` I was leading a wild life then . 
Father said just now that I spent several thousand roubles in seducing young girls . 
That 's a swinish invention , and there was nothing of the sort . 
And if there was , I did n't need money simply for that . 
With me money is an accessory , the overflow of my heart , the framework . 
To-day she would be my lady , to-morrow a wench out of the streets in her place . 
I entertained them both . 
I threw away money by the handful on music , rioting , and Gypsies . 
Sometimes I gave it to the ladies , too , for they 'll take it greedily , that must be admitted , and be pleased and thankful for it . 
Ladies used to be fond of me : not all of them , but it happened , it happened . 
But I always liked side-paths , little dark back-alleys behind the main road - there one finds adventures and surprises , and precious metal in the dirt . 
I am speaking figuratively , brother . 
In the town I was in , there were no such back-alleys in the literal sense , but morally there were . 
If you were like me , you 'd know what that means . 
I loved vice , I loved the ignominy of vice . 
I loved cruelty ; am I not a bug , am I not a noxious insect ? 
In fact a Karamazov ! 
Once we went , a whole lot of us , for a picnic , in seven sledges . 
It was dark , it was winter , and I began squeezing a girl 's hand , and forced her to kiss me . 
She was the daughter of an official , a sweet , gentle , submissive creature . 
She allowed me , she allowed me much in the dark . 
She thought , poor thing , that I should come next day to make her an offer -LRB- I was looked upon as a good match , too -RRB- . 
But I did n't say a word to her for five months . 
I used to see her in a corner at dances -LRB- we were always having dances -RRB- , her eyes watching me . 
I saw how they glowed with fire - a fire of gentle indignation . 
This game only tickled that insect lust I cherished in my soul . 
Five months later she married an official and left the town , still angry , and still , perhaps , in love with me . 
Now they live happily . 
Observe that I told no one . 
I did n't boast of it . 
Though I 'm full of low desires , and love what 's low , I 'm not dishonourable . 
You 're blushing ; your eyes flashed . 
Enough of this filth with you . 
And all this was nothing much - wayside blossoms a la Paul de Kock - though the cruel insect had already grown strong in my soul . 
I 've a perfect album of reminiscences , brother . 
God bless them , the darlings . 
I tried to break it off without quarrelling . 
And I never gave them away , I never bragged of one of them . 
But that 's enough . 
You ca n't suppose I brought you here simply to talk of such nonsense . 
No , I 'm going to tell you something more curious ; and do n't be surprised that I 'm glad to tell you , instead of being ashamed . '' 
`` You say that because I blushed , '' Alyosha said suddenly . 
`` I was n't blushing at what you were saying or at what you 've done . 
I blushed because I am the same as you are . '' 
`` You ? 
Come , that 's going a little too far ! '' 
`` No , it 's not too far , '' said Alyosha warmly -LRB- obviously the idea was not a new one -RRB- . 
`` The ladder 's the same . 
I 'm at the bottom step , and you 're above , somewhere about the thirteenth . 
That 's how I see it . 
But it 's all the same . 
Absolutely the same in kind . 
Anyone on the bottom step is bound to go up to the top one . '' 
`` Then one ought not to step on at all . '' 
`` Anyone who can help it had better not . '' 
`` But can you ? '' 
`` I think not . '' 
`` Hush , Alyosha , hush , darling ! 
I could kiss your hand , you touch me so . 
That rogue Grushenka has an eye for men . 
She told me once that she 'd devour you one day . 
There , there , I wo n't ! 
From this field of corruption fouled by flies , let 's pass to my tragedy , also befouled by flies , that is , by every sort of vileness . 
Although the old man told lies about my seducing innocence , there really was something of the sort in my tragedy , though it was only once , and then it did not come off . 
The old man who has reproached me with what never happened does not even know of this fact ; I never told anyone about it . 
You 're the first , except Ivan , of course - Ivan knows everything . 
He knew about it long before you . 
But Ivan 's a tomb . '' 
`` Ivan 's a tomb ? '' 
Alyosha listened with great attention . 
`` I was lieutenant in a line regiment , but still I was under supervision , like a kind of convict . 
Yet I was awfully well received in the little town . 
I spent money right and left . 
I was thought to be rich ; I thought so myself . 
But I must have pleased them in other ways as well . 
Although they shook their heads over me , they liked me . 
My colonel , who was an old man , took a sudden dislike to me . 
He was always down upon me , but I had powerful friends , and , moreover , all the town was on my side , so he could n't do me much harm . 
I was in fault myself for refusing to treat him with proper respect . 
I was proud . 
This obstinate old fellow , who was really a very good sort , kind-hearted and hospitable , had had two wives , both dead . 
His first wife , who was of a humble family , left a daughter as unpretentious as herself . 
She was a young woman of four and twenty when I was there , and was living with her father and an aunt , her mother 's sister . 
The aunt was simple and illiterate ; the niece was simple but lively . 
I like to say nice things about people . 
I never knew a woman of more charming character than Agafya - fancy , her name was Agafya Ivanovna ! 
And she was n't bad-looking either , in the Russian style : tall , stout , with a full figure , and beautiful eyes , though a rather coarse face . 
She had not married , although she had had two suitors . 
She refused them , but was as cheerful as ever . 
I was intimate with her , not in ` that ' way , it was pure friendship . 
I have often been friendly with women quite innocently . 
I used to talk to her with shocking frankness , and she only laughed . 
Many woman like such freedom , and she was a girl too , which made it very amusing . 
Another thing , one could never think of her as a young lady . 
She and her aunt lived in her father 's house with a sort of voluntary humility , not putting themselves on an equality with other people . 
She was a general favourite , and of use of everyone , for she was a clever dressmaker . 
She had a talent for it . 
She gave her services freely without asking for payment , but if anyone offered her payment , she did n't refuse . 
The colonel , of course , was a very different matter . 
He was one of the chief personages in the district . 
He kept open house , entertained the whole town , gave suppers and dances . 
At the time I arrived and joined the battalion , all the town was talking of the expected return of the colonel 's second daughter , a great beauty , who had just left a fashionable school in the capital . 
This second daughter is Katerina Ivanovna , and she was the child of the second wife , who belonged to a distinguished general 's family ; although , as I learnt on good authority , she too brought the colonel no money . 
She had connections , and that was all . 
There may have been expectations , but they had come to nothing . 
`` Yet , when the young lady came from boarding-school on a visit , the whole town revived . 
Our most distinguished ladies - two ` Excellencies ' and a colonel 's wife - and all the rest following their lead , at once took her up and gave entertainments in her honour . 
She was the belle of the balls and picnics , and they got up tableaux vivants in aid of distressed governesses . 
I took no notice , I went on as wildly as before , and one of my exploits at the time set all the town talking . 
I saw her eyes taking my measure one evening at the battery commander 's , but I did n't go up to her , as though I disdained her acquaintance . 
I did go up and speak to her at an evening party not long after . 
She scarcely looked at me , and compressed her lips scornfully . 
` Wait a bit . 
I 'll have my revenge , ' thought I. I behaved like an awful fool on many occasions at that time , and I was conscious of it myself . 
What made it worse was that I felt that ` Katenka ' was not an innocent boarding-school miss , but a person of character , proud and really high-principled ; above all , she had education and intellect , and I had neither . 
You think I meant to make her an offer ? 
No , I simply wanted to revenge myself , because I was such a hero and she did n't seem to feel it . 
