We peep into the Gospel only on the eve of making speeches , in order to dazzle the audience by our acquaintance with what is , anyway , a rather original composition , which may be of use to produce a certain effect - all to serve the purpose ! 
But what Christ commands us is something very different : He bids us beware of doing this , because the wicked world does this , but we ought to forgive and to turn the other cheek , and not to measure to our persecutors as they measure to us . 
This is what our God has taught us and not that to forbid children to murder their fathers is a prejudice . 
And we will not from the tribune of truth and good sense correct the Gospel of our Lord , Whom the counsel for the defence deigns to call only ` the crucified lover of humanity , ' in opposition to all orthodox Russia , which calls to Him , ` For Thou art our God ! ' '' 
At this the President intervened and checked the over-zealous speaker , begging him not to exaggerate , not to overstep the bounds , and so on , as presidents always do in such cases . 
The audience , too , was uneasy . 
The public was restless : there were even exclamations of indignation . 
Fetyukovitch did not so much as reply ; he only mounted the tribune to lay his hand on his heart and , with an offended voice , utter a few words full of dignity . 
He only touched again , lightly and ironically , on `` romancing '' and `` psychology , '' and in an appropriate place quoted , `` Jupiter , you are angry , therefore you are wrong , '' which provoked a burst of approving laughter in the audience , for Ippolit Kirillovitch was by no means like Jupiter . 
Then , a propos of the accusation that he was teaching the young generation to murder their fathers , Fetyukovitch observed , with great dignity , that he would not even answer . 
As for the prosecutor 's charge of uttering unorthodox opinions , Fetyukovitch hinted that it was a personal insinuation and that he had expected in this court to be secure from accusations `` damaging to my reputation as a citizen and a loyal subject . '' 
But at these words the President pulled him up , too , and Fetyukovitch concluded his speech with a bow , amid a hum of approbation in the court . 
And Ippolit Kirillovitch was , in the opinion of our ladies , `` crushed for good . '' 
Then the prisoner was allowed to speak . 
Mitya stood up , but said very little . 
He was fearfully exhausted , physically and mentally . 
The look of strength and independence with which he had entered in the morning had almost disappeared . 
He seemed as though he had passed through an experience that day , which had taught him for the rest of his life something very important he had not understood till then . 
His voice was weak , he did not shout as before . 
In his words there was a new note of humility , defeat and submission . 
`` What am I to say , gentlemen of the jury ? 
The hour of judgment has come for me , I feel the hand of God upon me ! 
The end has come to an erring man ! 
But , before God , I repeat to you , I am innocent of my father 's blood ! 
For the last time I repeat , it was n't I killed him ! 
I was erring , but I loved what is good . 
Every instant I strove to reform , but I lived like a wild beast . 
I thank the prosecutor , he told me many things about myself that I did not know ; but it 's not true that I killed my father , the prosecutor is mistaken . 
I thank my counsel , too . 
I cried listening to him ; but it 's not true that I killed my father , and he need n't have supposed it . 
And do n't believe the doctors . 
I am perfectly sane , only my heart is heavy . 
If you spare me , if you let me go , I will pray for you . 
I will be a better man . 
I give you my word before God I will ! 
And if you will condemn me , I 'll break my sword over my head myself and kiss the pieces . 
But spare me , do not rob me of my God ! 
I know myself , I shall rebel ! 
My heart is heavy , gentlemen ... spare me ! '' 
He almost fell back in his place : his voice broke : he could hardly articulate the last phrase . 
Then the judges proceeded to put the questions and began to ask both sides to formulate their conclusions . 
But I will not describe the details . 
At last the jury rose to retire for consultation . 
The President was very tired , and so his last charge to the jury was rather feeble . 
`` Be impartial , do n't be influenced by the eloquence of the defence , but yet weigh the arguments . 
Remember that there is a great responsibility laid upon you , '' and so on and so on . 
The jury withdrew and the court adjourned . 
People could get up , move about , exchange their accumulated impressions , refresh themselves at the buffet . 
It was very late , almost one o'clock in the night , but nobody went away : the strain was so great that no one could think of repose . 
All waited with sinking hearts ; though that is , perhaps , too much to say , for the ladies were only in a state of hysterical impatience and their hearts were untroubled . 
An acquittal , they thought , was inevitable . 
They all prepared themselves for a dramatic moment of general enthusiasm . 
I must own there were many among the men , too , who were convinced that an acquittal was inevitable . 
Some were pleased , others frowned , while some were simply dejected , not wanting him to be acquitted . 
Fetyukovitch himself was confident of his success . 
He was surrounded by people congratulating him and fawning upon him . 
`` There are , '' he said to one group , as I was told afterwards , `` there are invisible threads binding the counsel for the defence with the jury . 
One feels during one 's speech if they are being formed . 
I was aware of them . 
They exist . 
Our cause is won . 
Set your mind at rest . '' 
`` What will our peasants say now ? '' 
said one stout , cross-looking , pock-marked gentleman , a landowner of the neighbourhood , approaching a group of gentlemen engaged in conversation . 
`` But they are not all peasants . 
There are four government clerks among them . '' 
`` Yes , there are clerks , '' said a member of the district council , joining the group . 
`` And do you know that Nazaryev , the merchant with the medal , a juryman ? '' 
`` What of him ? '' 
`` He is a man with brains . '' 
`` But he never speaks . '' 
`` He is no great talker , but so much the better . 
There 's no need for the Petersburg man to teach him : he could teach all Petersburg himself . 
He 's the father of twelve children . 
Think of that ! '' 
`` Upon my word , you do n't suppose they wo n't acquit him ? '' 
one of our young officials exclaimed in another group . 
`` They 'll acquit him for certain , '' said a resolute voice . 
`` It would be shameful , disgraceful , not to acquit him cried the official . 
`` Suppose he did murder him - there are fathers and fathers ! 
And , besides , he was in such a frenzy ... . 
He really may have done nothing but swing the pestle in the air , and so knocked the old man down . 
But it was a pity they dragged the valet in . 
That was simply an absurd theory ! 
If I 'd been in Fetyukovitch 's place , I should simply have said straight out : ` He murdered him ; but he is not guilty , hang it all ! ' 
`` That 's what he did , only without saying , ` Hang it all ! ' '' 
`` No , Mihail Semyonovitch , he almost said that , too , '' put in a third voice . 
`` Why , gentlemen , in Lent an actress was acquitted in our town who had cut the throat of her lover 's lawful wife . '' 
`` Oh , but she did not finish cutting it . '' 
`` That makes no difference . 
She began cutting it . '' 
`` What did you think of what he said about children ? 
Splendid , was n't it ? '' 
`` Splended ! '' 
`` And about mysticism , too ! '' 
`` Oh , drop mysticism , do ! '' 
cried someone else ; `` think of Ippolit and his fate from this day forth . 
His wife will scratch his eyes out to-morrow for Mitya 's sake . '' 
`` Is she here ? '' 
`` What an idea ! 
If she 'd been here she 'd have scratched them out in court . 
She is at home with toothache . 
He he he ! '' 
`` He he he ! '' 
In a third group : `` I dare say they will acquit Mitenka , after all . '' 
`` I should not be surprised if he turns the Metropolis upside down to-morrow . 
He will be drinking for ten days ! '' 
`` Oh , the devil ! '' 
`` The devil 's bound to have a hand in it . 
Where should he be if not here ? '' 
`` Well , gentlemen , I admit it was eloquent . 
But still it 's not the thing to break your father 's head with a pestle ! 
Or what are we coming to ? '' 
`` The chariot ! 
Do you remember the chariot ? '' 
`` Yes ; he turned a cart into a chariot ! '' 
`` And to-morrow he will turn a chariot into a cart , just to suit his purpose . '' 
`` What cunning chaps there are nowadays ! 
Is there any justice to be had in Russia ? '' 
But the bell rang . 
The jury deliberated for exactly an hour , neither more nor less . 
A profound silence reigned in the court as soon as the public had taken their seats . 
I remember how the jurymen walked into the court . 
At last ! 
I wo n't repeat the questions in order , and , indeed , I have forgotten them . 
I remember only the answer to the President 's first and chief question : `` Did the prisoner commit the murder for the sake of robbery and with premeditation ? '' 
-LRB- I do n't remember the exact words . -RRB- 
There was a complete hush . 
The foreman of the jury , the youngest of the clerks , pronounced , in a clear , loud voice , amidst the deathlike stillness of the court : `` Yes , guilty ! '' 
And the same answer was repeated to every question : `` Yes , guilty ! '' 
and without the slightest extenuating comment . 
This no one had expected ; almost everyone had reckoned upon a recommendation to mercy , at least . 
The death-like silence in the court was not broken - all seemed petrified : those who desired his conviction as well as those who had been eager for his acquittal . 
But that was only for the first instant , and it was followed by a fearful hubbub . 
Many of the men in the audience were pleased . 
Some were rubbing their hands with no attempt to conceal their joy . 
Those who disagreed with the verdict seemed crushed , shrugged their shoulders , whispered , but still seemed unable to realise this . 
But how shall I describe the state the ladies were in ? 
I thought they would create a riot . 
At first they could scarcely believe their ears . 
Then suddenly the whole court rang with exclamations : `` What 's the meaning of it ? 
What next ? '' 
They leapt up from their places . 
They seemed to fancy that it might be at once reconsidered and reversed . 
At that instant Mitya suddenly stood up and cried in a heart-rending voice , stretching his hands out before him : `` I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am not guilty of my father 's blood ! 
Katya , I forgive you ! 
Brothers , friends , have pity on the other woman ! '' 
He could not go on , and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heard all over the court in a strange , unnatural voice unlike his own . 
From the farthest corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing shriek - it was Grushenka . 
She had succeeded in begging admittance to the court again before the beginning of the lawyers ' speeches . 
Mitya was taken away . 
The passing of the sentence was deferred till next day . 
The whole court was in a hubbub but I did not wait to hear . 
I only remember a few exclamations I heard on the steps as I went out . 
`` He 'll have a twenty years ' trip to the mines ! '' 
`` Not less . '' 
`` Well , our peasants have stood firm . '' 
`` And have done for our Mitya . '' 
EPILOGUE Plans for Mitya 's Escape VERY early , at nine o'clock in the morning , five days after the trial , Alyosha went to Katerina Ivanovna 's to talk over a matter of great importance to both of them , and to give her a message . 
She sat and talked to him in the very room in which she had once received Grushenka . 
In the next room Ivan Fyodorovitch lay unconscious in a high fever . 
Katerina Ivanovna had immediately after the scene at the trial ordered the sick and unconscious man to be carried to her house , disregarding the inevitable gossip and general disapproval of the public . 
One of two relations who lived with her had departed to Moscow immediately after the scene in court , the other remained . 
But if both had gone away , Katerina Ivanovna would have adhered to her resolution , and would have gone on nursing the sick man and sitting by him day and night . 
Varvinsky and Herzenstube were attending him . 
The famous doctor had gone back to Moscow , refusing to give an opinion as to the probable end of the illness . 
Though the doctors encouraged Katerina Ivanovna and Alyosha , it was evident that they could not yet give them positive hopes of recovery . 
Alyosha came to see his sick brother twice a day . 
But this time he had specially urgent business , and he foresaw how difficult it would be to approach the subject , yet he was in great haste . 
He had another engagement that could not be put off for that same morning , and there was need of haste . 
They had been talking for a quarter of an hour . 
Katerina Ivanovna was pale and terribly fatigued , yet at the same time in a state of hysterical excitement . 
She had a presentiment of the reason why Alyosha had come to her . 
`` Do n't worry about his decision , '' she said , with confident emphasis to Alyosha . 
`` One way or another he is bound to come to it . 
He must escape . 
That unhappy man , that hero of honour and principle - not he , not Dmitri Fyodorovitch , but the man lying the other side of that door , who has sacrificed himself for his brother , '' Katya added , with flashing eyes - `` told me the whole plan of escape long ago . 
You know he has already entered into negotiations ... . 
I 've told you something already ... . 
You see , it will probably come off at the third etape from here , when the party of prisoners is being taken to Siberia . 
Oh , it 's a long way off yet . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch has already visited the superintendent of the third etape . 
But we do n't know yet who will be in charge of the party , and it 's impossible to find that out so long beforehand . 
To-morrow , perhaps , I will show you in detail the whole plan which Ivan Fyodorovitch left me on the eve of the trial in case of need ... . 
That was when - do you remember ? 
- you found us quarrelling . 
He had just gone downstairs , but seeing you I made him come back ; do you remember ? 
Do you know what we were quarrelling about then ? '' 
`` No , I do n't , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Of course he did not tell you . 
It was about that plan of escape . 
He had told me the main idea three days before , and we began quarrelling about it at once and quarrelled for three days . 
We quarrelled because , when he told me that if Dmitri Fyodorovitch were convicted he would escape abroad with that creature , I felt furious at once - I ca n't tell you why , I do n't know myself why ... . 
Oh , of course , I was furious then about that creature , and that she , too , should go abroad with Dmitri ! '' 
Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly , her lips quivering with anger . 
`` As soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch saw that I was furious about that woman , he instantly imagined I was jealous of Dmitri and that I still loved Dmitri . 
That is how our first quarrel began . 
I would not give an explanation , I could not ask forgiveness . 
I could not bear to think that such a man could suspect me of still loving that ... and when I myself had told him long before that I did not love Dmitri , that I loved no one but him ! 
It was only resentment against that creature that made me angry with him . 
Three days later , on the evening you came , he brought me a sealed envelope , which I was to open at once , if anything happened to him . 
Oh , he foresaw his illness ! 
He told me that the envelope contained the details of the escape , and that if he died or was taken dangerously ill , I was to save Mitya alone . 
Then he left me money , nearly ten thousand - those notes to which the prosecutor referred in his speech , having learnt from someone that he had sent them to be changed . 
I was tremendously impressed to find that Ivan Fyodorovitch had not given up his idea of saving his brother , and was confiding this plan of escape to me , though he was still jealous of me and still convinced that I loved Mitya . 
Oh , that was a sacrifice ! 
No , you can not understand the greatness of such self-sacrifice , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I wanted to fall at his feet in reverence , but I thought at once that he would take it only for my joy at the thought of Mitya 's being saved -LRB- and he certainly would have imagined that ! -RRB- 
, and I was so exasperated at the mere possibility of such an unjust thought on his part that I lost my temper again , and instead of kissing his feet , flew into a fury again ! 
Oh , I am unhappy ! 
It 's my character , my awful , unhappy character ! 
Oh , you will see , I shall end by driving him , too , to abandon me for another with whom he can get on better , like Dmitri . 
But ... no , I could not bear it , I should kill myself . 
And when you came in then , and when I called to you and told him to come back , I was so enraged by the look of contempt and hatred he turned on me that do you remember ? 
- I cried out to you that it was he , he alone who had persuaded me that his brother Dmitri was a murderer ! 
I said that malicious thing on purpose to wound him again . 
He had never , never persuaded me that his brother was a murderer . 
On the contrary , it was I who persuaded him ! 
Oh , my vile temper was the cause of everything ! 
I paved the way to that hideous scene at the trial . 
He wanted to show me that he was an honourable man , and that , even if I loved his brother , he would not ruin him for revenge or jealousy . 
So he came to the court ... I am the cause of it all , I alone am to blame ! '' 
Katya never had made such confessions to Alyosha before , and he felt that she was now at that stage of unbearable suffering when even the proudest heart painfully crushes its pride and falls vanquished by grief . 
Oh , Alyosha knew another terrible reason of her present misery , though she had carefully concealed it from him during those days since the trial ; but it would have been , for some reason , too painful to him if she had been brought so low as to speak to him now about that . 
She was suffering for her `` treachery '' at the trial , and Alyosha felt that her conscience was impelling her to confess it to him , to him , Alyosha , with tears and cries and hysterical writhings on the floor . 
But he dreaded that moment and longed to spare her . 
It made the commission on which he had come even more difficult . 
He spoke of Mitya again . 
`` It 's all right , it 's all right , do n't be anxious about him ! 
she began again , sharply and stubbornly . 
`` All that is only momentary , I know him , I know his heart only too well . 
You may be sure he will consent to escape . 
It 's not as though it would be immediately ; he will have time to make up his mind to it . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch will be well by that time and will manage it all himself , so that I shall have nothing to do with it . 
Do n't be anxious ; he will consent to run away . 
He has agreed already : do you suppose he would give up that creature ? 
And they wo n't let her go to him , so he is bound to escape . 
It 's you he 's most afraid of , he is afraid you wo n't approve of his escape on moral grounds . 
But you must generously allow it , if your sanction is so necessary , '' Katya added viciously . 
She paused and smiled . 
`` He talks about some hymn , '' she went on again , `` some cross he has to bear , some duty ; I remember Ivan Fyodorovitch told me a great deal about it , and if you knew how he talked ! 
Katya cried suddenly , with feeling she could not repress , `` If you knew how he loved that wretched man at the moment he told me , and how he hated him , perhaps , at the same moment . 
And I heard his story and his tears with sneering disdain . 
Brute ! 
Yes , I am a brute . 
I am responsible for his fever . 
But that man in prison is incapable of suffering , '' Katya concluded irritably . 
`` Can such a man suffer ? 
Men like him never suffer ! '' 
There was a note of hatred and contemptuous repulsion in her words . 
And yet it was she who had betrayed him . 
`` Perhaps because she feels how she 's wronged him she hates him at moments , '' Alyosha thought to himself . 
He hoped that it was only `` at moments . '' 
In Katya 's last words he detected a challenging note , but he did not take it up . 
`` I sent for you this morning to make you promise to persuade him yourself . 
Or do you , too , consider that to escape would be dishonourable , cowardly , or something ... unchristian , perhaps ? '' 
Katya added , even more defiantly . 
`` Oh , no . 
I 'll tell him everything , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` He asks you to come and see him to-day , '' he blurted out suddenly , looking her steadily in the face . 
She started , and drew back a little from him on the sofa . 
`` Me ? 
Can that be ? '' 
She faltered , turning pale . 
`` It can and ought to be ! '' 
Alyosha began emphatically , growing more animated . 
`` He needs you particularly just now . 
I would not have opened the subject and worried you , if it were not necessary . 
He is ill , he is beside himself , he keeps asking for you . 
It is not to be reconciled with you that he wants you , but only that you would go and show yourself at his door . 
So much has happened to him since that day . 
He realises that he has injured you beyond all reckoning . 
He does not ask your forgiveness - ` It 's impossible to forgive me , ' he says himself - but only that you would show yourself in his doorway . '' 
`` It 's so sudden ... '' faltered Katya . 
`` I 've had a presentiment all these days that you would come with that message . 
I knew he would ask me to come . 
It 's impossible ! '' 
`` Let it be impossible , but do it . 
Only think , he realises for the first time how he has wounded you , the first time in his life ; he had never grasped it before so fully . 
He said , ` If she refuses to come I shall be unhappy all my life . ' 
you hear ? 
though he is condemned to penal servitude for twenty years , he is still planning to be happy - is not that piteous ? 
Think - you must visit him ; though he is ruined , he is innocent , '' broke like a challenge from Alyosha . 
`` His hands are clean , there is no blood on them ! 
For the sake of his infinite sufferings in the future visit him now . 
Go , greet him on his way into the darkness - stand at his door , that is all ... . 
You ought to do it , you ought to ! '' 
Alyosha concluded , laying immense stress on the word `` ought . '' 
`` I ought to ... but I can not ... '' Katya moaned . 
`` He will look at me ... . 
I ca n't . '' 
`` Your eyes ought to meet . 
How will you live all your life , if you do n't make up your mind to do it now ? '' 
`` Better suffer all my life . '' 
`` You ought to go , you ought to go , '' Alyosha repeated with merciless emphasis . 
`` But why to-day , why at once ? 
... I ca n't leave our patient - '' `` You can for a moment . 
It will only be a moment . 
If you do n't come , he will be in delirium by to-night . 
I would not tell you a lie ; have pity on him ! '' 
`` Have pity on me ! '' 
Katya said , with bitter reproach , and she burst into tears . 
`` Then you will come , '' said Alyosha firmly , seeing her tears . 
`` I 'll go and tell him you will come directly . '' 
`` No , do n't tell him so on any account , '' cried Katya in alarm . 
`` I will come , but do n't tell him beforehand , for perhaps I may go , but not go in ... I do n't know yet - '' Her voice failed her . 
She gasped for breath . 
Alyosha got up to go . 
`` And what if I meet anyone ? '' 
she said suddenly , in a low voice , turning white again . 
`` That 's just why you must go now , to avoid meeting anyone . 
There will be no one there , I can tell you that for certain . 
We will expect you , '' he concluded emphatically , and went out of the room . 
For a Moment the Lie Becomes Truth HE hurried to the hospital where Mitya was lying now . 
The day after his fate was determined , Mitya had fallen ill with nervous fever , and was sent to the prison division of the town hospital . 
But at the request of several persons -LRB- Alyosha , Madame Hohlakov , Lise , etc. -RRB- , Doctor Varvinsky had put Mitya not with other prisoners , but in a separate little room , the one where Smerdyakov had been . 
It is true that there was a sentinel at the other end of the corridor , and there was a grating over the window , so that Varvinsky could be at ease about the indulgence he had shown , which was not quite legal , indeed ; but he was a kind-hearted and compassionate young man . 
He knew how hard it would be for a man like Mitya to pass at once so suddenly into the society of robbers and murderers , and that he must get used to it by degrees . 
The visits of relations and friends were informally sanctioned by the doctor and overseer , and even by the police captain . 
But only Alyosha and Grushenka had visited Mitya . 
Rakitin had tried to force his way in twice , but Mitya persistently begged Varvinsky not to admit him . 
Alyosha found him sitting on his bed in a hospital dressing gown , rather feverish , with a towel , soaked in vinegar and water , on his head . 
He looked at Alyosha as he came in with an undefined expression , but there was a shade of something like dread discernible in it . 
He had become terribly preoccupied since the trial ; sometimes he would be silent for half an hour together , and seemed to be pondering something heavily and painfully , oblivious of everything about him . 
If he roused himself from his brooding and began to talk , he always spoke with a kind of abruptness and never of what he really wanted to say . 
He looked sometimes with a face of suffering at his brother . 
He seemed to be more at ease with Grushenka than with Alyosha . 
It is true , he scarcely spoke to her at all , but as soon as she came in , his whole face lighted up with joy . 
Alyosha sat down beside him on the bed in silence . 
This time Mitya was waiting for Alyosha in suspense , but he did not dare ask him a question . 
He felt it almost unthinkable that Katya would consent to come , and at the same time he felt that if she did not come , something inconceivable would happen . 
Alyosha understood his feelings . 
`` Trifon Borissovitch , '' Mitya began nervously , `` has pulled his whole inn to pieces , I am told . 
He 's taken up the flooring , pulled apart the planks , split up all the gallery , I am told . 
He is seeking treasure all the time - the fifteen hundred roubles which the prosecutor said I 'd hidden there . 
He began playing these tricks , they say , as soon as he got home . 
Serve him right , the swindler ! 
The guard here told me yesterday ; he comes from there . '' 
`` Listen , '' began Alyosha . 
`` She will come , but I do n't know when . 
Perhaps to-day , perhaps in a few days , that I ca n't tell . 
But she will come , she will , that 's certain . '' 
Mitya started , would have said something , but was silent . 
The news had a tremendous effect on him . 
It was evident that he would have liked terribly to know what had been said , but he was again afraid to ask . 
Something cruel and contemptuous from Katya would have cut him like a knife at that moment . 
`` This was what she said among other things ; that I must be sure to set your conscience at rest about escaping . 
If Ivan is not well by then she will see to it all herself . '' 
`` You 've spoken of that already , '' Mitya observed musingly . 
`` And you have repeated it to Grusha , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` Yes , '' Mitya admitted . 
`` She wo n't come this morning . '' 
He looked timidly at his brother . 
`` She wo n't come till the evening . 
When I told her yesterday that Katya was taking measures , she was silent , but she set her mouth . 
She only whispered , ` Let her ! ' 
She understood that it was important . 
I did not dare to try her further . 
She understands now , I think , that Katya no longer cares for me , but loves Ivan . '' 
`` Does she ? '' 
broke from Alyosha . 
`` Perhaps she does not . 
Only she is not coming this morning , '' Mitya hastened to explain again ; `` I asked her to do something for me . 
You know , Ivan is superior to all of us . 
He ought to live , not us . 
He will recover . '' 
`` Would you believe it , though Katya is alarmed about him , she scarcely doubts of his recovery , '' said Alyosha . 
`` That means that she is convinced he will die . 
It 's because she is frightened she 's so sure he will get well . '' 
`` Ivan has a strong constitution , and I , too , believe there 's every hope that he will get well , '' Alyosha observed anxiously . 
`` Yes , he will get well . 
But she is convinced that he will die . 
She has a great deal of sorrow to bear ... '' A silence followed . 
A grave anxiety was fretting Mitya . 
`` Alyosha , I love Grusha terribly , '' he said suddenly in a shaking voice , full of tears . 
`` They wo n't let her go out there to you , '' Alyosha put in at once . 
`` And there is something else I wanted tell you , '' Mitya went on , with a sudden ring in his voice . 
`` If they beat me on the way or out there , I wo n't submit to it . 
I shall kill someone , and shall be shot for it . 
And this will be going on for twenty years ! 
They speak to me rudely as it is . 
I 've been lying here all night , passing judgment on myself . 
I am not ready ! 
I am not able to resign myself . 
I wanted to sing a ` hymn ' ; but if a guard speaks rudely to me , I have not the strength to bear it . 
For Grusha I would bear anything ... anything except blows ... . 
But she wo n't be allowed to come there . '' 
Alyosha smiled gently . 
`` Listen , brother , once for all , '' he said . 
`` This is what I think about it . 
And you know that I would not tell you a lie . 
Listen : you are not ready , and such a cross is not for you . 
What 's more , you do n't need such a martyr 's cross when you are not ready for it . 
If you had murdered our father , it would grieve me that you should reject your punishment . 
But you are innocent , and such a cross is too much for you . 
You wanted to make yourself another man by suffering . 
I say , only remember that other man always , all your life and wherever you go ; and that will be enough for you . 
Your refusal of that great cross will only serve to make you feel all your life even greater duty , and that constant feeling will do more to make you a new man , perhaps , than if you went there . 
For there you would not endure it and would repine , and perhaps at last would say : ' I am quits . ' 
The lawyer was right about that . 
Such heavy burdens are not for all men . 
For some they are impossible . 
These are my thoughts about it , if you want them so much . 
If other men would have to answer for your escape , officers or soldiers , then I would not have ` allowed ' you , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But they declare - the superintendent of that etape * told Ivan himself - that if it 's well managed there will be no great inquiry , and that they can get off easily . 
Of course , bribing is dishonest even in such a case , but I ca n't undertake to judge about it , because if Ivan and Katya commissioned me to act for you , I know I should go and give bribes . 
I must tell you the truth . 
And so I ca n't judge of your own action . 
But let me assure you that I shall never condemn you . 
And it would be a strange thing if I could judge you in this . 
Now I think I 've gone into everything . '' 
* Stockade . 
`` But I do condemn myself ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I shall escape , that was settled apart from you ; could Mitya Karamazov do anything but run away ? 
But I shall condemn myself , and I will pray for my sin for ever . 
That 's how the Jesuits talk , is n't it ? 
Just as we are doing ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Alyosha smiled gently . 
`` I love you for always telling the whole truth and never hiding anything , '' cried Mitya , with a joyful laugh . 
`` So I 've caught my Alyosha being Jesuitical . 
I must kiss you for that . 
Now listen to the rest ; I 'll open the other side of my heart to you . 
This is what I planned and decided . 
If I run away , even with money and a passport , and even to America , I should be cheered up by the thought that I am not running away for pleasure , not for happiness , but to another exile as bad , perhaps , as Siberia . 
It is as bad , Alyosha , it is ! 
I hate that America , damn it , already . 
Even though Grusha will be with me . 
Just look at her ; is she an American ? 
She is Russian , Russian to the marrow of her bones ; she will be homesick for the mother country , and I shall see every hour that she is suffering for my sake , that she has taken up that cross for me . 
And what harm has she done ? 
And how shall I , too , put up with the rabble out there , though they may be better than I , every one of them ? 
I hate that America already ! 
And though they may be wonderful at machinery , every one of them , damn them , they are not of my soul . 
I love Russia , Alyosha , I love the Russian God , though I am a scoundrel myself . 
I shall choke there ! '' 
he exclaimed , his eyes suddenly flashing . 
His voice was trembling with tears . 
`` So this is what I 've decided , Alyosha , listen , '' he began again , mastering his emotion . 
`` As soon as I arrive there with Grusha , we will set to work at once on the land , in solitude , somewhere very remote , with wild bears . 
There must be some remote parts even there . 
I am told there are still Redskins there , somewhere , on the edge of the horizon . 
So to the country of the Last of the Mohicans , and there we 'll tackle the grammar at once , Grusha and I. Work and grammar - that 's how we 'll spend three years . 
And by that time we shall speak English like any Englishman . 
And as soon as we 've learnt it - good-bye to America ! 
We 'll run here to Russia as American citizens . 
Do n't be uneasy - we would not come to this little town . 
We 'd hide somewhere , a long way off , in the north or in the south . 
I shall be changed by that time , and she will , too , in America . 
The doctors shall make me some sort of wart on my face - what 's the use of their being so mechanical ! 
- or else I 'll put out one eye , let my beard grow a yard , and I shall turn grey , fretting for Russia . 
I dare say they wo n't recognise us . 
And if they do , let them send us to Siberia - I do n't care . 
It will show it 's our fate . 
We 'll work on the land here , too , somewhere in the wilds , and I 'll make up as an American all my life . 
But we shall die on our own soil . 
That 's my plan , and it sha n't be altered . 
Do you approve ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Alyosha , not wanting to contradict him . 
Mitya paused for a minute and said suddenly : `` And how they worked it up at the trial ! 
Did n't they work it up ! '' 
`` If they had not , you would have been convicted just the same , '' said Alyosha , with a sigh . 
`` Yes , people are sick of me here ! 
God bless them , but it 's hard , '' Mitya moaned miserably . 
Again there was silence for a minute . 
`` Alyosha , put me out of my misery at once ! '' 
he exclaimed suddenly . 
`` Tell me , is she coming now , or not ? 
Tell me ? 
What did she say ? 
How did she say it ? '' 
`` She said she would come , but I do n't know whether she will come to-day . 
It 's hard for her , you know , '' Alyosha looked timidly at his brother . 
`` I should think it is hard for her ! 
Alyosha , it will drive me out of my mind . 
Grusha keeps looking at me . 
She understands . 
My God , calm my heart : what is it I want ? 
I want Katya ! 
Do I understand what I want ? 
It 's the headstrong , evil Karamazov spirit ! 
No , I am not fit for suffering . 
I am a scoundrel , that 's all one can say . '' 
`` Here she is ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
At that instant Katya appeared in the doorway . 
For a moment she stood still , gazing at Mitya with a dazed expression . 
He leapt pulsively to his feet , and a scared look came into his face . 
He turned pale , but a timid , pleading smile appeared on his lips at once , and with an irresistible impulse he held out both hands to Katya . 
Seeing it , she flew impetuously to him . 
She seized him by the hands , and almost by force made him sit down on the bed . 
She sat down beside him , and still keeping his hands pressed them violently . 
Several times they both strove to speak , but stopped short and again gazed speechless with a strange smile , their eyes fastened on one another . 
So passed two minutes . 
`` Have you forgiven me ? '' 
Mitya faltered at last , and at the same moment turning to Alyosha , his face working with joy , he cried , `` Do you hear what I am asking , do you hear ? '' 
`` That 's what I loved you for , that you are generous at heart ! '' 
broke from Katya . 
`` My forgiveness is no good to you , nor yours to me ; whether you forgive me or not , you will always be a sore place in my heart , and I in yours - so it must be ... '' She stopped to take breath . 
