`` Look alive , Marya , or you 'll get the stick ! 
The bears rolled on the ground at last in the most unseemly fashion , amid roars of laughter from the closely-packed crowd of men and women . 
`` Well , let them ! 
Let them ! '' 
said Grushenka sententiously , with an ecstatic expression on her face . 
`` When they do get a day to enjoy themselves ; why should n't folks be happy ? '' 
Kalgonov looked as though he had been besmirched with dirt . 
`` It 's swinish , all this peasant foolery , '' he murmured , moving away ; `` it 's the game they play when it 's light all night in summer . '' 
He particularly disliked one `` new '' song to a jaunty dance-tune . 
It described how a gentleman came and tried his luck with the girls , to see whether they would love him : The master came to try the girls : Would they love him , would they not ? 
But the girls could not love the master : He would beat me cruelly And such love wo n't do for me . 
Then a gypsy comes along and he , too , tries : The gypsy came to try the girls : Would they love him , would they not ? 
But they could n't love the gypsy either : He would be a thief , I fear , And would cause me many a tear . 
And many more men come to try their luck , among them a soldier : The soldier came to try the girls : Would they love him , would they not ? 
But the soldier is rejected with contempt , in two indecent lines , sung with absolute frankness and producing a furore in the audience . 
The song ends with a merchant : The merchant came to try the girls : Would they love him , would they not ? 
And it appears that he wins their love because : The merchant will make gold for me And his queen I 'll gladly be . 
Kalgonov was positively indignant . 
`` That 's just a song of yesterday , '' he said aloud . 
`` Who writes such things for them ? 
They might just as well have had a railwayman or a Jew come to try his luck with the girls ; they 'd have carried all before them . '' 
And , almost as though it were a personal affront , he declared , on the spot , that he was bored , sat down on the sofa and immediately fell asleep . 
His pretty little face looked rather pale , as it fell back on the sofa cushion . 
`` Look how pretty he is , '' said Grushenka , taking Mitya up to him . 
`` I was combing his hair just now ; his hair 's like flax , and so thick ... '' And , bending over him tenderly , she kissed his forehead . 
Kalgonov instantly opened his eyes , looked at her , stood up , and with the most anxious air inquired where was Maximov ? 
`` So that 's who it is you want . '' 
Grushenka laughed . 
`` Stay with me a minute . 
Mitya , run and find his Maximov . '' 
Maximov , it appeared , could not tear himself away from the girls , only running away from time to time to pour himself out a glass of liqueur . 
He had drunk two cups of chocolate . 
His face was red , and his nose was crimson ; his eyes were moist , and mawkishly sweet.He ran up and announced that he was going to dance the `` sabotiere . '' 
`` They taught me all those well-bred , aristocratic dances when I was little ... '' `` Go , go with him , Mitya , and I 'll watch from here how he dances , '' said Grushenka . 
`` No , no , I 'm coming to look on , too , '' exclaimed Kalganov , brushing aside in the most naive way Grushenka 's offer to sit with him . 
They all went to look on . 
Maximov danced his dance . 
But it roused no great admiration in anyone but Mitya . 
It consisted of nothing but skipping and hopping , kicking the feet , and at every skip Maximov slapped the upturned sole of his foot . 
Kalgonov did not like it at all , but Mitya kissed the dancer . 
`` Thanks . 
You 're tired perhaps ? 
What are you looking for here ? 
Would you like some sweets ? 
A cigar , perhaps ? '' 
`` A cigarette . '' 
`` Do n't you want a drink ? '' 
`` I 'll just have a liqueur ... . 
Have you any chocolates ? '' 
`` Yes , there 's a heap of them on the table there . 
Choose one , my dear soul ! '' 
`` I like one with vanilla ... for old people . 
He he ! 
`` No , brother , we 've none of that special sort . '' 
`` I say , '' the old man bent down to whisper in Mitya 's ear . 
`` That girl there , little Marya , he he ! 
How would it be if you were to help me make friends with her ? '' 
`` So that 's what you 're after ! 
No , brother , that wo n't do ! '' 
`` I 'd do no harm to anyone , '' Maximov muttered disconsolately . 
`` Oh , all right , all right . 
They only come here to dance and sing , you know , brother . 
But damn it all , wait a bit ! 
... Eat and drink and be merry , meanwhile . 
Do n't you want money ? '' 
`` Later on , perhaps , '' smiled Maximov . 
`` All right , all right ... '' Mitya 's head was burning . 
He went outside to the wooden balcony which ran round the whole building on the inner side , overlooking the courtyard . 
The fresh air revived him . 
He stood alone in a dark corner , and suddenly clutched his head in both hands . 
His scattered thoughts came together ; his sensations blended into a whole and threw a sudden light into his mind . 
A fearful and terrible light ! 
`` If I 'm to shoot myself , why not now ? '' 
passed through his mind . 
`` Why not go for the pistols , bring them here , and here , in this dark dirty corner , make an end ? '' 
Almost a minute he undecided . 
A few hours earlier , when he had been dashing here , he was pursued by disgrace , by the theft he had committed , and that blood , that blood ! 
... But yet it was easier for him then . 
Then everything was over : he had lost her , given her up . 
She was gone , for him - oh , then his death sentence had been easier for him ; at least it had seemed necessary , inevitable , for what had he to stay on earth for ? 
But now ? 
Was it the same as then ? 
Now one phantom , one terror at least was at an end : that first , rightful lover , that fateful figure had vanished , leaving no trace . 
The terrible phantom had turned into something so small , so comic ; it had been carried into the bedroom and locked in . 
It would never return . 
She was ashamed , and from her eyes he could see now whom she loved . 
Now he had everything to make life happy ... but he could not go on living , he could not ; oh , damnation ! 
`` O God ! 
restore to life the man I knocked down at the fence ! 
Let this fearful cup pass from me ! 
Lord , thou hast wrought miracles for such sinners as me ! 
But what , what if the old man 's alive ? 
Oh , then the shame of the other disgrace I would wipe away . 
I would restore the stolen money . 
I 'd give it back ; I 'd get it somehow ... . 
No trace of that shame will remain except in my heart for ever ! 
But no , no ; oh , impossible cowardly dreams ! 
Oh , damnation ! '' 
Yet there was a ray of light and hope in his darkness . 
He jumped up and ran back to the room - to her , to her , his queen for ever ! 
Was not one moment of her love worth all the rest of life , even in the agonies of disgrace ? 
This wild question clutched at his heart . 
`` To her , to her alone , to see her , to hear her , to think of nothing , to forget everything , if only for that night , for an hour , for a moment ! '' 
Just as he turned from the balcony into the passage , he came upon the landlord , Trifon Borissovitch . 
He thought he looked gloomy and worried , and fancied he had come to find him . 
`` What is it , Trifon Borissovitch ? 
Are you looking for me ? '' 
`` No , sir , '' The landlord seemed disconcerted . 
`` Why should I be looking for you ? 
Where have you been ? '' 
`` Why do you look so glum ? 
You 're not angry , are you ? 
Wait a bit , you shall soon get to bed ... . 
What 's the time ? '' 
`` It 'll be three o'clock . 
Past three , it must be . '' 
`` We 'll leave off soon . 
We 'll leave off . '' 
`` Do n't mention it ; it does n't matter . 
Keep it up as long as you like ... '' `` What 's the matter with him ? '' 
Mitya wondered for an instant , and he ran back to the room where the girls were dancing . 
But she was not there . 
She was not in the blue room either ; there was no one but Kalgonov asleep on the sofa . 
Mitya peeped behind the curtain - she was there . 
She was sitting in the corner , on a trunk . 
Bent forward , with her head and arms on the bed close by , she was crying bitterly , doing her utmost to stifle her sobs that she might not be heard . 
Seeing Mitya , she beckoned him to her , and when he ran to her , she grasped his hand tightly . 
`` Mitya , Mitya , I loved him , you know . 
How I have loved him these five years , all that time ! 
Did I love him or only my own anger ? 
No , him , him ! 
It 's a lie that it was my anger I loved and not him . 
Mitya , I was only seventeen then ; he was so kind to me , so merry ; he used to sing to me ... . 
Or so it seemed to a silly girl like me ... . 
And now , O Lord , it 's not the same man . 
Even his face is not the same ; he 's different altogether . 
I should n't have known him . 
I drove here with Timofey , and all the way I was thinking how I should meet him , what I should say to him , how we should look at one another . 
My soul was faint , and all of a sudden it was just as though he had emptied a pail of dirty water over me . 
He talked to me like a schoolmaster , all so grave and learned ; he met me so solemnly that I was struck dumb . 
I could n't get a word in . 
At first I thought he was ashamed to talk before his great big Pole . 
I sat staring at him and wondering why I could n't say a word to him now . 
It must have been his wife that ruined him ; you know he threw me up to get married . 
She must have changed him like that . 
Mitya , how shameful it is ! 
Oh , Mitya , I 'm ashamed , I 'm ashamed for all my life . 
Curse it , curse it , curse those five years ! '' 
And again she burst into tears , but clung tight to Mitya 's hand and did not let it go . 
`` Mitya , darling , stay , do n't go away . 
I want to say one word to you , '' she whispered , and suddenly raised her face to him . 
`` Listen , tell me who it is I love ? 
I love one man here . 
Who is that man ? 
That 's what you must tell me . '' 
A smile lighted up her face that was swollen with weeping , and her eyes shone in the half darkness . 
`` A falcon flew in , and my heart sank . 
`` Fool ! 
that 's the man you love ! ' 
That was what my heart whispered to me at once . 
You came in and all grew bright . 
What 's he afraid of ? 
I wondered . 
For you were frightened ; you could n't speak . 
It 's not them he 's afraid of - could you be frightened of anyone ? 
It 's me he 's afraid of , I thought , only me . 
So Fenya told you , you little stupid , how I called to Alyosha out of the window that I 'd loved Mityenka for one hour , and that I was going now to love ... another . 
Mitya , Mitya , how could I be such a fool as to think I could love anyone after you ? 
Do you forgive me , Mitya ? 
Do you forgive me or not ? 
Do you love me ? 
Do you love me ? '' 
She jumped up and held him with both hands on his shoulders . 
Mitya , dumb with rapture , gazed into her eyes , at her face , at her smile , and suddenly clasped her tightly his arms and kissed her passionately . 
`` You will forgive me for having tormented you ? 
It was through spite I tormented you all . 
It was for spite I drove the old man out of his mind ... . 
Do you remember how you drank at my house one day and broke the wine-glass ? 
I remembered that and I broke a glass to-day and drank ` to my vile heart . ' 
Mitya , my falcon , why do n't you kiss me ? 
He kissed me once , and now he draws back and looks and listens . 
Why listen to me ? 
Kiss me , kiss me hard , that 's right . 
if you love , well , then , love ! 
I 'll be your slave now , your slave for the rest of my life . 
It 's sweet to be a slave . 
Kiss me ! 
Beat me , ill-treat me , do what you will with me ... . 
And I do deserve to suffer . 
Stay , wait , afterwards , I wo n't have that ... '' she suddenly thrust him away . 
`` Go along , Mitya , I 'll come and have some wine , I want to be drunk , I 'm going to get drunk and dance ; I must , I must ! '' 
She tore herself away from him and disappeared behind the curtain . 
Mitya followed like a drunken man . 
`` Yes , come what may - whatever may happen now , for one minute I 'd give the whole world , '' he thought . 
Grushenka did , in fact , toss off a whole glass of champagne at one gulp , and became at once very tipsy . 
She sat down in the same chair as before , with a blissful smile on her face . 
Her cheeks were glowing , her lips were burning , her flashing eyes were moist ; there was passionate appeal in her eyes . 
Even Kalgonov felt a stir at the heart and went up to her . 
`` Did you feel how I kissed you when you were asleep just now ? '' 
she said thickly . 
`` I 'm drunk now , that 's what it is ... . 
And are n't you drunk ? 
And why is n't Mitya drinking ? 
Why do n't you drink , Mitya ? 
I 'm drunk , and you do n't drink ... '' `` I am drunk ! 
I 'm drunk as it is ... drunk with you ... and now I 'll be drunk with wine , too . '' 
He drank off another glass , and - he thought it strange himself - that glass made him completely drunk . 
He was suddenly drunk , although till that moment he had been quite sober , he remembered that . 
From that moment everything whirled about him , as though he were delirious . 
He walked , laughed , talked to everybody , without knowing what he was doing . 
Only one persistent burning sensation made itself felt continually , `` like a red-hot coal in his heart , '' he said afterwards . 
He went up to her , sat beside her , gazed at her , listened to her ... . 
She became very talkative , kept calling everyone to her , and beckoned to different girls out of the chorus . 
When the girl came up , she either kissed her , or made the sign of the cross over her . 
In another minute she might have cried . 
She was greatly amused by the `` little old man , '' as she called Maximov . 
He ran up every minute to kiss her hands , each little finger , '' and finally he danced another dance to an old song , which he sang himself . 
He danced with special vigour to the refrain : The little pig says - umph ! 
umph ! 
umph ! 
The little calf says - moo , moo , moo , The little duck says - quack , quack , quack , The little goose says - ga , ga , ga. . 
The hen goes strutting through the porch ; Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo , she 'll say , Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo , she 'll say ! 
`` Give him something , Mitya , '' said Grushenka . 
`` Give him a present , he 's poor , you know . 
Ah , the poor , the insulted ! 
... Do you know , Mitya , I shall go into a nunnery . 
No , I really shall one day . 
Alyosha said something to me to-day that I shall remember all my life ... . 
Yes ... . 
But to-day let us dance . 
To-morrow to the nunnery , but to-day we 'll dance . 
I want to play to-day , good people , and what of it ? 
God will forgive us . 
If I were God , I 'd forgive everyone : ` My dear sinners , from this day forth I forgive you . ' 
I 'm going to beg forgiveness : ` Forgive me , good people , a silly wench . ' 
I 'm a beast , that 's what I am . 
But I want to pray . 
I gave a little onion . 
Wicked as I 've been , I want to pray . 
Mitya , let them dance , do n't stop them . 
Everyone in the world is good . 
Everyone - even the worst of them . 
The world 's a nice place . 
Though we 're bad the world 's all right . 
We 're good and bad , good and bad ... . 
Come , tell me , I 've something to ask you : come here everyone , and I 'll ask you : Why am I so good ? 
You know I am good . 
I 'm very good ... . 
Come , why am I so good ? '' 
So Grushenka babbled on , getting more and more drunk . 
At last she announced that she was going to dance , too . 
She got up from her chair , staggering . 
`` Mitya , do n't give me any more wine - if I ask you , do n't give it to me . 
Wine does n't give peace . 
Everything 's going round , the stove , and everything . 
I want to dance . 
Let everyone see how I dance ... let them see how beautifully I dance ... '' She really meant it . 
She pulled a white cambric handkerchief out of her pocket , and took it by one corner in her right hand , to wave it in the dance . 
Mitya ran to and fro , the girls were quiet , and got ready to break into a dancing song at the first signal . 
Maximov , hearing that Grushenka wanted to dance , squealed with delight , and ran skipping about in front of her , humming : With legs so slim and sides so trim And its little tail curled tight . 
But Grushenka waved her handkerchief at him and drove him away . 
`` Sh-h ! 
Mitya , why do n't they come ? 
Let everyone come ... to look on . 
Call them in , too , that were locked in ... . 
Why did you lock them in ? 
Tell them I 'm going to dance . 
Let them look on , too ... '' Mitya walked with a drunken swagger to the locked door , and began knocking to the Poles with his fist . 
`` Hi , you ... Podvysotskis ! 
Come , she 's going to dance . 
She calls you . '' 
`` Lajdak ! '' 
one of the Poles shouted in reply . 
`` You 're a lajdak yourself ! 
You 're a little scoundrel , that 's what you are . '' 
`` Leave off laughing at Poland , '' said Kalganov sententiously . 
He too was drunk . 
`` Be quiet , boy ! 
If I call him a scoundrel , it does n't mean that I called all Poland so . 
One lajdak does n't make a Poland . 
Be quiet , my pretty boy , eat a sweetmeat . '' 
`` Ach , what fellows ! 
As though they were not men . 
Why wo n't they make friends ? '' 
said Grushenka , and went forward to dance . 
The chorus broke into `` Ah , my porch , my new porch ! '' 
Grushenka flung back her head , half opened her lips , smiled , waved her handkerchief , and suddenly , with a violent lurch , stood still in the middle of the room , looking bewildered . 
`` I 'm weak ... '' she said in an exhausted voice . 
`` Forgive me ... . 
I 'm weak , I ca n't ... . 
I 'm sorry . '' 
She bowed to the chorus , and then began bowing in all directions . 
`` I 'm sorry ... . 
Forgive me ... '' `` The lady 's been drinking . 
The pretty lady has been drinking , '' voices were heard saying . 
`` The lady 's drunk too much , '' Maximov explained to the girls , giggling . 
`` Mitya , lead me away ... take me , '' said Grushenka helplessly . 
Mitya pounced on her , snatched her up in his arms , and carried the precious burden through the curtains . 
`` Well , now I 'll go , '' thought Kalganov , and walking out of the blue room , he closed the two halves of the door after him . 
But the orgy in the larger room went on and grew louder and louder . 
Mitya laid Grushenka on the bed and kissed her on the lips . 
`` Do n't touch me ... '' she faltered , in an imploring voice . 
`` Do n't touch me , till I 'm yours ... . 
I 've told you I 'm yours , but do n't touch me ... spare me ... . 
With them here , with them close , you must n't . 
He 's here . 
It 's nasty here ... '' `` I 'll obey you ! 
I wo n't think of it ... I worship you ! '' 
muttered Mitya . 
`` Yes , it 's nasty here , it 's abominable . '' 
And still holding her in his arms , he sank on his knees by the bedside . 
`` I know , though you 're a brute , you 're generous , '' Grushenka articulated with difficulty . 
`` It must be honourable ... it shall be honourable for the future ... and let us be honest , let us be good , not brutes , but good ... take me away , take me far away , do you hear ? 
I do n't want it to be here , but far , far away ... '' `` Oh , yes , yes , it must be ! '' 
said Mitya , pressing her in his arms . 
`` I 'll take you and we 'll fly away ... . 
Oh , I 'd give my whole life for one year only to know about that blood ! '' 
`` What blood ? '' 
asked Grushenka , bewildered . 
`` Nothing , '' muttered Mitya , through his teeth . 
`` Grusha , you wanted to be honest , but I 'm a thief . 
But I 've stolen money from Katya ... . 
Disgrace , a disgrace ! '' 
`` From Katya , from that young lady ? 
No , you did n't steal it . 
Give it back to her , take it from me ... . 
Why make a fuss ? 
Now everything of mine is yours . 
What does money matter ? 
We shall waste it anyway ... . 
Folks like us are bound to waste money . 
But we 'd better go and work the land . 
I want to dig the earth with my own hands . 
We must work , do you hear ? 
Alyosha said so . 
I wo n't be your mistress , I 'll be faithful to you , I 'll be your slave , I 'll work for you . 
We 'll go to the young lady and bow down to her together , so that she may forgive us , and then we 'll go away . 
And if she wo n't forgive us , we 'll go , anyway . 
Take her money and love me ... . 
Do n't love her ... . 
Do n't love her any more . 
If you love her , I shall strangle her ... . 
I 'll put out both her eyes with a needle ... '' `` I love you . 
love only you . 
I 'll love you in Siberia ... '' `` Why Siberia ? 
Never mind , Siberia , if you like . 
I do n't care ... we 'll work ... there 's snow in Siberia ... . 
I love driving in the snow ... and must have bells ... . 
Do you hear , there 's a bell ringing ? 
Where is that bell ringing ? 
There are people coming ... . 
Now it 's stopped . '' 
She closed her eyes , exhausted , and suddenly fell asleep for an instant . 
There had certainly been the sound of a bell in the distance , but the ringing had ceased . 
Mitya let his head sink on her breast . 
He did not notice that the bell had ceased ringing , nor did he notice that the songs had ceased , and that instead of singing and drunken clamour there was absolute stillness in the house . 
Grushenka opened her eyes . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
Was I asleep ? 
Yes ... a bell ... I 've been asleep and dreamt I was driving over the snow with bells , and I dozed . 
I was with someone I loved , with you . 
And far , far away . 
I was holding you and kissing you , nestling close to you . 
I was cold , and the snow glistened ... . 
You know how the snow glistens at night when the moon shines . 
It was as though I was not on earth . 
I woke up , and my dear one is close to me . 
How sweet that is ! 
... '' `` Close to you , '' murmured Mitya , kissing her dress , her bosom , her hands . 
And suddenly he had a strange fancy : it seemed to him that she was looking straight before her , not at him , not into his face , but over his head , with an intent , almost uncanny fixity . 
An expression of wonder , almost of alarm , came suddenly into her face . 
`` Mitya , who is that looking at us ? '' 
she whispered . 
Mitya turned , and saw that someone had , in fact , parted the curtains and seemed to be watching them . 
And not one person alone , it seemed . 
He jumped up and walked quickly to the intruder . 
`` Here , come to us , come here , '' said a voice , speaking not loudly , but firmly and peremptorily . 
Mitya passed to the other side of the curtain and stood stock still . 
The room was filled with people , but not those who had been there before . 
An instantaneous shiver ran down his back , and he shuddered . 
He recognised all those people instantly . 
That tall , stout old man in the overcoat and forage-cap with a cockade - was the police captain , Mihail Makarovitch . 
And that `` consumptive-looking '' trim dandy , `` who always has such polished boots '' - that was the deputy prosecutor . 
`` He has a chronometer worth four hundred roubles ; he showed it to me . '' 
And that small young man in spectacles ... . 
Mitya forgot his surname though he knew him , had seen him : he was the `` investigating lawyer , '' from the `` school of jurisprudence , '' who had only lately come to the town . 
And this man - the inspector of police , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , a man he knew well . 
And those fellows with the brass plates on , why are they here ? 
And those other two ... peasants ... . 
And there at the door Kalganov with Trifon Borissovitch ... `` Gentlemen ! 
What 's this for , gentlemen ? '' 
began Mitya , but suddenly , as though beside himself , not knowing what he was doing , he cried aloud , at the top of his voice : `` I un-der-stand ! '' 
The young man in spectacles moved forward suddenly , and stepping up to Mitya , began with dignity , though hurriedly : `` We have to make ... in brief , I beg you to come this way , this way to the sofa ... . 
It is absolutely imperative that you should give an explanation . '' 
`` The old man ! '' 
cried Mitya frantically . 
`` The old man and his blood ! 
... I understand . '' 
And he sank , almost fell , on a chair close by , as though he had been mown down by a scythe . 
`` You understand ? 
He understands it ! 
Monster and parricide ! 
Your father 's blood cries out against you ! '' 
the old captain of police roared suddenly , stepping up to Mitya . 
He was beside himself , crimson in the face and quivering all over . 
`` This is impossible ! '' 
cried the small young man . 
`` Mihail Makarovitch , Mihail Makarovitch , this wo n't do ! 
... I beg you 'll allow me to speak . 
I should never have expected such behaviour from you ... '' `` This is delirium , gentlemen , raving delirium , '' cried the captain of police ; `` look at him : drunk , at this time of night , in the company of a disreputable woman , with the blood of his father on his hands ... . 
It 's delirium ! 
... '' `` I beg you most earnestly , dear Mihail Makarovitch , to restrain your feelings , '' the prosecutor said in a rapid whisper to the old police captain , `` or I shall be forced to resort to - '' But the little lawyer did not allow him to finish . 
He turned to Mitya , and delivered himself in a loud , firm , dignified voice : `` Ex-Lieutenant Karamazov , it is my duty to inform you that you are charged with the murder of your father , Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , perpetrated this night ... '' He said something more , and the prosecutor , too , put in something , but though Mitya heard them he did not understand them . 
He stared at them all with wild eyes . 
The Preliminary Investigation The Beginning of Perhotin 's Official Career PYOTR ILYITCH PERHOTIN , whom we left knocking at the strong locked gates of the widow Morozov 's house , ended , of course , by making himself heard . 
Fenya , who was still excited by the fright she had had two hours before , and too much `` upset '' to go to bed , was almost frightened into hysterics on hearing the furious knocking at the gate . 
Though she had herself seen him drive away , she fancied that it must be Dmitri Fyodorovitch knocking again , no one else could knock so savagely . 
She ran to the house-porter , who had already waked up and gone out to the gate , and began imploring him not to open it . 
But having questioned Pyotr Ilyitch , and learned that he wanted to see Fenya on very `` important business , '' the man made up his mind at last to open . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was admitted into Fenya 's kitchen , but the girl begged him to allow the houseporter to be present , `` because of her misgivings . '' 
He began questioning her and at once learnt the most vital fact , that is , that when Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run out to look for Grushenka , he had snatched up a pestle from the mortar , and that when he returned , the pestle was not with him and his hands were smeared with blood . 
`` And the blood was simply flowing , dripping from him , dripping ! '' 
Fenya kept exclaiming . 
This horrible detail was simply the product of her disordered imagination . 
But although not `` dripping , '' Pyotr Ilyitch had himself seen those hands stained with blood , and had helped to wash them . 
Moreover , the question he had to decide was , not how soon the blood had dried , but where Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run with the pestle , or rather , whether it really was to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , and how he could satisfactorily ascertain . 
Pyotr Ilyitch persisted in returning to this point , and though he found out nothing conclusive , yet he carried away a conviction that Dmitri Fyodorovitch could have gone nowhere but to his father 's house , and that , therefore , something must have happened there . 
`` And when he came back , '' Fenya added with excitement . 
`` I told him the whole story , and then I began asking him , ` Why have you got blood on your hands , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? ' 
and he answered that that was human blood , and that he had just killed someone . 
He confessed it all to me , and suddenly ran off like a madman . 
I sat down and began thinking , where 's he run off to now like a madman ? 
He 'll go to Mokroe , I thought , and kill my mistress there . 
I ran out to beg him not to kill her . 
I was running to his lodgings , but I looked at Plotnikov 's shop , and saw him just setting off , and there was no blood on his hands then . '' 
-LRB- Fenya had noticed this and remembered it . -RRB- 
Fenya 's old grandmother confirmed her evidence as far as she was capable . 
After asking some further questions , Pyotr Ilyitch left the house , even more upset and uneasy than he had been when he entered it . 
The most direct and the easiest thing for him to do would have been to go straight to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , to find out whether anything had happened there , and if so , what ; and only to go to the police captain , as Pyotr Ilyitch firmly intended doing , when he had satisfied himself of the fact . 
But the night was dark , Fyodor Pavlovitch 's gates were strong , and he would have to knock again . 
His acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch was of the slightest , and what if , after he had been knocking , they opened to him , and nothing had happened ? 
Fyodor Pavlovitch in his jeering way would go telling the story all over the town , how a stranger , called Perhotin , had broken in upon him at midnight to ask if anyone had killed him . 
It would make a scandal . 
And scandal was what Pyotr Ilyitch dreaded more than anything in the world . 
Yet the feeling that possessed him was so strong , that though he stamped his foot angrily and swore at himself , he set off again , not to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's but to Madame Hohlakov 's . 
He decided that if she denied having just given Dmitri Fyodorovitch three thousand roubles , he would go straight to the police captain , but if she admitted having given him the money , he would go home and let the matter rest till next morning . 
It is , of course , perfectly evident that there was even more likelihood of causing scandal by going at eleven o'clock at night to a fashionable lady , a complete stranger , and perhaps rousing her from her bed to ask her an amazing question , than by going to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
But that is just how it is , sometimes , especially in cases like the present one , with the decisions of the most precise and phlegmatic people . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was by no means phlegmatic at that moment . 
He remembered all his life how a haunting uneasiness gradually gained possession of him , growing more and more painful and driving him on , against his will . 
Yet he kept cursing himself , of course , all the way for going to this lady , but `` I will get to the bottom of it , I will ! '' 
he repeated for the tenth time , grinding his teeth , and he carried out his intention . 
It was exactly eleven o'clock when he entered Madame Hohlakov 's house . 
He was admitted into the yard pretty quickly , but , in response to his inquiry whether the lady was still up , the porter could give no answer , except that she was usually in bed by that time . 
`` Ask at the top of the stairs . 
If the lady wants to receive you , she 'll receive you . 
If she wo n't , she wo n't . '' 
Pyotr Ilyitch went up , but did not find things so easy here . 
The footman was unwilling to take in his name , but finally called a maid . 
Pyotr Ilyitch politely but insistently begged her to inform her lady that an official , living in the town , called Perhotin , had called on particular business , and that if it were not of the greatest importance he would not have ventured to come . 
`` Tell her in those words , in those words exactly , '' he asked the girl . 
She went away . 
He remained waiting in the entry . 
Madame Hohlakov herself was already in her bedroom , though not yet asleep . 
She had felt upset ever since Mitya 's visit , and had a presentiment that she would not get through the night without the sick headache which always , with her , followed such excitement . 
She was surprised on hearing the announcement from the maid . 
She irritably declined to see him , however , though the unexpected visit at such an hour , of an `` official living in the town , '' who was a total stranger , roused her feminine curiosity intensely . 
But this time Pyotr Ilyitch was as obstinate as a mule . 
He begged the maid most earnestly to take another message in these very words : `` That he had come on business of the greatest importance , and that Madame Hohlakov might have cause to regret it later , if she refused to see him now . '' 
`` I plunged headlong , '' he described it afterwards . 
The maid , gazing at him in amazement , went to take his message again . 
Madame Hohlakov was impressed . 
She thought a little , asked what he looked like , and learned that he was very well dressed , young , and so polite . '' 
We may note , parenthetically , that Pyotr Ilyitch was a rather good-looking young man , and well aware of the fact . 
Madame Hohlakov made up her mind to see him . 
She was in her dressing-gown and slippers , but she flung a black shawl over her shoulders . 
`` The official '' was asked to walk into the drawing-room , the very room in which Mitya had been received shortly before . 
The lady came to meet her visitor , with a sternly inquiring countenance , and , without asking him to sit down , began at once with the question : `` What do you want ? '' 
`` I have ventured to disturb you , madam , on a matter concerning our common acquaintance , Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov , '' Perhotin began . 
But he had hardly uttered the name , when the lady 's face showed signs of acute irritation . 
She almost shrieked , and interrupted him in a fury : `` How much longer am I to be worried by that awful man ? '' 
she cried hysterically . 
`` How dare you , sir , how could you venture to disturb a lady who is a stranger to you , in her own house at such an hour ! 
... And to force yourself upon her to talk of a man who came here , to this very drawing-room , only three hours ago , to murder me , and went stamping out of the room , as no one would go out of a decent house . 
Let me tell you , sir , that I shall lodge a complaint against you , that I will not let it pass . 
Kindly leave me at once ... I am a mother ... . 
I. . . 
I - '' `` Murder ! 
then he tried to murder you , too ? '' 
`` Why , has he killed somebody else ? '' 
Madame Hohlakov asked impulsively . 
`` If you would kindly listen , madam , for half a moment , I 'll explain it all in a couple of words , '' answered Perhotin , firmly . 
`` At five o'clock this afternoon Dmitri Fyodorovitch borrowed ten roubles from me , and I know for a fact he had no money . 
Yet at nine o'clock , he came to see me with a bundle of hundred-rouble notes in his hand , about two or three thousand roubles . 
His hands and face were all covered with blood , and he looked like a madman . 
When I asked him where he had got so much money , he answered that he had just received it from you , that you had given him a sum of three thousand to go to the gold mines ... '' Madame Hohlakov 's face assumed an expression of intense and painful excitement . 
`` Good God ! 
He must have killed his old father ! '' 
she cried , clasping her hands . 
`` I have never given him money , never ! 
