I 'm not ` old fellow ' to you , and you can keep your advice for another time ! '' 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch snapped out savagely , as though glad to vent his wrath . 
Mitya was reduced to silence . 
He flushed all over . 
A moment later he felt suddenly very cold . 
The rain had ceased , but the dull sky was still overcast with clouds , and a keen wind was blowing straight in his face . 
`` I 've taken a chill , '' thought Mitya , twitching his shoulders . 
At last Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , too , got into the cart , sat down heavily , and , as though without noticing it , squeezed Mitya into the corner . 
It is true that he was out of humour and greatly disliked the task that had been laid upon him . 
`` Good-bye , Trifon Borissovitch ! '' 
Mitya shouted again , and felt himself , that he had not called out this time from good-nature , but involuntarily , from resentment . 
But Trifon Borissovitch stood proudly , with both hands behind his back , and staring straight at Mitya with a stern and angry face , he made no reply . 
`` Good-bye , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , good-bye ! '' 
he heard all at once the voice of Kalganov , who had suddenly darted out . 
Running up to the cart he held out his hand to Mitya . 
He had no cap on . 
Mitya had time to seize and press his hand . 
`` Good-bye , dear fellow ! 
I sha n't forget your generosity , '' he cried warmly . 
But the cart moved and their hands parted . 
The bell began ringing and Mitya was driven off . 
Kalganov ran back , sat down in a corner , bent his head , hid his face in his hands , and burst out crying . 
For a long while he sat like that , crying as though he were a little boy instead of a young man of twenty . 
Oh , he believed almost without doubt in Mitya 's guilt . 
`` What are these people ? 
What can men be after this ? '' 
he exclaimed incoherently , in bitter despondency , almost despair . 
At that moment he had no desire to live . 
`` Is it worth it ? 
Is it worth it ? '' 
exclaimed the boy in his grief . 
Kolya Krassotkin IT was the beginning of November . 
There had been a hard frost , eleven degrees Reaumur , without snow , but a little dry snow had fallen on the frozen ground during the night , and a keen dry wind was lifting and blowing it along the dreary streets of our town , especially about the market-place . 
It was a dull morning , but the snow had ceased . 
Not far from the market-place , close to Plotnikov 's shop , there stood a small house , very clean both without and within . 
It belonged to Madame Krassotkin , the widow of a former provincial secretary , who had been dead for fourteen years . 
His widow , still a nice-looking woman of thirty-two , was living in her neat little house on her private means . 
She lived in respectable seclusion ; she was of a soft but fairly cheerful disposition . 
She was about eighteen at the time of her husband 's death ; she had been married only a year and had just borne him a son . 
From the day of his death she had devoted herself heart and soul to the bringing up of her precious treasure , her boy Kolya . 
Though she had loved him passionately those fourteen years , he had caused her far more suffering than happiness . 
She had been trembling and fainting with terror almost every day , afraid he would fall ill , would catch cold , do something naughty , climb on a chair and fall off it , and so on and so on . 
When Kolya began going to school , the mother devoted herself to studying all the sciences with him so as to help him , and go through his lessons with him . 
She hastened to make the acquaintance of the teachers and their wives , even made up to Kolya 's schoolfellows , and fawned upon them in the hope of thus saving Kolya from being teased , laughed at , or beaten by them . 
She went so far that the boys actually began to mock at him on her account and taunt him with being a `` mother 's darling . '' 
But the boy could take his own part . 
He was a resolute boy , `` tremendously strong , '' as was rumoured in his class , and soon proved to be the fact ; he was agile , strong-willed , and of an audacious and enterprising temper . 
He was good at lessons , and there was a rumour in the school that he could beat the teacher , Dardanelov , at arithmetic and universal history . 
Though he looked down upon everyone , he was a good comrade and not supercilious . 
He accepted his schoolfellows ' respect as his due , but was friendly with them . 
Above all , he knew where to draw the line . 
He could restrain himself on occasion , and in his relations with the teachers he never overstepped that last mystic limit beyond which a prank becomes an unpardonable breach of discipline . 
But he was as fond of mischief on every possible occasion as the smallest boy in the school , and not so much for the sake of mischief as for creating a sensation , inventing something , something effective and conspicuous . 
He was extremely vain . 
He knew how to make even his mother give way to him ; he was almost despotic in his control of her . 
She gave way to him , oh , she had given way to him for years . 
The one thought unendurable to her was that her boy had no great love for her . 
She was always fancying that Kolya was `` unfeeling '' to her , and at times , dissolving into hysterical tears , she used to reproach him with his coldness . 
The boy disliked this , and the more demonstrations of feeling were demanded of him , the more he seemed intentionally to avoid them . 
Yet it was not intentional on his part but instinctive - it was his character . 
His mother was mistaken ; he was very fond of her . 
He only disliked `` sheepish sentimentality , '' as he expressed it in his schoolboy language . 
There was a bookcase in the house containing a few books that had been his father 's . 
Kolya was fond of reading , and had read several of them by himself . 
His mother did not mind that and only wondered sometimes at seeing the boy stand for hours by the bookcase poring over a book instead of going to play . 
And in that way Kolya read some things unsuitable for his age . 
Though the boy , as a rule , knew where to draw the line in his mischief , he had of late begun to play pranks that caused his mother serious alarm . 
It is true there was nothing vicious in what he did , but a wild mad recklessness . 
It happened that July , during the summer holidays , that the mother and son went to another district , forty-five miles away , to spend a week with a distant relation , whose husband was an official at the railway station -LRB- the very station , the nearest one to our town , from which a month later Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov set off for Moscow -RRB- . 
There Kolya began by carefully investigating every detail connected with the railways , knowing that he could impress his schoolfellows when he got home with his newly acquired knowledge . 
But there happened to be some other boys in the place with whom he soon made friends . 
Some of them were living at the station , others in the neighbourhood ; there were six or seven of them , all between twelve and fifteen , and two of them came from our town . 
The boys played together , and on the fourth or fifth day of Kolya 's stay at the station , a mad bet was made by the foolish boys . 
Kolya , who was almost the youngest of the party and rather looked down upon by the others in consequence , was moved by vanity or by reckless bravado to bet them two roubles that he would lie down between the rails at night when the eleven o'clock train was due , and would lie there without moving while the train rolled over him at full speed . 
It is true they made a preliminary investigation , from which it appeared that it was possible to lie so flat between the rails that the train could pass over without touching , but to lie there was no joke ! 
Kolya maintained stoutly that he would . 
At first they laughed at him , called him a little liar , a braggart , but that only egged him on . 
What piqued him most was that these boys of fifteen turned up their noses at him too superciliously , and were at first disposed to treat him as `` a small boy , '' not fit to associate with them , and that was an unendurable insult . 
And so it was resolved to go in the evening , half a mile from the station , so that the train might have time to get up full speed after leaving the station The boys assembled . 
It was a pitch-dark night without a moon . 
At the time fixed , Kolya lay down between the rails . 
The five others who had taken the bet waited among the bushes below the embankment , their hearts beating with suspense , which was followed by alarm and remorse . 
At last they heard in the distance the rumble of the train leaving the station . 
Two red lights gleamed out of the darkness ; the monster roared as it approached . 
`` Run , run away from the rails , '' the boys cried to Kolya from the bushes , breathless with terror . 
But it was too late : the train darted up and flew past . 
The boys rushed to Kolya . 
He lay without moving . 
They began pulling at him , lifting him up . 
He suddenly got up and walked away without a word . 
Then he explained that he had lain there as though he were insensible to frighten them , but the fact was that he really had lost consciousness , as he confessed long after to his mother . 
In this way his reputation as `` a desperate character , '' was established for ever . 
He returned home to the station as white as a sheet . 
Next day he had a slight attack of nervous fever , but he was in high spirits and well pleased with himself . 
The incident did not become known at once , but when they came back to the town it penetrated to the school and even reached the ears of the masters . 
But then Kolya 's mother hastened to entreat the masters on her boy 's behalf , and in the end Dardanelov , a respected and influential teacher , exerted himself in his favour , and the affair was ignored . 
Dardanelov was a middle-aged bachelor , who had been passionately in love with Madame Krassotkin for many years past , and had once already , about a year previously , ventured , trembling with fear and the delicacy of his sentiments , to offer her most respectfully his hand in marriage . 
But she refused him resolutely , feeling that to accept him would be an act of treachery to her son , though Dardanelov had , to judge from certain mysterious symptoms , reason for believing that he was not an object of aversion to the charming but too chaste and tender-hearted widow . 
Kolya 's mad prank seemed to have broken the ice , and Dardanelov was rewarded for his intercession by a suggestion of hope . 
The suggestion , it is true , was a faint one , but then Dardanelov was such a paragon of purity and delicacy that it was enough for the time being to make him perfectly happy . 
He was fond of the boy , though he would have felt it beneath him to try and win him over , and was severe and strict with him in class . 
Kolya , too , kept him at a respectful distance . 
He learned his lessons perfectly ; he was second in his class , was reserved with Dardanelov , and the whole class firmly believed that Kolya was so good at universal history that he could `` beat '' even Dardanelov . 
Kolya did indeed ask him the question , `` Who founded Troy ? '' 
to which Dardanelov had made a very vague reply , referring to the movements and migrations of races , to the remoteness of the period , to the mythical legends . 
But the question , `` Who had founded Troy ? '' 
that is , what individuals , he could not answer , and even for some reason regarded the question as idle and frivolous . 
But the boys remained convinced that Dardanelov did not know who founded Troy . 
Kolya had read of the founders of Troy in Smaragdov , whose history was among the After the incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya 's attitude to his mother . 
When Anna Fyodorovna -LRB- Madame Krassotkin -RRB- heard of her son 's exploit , she almost went out of her mind with horror . 
She had such terrible attacks of hysterics , lasting with intervals for several days , that Kolya , seriously alarmed at last , promised on his honour that such pranks should never be repeated . 
He swore on his knees before the holy image , and swore by the memory of his father , at Madame Krassotkin 's instance , and the `` manly '' Kolya burst into tears like a boy of six . 
And all that day the mother and son were constantly rushing into each other 's arms sobbing . 
Next day Kolya woke up as `` unfeeling '' as before , but he had become more silent , more modest , sterner , and more thoughtful . 
Six weeks later , it is true , he got into another scrape , which even brought his name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace , but it was a scrape of quite another kind , amusing , foolish , and he did not , as it turned out , take the leading part in it , but was only implicated in it . 
But of this later . 
His mother still fretted and trembled , but the more uneasy she became , the greater were the hopes of Dardanelov . 
It must be noted that Kolya understood and divined what was in Dardanelov 's heart and , of course , despised him profoundly for his `` feelings '' ; he had in the past been so tactless as to show this contempt before his mother , hinting vaguely that he knew what Dardanelov was after . 
But from the time of the railway incident his behaviour in this respect also was changed ; he did not allow himself the remotest allusion to the subject and began to speak more respectfully of Dardanelov before his mother , which the sensitive woman at once appreciated with boundless gratitude . 
But at the slightest mention of Dardanelov by a visitor in Kolya 's presence , she would flush as pink as a rose . 
At such moments Kolya would either stare out of the window scowling , or would investigate the state of his boots , or would shout angrily for `` Perezvon , '' the big , shaggy , mangy dog , which he had picked up a month before , brought home , and kept for some reason secretly indoors , not showing him to any of his schoolfellows . 
He bullied him frightfully , teaching him all sorts of tricks , so that the poor dog howled for him whenever he was absent at school , and when he came in , whined with delight , rushed about as if he were crazy , begged , lay down on the ground pretending to be dead , and so on ; in fact , showed all the tricks he had taught him , not at the word of command , but simply from the zeal of his excited and grateful heart . 
I have forgotten , by the way , to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the boy stabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the reader as the son of Captain Snegiryov . 
Ilusha had been defending his father when the schoolboys jeered at him , shouting the nickname `` wisp of tow . '' 
Children AND so on that frosty , snowy , and windy day in November , Kolya Krassotkin was sitting at home . 
It was Sunday and there was no school . 
It had just struck eleven , and he particularly wanted to go out `` on very urgent business , '' but he was left alone in charge of the house , for it so happened that all its elder inmates were absent owing to a sudden and singular event . 
Madame Krassotkin had let two little rooms , separated from the rest of the house by a passage , to a doctor 's wife with her two small children . 
This lady was the same age as Anna Fyodorovna , and a great friend of hers . 
Her husband , the doctor , had taken his departure twelve months before , going first to Orenburg and then to Tashkend , and for the last six months she had not heard a word from him . 
Had it not been for her friendship with Madame Krassotkin , which was some consolation to the forsaken lady , she would certainly have completely dissolved away in tears . 
And now , to add to her misfortunes , Katerina , her only servant , was suddenly moved the evening before to announce , to her mistress 's amazement , that she proposed to bring a child into the world before morning . 
It seemed almost miraculous to everyone that no one had noticed the probability of it before . 
The astounded doctor 's wife decided to move Katerina while there was still time to an establishment in the town kept by a midwife for such emergencies . 
As she set great store by her servant , she promptly carried out this plan and remained there looking after her . 
By the morning all Madame Krassotkin 's friendly sympathy and energy were called upon to render assistance and appeal to someone for help in the case . 
So both the ladies were absent from home , the Krassotkins ' servant , Agafya , had gone out to the market , and Kolya was thus left for a time to protect and look after `` the kids , '' that is , the son and daughter of the doctor 's wife , who were left alone . 
Kolya was not afraid of taking care of the house , besides he had Perezvon , who had been told to lie flat , without moving , under the bench in the hall . 
Every time Kolya , walking to and fro through the rooms , came into the hall , the dog shook his head and gave two loud and insinuating taps on the floor with his tail , but alas ! 
the whistle did not sound to release him . 
Kolya looked sternly at the luckless dog , who relapsed again into obedient rigidity . 
The one thing that troubled Kolya was `` the kids . '' 
He looked , of course , with the utmost scorn on Katerina 's unexpected adventure , but he was very fond of the bereaved `` kiddies , '' and had already taken them a picture-book . 
Nastya , the elder , a girl of eight , could read , and Kostya , the boy , aged seven , was very fond of being read to by her . 
Krassotkin could , of course , have provided more diverting entertainment for them . 
He could have made them stand side by side and played soldiers with them , or sent them hiding all over the house . 
He had done so more than once before and was not above doing it , so much so that a report once spread at school that Krassotkin played horses with the little lodgers at home , prancing with his head on one side like a trace-horse . 
But Krassotkin haughtily parried this thrust , pointing out that to play horses with boys of one 's own age , boys of thirteen , would certainly be disgraceful `` at this date , '' but that he did it for the sake of `` the kids '' because he liked them , and no one had a right to call him to account for his feelings . 
The two `` kids '' adored him . 
But on this occasion he was in no mood for games . 
He had very important business of his own before him , something almost mysterious . 
Meanwhile time was passing and Agafya , with whom he could have left the children , would not come back from market . 
He had several times already crossed the passage , opened the door of the lodgers ' room and looked anxiously at `` the kids '' who were sitting over the book , as he had bidden them . 
Every time he opened the door they grinned at him , hoping he would come in and would do something delightful and amusing . 
But Kolya was bothered and did not go in . 
At last it struck eleven and he made up his mind , once for all , that if that `` damned '' Agafya did not come back within ten minutes he should go out without waiting for her , making `` the kids '' promise , of course , to be brave when he was away , not to be naughty , not to cry from fright . 
With this idea he put on his wadded winter overcoat with its catskin fur collar , slung his satchel round his shoulder , and , regardless of his mother 's constantly reiterated entreaties that he would always put on goloshes in such cold weather , he looked at them contemptuously as he crossed the hall and went out with only his boots on . 
Perezvon , seeing him in his outdoor clothes , began tapping nervously , yet vigorously , on the floor with his tail . 
Twitching all over , he even uttered a plaintive whine . 
But Kolya , seeing his dog 's passionate excitement , decided that it was a breach of discipline , kept him for another minute under the bench , and only when he had opened the door into the passage , whistled for him . 
The dog leapt up like a mad creature and rushed bounding before him rapturously . 
Kolya opened the door to peep at `` the kids . '' 
They were both sitting as before at the table , not reading but warmly disputing about something . 
The children often argued together about various exciting problems of life , and Nastya , being the elder , always got the best of it . 
If Kostya did not agree with her , he almost always appealed to Kolya Krassotkin , and his verdict was regarded as infallible by both of them . 
This time the `` kids '' ' discussion rather interested Krassotkin , and he stood still in the passage to listen . 
The children saw he was listening and that made them dispute with even greater energy . 
`` I shall never , never believe , '' Nastya prattled , `` that the old women find babies among the cabbages in the kitchen garden . 
It 's winter now and there are no cabbages , and so the old woman could n't have taken Katerina a daughter . '' 
Kolya whistled to himself . 
`` Or perhaps they do bring babies from somewhere , but only to those who are married . '' 
Kostya stared at Nastya and listened , pondering profoundly . 
`` Nastya , how silly you are ! '' 
he said at last , firmly and calmly . 
`` How can Katerina have a baby when she is n't married ? '' 
Nastya was exasperated . 
`` You know nothing about it , '' she snapped irritably . 
`` Perhaps she has a husband , only he is in prison , so now she 's got a baby . '' 
`` But is her husband in prison ? '' 
the matter-of-fact Kostya inquired gravely . 
`` Or , I tell you what , '' Nastya interrupted impulsively , completely rejecting and forgetting her first hypothesis . 
`` She has n't a husband , you are right there , but she wants to be married , and so she 's been thinking of getting married , and thinking and thinking of it till now she 's got it , that is , not a husband but a baby . '' 
`` Well , perhaps so , '' Kostya agreed , entirely vanquished . 
`` But you did n't say so before . 
So how could I tell ? '' 
`` Come , kiddies , '' said Kolya , stepping into the room . 
`` You 're terrible people , I see . '' 
`` And Perezvon with you ! '' 
grinned Kostya , and began snapping his fingers and calling Perezvon . 
`` I am in a difficulty , kids , '' Krassotkin began solemnly , `` and you must help me . 
Agafya must have broken her leg , since she has not turned up till now , that 's certain . 
I must go out . 
Will you let me go ? '' 
The children looked anxiously at one another . 
Their smiling faces showed signs of uneasiness , but they did not yet fully grasp what was expected of them . 
`` You wo n't be naughty while I am gone ? 
You wo n't climb on the cupboard and break your legs ? 
You wo n't be frightened alone and cry ? '' 
A look of profound despondency came into the children 's faces . 
`` And I could show you something as a reward , a little copper cannon which can be fired with real gunpowder . '' 
The children 's faces instantly brightened . 
`` Show us the cannon , '' said Kostya , beaming all over . 
Krassotkin put his hand in his satchel , and pulling out a little bronze cannon stood it on the table . 
`` Ah , you are bound to ask that ! 
Look , it 's on wheels . '' 
He rolled the toy on along the table . 
`` And it can be fired off , too . 
It can be loaded with shot and fired off . '' 
`` And it could kill anyone ? '' 
`` It can kill anyone ; you 've only got to aim at anybody , '' and Krassotkin explained where the powder had to be put , where the shot should be rolled in , showing a tiny hole like a touch-hole , and told them that it kicked when it was fired . 
The children listened with intense interest . 
What particularly struck their imagination was that the cannon kicked . 
`` And have you got any powder ? '' 
Nastya inquired . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Show us the powder , too , '' she drawled with a smile of entreaty . 
Krassotkin dived again into his satchel and pulled out a small flask containing a little real gunpowder . 
He had some shot , too , in a screw of paper . 
He even uncorked the flask and shook a little powder into the palm of his hand . 
`` One has to be careful there 's no fire about , or it would blow up and kill us all , '' Krassotkin warned them sensationally . 
The children gazed at the powder with an awe-stricken alarm that only intensified their enjoyment . 
But Kostya liked the shot better . 
`` And does the shot burn ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` No , it does n't . '' 
`` Give me a little shot , '' he asked in an imploring voice . 
`` I 'll give you a little shot ; here , take it , but do n't show it to your mother till I come back , or she 'll be sure to think it 's gunpowder , and will die of fright and give you a thrashing . '' 
`` Mother never does whip us , '' Nastya observed at once . 
`` I know , I only said it to finish the sentence . 
And do n't you ever deceive your mother except just this once , until I come back . 
And so , kiddies , can I go out ? 
You wo n't be frightened and cry when I 'm gone ? '' 
`` We sha-all cry , '' drawled Kostya , on the verge of tears already . 
`` We shall cry , we shall be sure to cry , '' Nastya chimed in with timid haste . 
`` Oh , children , children , how fraught with peril are your years ! 
There 's no help for it , chickens ; I shall have to stay with you I do n't know how long . 
And time is passing , time is passing , oogh ! '' 
`` Tell Perezvon to pretend to be dead ! '' 
Kostya begged . 
`` There 's no help for it , we must have recourse to Perezvon . 
Ici , Perezvon . '' 
And Kolya began giving orders to the dog , who performed all his tricks . 
He was a rough-haired dog , of medium size , with a coat of a sort of lilac-grey colour . 
He was blind in his right eye , and his left ear was torn . 
He whined and jumped , stood and walked on his hind legs , lay on his back with his paws in the air , rigid as though he were dead . 
While this last performance was going on , the door opened and Agafya , Madame Krassotkin 's servant , a stout woman of forty , marked with small-pox , appeared in the doorway . 
She had come back from market and had a bag full of provisions in her hand . 
Holding up the bag of provisions in her left hand she stood still to watch the dog . 
Though Kolya had been so anxious for her return , he did not cut short the performance , and after keeping Perezvon dead for the usual time , at last he whistled to him . 
The dog jumped up and began bounding about in his joy at having done his duty . 
`` Only think , a dog ! '' 
Agafya observed sententiously . 
`` Why are you late , female ? '' 
asked Krassotkin sternly . 
`` Female , indeed ! 
Go on with you , you brat . '' 
`` Brat ? '' 
`` Yes , a brat . 
What is it to you if I 'm late ; if I 'm late , you may be sure I have good reason , '' muttered Agafya , busying herself about the stove , without a trace of anger or displeasure in her voice . 
She seemed quite pleased , in fact , to enjoy a skirmish with her merry young master . 
`` Listen , you frivolous young woman , '' Krassotkin began , getting up from the sofa , `` can you swear by all you hold sacred in the world and something else besides , that you will watch vigilantly over the kids in my absence ? 
I am going out . '' 
`` And what am I going to swear for ? '' 
laughed Agafya . 
`` I shall look after them without that . '' 
`` No , you must swear on your eternal salvation . 
Else I sha n't go . '' 
`` Well , do n't then . 
What does it matter to me ? 
It 's cold out ; stay at home . '' 
`` Kids , '' Kolya turned to the children , `` this woman will stay with you till I come back or till your mother comes , for she ought to have been back long ago . 
She will give you some lunch , too . 
You 'll give them something , Agafya , wo n't you ? '' 
`` That I can do . '' 
`` Good-bye , chickens , I go with my heart at rest . 
And you , granny , '' he added gravely , in an undertone , as he passed Agafya , `` I hope you 'll spare their tender years and not tell them any of your old woman 's nonsense about Katerina . 
Ici , Perezvon ! '' 
`` Get along with you ! '' 
retorted Agafya , really angry this time . 
`` Ridiculous boy ! 
You want a whipping for saying such things , that 's what you want ! '' 
The Schoolboy BUT Kolya did not hear her . 
At last he could go out . 
As he went out at the gate he looked round him , shrugged up his shoulders , and saying `` It is freezing , '' went straight along the street and turned off to the right towards the market-place . 
When he reached the last house but one before the market-place he stopped at the gate , pulled a whistle out of his pocket , and whistled with all his might as though giving a signal . 
He had not to wait more than a minute before a rosy-cheeked boy of about eleven , wearing a warm , neat and even stylish coat , darted out to meet him . 
This was Smurov , a boy in the preparatory class -LRB- two classes below Kolya Krassotkin -RRB- , son of a well-to-do official . 
Apparently he was forbidden by his parents to associate with Krassotkin , who was well known to be a desperately naughty boy , so Smurov was obviously slipping out on the sly . 
He was - if the reader has not forgotten one of the group of boys who two months before had thrown stones at Ilusha . 
He was the one who told Alyosha about Ilusha . 
`` I 've been waiting for you for the last hour , Krassotkin , '' said Smurov stolidly , and the boys strode towards the market-place . 
`` I am late , '' answered Krassotkin . 
`` I was detained by circumstances . 
You wo n't be thrashed for coming with me ? '' 
`` Come , I say , I 'm never thrashed ! 
And you 've got Perezvon with you ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You 're taking him , too ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Ah ! 
if it were only Zhutchka ! '' 
`` That 's impossible . 
Zhutchka 's non-existent . 
Zhutchka is lost in the mists of obscurity . '' 
`` Ah ! 
could n't we do this ? '' 
Smurov suddenly stood still . 
`` You see Ilusha says that Zhutchka was a shaggy , greyish , smoky-looking dog like Perezvon . 
Could n't you tell him this is Zhutchka , and he might believe you ? '' 
`` Boy , shun a lie , that 's one thing ; even with a good object - that 's another . 
Above all , I hope you 've not told them anything about my coming . '' 
`` Heaven forbid ! 
I know what I am about . 
But you wo n't comfort him with Perezvon , '' said Smurov , with a sigh . 
`` You know his father , the captain , ` the wisp of tow , ' told us that he was going to bring him a real mastiff pup , with a black nose , to-day . 
He thinks that would comfort Ilusha ; but I doubt it . '' 
`` And how is Ilusha ? '' 
`` Ah , he is bad , very bad ! 
I believe he 's in consumption : he is quite conscious , but his breathing ! 
His breathing 's gone wrong . 
The other day he asked to have his boots on to be led round the room . 
He tried to walk , but he could n't stand . 
` Ah , I told you before , father , ' he said , ` that those boots were no good . 
I could never walk properly in them . ' 
He fancied it was his boots that made him stagger , but it was simply weakness , really . 
He wo n't live another week . 
Herzenstube is looking after him . 
Now they are rich again - they 've got heaps of money . 
`` They are rogues . '' 
`` Who are rogues ? '' 
`` Doctors and the whole crew of quacks collectively , and also , of course , individually . 
I do n't believe in medicine . 
It 's a useless institution . 
I mean to go into all that . 
But what 's that sentimentality you 've got up there ? 
The whole class seems to be there every day . '' 
`` Not the whole class : it 's only ten of our fellows who go to see him every day . 
There 's nothing in that . '' 
`` What I do n't understand in all this is the part that Alexey Karamazov is taking in it . 
His brother 's going to be tried to-morrow or next day for such a crime , and yet he has so much time to spend on sentimentality with boys . '' 
`` There 's no sentimentality about it . 
You are going yourself now to make it up with Ilusha . '' 
`` Make it up with him ? 
What an absurd expression ! 
But I allow no one to analyse my actions . '' 
`` And how pleased Ilusha will be to see you ! 
He has no idea that you are coming . 
Why was it , why was it you would n't come all this time ? '' 
Smurov cried with sudden warmth . 
`` My dear boy , that 's my business , not yours . 
I am going of myself because I choose to , but you 've all been hauled there by Alexey Karamazov - there 's a difference , you know . 
And how do you know ? 
I may not be going to make it up at all . 
It 's a stupid expression . '' 
`` It 's not Karamazov at all ; it 's not his doing . 
Our fellows began going there of themselves . 
Of course , they went with Karamazov at first . 
And there 's been nothing of that sort of silliness . 
First one went , and then another . 
His father was awfully pleased to see us . 
You know he will simply go out of his mind if Ilusha dies . 
He sees that Ilusha 's dying . 
And he seems so glad we 've made it up with Ilusha . 
Ilusha asked after you , that was all . 
He just asks and says no more . 
His father will go out of his mind or hang himself . 
He behaved like a madman before . 
You know he is a very decent man . 
We made a mistake then . 
It 's all the fault of that murderer who beat him then . '' 
`` Karamazov 's a riddle to me all the same . 
I might have made his acquaintance long ago , but I like to have a proper pride in some cases . 
Besides , I have a theory about him which I must work out and verify . '' 
Kolya subsided into dignified silence . 
Smurov , too , was silent . 
Smurov , of course , worshipped Krassotkin and never dreamed of putting himself on a level with him . 
Now he was tremendously interested at Kolya 's saying that he was `` going of himself '' to see Ilusha . 
He felt that there must be some mystery in Kolya 's suddenly taking it into his head to go to him that day . 
They crossed the market-place , in which at that hour were many loaded wagons from the country and a great number of live fowls . 
The market women were selling rolls , cottons and threads , etc. , in their booths . 
These Sunday markets were naively called `` fairs '' in the town , and there were many such fairs in the year . 
Perezvon ran about in the wildest spirits , sniffing about first one side , then the other . 
When he met other dogs they zealously smelt each other over according to the rules of canine etiquette . 
`` I like to watch such realistic scenes , Smurov , '' said Kolya suddenly . 
`` Have you noticed how dogs sniff at one another when they meet ? 
It seems to be a law of their nature . '' 
`` Yes ; it 's a funny habit . '' 
`` No , it 's not funny ; you are wrong there . 
There 's nothing funny in nature , however funny it may seem to man with his prejudices . 
If dogs could reason and criticise us they 'd be sure to find just as much that would be funny to them , if not far more , in the social relations of men , their masters - far more , indeed . 
I repeat that , because I am convinced that there is far more foolishness among us . 
That 's Rakitin 's idea - a remarkable idea . 
I am a Socialist , Smurov . '' 
`` And what is a Socialist ? '' 
asked Smurov . 
`` That 's when all are equal and all have property in common , there are no marriages , and everyone has any religion and laws he likes best , and all the rest of it . 
You are not old enough to understand that yet . 
It 's cold , though . '' 
`` Yes , twelve degrees of frost . 
Father looked at the thermometer just now . '' 
`` Have you noticed , Smurov , that in the middle of winter we do n't feel so cold even when there are fifteen or eighteen degrees of frost as we do now , in the beginning of winter , when there is a sudden frost of twelve degrees , especially when there is not much snow . 
It 's because people are not used to it . 
Everything is habit with men , everything even in their social and political relations . 
Habit is the great motive-power . 
What a funny-looking peasant ! '' 
Kolya pointed to a tall peasant , with a good-natured countenance in a long sheepskin coat , who was standing by his wagon , clapping together his hands , in their shapeless leather gloves , to warm them . 
His long fair beard was all white with frost . 
`` That peasant 's beard 's frozen , '' Kolya cried in a loud provocative voice as he passed him . 
`` Lots of people 's beards are frozen , '' the peasant replied , calmly and sententiously . 
`` Do n't provoke him , '' observed Smurov . 
`` It 's all right ; he wo n't be cross ; he 's a nice fellow . 
Good-bye , Matvey . '' 
`` Good-bye . '' 
`` Is your name Matvey ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Did n't you know ? '' 
`` No , I did n't . 
It was a guess . '' 
`` You do n't say so ! 
You are a schoolboy , I suppose ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You get whipped , I expect ? '' 
`` Nothing to speak of - sometimes . '' 
`` Does it hurt ? '' 
`` Well , yes , it does . '' 
`` Ech , what a life ! '' 
The peasant heaved a sigh from the bottom of his heart . 
`` Good-bye , Matvey . '' 
`` Good-bye . 
You are a nice chap , that you are . '' 
The boys went on . 
`` That was a nice peasant , '' Kolya observed to Smurov . 
`` I like talking to the peasants , and am always glad to do them justice . '' 
`` Why did you tell a lie , pretending we are thrashed ? '' 
asked Smurov . 
`` I had to say that to please him . '' 
`` How do you mean ? '' 
`` You know , Smurov , I do n't like being asked the same thing twice . 
I like people to understand at the first word . 
Some things ca n't be explained . 
According to a peasant 's notions , schoolboys are whipped , and must be whipped . 
What would a schoolboy be if he were not whipped ? 
And if I were to tell him we are not , he 'd be disappointed . 
But you do n't understand that . 
One has to know how to talk to the peasants . '' 
`` Only do n't tease them , please , or you 'll get into another scrape as you did about that goose . '' 
`` So you 're afraid ? '' 
`` Do n't laugh , Kolya . 
Of course I 'm afraid . 
My father would be awfully cross . 
I am strictly forbidden to go out with you . '' 
`` Do n't be uneasy , nothing will happen this time . 
Hallo , Natasha ! '' 
he shouted to a market woman in one of the booths . 
`` Call me Natasha ! 
What next ! 
My name is Marya , '' the middle-aged marketwoman shouted at him . 
`` I am so glad it 's Marya . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` Ah , you young rascal ! 
A brat like you to carry on so ! '' 
`` I 'm in a hurry . 
I ca n't stay now . 
You shall tell me next Sunday . '' 
Kolya waved his hand at her , as though she had attacked him and not he her . 
`` I 've nothing to tell you next Sunday . 
You set upon me , you impudent young monkey . 
I did n't say anything , '' bawled Marya . 
`` You want a whipping , that 's what you want , you saucy jackanapes ! '' 
There was a roar of laughter among the other market women round her . 
Suddenly a man in a violent rage darted out from the arcade of shops close by . 
He was a young man , not a native of the town , with dark , curly hair and a long , pale face , marked with smallpox . 
He wore a long blue coat and a peaked cap , and looked like a merchant 's clerk . 
He was in a state of stupid excitement and brandished his fist at Kolya . 
`` I know you ! '' 
he cried angrily , `` I know you ! '' 
Kolya stared at him . 
He could not recall when he could have had a row with the man . 
But he had been in so many rows in the street that he could hardly remember them all . 
`` Do you ? '' 
he asked sarcastically . 
`` I know you ! 
I know you ! '' 
the man repeated idiotically . 
So much the better for you . 
Well , it 's time I was going . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` You are at your saucy pranks again ? '' 
cried the man . 
`` You are at your saucy pranks again ? 
I know , you are at it again ! '' 
`` It 's not your business , brother , if I am at my saucy pranks again , '' said Kolya , standing still and scanning him . 
`` Not my business ? '' 
`` No ; it 's not your business . '' 
`` Whose then ? 
Whose then ? 
Whose then ? '' 
`` It 's Trifon Nikititch 's business , not yours . '' 
`` What Trifon Nikititch ? '' 
asked the youth , staring with loutish amazement at Kolya , but still as angry as ever . 
