It 's absurd to ask . 
Because I had condemned myself to die at five o'clock this morning , here , at dawn . 
I thought it made no difference whether I died a thief or a man of honour . 
But I see it 's not so , it turns out that it does make a difference . 
Believe me , gentlemen , what has tortured me most during this night has not been the thought that I 'd killed the old servant , and that I was in danger of Siberia just when my love was being rewarded , and Heaven was open to me again . 
Oh , that did torture me , but not in the same way ; not so much as the damned consciousness that I had torn that damned money off my breast at last and spent it , and had become a downright thief ! 
Oh , gentlemen , I tell you again , with a bleeding heart , I have learnt a great deal this night . 
I have learnt that it 's not only impossible to live a scoundrel , but impossible to die a scoundrel ... . 
No , gentlemen , one must die honest ... '' Mitya was pale . 
His face had a haggard and exhausted look , in spite of his being intensely excited . 
`` I am beginning to understand you , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' the prosecutor said slowly , a soft and almost compassionate tone . 
`` But all this , if you 'll excuse my saying so , is a matter of nerves , in my opinion ... your overwrought nerves , that 's what it is . 
And why , for instance , should you not have saved yourself such misery for almost a month , by going and returning that fifteen hundred to the lady who had entrusted it to you ? 
And why could you not have explained things to her , and in view of your position , which you describe as being so awful , why could you not have had recourse to the plan which would so naturally have occurred to one 's mind , that is , after honourably confessing your errors to her , why could you not have asked her to lend you the sum needed for your expenses , which , with her generous heart , she would certainly not have refused you in your distress , especially if it had been with some guarantee , or even on the security you offered to the merchant Samsonov , and to Madame Hohlakov ? 
I suppose you still regard that security as of value ? '' 
Mitya suddenly crimsoned . 
`` Surely you do n't think me such an out and out scoundrel as that ? 
You ca n't be speaking in earnest ? '' 
he said , with indignation , looking the prosecutor straight in the face , and seeming unable to believe his ears . 
`` I assure you I 'm in earnest ... Why do you imagine I 'm not serious ? '' 
It was the prosecutor 's turn to be surprised . 
`` Oh , how base that would have been ! 
Gentlemen , do you know , you are torturing me ! 
Let me tell you everything , so be it . 
I 'll confess all my infernal wickedness , but to put you to shame , and you 'll be surprised yourselves at the depth of ignominy to which a medley of human passions can sink . 
You must know that I already had that plan myself , that plan you spoke of , just now , prosecutor ! 
Yes , gentlemen , I , too , have had that thought in my mind all this current month , so that I was on the point of deciding to go to Katya - I was mean enough for that . 
But to go to her , to tell her of my treachery , and for that very treachery , to carry it out , for the expenses of that treachery , to beg for money from her , Katya -LRB- to beg , do you hear , to beg -RRB- , and go straight from her to run away with the other , the rival , who hated and insulted her - to think of it ! 
You must be mad , prosecutor ! '' 
`` Mad I am not , but I did speak in haste , without thinking ... of that feminine jealousy ... if there could be jealousy in this case , as you assert ... yes , perhaps there is something of the kind , '' said the prosecutor , smiling . 
`` But that would have been so infamous ! '' 
Mitya brought his fist down on the table fiercely . 
`` That would have been filthy beyond everything ! 
Yes , do you know that she might have given me that money , yes , and she would have given it , too ; she 'd have been certain to give it , to be revenged on me , she 'd have given it to satisfy her vengeance , to show her contempt for me , for hers is an infernal nature , too , and she 's a woman of great wrath . 
I 'd have taken the money , too , oh , I should have taken it ; I should have taken it , and then , for the rest of my life ... oh , God ! 
Forgive me , gentlemen , I 'm making such an outcry because I 've had that thought in my mind so lately , only the day before yesterday , that night when I was having all that bother with Lyagavy , and afterwards yesterday , all day yesterday , I remember , till that happened ... '' `` Till what happened ? '' 
put in Nikolay Parfenovitch inquisitively , but Mitya did not hear it . 
`` I have made you an awful confession , '' Mitya said gloomily in conclusion . 
`` You must appreciate it , and what 's more , you must respect it , for if not , if that leaves your souls untouched , then you 've simply no respect for me , gentlemen , I tell you that , and I shall die of shame at having confessed it to men like you ! 
Oh , I shall shoot myself ! 
Yes , I see , I see already that you do n't believe me . 
What , you want to write that down , too ? '' 
he cried in dismay . 
`` Yes , what you said just now , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , looking at him surprise , `` that is , that up to the last hour you were still contemplating going to Katerina Ivanovna to beg that sum from her ... . 
I assure you , that 's a very important piece of evidence for us , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , I mean for the whole case ... and particularly for you , particularly important for you . '' 
`` Have mercy , gentlemen ! '' 
Mitya flung up his hands . 
`` Do n't write that , anyway ; have some shame . 
Here I 've torn my heart asunder before you , and you seize the opportunity and are fingering the wounds in both halves ... . 
Oh , my God ! '' 
In despair he hid his face in his hands . 
`` Do n't worry yourself so , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' observed the prosecutor , `` everything that is written down will be read over to you afterwards , and what you do n't agree to we 'll alter as you like . 
But now I 'll ask you one little question for the second time . 
Has no one , absolutely no one , heard from you of that money you sewed up ? 
That , I must tell you , is almost impossible to believe . '' 
`` No one , no one , I told you so before , or you 've not understood anything ! 
Let me alone ! '' 
`` Very well , this matter is bound to be explained , and there 's plenty of time for it , but meantime , consider ; we have perhaps a dozen witnesses that you yourself spread it abroad , and even shouted almost everywhere about the three thousand you 'd spent here ; three thousand , not fifteen hundred . 
And now , too , when you got hold of the money you had yesterday , you gave many people to understand that you had brought three thousand with you . '' 
`` You 've got not dozens , but hundreds of witnesses , two hundred witnesses , two hundred have heard it , thousands have heard it ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` Well , you see , all bear witness to it . 
And the word all means something . '' 
`` It means nothing . 
I talked rot , and everyone began repeating it . '' 
`` But what need had you to ` talk rot , ' as you call it ? '' 
`` The devil knows . 
From bravado perhaps ... at having wasted so much money ... . 
To try and forget that money I had sewn up , perhaps ... yes , that was why ... damn it ... how often will you ask me that question ? 
Well , I told a fib , and that was the end of it ; once I 'd said it , I did n't care to correct it . 
What does a man tell lies for sometimes ? '' 
`` That 's very difficult to decide , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , what makes a man tell lies , '' observed the prosecutor impressively . 
`` Tell me , though , was that ` amulet , ' as you call it , on your neck , a big thing ? '' 
`` No , not big . '' 
`` How big , for instance ? '' 
`` If you fold a hundred-rouble note in half , that would be the size . '' 
`` You 'd better show us the remains of it . 
You must have them somewhere . '' 
`` Damnation , what nonsense ! 
I do n't know where they are . '' 
`` But excuse me : where and when did you take it off your neck ? 
According to your own evidence you did n't go home . '' 
`` When I was going from Fenya 's to Perhotin 's , on the way I tore it off my neck and took out the money . '' 
`` In the dark ? '' 
`` What should I want a light for ? 
I did it with my fingers in one minute . '' 
`` Without scissors , in the street ? '' 
`` In the market-place I think it was . 
Why scissors ? 
It was an old rag . 
It was torn in a minute . '' 
`` Where did you put it afterwards ? '' 
`` I dropped it there . '' 
`` Where was it , exactly ? '' 
`` In the market-place , in the market-place ! 
The devil knows whereabouts . 
What do you want to know for ? '' 
`` That 's extremely important , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
It would be material evidence in your favour . 
How is it you do n't understand that ? 
Who helped you to sew it up a month ago ? '' 
`` No one helped me . 
I did it myself . '' 
`` Can you sew ? '' 
`` A soldier has to know how to sew . 
No knowledge was needed to do that . '' 
`` Where did you get the material , that is , the rag in which you sewed the money ? '' 
`` Are you laughing at me ? '' 
`` Not at all . 
And we are in no mood for laughing , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` I do n't know where I got the rag from - somewhere , I suppose . '' 
`` I should have thought you could n't have forgotten it ? '' 
`` Upon my word , I do n't remember . 
I might have torn a bit off my linen . '' 
`` That 's very interesting . 
We might find in your lodgings to-morrow the shirt or whatever it is from which you tore the rag . 
What sort of rag was it , cloth or linen ? '' 
`` Goodness only knows what it was . 
Wait a bit ... I believe I did n't tear it off anything . 
It was a bit of calico ... . 
I believe I sewed it up in a cap of my landlady 's . '' 
`` In your landlady 's cap ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I took it from her . '' 
`` How did you get it ? '' 
`` You see , I remember once taking a cap for a rag , perhaps to wipe my pen on . 
I took it without asking , because it was a worthless rag . 
I tore it up , and I took the notes and sewed them up in it . 
I believe it was in that very rag I sewed them . 
An old piece of calico , washed a thousand times . '' 
`` And you remember that for certain now ? '' 
`` I do n't know whether for certain . 
I think it was in the cap . 
But , hang it , what does it matter ? '' 
`` In that case your landlady will remember that the thing was lost ? '' 
`` No , she wo n't , she did n't miss it . 
It was an old rag , I tell you , an old rag not worth a farthing . '' 
`` And where did you get the needle and thread ? '' 
`` I 'll stop now . 
I wo n't say any more . 
Enough of it ! '' 
said Mitya , losing his temper at last . 
`` It 's strange that you should have so completely forgotten where you threw the pieces in the market-place . '' 
`` Give orders for the market-place to be swept to-morrow , and perhaps you 'll find it , '' said Mitya sneering . 
`` Enough , gentlemen , enough ! '' 
he decided , in an exhausted voice . 
`` I see you do n't believe me ! 
Not for a moment ! 
It 's my fault , not yours . 
I ought not to have been so ready . 
Why , why did I degrade myself by confessing my secret to you ? 
it 's a joke to you . 
I see that from your eyes . 
You led me on to it , prosecutor ! 
Sing a hymn of triumph if you can ... . 
Damn you , you torturers ! '' 
He bent his head , and hid his face in his hands . 
The lawyers were silent . 
A minute later he raised his head and looked at them almost vacantly . 
His face now expressed complete , hopeless despair , and he sat mute and passive as though hardly conscious of what was happening . 
In the meantime they had to finish what they were about . 
They had immediately to begin examining the witnesses . 
It was by now eight o'clock in the morning . 
The lights had been extinguished long ago . 
Mihail Makarovitch and Kalganov , who had been continually in and out of the room all the while the interrogation had been going on , had now both gone out again . 
The lawyers , too , looked very tired . 
It was a wretched morning , the whole sky was overcast , and the rain streamed down in bucketfuls . 
Mitya gazed blankly out of window . 
`` May I look out of window ? '' 
he asked Nikolay Parfenovitch , suddenly . 
`` Oh , as much as you like , '' the latter replied . 
Mitya got up and went to the window ... . 
The rain lashed against its little greenish panes . 
He could see the muddy road just below the house , and farther away , in the rain and mist , a row of poor , black , dismal huts , looking even blacker and poorer in the rain . 
Mitya thought of `` Phoebus the golden-haired , and how he had meant to shoot himself at his first ray . 
`` Perhaps it would be even better on a morning like this , '' he thought with a smile , and suddenly , flinging his hand downwards , he turned to his `` torturers . '' 
`` Gentlemen , '' he cried , `` I see that I am lost ! 
But she ? 
Tell me about her , I beseech you . 
Surely she need not be ruined with me ? 
She 's innocent , you know , she was out of her mind when she cried last night ` It 's all my fault ! ' 
She 's done nothing , nothing ! 
I 've been grieving over her all night as I sat with you ... . 
Ca n't you , wo n't you tell me what you are going to do with her now ? '' 
`` You can set your mind quite at rest on that score , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' the prosecutor answered at once , with evident alacrity . 
`` We have , so far , no grounds for interfering with the lady in whom you are so interested . 
I trust that it may be the same in the later development of the case ... . 
On the contrary , we 'll do everything that lies in our power in that matter . 
Set your mind completely at rest . '' 
`` Gentlemen , I thank you . 
I knew that you were honest , straightforward people in spite of everything . 
You 've taken a load off my heart ... . 
Well , what are we to do now ? 
I 'm ready . '' 
`` Well , we ought to make haste . 
We must pass to examining the witnesses without delay . 
That must be done in your presence and therefore - '' `` Should n't we have some tea first ? '' 
interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch , `` I think we 've deserved it ! '' 
They decided that if tea were ready downstairs -LRB- Mihail Makarovitch had , no doubt , gone down to get some -RRB- they would have a glass and then `` go on and on , '' putting off their proper breakfast until a more favourable opportunity . 
Tea really was ready below , and was soon brought up . 
Mitya at first refused the glass that Nikolay Parfenovitch politely offered him , but afterwards he asked for it himself and drank it greedily . 
He looked surprisingly exhausted . 
It might have been supposed from his Herculean strength that one night of carousing , even accompanied by the most violent emotions , could have had little effect on him . 
But he felt that he could hardly hold his head up , and from time to time all the objects about him seemed heaving and dancing before his eyes . 
`` A little more and I shall begin raving , '' he said to himself . 
The Evidences of the Witnesses . 
The Babe THE examination of the witnesses began . 
But we will not continue our story in such detail as before . 
And so we will not dwell on how Nikolay Parfenovitch impressed on every witness called that he must give his evidence in accordance with truth and conscience , and that he would afterwards have to repeat his evidence on oath , how every witness was called upon to sign the protocol of his evidence , and so on . 
We will only note that the point principally insisted upon in the examination was the question of the three thousand roubles ; that is , was the sum spent here , at Mokroe , by Mitya on the first occasion , a month before , three thousand or fifteen hundred ? 
And again had he spent three thousand or fifteen hundred yesterday ? 
Alas , all the evidence given by everyone turned out to be against Mitya . 
There was not one in his favour , and some witnesses introduced new , almost crushing facts , in contradiction of his , Mitya 's , story . 
The first witness examined was Trifon Borissovitch . 
He was not in the least abashed as he stood before the lawyers . 
He had , on the contrary , an air of stern and severe indignation with the accused , which gave him an appearance of truthfulness and personal dignity . 
He spoke little , and with reserve , waited to be questioned , answered precisely and deliberately . 
Firmly and unhesitatingly he bore witness that the sum spent a month before could not have been less than three thousand , that all the peasants about here would testify that they had heard the sum of three thousand mentioned by Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself . 
`` What a lot of money he flung away on the Gypsy girls alone ! 
He wasted a thousand , I daresay , on them alone . '' 
`` I do n't believe I gave them five hundred , '' was Mitya 's gloomy comment on this . 
`` It 's a pity I did n't count the money at the time , but I was drunk ... '' Mitya was sitting sideways with his back to the curtains . 
He listened gloomily , with a melancholy and exhausted air , as though he would say : `` Oh , say what you like . 
It makes no difference now . '' 
`` More than a thousand went on them , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' retorted Trifon Borissovitch firmly . 
`` You flung it about at random and they picked it up . 
They were a rascally , thievish lot , horse-stealers , they 've been driven away from here , or maybe they 'd bear witness themselves how much they got from you . 
I saw the sum in your hands , myself - count it I did n't , you did n't let me , that 's true enough - but by the look of it I should say it was far more than fifteen hundred ... fifteen hundred , indeed ! 
We 've seen money too . 
We can judge of amounts ... '' As for the sum spent yesterday he asserted that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had told him , as soon as he arrived , that he had brought three thousand with him . 
`` Come now , is that so , Trifon Borissovitch ? '' 
replied Mitya . 
`` Surely I did n't declare so positively that I 'd brought three thousand ? '' 
`` You did say so , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
You said it before Andrey . 
Andrey himself is still here . 
Send for him . 
And in the hall , when you were treating the chorus , you shouted straight out that you would leave your sixth thousand here - that is , with what you spent before , we must understand . 
Stepan and Semyon heard it , and Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov , too , was standing beside you at the time . 
Maybe he 'd remember it ... '' The evidence as to the `` sixth '' thousand made an extraordinary impression on the two lawyers . 
They were delighted with this new mode of reckoning ; three and three made six , three thousand then and three now made six , that was clear . 
They questioned all the peasants suggested by Trifon Borissovitch , Stepan and Semyon , the driver Andrey , and Kalganov . 
The peasants and the driver unhesitatingly confirmed Trifon Borissovitch 's evidence . 
They noted down , with particular care , Andrey 's account of the conversation he had had with Mitya on the road : '' ` Where , ' says he , ` am I , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , going , to heaven or to hell , and shall I be forgiven in the next world or not ? ' '' 
The psychological Ippolit Kirillovitch heard this with a subtle smile , and ended by recommending that these remarks as to where Dmitri Fyodorovitch would go should be `` included in the case . '' 
Kalganov , when called , came in reluctantly , frowning and ill-humoured , and he spoke to the lawyers as though he had never met them before in his life , though they were acquaintances whom he had been meeting every day for a long time past . 
He began by saying that `` he knew nothing about it and did n't want to . '' 
But it appeared that he had heard of the '' sixth '' thousand , and he admitted that he had been standing close by at the moment . 
As far as he could see he `` did n't know '' how much money Mitya had in his hands . 
He affirmed that the Poles had cheated at cards . 
In reply to reiterated questions he stated that , after the Poles had been turned out , Mitya 's position with Agrafena Alexandrovna had certainly improved , and that she had said that she loved him . 
He spoke of Agrafena Alexandrovna with reserve and respect , as though she had been a lady of the best society , and did not once allow himself to call her Grushenka . 
In spite of the young man 's obvious repugnance at giving evidence , Ippolit Kirillovitch examined him at great length , and only from him learnt all the details of what made up Mitya 's `` romance , '' so to say , on that night . 
Mitya did not once pull Kalganov up . 
At last they let the young man go , and he left the room with unconcealed indignation . 
The Poles , too , were examined . 
Though they had gone to bed in their room , they had not slept all night , and on the arrival of the police officers they hastily dressed and got ready , realising that they would certainly be sent for . 
They gave their evidence with dignity , though not without some uneasiness . 
The little Pole turned out to be a retired official of the twelfth class , who had served in Siberia as a veterinary surgeon . 
His name was Mussyalovitch . 
Pan Vrubelvsky turned out to be an uncertificated dentist . 
Although Nikolay Parfenovitch asked them questions on entering the room they both addressed their answers to Mihail Makarovitch , who was standing on one side , taking him in their ignorance for the most important person and in command , and addressed him at every word as `` Pan Colonel . '' 
Only after several reproofs from Mihail Makarovitch himself , they grasped that they had to address their answers to Nikolay Parfenovitch only . 
It turned out that they could speak Russian quite correctly except for their accent in some words . 
Of his relations with Grushenka , past and present , Pan Mussyalovitch spoke proudly and warmly , so that Mitya was roused at once and declared that he would not allow the `` scoundrel '' to speak like that in his presence ! 
Pan Mussyalovitch at once called attention to the word `` scoundrel , '' and begged that it should be put down in the protocol . 
Mitya fumed with rage . 
`` He 's a scoundrel ! 
A scoundrel ! 
You can put that down . 
And put down , too , that , in spite of the protocol I still declare that he 's a scoundrel ! '' 
he cried . 
Though Nikolay Parfenovitch did insert this in the protocol , he showed the most praiseworthy tact and management . 
After sternly reprimanding Mitya , he cut short all further inquiry into the romantic aspect of the case , and hastened to pass to what was essential . 
One piece of evidence given by the Poles roused special interest in the lawyers : that was how , in that very room , Mitya had tried to buy off Pan Mussyalovitch , and had offered him three thousand roubles to resign his claims , seven hundred roubles down , and the remaining two thousand three hundred `` to be paid next day in the town . '' 
He had sworn at the time that he had not the whole sum with him at Mokroe , but that his money was in the town . 
Mitya observed hotly that he had not said that he would be sure to pay him the remainder next day in the town . 
But Pan Vrublevsky confirmed the statement , and Mitya , after thinking for a moment admitted , frowning , that it must have been as the Poles stated , that he had been excited at the time , and might indeed have said so . 
The prosecutor positively pounced on this piece of evidence . 
It seemed to establish for the prosecution -LRB- and they did , in fact , base this deduction on it -RRB- that half , or a part of , the three thousand that had come into Mitya 's hands might really have been left somewhere hidden in the town , or even , perhaps , somewhere here , in Mokroe . 
This would explain the circumstance , so baffling for the prosecution , that only eight hundred roubles were to be found in Mitya 's hands . 
This circumstance had been the one piece of evidence which , insignificant as it was , had hitherto told , to some extent , in Mitya 's favour . 
Now this one piece of evidence in his favour had broken down . 
In answer to the prosecutor 's inquiry , where he would have got the remaining two thousand three hundred roubles , since he himself had denied having more than fifteen hundred , Mitya confidently replied that he had meant to offer the `` little chap , '' not money , but a formal deed of conveyance of his rights to the village of Tchermashnya , those rights which he had already offered to Samsonov and Madame Hohlakov . 
The prosecutor positively smiled at the `` innocence of this subterfuge . '' 
`` And you imagine he would have accepted such a deed as a substitute for two thousand three hundred roubles in cash ? '' 
`` He certainly would have accepted it , '' Mitya declared warmly . 
`` Why , look here , he might have grabbed not two thousand , but four or six , for it . 
He would have put his lawyers , Poles and Jews , on to the job , and might have got , not three thousand , but the whole property out of the old man . '' 
The evidence of Pan Mussyalovitch was , of course , entered in the protocol in the fullest detail . 
Then they let the Poles go . 
The incident of the cheating at cards was hardly touched upon . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch was too well pleased with them , as it was , and did not want to worry them with trifles , moreover , it was nothing but a foolish , drunken quarrel over cards . 
There had been drinking and disorder enough , that night ... . 
So the two hundred roubles remained in the pockets of the Poles . 
Then old Maximov was summoned . 
He came in timidly , approached with little steps , looking very dishevelled and depressed . 
He had , all this time , taken refuge below with Grushenka , sitting dumbly beside her , and `` now and then he 'd begin blubbering over her and wiping his eyes with a blue check handkerchief , '' as Mihail Makarovitch described afterwards . 
So that she herself began trying to pacify and comfort him . 
The old man at once confessed that he had done wrong , that he had borrowed `` ten roubles in my poverty , '' from Dmitri Fyodorovitch , and that he was ready to pay it back . 
To Nikolay Parfenovitch 's direct question , had he noticed how much money Dmitri Fyodorovitch held in his hand , as he must have been able to see the sum better than anyone when he took the note from him , Maximov , in the most positive manner , declared that there was twenty thousand . 
`` Have you ever seen so much as twenty thousand before , then ? '' 
inquired Nikolay Parfenovitch , with a smile . 
`` To be sure I have , not twenty , but seven , when my wife mortgaged my little property . 
She 'd only let me look at it from a distance , boasting of it to me . 
It was a very thick bundle , all rainbow-coloured notes . 
And Dmitri Fyodorovitch 's were all rainbow-coloured ... '' He was not kept long . 
At last it was Grushenka 's turn . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch was obviously apprehensive of the effect her appearance might have on Mitya , and he muttered a few words of admonition to him , but Mitya bowed his head in silence , giving him to understand `` that he would not make a scene . '' 
Mihail Makarovitch himself led Grushenka in . 
She entered with a stern and gloomy face , that looked almost composed , and sat down quietly on the chair offered her by Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
She was very pale , she seemed to be cold , and wrapped herself closely in her magnificent black shawl . 
She was suffering from a slight feverish chill - the first symptom of the long illness which followed that night . 
Her grave air , her direct earnest look and quiet manner made a very favourable impression on everyone . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch was even a little bit `` fascinated . '' 
He admitted himself , when talking about it afterwards , that only then had he seen `` how handsome the woman was , '' for , though he had seen her several times he had always looked upon her as something of a `` provincial hetaira . '' 
`` She has the manners of the best society , '' he said enthusiastically , gossiping about her in a circle of ladies . 
But this was received with positive indignation by the ladies , who immediately called him a `` naughty man , '' to his great satisfaction . 
As she entered the room , Grushenka only glanced for an instant at Mitya , who looked at her uneasily . 
But her face reassured him at once . 
After the first inevitable inquiries and warnings , Nikolay Parfenovitch asked her , hesitating a little , but preserving the most courteous manner , on what terms she was with the retired lieutenant , Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
To this Grushenka firmly and quietly replied : `` He was an acquaintance . 
He came to see me as an acquaintance during the last month . '' 
To further inquisitive questions she answered plainly and with complete frankness , that , though `` at times '' she had thought him attractive , she had not loved him , but had won his heart as well as his old father 's `` in my nasty spite , '' that she had seen that Mitya was very jealous of Fyodor Pavlovitch and everyone else ; but that had only amused her . 
She had never meant to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch , she had simply been laughing at him . 
`` I had no thoughts for either of them all this last month . 
I was expecting another man who had wronged me . 
But I think , '' she said in conclusion , `` that there 's no need for you to inquire about that , nor for me to answer you , for that 's my own affair . '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch immediately acted upon this hint . 
He again dismissed the `` romantic '' aspect of the case and passed to the serious one , that is , to the question of most importance , concerning the three thousand roubles . 
Grushenka confirmed the statement that three thousand roubles had certainly been spent on the first carousal at Mokroe , and , though she had not counted the money herself , she had heard that it was three thousand from Dmitri Fyodorovitch 's own lips . 
`` Did he tell you that alone , or before someone else , or did you only hear him speak of it to others in your presence ? '' 
the prosecutor inquired immediately . 
To which Grushenka replied that she had heard him say so before other people , and had heard him say so when they were alone . 
`` Did he say it to you alone once , or several times ? '' 
inquired the prosecutor , and learned that he had told Grushenka so several times . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch was very well satisfied with this piece of evidence . 
Further examination elicited that Grushenka knew , too , where that money had come from , and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had got it from Katerina Ivanovna . 
`` And did you never , once , hear that the money spent a month ago was not three thousand , but less , and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had saved half that sum for his own use ? '' 
`` No , I never heard that , '' answered Grushenka . 
It was explained further that Mitya had , on the contrary , often told her that he had n't a farthing . 
`` He was always expecting to get some from his father , '' said Grushenka in conclusion . 
`` Did he never say before you ... casually , or in a moment of irritation , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch put in suddenly , `` that he intended to make an attempt on his father 's life ? '' 
`` Ach , he did say so , '' sighed Grushenka . 
`` Once or several times ? '' 
`` He mentioned it several times , always in anger . '' 
`` And did you believe he would do it ? '' 
`` No , I never believed it , '' she answered firmly . 
`` I had faith in his noble heart . '' 
`` Gentlemen , allow me , '' cried Mitya suddenly , `` allow me to say one word to Agrafena Alexandrovna , in your presence . '' 
`` You can speak , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch assented . 
`` Agrafena Alexandrovna ! '' 
Mitya got up from his chair , `` have faith in God and in me . 
I am not guilty of my father 's murder ! '' 
Having uttered these words Mitya sat down again on his chair . 
Grushenka stood up and crossed herself devoutly before the ikon . 
`` Thanks be to Thee , O Lord , '' she said , in a voice thrilled with emotion , and still standing , she turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and added : `` As he has spoken now , believe it ! 
I know him . 
He 'll say anything as a joke or from obstinacy , but he 'll never deceive you against his conscience . 
He 's telling the whole truth , you may believe it . '' 
`` Thanks , Agrafena Alexandrovna , you 've given me fresh courage , '' Mitya responded in a quivering voice . 
As to the money spent the previous day , she declared that she did not know what sum it was , but had heard him tell several people that he had three thousand with him . 
And to the question where he got the money , she said that he had told her that he had `` stolen '' it from Katerina Ivanovna , and that she had replied to that that he had n't stolen it , and that he must pay the money back next day . 
On the prosecutor 's asking her emphatically whether the money he said he had stolen from Katerina Ivanovna was what he had spent yesterday , or what he had squandered here a month ago , she declared that he meant the money spent a month ago , and that that was how she understood him . 
Grushenka was at last released , and Nikolay Parfenovitch informed her impulsively that she might at once return to the town and that if he could be of any assistance to her , with horses for example , or if she would care for an escort , he ... would be - `` I thank you sincerely , '' said Grushenka , bowing to him , `` I 'm going with this old gentleman ; I am driving him back to town with me , and meanwhile , if you 'll allow me , I 'll wait below to hear what you decide about Dmitri Fyodorovitch . '' 
She went out . 
Mitya was calm , and even looked more cheerful , but only for a moment . 
He felt more and more oppressed by a strange physical weakness . 
His eyes were closing with fatigue . 
The examination of the witnesses was , at last , over . 
They procceded to a revision of the protocol . 
Mitya got up , moved from his chair to the corner by the curtain , lay down on a large chest covered with a rug , and instantly fell asleep . 
He had a strange dream , utterly out of keeping with the place and the time . 
He was driving somewhere in the steppes , where he had been stationed long ago , and a peasant was driving him in a cart with a pair of horses , through snow and sleet . 
He was cold , it was early in November , and the snow was falling in big wet flakes , melting as soon as it touched the earth . 
And the peasant drove him smartly , he had a fair , long beard . 
He was not an old man , somewhere about fifty , and he had on a grey peasant 's smock . 
Not far off was a village , he could see the black huts , and half the huts were burnt down , there were only the charred beams sticking up . 
And as they drove in , there were peasant women drawn up along the road , a lot of women , a whole row , all thin and wan , with their faces a sort of brownish colour , especially one at the edge , a tall , bony woman , who looked forty , but might have been only twenty , with a long thin face . 
And in her arms was a little baby crying . 
And her breasts seemed so dried up that there was not a drop of milk in them . 
And the child cried and cried , and held out its little bare arms , with its little fists blue from cold . 
`` Why are they crying ? 
Why are they crying ? '' 
Mitya asked , as they dashed gaily by . 
`` It 's the babe , '' answered the driver , `` the babe weeping . '' 
And Mitya was struck by his saying , in his peasant way , `` the babe , '' and he liked the peasant 's calling it a `` babe . '' 
There seemed more pity in it . 
`` But why is it weeping ? '' 
Mitya persisted stupidly , `` why are its little arms bare ? 
Why do n't they wrap it up ? '' 
`` The babe 's cold , its little clothes are frozen and do n't warm it . '' 
`` But why is it ? 
Why ? '' 
foolish Mitya still persisted . 
`` Why , they 're poor people , burnt out . 
They 've no bread . 
They 're begging because they 've been burnt out . '' 
`` No , no , '' Mitya , as it were , still did not understand . 
`` Tell me why it is those poor mothers stand there ? 
Why are people poor ? 
Why is the babe poor ? 
Why is the steppe barren ? 
Why do n't they hug each other and kiss ? 
Why do n't they sing songs of joy ? 
Why are they so dark from black misery ? 
Why do n't they feed the babe ? '' 
And he felt that , though his questions were unreasonable and senseless , yet he wanted to ask just that , and he had to ask it just in that way . 
And he felt that a passion of pity , such as he had never known before , was rising in his heart , that he wanted to cry , that he wanted to do something for them all , so that the babe should weep no more , so that the dark-faced , dried-up mother should not weep , that no one should shed tears again from that moment , and he wanted to do it at once , at once , regardless of all obstacles , with all the recklessness of the Karamazovs . 
`` And I 'm coming with you . 
I wo n't leave you now for the rest of my life , I 'm coming with you '' , he heard close beside him Grushenka 's tender voice , thrilling with emotion . 
And his heart glowed , and he struggled forward towards the light , and he longed to live , to live , to go on and on , towards the new , beckoning light , and to hasten , hasten , now , at once ! 
`` What ! 
Where ? '' 
he exclaimed opening his eyes , and sitting up on the chest , as though he had revived from a swoon , smiling brightly . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch was standing over him , suggesting that he should hear the protocol read aloud and sign it . 
Mitya guessed that he had been asleep an hour or more , but he did not hear Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
He was suddenly struck by the fact that there was a pillow under his head , which had n't been there when he had leant back , exhausted , on the chest . 
`` Who put that pillow under my head ? 
Who was so kind ? '' 
he cried , with a sort of ecstatic gratitude , and tears in his voice , as though some great kindness had been shown him . 
He never found out who this kind man was ; perhaps one of the peasant witnesses , or Nikolay Parfenovitch 's little secretary , had compassionately thought to put a pillow under his head ; but his whole soul was quivering with tears . 
He went to the table and said that he would sign whatever they liked . 
`` I 've had a good dream , gentlemen , '' he said in a strange voice , with a new light , as of joy , in his face . 
They Carry Mitya Away WHEN the protocol had been signed , Nikolay Parfenovitch turned solemnly to the prisoner and read him the `` Committal , '' setting forth , that in such a year , on such a day , in such a place , the investigating lawyer of such-and-such a district court , having examined so-and-so -LRB- to wit , Mitya -RRB- accused of this and of that -LRB- all the charges were carefully written out -RRB- and having considered that the accused , not pleading guilty to the charges made against him , had brought forward nothing in his defence , while the witnesses , so-and-so , and so-and-so , and the circumstances such-and-such testify against him , acting in accordance with such-and-such articles of the Statute Book , and so on , has ruled , that , in order to preclude so-and-so -LRB- Mitya -RRB- from all means of evading pursuit and judgment , he be detained in such-and-such a prison , which he hereby notifies to the accused and communicates a copy of this same `` Committal '' to the deputy prosecutor , and so on , and so on . 
In brief , Mitya was informed that he was , from that moment , a prisoner , and that he would be driven at once to the town , and there shut up in a very unpleasant place . 
Mitya listened attentively , and only shrugged his shoulders . 
`` Well , gentlemen , I do n't blame you . 
I 'm ready ... . 
I understand that there 's nothing else for you to do . '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch informed him gently that he would be escorted at once by the rural police officer , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , who happened to be on the spot ... `` Stay , '' Mitya interrupted , suddenly , and impelled by uncontrollable feeling he pronounced , addressing all in the room : `` Gentlemen , we 're all cruel , we 're all monsters , we all make men weep , and mothers , and babes at the breast , but of all , let it be settled here , now , of all I am the lowest reptile ! 
I 've sworn to amend , and every day I 've done the same filthy things . 
I understand now that such men as I need a blow , a blow of destiny to catch them as with a noose , and bind them by a force from without . 
Never , never should I have risen of myself ! 
But the thunderbolt has fallen . 
I accept the torture of accusation , and my public shame ; I want to suffer and by suffering I shall be purified . 
Perhaps I shall be purified , gentlemen ? 
But listen , for the last time , I am not guilty of my father 's blood . 
I accept my punishment , not because I killed him , but because I meant to kill him , and perhaps I really might have killed him . 
Still I mean to fight it out with you . 
I warn you of that . 
I 'll fight it out with you to the end , and then God will decide . 
Good-bye , gentlemen , do n't be vexed with me for having shouted at you during the examination . 
Oh , I was still such a fool then ... . 
In another minute I shall be a prisoner , but now , for the last time , as a free man , Dmitri Karamazov offers you his hand . 
Saying good-bye to you , I say it to all men . '' 
His voice quivered and he stretched out his hand , but Nikolay Parfenovitch , who happened to stand nearest to him , with a sudden , almost nervous movement , hid his hands behind his back . 
Mitya instantly noticed this , and started . 
He let his outstretched hand fall at once . 
`` The preliminary inquiry is not yet over , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch faltered , somewhat embarrassed . 
`` We will continue it in the town , and I , for my part , of course , am ready to wish you all success ... in your defence ... . 
As a matter of fact , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , I 've always been disposed to regard you as , so to speak , more unfortunate than guilty . 
All of us here , if I may make bold to speak for all , we are all ready to recognise that you are , at bottom , a young man of honour , but , alas , one who has been carried away by certain passions to a somewhat excessive degree ... '' Nikolay Parfenovitch 's little figure was positively majestic by the time he had finished speaking . 
It struck Mitya that in another minute this `` boy '' would take his arm , lead him to another corner , and renew their conversation about `` girls . '' 
But many quite irrelevant and inappropriate thoughts sometimes occur even to a prisoner when he is being led out to execution . 
`` Gentlemen , you are good , you are humane , may I see her to say ` good-bye ' for the last time ? '' 
asked Mitya . 
`` Certainly , but considering ... in fact , now it 's impossible except in the presence of - '' `` Oh , well , if it must be so , it must ! '' 
Grushenka was brought in , but the farewell was brief , and of few words , and did not at all satisfy Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
Grushenka made a deep bow to Mitya . 
`` I have told you I am yours , and I will be yours . 
I will follow you for ever , wherever they may send you . 
Farewell ; you are guiltless , though you 've been your own undoing . '' 
Her lips quivered , tears flowed from her eyes . 
`` Forgive me , Grusha , for my love , for ruining you , too , with my love . '' 
Mitya would have said something more , but he broke off and went out . 
He was at once surrounded by men who kept a constant watch on him . 
At the bottom of the steps to which he had driven up with such a dash the day before with Andrey 's three horses , two carts stood in readiness . 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , a sturdy , thick-set man with a wrinkled face , was annoyed about something , some sudden irregularity . 
He was shouting angrily . 
He asked Mitya to get into the cart with somewhat excessive surliness . 
`` When I stood him drinks in the tavern , the man had quite a different face , '' thought Mitya , as he got in . 
At the gates there was a crowd of people , peasants , women , and drivers . 
Trifon Borissovitch came down the steps too . 
All stared at Mitya . 
`` Forgive me at parting , good people ! '' 
Mitya shouted suddenly from the cart . 
`` Forgive us too ! '' 
he heard two or three voices . 
`` Good-bye to you , too , Trifon Borissovitch ! '' 
But Trifon Borissovitch did not even turn round . 
He was , perhaps , too busy . 
He , too , was shouting and fussing about something . 
It appeared that everything was not yet ready in the second cart , in which two constables were to accompany Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
The peasant who had been ordered to drive the second cart was pulling on his smock , stoutly maintaining that it was not his turn to go , but Akim 's . 
But Akim was not to be seen . 
They ran to look for him . 
The peasant persisted and besought them to wait . 
`` You see what our peasants are , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
They 've no shame ! '' 
exclaimed Trifon Borissovitch . 
`` Akim gave you twenty-five copecks the day before yesterday . 
You 've drunk it all and now you cry out . 
I 'm simply surprised at your good-nature , with our low peasants , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , that 's all I can say . '' 
`` But what do we want a second cart for ? '' 
Mitya put in . 
`` Let 's start with the one , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
I wo n't be unruly , I wo n't run away from you , old fellow . 
What do we want an escort for ? '' 
`` I 'll trouble you , sir , to learn how to speak to me if you 've never been taught . 
