Kolya scanned him gravely . 
`` Have you been to the Church of the Ascension ? '' 
he suddenly asked him , with stern emphasis . 
`` What Church of Ascension ? 
What for ? 
No , I have n't , '' said the young man , somewhat taken aback . 
`` Do you know Sabaneyev ? '' 
Kolya went on even more emphatically and even more severely . 
`` What Sabaneyev ? 
No , I do n't know him . '' 
`` Well then you can go to the devil , '' said Kolya , cutting short the conversation ; and turning sharply to the right he strode quickly on his way as though he disdained further conversation with a dolt who did not even know Sabaneyev . 
`` Stop , heigh ! 
What Sabaneyev ? '' 
the young man recovered from his momentary stupefaction and was as excited as before . 
`` What did he say ? '' 
He turned to the market women with a silly stare . 
The women laughed . 
`` You can never tell what he 's after , '' said one of them . 
`` What Sabaneyev is it he 's talking about ? '' 
the young man repeated , still furious and brandishing his right arm . 
`` It must be a Sabaneyev who worked for the Kuzmitchovs , that 's who it must be , '' one of the women suggested . 
The young man stared at her wildly . 
`` For the Kuzmitchovs ? '' 
repeated another woman . 
`` But his name was n't Trifon . 
His name 's Kuzma , not Trifon ; but the boy said Trifon Nikititch , so it ca n't be the same . '' 
`` His name is not Trifon and not Sabaneyev , it 's Tchizhov , '' put in suddenly a third woman , who had hitherto been silent , listening gravely . 
`` Alexey Ivanitch is his name . 
Tchizhov , Alexey Ivanitch . '' 
`` Not a doubt about it , it 's Tchizhov , '' a fourth woman emphatically confirmed the statement . 
The bewildered youth gazed from one to another . 
`` But what did he ask for , what did he ask for , good people ? '' 
he cried almost in desperation . '' 
` Do you know Sabaneyev ? ' 
says he . 
And who the devil 's to know who is Sabaneyev ? '' 
`` You 're a senseless fellow . 
I tell you it 's not Sabaneyev , but Tchizhov , Alexey Ivanitch Tchizhov , that 's who it is ! '' 
one of the women shouted at him impressively . 
`` What Tchizhov ? 
Who is he ? 
Tell me , if you know . '' 
`` That tall , snivelling fellow who used to sit in the market in the summer . '' 
`` And what 's your Tchizhov to do with me , good people , eh ? '' 
`` How can I tell what he 's to do with you ? '' 
put in another . 
`` You ought to know yourself what you want with him , if you make such a clamour about him . 
He spoke to you , he did not speak to us , you stupid . 
Do n't you really know him ? '' 
`` Know whom ? '' 
`` Tchizhov . '' 
`` The devil take Tchizhov and you with him . 
I 'll give him a hiding , that I will . 
He was laughing at me ! '' 
`` Will give Tchizhov a hiding ! 
More likely he will give you one . 
You are a fool , that 's what you are ! '' 
`` Not Tchizhov , not Tchizhov , you spiteful , mischievous woman . 
I 'll give the boy a hiding . 
Catch him , catch him , he was laughing at me The woman guffawed . 
But Kolya was by now a long way off , marching along with a triumphant air . 
Smurov walked beside him , looking round at the shouting group far behind . 
He too was in high spirits , though he was still afraid of getting into some scrape in Kolya 's company . 
`` What Sabaneyev did you mean ? '' 
he asked Kolya , foreseeing what his answer would be . 
`` How do I know ? 
Now there 'll be a hubbub among them all day . 
I like to stir up fools in every class of society . 
There 's another blockhead , that peasant there . 
You know , they say ` there 's no one stupider than a stupid Frenchman , ' but a stupid Russian shows it in his face just as much . 
Ca n't you see it all over his face that he is a fool , that peasant , eh ? '' 
`` Let him alone , Kolya . 
Let 's go on . '' 
`` Nothing could stop me , now I am once off . 
Hey , good morning , peasant ! '' 
A sturdy-looking peasant , with a round , simple face and grizzled beard , who was walking by , raised his head and looked at the boy . 
He seemed not quite sober . 
`` Good morning , if you are not laughing at me , '' he said deliberately in reply . 
`` And if I am ? '' 
laughed Kolya . 
`` Well , a joke 's a joke . 
Laugh away . 
I do n't mind . 
There 's no harm in a joke . '' 
`` I beg your pardon , brother , it was a joke . '' 
`` Well , God forgive you ! '' 
`` Do you forgive me , too ? '' 
`` I quite forgive you . 
Go along . '' 
`` I say , you seem a clever peasant . '' 
`` Cleverer than you , '' the peasant answered unexpectedly , with the same gravity . 
`` I doubt it , '' said Kolya , somewhat taken aback . 
`` It 's true , though . '' 
`` Perhaps it is . '' 
`` It is , brother . '' 
`` Good-bye , peasant ! '' 
`` Good-bye ! '' 
`` There are all sorts of peasants , '' Kolya observed to Smurov after a brief silence . 
`` How could I tell I had hit on a clever one ? 
I am always ready to recognise intelligence in the peasantry . '' 
In the distance the cathedral clock struck half-past eleven . 
The boys made haste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov 's lodging , a considerable distance , quickly and almost in silence . 
Twenty paces from the house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask Karamazov to come out to him . 
`` One must sniff round a bit first , '' he observed to Smurov . 
`` Why ask him to come out ? '' 
Smurov protested . 
`` You go in ; they will be awfully glad to see you . 
What 's the sense of making friends in the frost out here ? '' 
`` I know why I want to see him out here in the frost , '' Kolya cut him short in the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with `` small boys , '' and Smurov ran to do his bidding . 
The Lost Dog KOLYA leaned against the fence with an air of dignity , waiting for Alyosha to appear . 
Yes , he had long wanted to meet him . 
He had heard a great deal about him from the boys , but hitherto he had always maintained an appearance of disdainful indifference when he was mentioned , and he had even `` criticised '' what he heard about Alyosha . 
But secretely he had a great longing to make his acquaintance ; there was something sympathetic and attractive in all he was told about Alyosha . 
So the present moment was important : to begin with , he had to show himself at his best , to show his independence . 
`` Or he 'll think of me as thirteen and take me for a boy , like the rest of them . 
And what are these boys to him ? 
I shall ask him when I get to know him . 
It 's a pity I am so short , though . 
Tuzikov is younger than I am , yet he is half a head taller . 
But I have a clever face . 
I am not good-looking . 
I know I 'm hideous , but I 've a clever face . 
I must n't talk too freely ; if I fall into his arms all at once , he may think - Tfoo ! 
how horrible if he should think - ! '' 
Such were the thoughts that excited Kolya while he was doing his utmost to assume the most independent air . 
What distressed him most was his being so short ; he did not mind so much his `` hideous '' face , as being so short . 
On the wall in a corner at home he had the year before made a pencil-mark to show his height , and every two months since he anxiously measured himself against it to see how much he had gained . 
But alas ! 
he grew very slowly , and this sometimes reduced him almost to despair . 
His face was in reality by no means `` hideous '' ; on the contrary , it was rather attractive , with a fair , pale skin , freckled . 
His small , lively grey eyes had a fearless look , and often glowed with feeling . 
He had rather high cheekbones ; small , very red , but not very thick , lips ; his nose was small and unmistakably turned up . 
`` I 've a regular pug nose , a regular pug nose , '' Kolya used to mutter to himself when he looked in the looking-glass , and he always left it with indignation . 
`` But perhaps I have n't got a clever face ? '' 
he sometimes thought , doubtful even of that . 
But it must not be supposed that his mind was preoccupied with his face and his height . 
On the contrary , however bitter the moments before the looking-glass were to him , he quickly forgot them , and forgot them for a long time , `` abandoning himself entirely to ideas and to real life , '' as he formulated it to himself . 
Alyosha came out quickly and hastened up to Kolya . 
Before he reached him , Kolya could see that he looked delighted . 
`` Can he be so glad to see me ? '' 
Kolya wondered , feeling pleased . 
We may note here , in passing , that Alyosha 's appearance had undergone a complete change since we saw him last . 
He had abandoned his cassock and was wearing now a wellcut coat , a soft , round hat , and his hair had been cropped short . 
All this was very becoming to him , and he looked quite handsome . 
His charming face always had a good-humoured expression ; but there was a gentleness and serenity in his good-humour . 
To Kolya 's surprise , Alyosha came out to him just as he was , without an overcoat . 
He had evidently come in haste . 
He held out his hand to Kolya at once . 
`` Here you are at last ! 
How anxious we 've been to see you ! '' 
`` There were reasons which you shall know directly . 
Anyway , I am glad to make your acquaintance . 
I 've long been hoping for an opportunity , and have heard a great deal about you , '' Kolya muttered , a little breathless . 
`` We should have met anyway . 
I 've heard a great deal about you , too ; but you 've been a long time coming here . '' 
`` Tell me , how are things going ? '' 
`` Ilusha is very ill . 
He is certainly dying . '' 
`` How awful ! 
You must admit that medicine is a fraud , Karamazov , '' cried Kolya warmly . 
`` Ilusha has mentioned you often , very often , even in his sleep , in delirium , you know . 
One can see that you used to be very , very dear to him ... before the incident ... with the knife ... . 
Then there 's another reason ... . 
Tell me , is that your dog ? '' 
`` Yes Perezvon . '' 
`` Not Zhutchka ? '' 
Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity . 
`` Is she lost for ever ? '' 
`` I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka . 
I 've heard all about it . '' 
Kolya smiled mysteriously . 
`` Listen , Karamazov , I 'll tell you all about it . 
That 's what I came for ; that 's what I asked you to come out here for , to explain the whole episode to you before we go in , '' he began with animation . 
`` You see , Karamazov , Ilusha came into the preparatory class last spring . 
Well , you know what our preparatory class is - a lot of small boys . 
They began teasing Ilusha at once . 
I am two classes higher up , and , of course , I only look on at them from a distance . 
I saw the boy was weak and small , but he would n't give in to them ; he fought with them . 
I saw he was proud , and his eyes were full of fire . 
I like children like that . 
And they teased him all the more . 
The worst of it was he was horribly dressed at the time , his breeches were too small for him , and there were holes in his boots . 
They worried him about it ; they jeered at him . 
That I ca n't stand . 
I stood up for him at once , and gave it to them hot . 
I beat them , but they adore me , do you know , Karamazov ? '' 
Kolya boasted impulsively ; `` but I am always fond of children . 
I 've two chickens in my hands at home now - that 's what detained me to-day . 
So they left off beating Ilusha and I took him under my protection . 
I saw the boy was proud . 
I tell you that , the boy was proud ; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me : he did my slightest bidding , obeyed me as though I were God , tried to copy me . 
In the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once ' and I 'd go about with him . 
On Sundays , too . 
They always laugh when an older boy makes friends with a younger one like that ; but that 's a prejudice . 
If it 's my fancy , that 's enough . 
I am teaching him , developing him . 
Why should n't I develop him if I like him ? 
Here you , Karamazov , have taken up with all these nestlings . 
I see you want to influence the younger generation - to develop them , to be of use to them , and I assure you this trait in your character , which I knew by hearsay , attracted me more than anything . 
Let us get to the point , though . 
I noticed that there was a sort of softness and sentimentality coming over the boy , and you know I have a positive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality , and I have had it from a baby . 
There were contradictions in him , too : he was proud , but he was slavishly devoted to me , and yet all at once his eyes would flash and he 'd refuse to agree with me ; he 'd argue , fly into a rage . 
I used sometimes to propound certain ideas ; I could see that it was not so much that he disagreed with the ideas , but that he was simply rebelling against me , because I was cool in responding to his endearments . 
And so , in order to train him properly , the tenderer he was , the colder I became . 
I did it on purpose : that was my idea . 
My object was to form his character , to lick him into shape , to make a man of him ... and besides ... no doubt , you understand me at a word . 
Suddenly I noticed for three days in succession he was downcast and dejected , not because of my coldness , but for something else , something more important . 
I wondered what the tragedy was . 
I have pumped him and found out that he had somehow got to know Smerdyakov , who was footman to your late father - it was before his death , of course - and he taught the little fool a silly trick - that is , a brutal , nasty trick . 
He told him to take a piece of bread , to stick a pin in it , and throw it to one of those hungry dogs who snap up anything without biting it , and then to watch and see what would happen . 
So they prepared a piece of bread like that and threw it to Zhutchka , that shaggy dog there 's been such a fuss about . 
The people of the house it belonged to never fed it at all , though it barked all day . 
-LRB- Do you like that stupid barking , Karamazov ? 
I ca n't stand it . -RRB- 
So it rushed at the bread , swallowed it , and began to squeal ; it turned round and round and ran away , squealing as it ran out of sight . 
That was Ilusha 's own account of it . 
He confessed it to me , and cried bitterly . 
He hugged me , shaking all over . 
He kept on repeating ` He ran away squealing ' : the sight of that haunted him . 
He was tormented by remorse , I could see that . 
I took it seriously . 
I determined to give him a lesson for other things as well . 
So I must confess I was n't quite straightforward , and pretended to be more indignant perhaps than I was . 
` You 've done a nasty thing , ' I said , ` you are a scoundrel . 
I wo n't tell of it , of course , but I shall have nothing more to do with you for a time . 
I 'll think it over and let you know through Smurov ' - that 's the boy who 's just come with me ; he 's always ready to do anything for me - ` whether I will have anything to do with you in the future or whether I give you up for good as a scoundrel . ' 
He was tremendously upset . 
I must own I felt I 'd gone too far as I spoke , but there was no help for it . 
I did what I thought best at the time . 
A day or two after , I sent Smurov to tell him that I would not speak to him again . 
That 's what we call it when two schoolfellows refuse to have anything more to do with one another . 
Secretly I only meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then , if I saw signs of repentance , to hold out my hand to him again . 
That was my intention . 
But what do you think happened ? 
He heard Smurov 's message , his eyes flashed . 
` Tell Krassotkin for me , ' he cried , ` that I will throw bread with pins to all the dogs - all - all of them ! ' 
` So he 's going in for a little temper . 
We must smoke it out of him . ' 
And I began to treat him with contempt ; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled sarcastically . 
And just then that affair with his father happened . 
You remember ? 
You must realise that he was fearfully worked up by what had happened already . 
The boys , seeing I 'd given him up , set on him and taunted him , shouting , ` Wisp of tow , wisp of tow ! ' 
And he had soon regular skirmishes with them , which I am very sorry for . 
They seem to have given him one very bad beating . 
One day he flew at them all as they were coming out of school . 
I stood a few yards off , looking on . 
And , I swear , I do n't remember that I laughed ; it was quite the other way , I felt awfully sorry for him ; in another minute I would have run up to take his part . 
But he suddenly met my eyes . 
I do n't know what he fancied ; but he pulled out a penknife , rushed at me , and struck at my thigh , here in my right leg . 
I did n't move . 
I do n't mind owning I am plucky sometimes , Karamazov . 
I simply looked at him contemptuously , as though to say , ` This is how you repay all my kindness ! 
Do it again if you like , I 'm at your service . ' 
But he did n't stab me again ; he broke down ; he was frightened at what he had done ; he threw away the knife , burst out crying , and ran away . 
I did not sneak on him , of course , and I made them all keep quiet , so it should n't come to the ears of the masters . 
I did n't even tell my mother till it had healed up . 
And the wound was a mere scratch . 
And then I heard that the same day he 'd been throwing stones and had bitten your finger - but you understand now what a state he was in ! 
Well , it ca n't be helped : it was stupid of me not to come and forgive him - that is , to make it up with him - when he was taken ill . 
I am sorry for it now . 
But I had a special reason . 
So now I 've told you all about it ... but I 'm afraid it was stupid of me . '' 
`` Oh , what a pity , '' exclaimed Alyosha , with feeling , `` that I did n't know before what terms you were on with him , or I 'd have come to you long ago to beg you to go to him with me . 
Would you believe it , when he was feverish he talked about you in delirium . 
I did n't know how much you were to him ! 
And you 've really not succeeded in finding that dog ? 
His father and the boys have been hunting all over the town for it . 
Would you believe it , since he 's been ill , I 've three times heard him repeat with tears , ` It 's because I killed Zhutchka , father , that I am ill now . 
God is punishing me for it . ' 
He ca n't get that idea out of his head . 
And if the dog were found and proved to be alive , one might almost fancy the joy would cure him . 
We have all rested our hopes on you . '' 
`` Tell me , what made you hope that I should be the one to find him ? '' 
Kolya asked , with great curiosity . 
`` Why did you reckon on me rather than anyone else ? '' 
`` There was a report that you were looking for the dog , and that you would bring it when you 'd found it . 
Smurov said something of the sort . 
We 've all been trying to persuade Ilusha that the dog is alive , that it 's been seen . 
The boys brought him a live hare : he just looked at it , with a faint smile , and asked them to set it free in the fields . 
And so we did . 
His father has just this moment come back , bringing him a mastiff pup , hoping to comfort him with that ; but I think it only makes it worse . '' 
`` Tell me , Karamazov , what sort of man is the father ? 
I know him , but what do you make of him - a mountebank , a buffoon ? '' 
`` Oh no ; there are people of deep feeling who have been somehow crushed . 
Buffoonery in them is a form of resentful irony against those to whom they dare n't speak the truth , from having been for years humiliated and intimidated by them . 
Believe me , Krassotkin , that sort of buffoonery is sometimes tragic in the extreme . 
His whole life now is centred in Ilusha , and if Ilusha dies , he will either go mad with grief or kill himself . 
I feel almost certain of that when I look at him now . '' 
`` I understand you , Karamazov . 
I see you understand human nature , '' Kolya added , with feeling . 
`` And as soon as I saw you with a dog , I thought it was Zhutchka you were bringing . '' 
`` Wait a bit , Karamazov , perhaps we shall find it yet ; but this is Perezvon . 
I 'll let him go in now and perhaps it will amuse Ilusha more than the mastiff pup . 
Wait a bit , Karamazov , you will know something in a minute . 
But , I say , I am keeping you here ! '' 
Kolya cried suddenly . 
`` You 've no overcoat on in this bitter cold . 
You see what an egoist I am . 
Oh , we are all egoists , Karamazov ! '' 
`` Do n't trouble ; it is cold , but I do n't often catch cold . 
Let us go in , though , and , by the way , what is your name ? 
I know you are called Kolya , but what else ? '' 
`` Nikolay - Nikolay Ivanovitch Krassotkin , or , as they say in official documents , ` Krassotkin son . ' '' 
Kolya laughed for some reason , but added suddenly , `` Of course I hate my name Nikolay . '' 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` It 's so trivial , so ordinary . '' 
`` You are thirteen ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` No , fourteen - that is , I shall be fourteen very soon , in a fortnight . 
I 'll confess one weakness of mine , Karamazov , just to you , since it 's our first meeting , so that you may understand my character at once . 
I hate being asked my age , more than that ... and in fact ... there 's a libellous story going about me , that last week I played robbers with the preparatory boys . 
It 's a fact that I did play with them , but it 's a perfect libel to say I did it for my own amusement . 
I have reasons for believing that you 've heard the story ; but I was n't playing for my own amusement , it was for the sake of the children , because they could n't think of anything to do by themselves . 
But they 've always got some silly tale . 
This is an awful town for gossip , I can tell you . '' 
`` But what if you had been playing for your own amusement , what 's the harm ? '' 
`` Come , I say , for my own amusement ! 
You do n't play horses , do you ? '' 
`` But you must look at it like this , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Grown-up people go to the theatre and there the adventures of all sorts of heroes are represented - sometimes there are robbers and battles , too - and is n't that just the same thing , in a different form , of course ? 
And young people 's games of soldiers or robbers in their playtime are also art in its first stage . 
You know , they spring from the growing artistic instincts of the young . 
And sometimes these games are much better than performances in the theatre ; the only difference is that people go there to look at the actors , while in these games the young people are the actors themselves . 
But that 's only natural . '' 
`` You think so ? 
Is that your idea ? '' 
Kolya looked at him intently . 
`` Oh , you know , that 's rather an interesting view . 
When I go home , I 'll think it over . 
I 'll admit I thought I might learn something from you . 
I 've come to learn of you , Karamazov , '' Kolya concluded , in a voice full of spontaneous feeling . 
`` And I of you , '' said Alyosha , smiling and pressing his hand . 
Kolya was much pleased with Alyosha . 
What struck him most was that he treated him exactly like an equal and that he talked to him just as if he were `` quite grown up . '' 
`` I 'll show you something directly , Karamazov ; it 's a theatrical performance , too , '' he said , laughing nervously . 
`` That 's why I 've come . '' 
`` Let us go first to the people of the house , on the left . 
All the boys leave their coats in there , because the room is small and hot . '' 
`` Oh , I 'm only coming in for a minute . 
I 'll keep on my overcoat . 
Perezvon will stay here in the passage and be dead . 
Ici , Perezvon , lie down and be dead ! 
You see how he 's dead . 
I 'll go in first and explore , then I 'll whistle to him when I think fit , and you 'll see , he 'll dash in like mad . 
Only Smurov must not forget to open the door at the moment . 
I 'll arrange it all and you 'll see something . '' 
By Ilusha 's Bedside THE room inhabited by the family of the retired captain Snegiryov is already familiar to the reader . 
It was close and crowded at that moment with a number of visitors . 
Several boys were sitting with Ilusha , and though all of them , like Smurov , were prepared to deny that it was Alyosha who had brought them and reconciled them with Ilusha , it was really the fact . 
All the art he had used had been to take them , one by one , to Ilusha , without `` sheepish sentimentality , '' appearing to do so casually and without design . 
It was a great consolation to Ilusha in his suffering . 
He was greatly touched by seeing the almost tender affection and sympathy shown him by these boys , who had been his enemies . 
Krassotkin was the only one missing and his absence was a heavy load on Ilusha 's heart . 
Perhaps the bitterest of all his bitter memories was his stabbing Krassotkin , who had been his one friend and protector . 
Clever little Smurov , who was the first to make it up with Ilusha , thought it was so . 
But when Smurov hinted to Krassotkin that Alyosha wanted to come and see him about something , the latter cut him short , bidding Smurov tell `` Karamazov '' at once that he knew best what to do , that he wanted no one 's advice , and that , if he went to see Ilusha , he would choose his own time for he had `` his own reasons . '' 
That was a fortnight before this Sunday . 
That was why Alyosha had not been to see him , as he had meant to . 
But though he waited he sent Smurov to him twice again . 
Both times Krassotkin met him with a curt , impatient refusal , sending Alyosha a message not to bother him any more , that if he came himself , he , Krassotkin , would not go to Ilusha at all . 
Up to the very last day , Smurov did not know that Kolya meant to go to Ilusha that morning , and only the evening before , as he parted from Smurov , Kolya abruptly told him to wait at home for him next morning , for he would go with him to the Snegiryovs , but warned him on no account to say he was coming , as he wanted to drop in casually . 
Smurov obeyed . 
Smurov 's fancy that Kolya would bring back the lost dog was based on the words Kolya had dropped that `` they must be asses not to find the dog , if it was alive . '' 
When Smurov , waiting for an opportunity , timidly hinted at his guess about the dog , Krassotkin flew into a violent rage . 
`` I 'm not such an ass as to go hunting about the town for other people 's dogs when I 've got a dog of my own ! 
And how can you imagine a dog could be alive after swallowing a pin ? 
Sheepish sentimentality , thats what it is ! 
For the last fortnight Ilusha had not left his little bed under the ikons in the corner . 
He had not been to school since the day he met Alyosha and bit his finger . 
He was taken ill the same day , though for a month afterwards he was sometimes able to get up and walk about the room and passage . 
But latterly he had become so weak that he could not move without help from his father . 
His father was terribly concerned about him . 
He even gave up drinking and was almost crazy with terror that his boy would die . 
And often , especially after leading him round the room on his arm and putting him back to bed , he would run to a dark corner in the passage and , leaning his head against the wall , he would break into paroxysms of violent weeping , stifling his sobs that they might not be heard by Ilusha . 
Returning to the room , he would usually begin doing something to amuse and comfort his precious boy : he would tell him stories , funny anecdotes , or would mimic comic people he had happened to meet , even imitate the howls and cries of animals . 
But Ilusha could not bear to see his father fooling and playing the buffoon . 
Though the boy tried not to show how he disliked it , he saw with an aching heart that his father was an object of contempt , and he was continually haunted by the memory of the `` wisp of tow '' and that `` terrible day . '' 
Nina , Ilusha 's gentle , crippled sister , did not like her father 's buffoonery either -LRB- Varvara had been gone for some time past to Petersburg to study at the university -RRB- . 
But the half-imbecile mother was greatly diverted and laughed heartily when her husband began capering about or performing something . 
It was the only way she could be amused ; all the rest of the time she was grumbling and complaining that now everyone had forgotten her , that no one treated her with respect , that she was slighted , and so on . 
But during the last few days she had completely changed . 
She began looking constantly at Ilusha 's bed in the corner and seemed lost in thought . 
She was more silent , quieter , and , if she cried , she cried quietly so as not to be heard . 
The captain noticed the change in her with mournful perplexity . 
The boys ' visits at first only angered her , but later on their merry shouts and stories began to divert her , and at last she liked them so much that , if the boys had given up coming , she would have felt dreary without them . 
When the children told some story or played a game , she laughed and clapped her hands . 
She called some of them to her and kissed them . 
She was particularly fond of Smurov . 
As for the captain , the presence in his room of the children , who came to cheer up Ilusha , filled his heart from the first with ecstatic joy . 
He even hoped that Ilusha would now get over his depression and that that would hasten his recovery . 
In spite of his alarm about Ilusha , he had not , till lately , felt one minute 's doubt of his boy 's ultimate recovery . 
He met his little visitors with homage , waited upon them hand and foot ; he was ready to be their horse and even began letting them ride on his back , but Ilusha did not like the game and it was given up . 
He began buying little things for them , gingerbread and nuts , gave them tea and cut them sandwiches . 
It must be noted that all this time he had plenty of money . 
He had taken the two hundred roubles from Katerina Ivanovna just as Alyosha had predicted he would . 
And afterwards Katerina Ivanovna , learning more about their circumstances and Ilusha 's illness , visited them herself , made the acquaintance of the family , and succeeded in fascinating the half-imbecile mother . 
Since then she had been lavish in helping them , and the captain , terror-stricken at the thought that his boy might be dying , forgot his pride and humbly accepted her assistance . 
All this time Doctor Herzenstube , who was called in by Katerina Ivanovna , came punctually every other day , but little was gained by his visits and he dosed the invalid mercilessly . 
But on that Sunday morning a new doctor was expected , who had come from Moscow , where he had a great reputation . 
Katerina Ivanovna had sent for him from Moscow at great expense , not expressly for Ilusha , but for another object of which more will be said in its place hereafter . 
But , as he had come , she had asked him to see Ilusha as well , and the captain had been told to expect him . 
He had n't the slightest idea that Kolya Krassotkin was coming , though he had long wished for a visit from the boy for whom Ilusha was fretting . 
At the moment when Krassotkin opened the door and came into the room , the captain and all the boys were round Ilusha 's bed , looking at a tiny mastiff pup , which had only been born the day before , though the captain had bespoken it a week ago to comfort and amuse Ilusha , who was still fretting over the lost and probably dead Zhutchka . 
Ilusha , who had heard three days before that he was to be presented with a puppy , not an ordinary puppy , but a pedigree mastiff -LRB- a very important point , of course -RRB- , tried from delicacy of feeling to pretend that he was pleased . 
But his father and the boys could not help seeing that the puppy only served to recall to his little heart the thought of the unhappy dog he had killed . 
The puppy lay beside him feebly moving and he , smiling sadly , stroked it with his thin , pale , wasted hand . 
Clearly he liked the puppy , but ... it was n't Zhutchka ; if he could have had Zhutchka and the puppy , too , then he would have been completely happy . 
`` Krassotkin ! '' 
cried one of the boys suddenly . 
He was the first to see him come in . 
Krassotkin 's entrance made a general sensation ; the boys moved away and stood on each side of the bed , so that he could get a full view of Ilusha . 
The captain ran eagerly to meet Kolya . 
`` Please come in ... you are welcome ! '' 
he said hurriedly . 
`` Ilusha , Mr. Krassotkin has come to see you ! 
But Krassotkin , shaking hands with him hurriedly , instantly showed his complete knowledge of the manners of good society . 
He turned first to the captain 's wife sitting in her armchair , who was very ill-humoured at the moment , and was grumbling that the boys stood between her and Ilusha 's bed and did not let her see the new puppy . 
With the greatest courtesy he made her a bow , scraping his foot , and turning to Nina , he made her , as the only other lady present , a similar bow . 
This polite behaviour made an extremely favourable impression on the deranged lady . 
`` There , . 
you can see at once he is a young man that has been well brought up , '' she commented aloud , throwing up her hands ; `` But as for our other visitors they come in one on the top of another . '' 
`` How do you mean , mamma , one on the top of another , how is that ? '' 
muttered the captain affectionately , though a little anxious on her account . 
`` That 's how they ride in . 
They get on each other 's shoulders in the passage and prance in like that on a respectable family . 
Strange sort of visitors ! '' 
`` But who 's come in like that , mamma ? '' 
`` Why , that boy came in riding on that one 's back and this one on that one 's . '' 
Kolya was already by Ilusha 's bedside . 
The sick boy turned visibly paler . 
He raised himself in the bed and looked intently at Kolya . 
Kolya had not seen his little friend for two months , and he was overwhelmed at the sight of him . 
He had never imagined that he would see such a wasted , yellow face , such enormous , feverishly glowing eyes and such thin little hands . 
He saw , with grieved surprise , Ilusha 's rapid , hard breathing and dry lips . 
He stepped close to him , held out his hand , and almost overwhelmed , he said : `` Well , old man ... how are you ? '' 
But his voice failed him , he could n't achieve an appearance of ease ; his face suddenly twitched and the corners of his mouth quivered . 
Ilusha smiled a pitiful little smile , still unable to utter a word . 
Something moved Kolya to raise his hand and pass it over Ilusha 's hair . 
`` Never mind ! '' 
he murmured softly to him to cheer him up , or perhaps not knowing why he said it . 
For a minute they were silent again . 
`` Hallo , so you 've got a new puppy ? '' 
Kolya said suddenly , in a most callous voice . 
`` Ye-es , '' answered Ilusha in a long whisper , gasping for breath . 
`` A black nose , that means he 'll be fierce , a good house-dog , '' Kolya observed gravely and stolidly , as if the only thing he cared about was the puppy and its black nose . 
But in reality he still had to do his utmost to control his feelings not to burst out crying like a child , and do what he would he could not control it . 
`` When it grows up , you 'll have to keep it on the chain , I 'm sure . '' 
`` He 'll be a huge dog ! '' 
cried one of the boys . 
`` Of course he will , '' `` a mastiff , '' `` large , '' `` like this , '' `` as big as a calf , '' shouted several voices . 
`` As big as a calf , as a real calf , '' chimed in the captain . 
`` I got one like that on purpose , one of the fiercest breed , and his parents are huge and very fierce , they stand as high as this from the floor ... . 
Sit down here , on Ilusha 's bed , or here on the bench . 
You are welcome , we 've been hoping to see you a long time ... . 
You were so kind as to come with Alexey Fyodorovitch ? '' 
Krassotkin sat on the edge of the bed , at Ilusha 's feet . 
Though he had perhaps prepared a free-and-easy opening for the conversation on his way , now he completely lost the thread of it . 
`` No ... I came with Perezvon . 
I 've got a dog now , called Perezvon . 
A Slavonic name . 
He 's out there ... if I whistle , he 'll run in . 
I 've brought a dog , too , '' he said , addressing Ilusha all at once . 
`` Do you remember Zhutchka , old man ? '' 
he suddenly fired the question at him . 
Ilusha 's little face quivered . 
He looked with an agonised expression at Kolya . 
Alyosha , standing at the door , frowned and signed to Kolya not to speak of Zhutchka , but he did not or would not notice . 
`` Where ... is Zhutchka ? '' 
Ilusha asked in a broken voice . 
`` Oh well , my boy , your Zhutchka 's lost and done for ! '' 
Ilusha did not speak , but he fixed an intent gaze once more on Kolya . 
Alyosha , catching Kolya 's eye , signed to him vigourously again , but he turned away his eyes pretending not to have noticed . 
`` It must have run away and died somewhere . 
It must have died after a meal like that , '' Kolya pronounced pitilessly , though he seemed a little breathless . 
`` But I 've got a dog , Perezvon ... A Slavonic name ... I 've brought him to show you . '' 
`` I do n't want him ! '' 
said Ilusha suddenly . 
`` No , no , you really must see him ... it will amuse you . 
I brought him on purpose ... . 
He 's the same sort of shaggy dog ... . 
You allow me to call in my dog , madam ? '' 
He suddenly addressed Madame Snegiryov , with inexplicable excitement in his manner . 
`` I do n't want him , I do n't want him ! '' 
cried Ilusha , with a mournful break in his voice . 
There was a reproachful light in his eyes . 
`` You 'd better , '' the captain started up from the chest by the wall on which he had just sat down , `` you 'd better ... another time , '' he muttered , but Kolya could not be restrained . 
He hurriedly shouted to Smurov , `` Open the door , '' and as soon as it was open , he blew his whistle . 
Perezvon dashed headlong into the room . 
`` Jump , Perezvon , beg ! 
Beg ! '' 
shouted Kolya , jumping up , and the dog stood erect on its hind-legs by Ilusha 's bedside . 
What followed was a surprise to everyone : Ilusha started , lurched violently forward , bent over Perezvon and gazed at him , faint with suspense . 
`` It 's ... Zhutchka ! '' 
he cried suddenly , in a voice breaking with joy and suffering . 
`` And who did you think it was ? '' 
Krassotkin shouted with all his might , in a ringing , happy voice , and bending down he seized the dog and lifted him up to Ilusha . 
`` Look , old man , you see , blind of one eye and the left ear is torn , just the marks you described to me . 
It was by that I found him . 
I found him directly . 
