Then he suddenly remembered how he had tried to join their hands , and he felt fearfully ashamed again . 
`` Though I acted quite sincerely , I must be more sensible in the future , '' he concluded suddenly , and did not even smile at his conclusion . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's commission took him to Lake Street , and his brother Dmitri lived close by , in a turning out of Lake Street . 
Alyosha decided to go to him in any case before going to the captain , though he had a presentiment that he would not find his brother . 
He suspected that he would intentionally keep out of his way now , but he must find him anyhow . 
Time was passing : the thought of his dying elder had not left Alyosha for one minute from the time he set off from the monastery . 
There was one point which interested him particularly about Katerina Ivanovna 's commission ; when she had mentioned the captain 's son , the little schoolboy who had run beside his father crying , the idea had at once struck Alyosha that this must be the schoolboy who had bitten his finger when he , Alyosha , asked him what he had done to hurt him . 
Now Alyosha felt practically certain of this , though he could not have said why . 
Thinking of another subject was a relief , and he resolved to think no more about the `` mischief '' he had done , and not to torture himself with remorse , but to do what he had to do , let come what would . 
At that thought he was completely comforted . 
Turning to the street where Dmitri lodged , he felt hungry , and taking out of his pocket the roll he had brought from his father 's , he ate it . 
It made him feel stronger . 
Dmitri was not at home . 
The people of the house , an old cabinet-maker , his son , and his old wife , looked with positive suspicion at Alyosha . 
`` He has n't slept here for the last three nights . 
Maybe he has gone away , '' the old man said in answer to Alyosha 's persistent inquiries . 
Alyosha saw that he was answering in accordance with instructions . 
When he asked whether he were not at Grushenka 's or in hiding at Foma 's -LRB- Alyosha spoke so freely on purpose -RRB- , all three looked at him in alarm . 
`` They are fond of him , they are doing their best for him , '' thought Alyosha . 
`` That 's good . '' 
At last he found the house in Lake Street . 
It was a decrepit little house , sunk on one side , with three windows looking into the street , and with a muddy yard , in the middle of which stood a solitary cow . 
He crossed the yard and found the door opening into the passage . 
On the left of the passage lived the old woman of the house with her old daughter . 
Both seemed to be deaf . 
In answer to his repeated inquiry for the captain , one of them at last understood that he was asking for their lodgers , and pointed to a door across the passage . 
The captain 's lodging turned out to be a simple cottage room . 
Alyosha had his hand on the iron latch to open the door , when he was struck by the strange hush within . 
Yet he knew from Katerina Ivanovna 's words that the man had a family . 
`` Either they are all asleep or perhaps they have heard me coming and are waiting for me to open the door . 
I 'd better knock first , '' and he knocked . 
An answer came , but not at once , after an interval of perhaps ten seconds . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
shouted someone in a loud and very angry voice . 
Then Alyosha opened the door and crossed the threshold . 
He found himself in a regular peasant 's room . 
Though it was large , it was cumbered up with domestic belongings of all sorts , and there were several people in it . 
On the left was a large Russian stove . 
From the stove to the window on the left was a string running across the room , and on it there were rags hanging . 
There was a bedstead against the wall on each side , right and left , covered with knitted quilts . 
On the one on the left was a pyramid of four print-covered pillows , each smaller than the one beneath . 
On the other there was only one very small pillow . 
The opposite corner was screened off by a curtain or a sheet hung on a string . 
Behind this curtain could be seen a bed made up on a bench and a chair . 
The rough square table of plain wood had been moved into the middle window . 
The three windows , which consisted each of four tiny greenish mildewy panes , gave little light , and were close shut , so that the room was not very light and rather stuffy . 
On the table was a frying pan with the remains of some fried eggs , a half-eaten piece of bread , and a small bottle with a few drops of vodka . 
A woman of genteel appearance , wearing a cotton gown , was sitting on a chair by the bed on the left . 
Her face was thin and yellow , and her sunken cheeks betrayed at the first glance that she was ill . 
But what struck Alyosha most was the expression in the poor woman 's eyes - a look of surprised inquiry and yet of haughty pride . 
And while he was talking to her husband , her big brown eyes moved from one speaker to the other with the same haughty and questioning expression . 
Beside her at the window stood a young girl , rather plain , with scanty reddish hair , poorly but very neatly dressed . 
She looked disdainfully at Alyosha as he came in . 
Beside the other bed was sitting another female figure . 
She was a very sad sight , a young girl of about twenty , but hunchback and crippled `` with withered legs , '' as Alyosha was told afterwards . 
Her crutches stood in the corner close by . 
The strikingly beautiful and gentle eyes of this poor girl looked with mild serenity at Alyosha . 
A man of forty-five was sitting at the table , finishing the fried eggs . 
He was spare , small , and weakly built . 
He had reddish hair and a scanty light-coloured beard , very much like a wisp of tow -LRB- this comparison and the phrase `` a wisp of tow '' flashed at once into Alyosha 's mind for some reason , he remembered it afterwards -RRB- . 
It was obviously this gentleman who had shouted to him , as there was no other man in the room . 
But when Alyosha went in , he leapt up from the bench on which he was sitting , and , hastily wiping his mouth with a ragged napkin , darted up to Alyosha . 
`` It 's a monk come to beg for the monastery . 
A nice place to come to ! '' 
the girl standing in the left corner said aloud . 
The man spun round instantly towards her and answered her in an excited and breaking voice : `` No , Varvara , you are wrong . 
Allow me to ask , '' he turned again to Alyosha , `` what has brought you to our retreat ? '' 
Alyosha looked attentively at him . 
It was the first time he had seen him . 
There was something angular , flurried and irritable about him . 
Though he had obviously just been drinking , he was not drunk . 
There was extraordinary impudence in his expression , and yet , strange to say , at the same time there was fear . 
He looked like a man who had long been kept in subjection and had submitted to it , and now had suddenly turned and was trying to assert himself . 
Or , better still , like a man who wants dreadfully to hit you but is horribly afraid you will hit him . 
In his words and in the intonation of his shrill voice there was a sort of crazy humour , at times spiteful and at times cringing , and continually shifting from one tone to another . 
The question about `` our retreat '' he had asked , as it were , quivering all over , rolling his eyes , and skipping up so close to Alyosha that he instinctively drew back a step . 
He was dressed in a very shabby dark cotton coat , patched and spotted . 
He wore checked trousers of an extremely light colour , long out of fashion , and of very thin material . 
They were so crumpled and so short that he looked as though he had grown out of them like a boy . 
`` I am Alexey Karamazov , '' Alyosha began in reply . 
`` I quite understand that , sir , '' the gentleman snapped out at once to assure him that he knew who he was already . 
`` I am Captain Snegiryov , sir , but I am still desirous to know precisely what has led you - '' `` Oh , I 've come for nothing special . 
I wanted to have a word with you - if only you allow me . '' 
`` In that case , here is a chair , sir ; kindly be seated . 
That 's what they used to say in the old comedies , ` kindly be seated , ' '' and with a rapid gesture he seized an empty chair -LRB- it was a rough wooden chair , not upholstered -RRB- and set it for him almost in the middle of the room ; then , taking another similar chair for himself , he sat down facing Alyosha , so close to him that their knees almost touched . 
`` Nikolay Ilyitch Snegiryov , sir , formerly a captain in the Russian infantry , put to shame for his vices , but still a captain . 
Though I might not be one now for the way I talk ; for the last half of my life I 've learnt to say ` sir . ' 
It 's a word you use when you 've come down in the world . '' 
`` That 's very true , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But is it used involuntarily or on purpose ? '' 
`` As God 's above , it 's involuntary , and I use n't to use it ! 
I did n't use the word ` sir ' all my life , but as soon as I sank into low water I began to say ` sir . ' 
It 's the work of a higher power . 
I see you are interested in contemporary questions , but how can I have excited your curiosity , living as I do in surroundings impossible for the exercise of hospitality ? '' 
`` I 've come - about that business . '' 
`` About what business ? '' 
the captain interrupted impatiently . 
`` About your meeting with my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Alyosha blurted out awkwardly . 
`` What meeting , sir ? 
You do n't mean that meeting ? 
About my ` wisp of tow , ' then ? '' 
He moved closer so that his knees positively knocked against Alyosha . 
His lips were strangely compressed like a thread . 
`` What wisp of tow ? '' 
muttered Alyosha . 
`` He is come to complain of me , father ! '' 
cried a voice familiar to Alyosha - the voice of the schoolboy - from behind the curtain . 
`` I bit his finger just now . '' 
The curtain was pulled , and Alyosha saw his assailant lying on a little bed made up on the bench and the chair in the corner under the ikons . 
The boy lay covered by his coat and an old wadded quilt . 
He was evidently unwell , and , judging by his glittering eyes , he was in a fever . 
He looked at Alyosha without fear , as though he felt he was at home and could not be touched . 
`` What ! 
Did he bite your finger ? '' 
The captain jumped up from his chair . 
`` Was it your finger he bit ? '' 
`` Yes . 
He was throwing stones with other schoolboys . 
There were six of them against him alone . 
I went up to him , and he threw a stone at me and then another at my head . 
I asked him what I had done to him . 
And then he rushed at me and bit my finger badly , I do n't know why . '' 
`` I 'll thrash him , sir , at once - this minute ! '' 
The captain jumped up from his seat . 
`` But I am not complaining at all , I am simply telling you ... . 
I do n't want him to be thrashed . 
Besides , he seems to be ill . '' 
`` And do you suppose I 'd thrash him ? 
That I 'd take my Ilusha and thrash him before you for your satisfaction ? 
Would you like it done at once , sir ? '' 
said the captain , suddenly turning to Alyosha , as though he were going to attack him . 
`` I am sorry about your finger , sir ; but instead of thrashing Ilusha , would you like me to chop off my four fingers with this knife here before your eyes to satisfy your just wrath ? 
I should think four fingers would be enough to satisfy your thirst for vengeance . 
You wo n't ask for the fifth one too ? '' 
He stopped short with a catch in his throat . 
Every feature in his face was twitching and working ; he looked extremely defiant . 
He was in a sort of frenzy . 
`` I think I understand it all now , '' said Alyosha gently and sorrowfully , still keeping his seat . 
`` So your boy is a good boy , he loves his father , and he attacked me as the brother of your assailant ... . 
Now I understand it , '' he repeated thoughtfully . 
`` But my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch regrets his action , I know that , and if only it is possible for him to come to you , or better still , to meet you in that same place , he will ask your forgiveness before everyone - if you wish it . '' 
`` After pulling out my beard , you mean , he will ask my forgiveness ? 
And he thinks that will be a satisfactory finish , does n't he ? '' 
`` Oh , no ! 
On the contrary , he will do anything you like and in any way you like . '' 
`` So if I were to ask his highness to go down on his knees before me in that very tavern - ` The Metropolis ' it 's called - or in the marketplace , he would do it ? '' 
`` Yes , he would even go down on his knees . '' 
`` You 've pierced me to the heart , sir . 
Touched me to tears and pierced me to the heart ! 
I am only too sensible of your brother 's generosity . 
Allow me to introduce my family , my two daughters and my son - my litter . 
If I die , who will care for them , and while I live who but they will care for a wretch like me ? 
That 's a great thing the Lord has ordained for every man of my sort , sir . 
For there must be someone able to love even a man like me . '' 
`` Ah , that 's perfectly true ! '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
`` Oh , do leave off playing the fool ! 
Some idiot comes in , and you put us to shame ! '' 
cried the girl by the window , suddenly turning to her father with a disdainful and contemptuous air . 
`` Wait a little , Varvara ! '' 
cried her father , speaking peremptorily but looking at them quite approvingly . 
`` That 's her character , '' he said , addressing Alyosha again . 
`` And in all nature there was naught That could find favour in his eyes - or rather in the feminine - that could find favour in her eyes - . 
But now let me present you to my wife , Arina Petrovna . 
She is crippled , she is forty-three ; she can move , but very little . 
She is of humble origin . 
Arina Petrovna , compose your countenance . 
This is Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
Get up , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
He took him by the hand and with unexpected force pulled him up . 
`` You must stand up to be introduced to a lady . 
It 's not the Karamazov , mamma , who ... h 'm ... etcetera , but his brother , radiant with modest virtues . 
Come , Arina Petrovna , come , mamma , first your hand to be kissed . '' 
And he kissed his wife 's hand respectfully and even tenderly . 
The girl at the window turned her back indignantly on the scene ; an expression of extraordinary cordiality came over the haughtily inquiring face of the woman . 
`` Good morning ! 
Sit down , Mr. Tchernomazov , '' she said . 
`` Karamazov , mamma , Karamazov . 
We are of humble origin , '' he whispered again . 
`` Well , Karamazov , or whatever it is , but I always think of Tchermomazov ... . 
Sit down . 
Why has he pulled you up ? 
He calls me crippled , but I am not , only my legs are swollen like barrels , and I am shrivelled up myself . 
Once I used to be so fat , but now it 's as though I had swallowed a needle . '' 
`` We are of humble origin , '' the captain muttered again . 
`` Oh , father , father ! '' 
the hunchback girl , who had till then been silent on her chair , said suddenly , and she hid her eyes in her handkerchief . 
`` Buffoon ! '' 
blurted out the girl at the window . 
`` Have you heard our news ? '' 
said the mother , pointing at her daughters . 
`` It 's like clouds coming over ; the clouds pass and we have music again . 
When we were with the army , we used to have many such guests . 
I do n't mean to make any comparisons ; everyone to their taste . 
The deacon 's wife used to come then and say , ` Alexandr Alexandrovitch is a man of the noblest heart , but Nastasya Petrovna , ' she would say , ` is of the brood of hell . ' 
` Well , ' I said , ` that 's a matter of taste ; but you are a little spitfire . ' 
` And you want keeping in your place ; ' says she . 
` You black sword , ' said I , ` who asked you to teach me ? ' 
` But my breath , ' says she , ` is clean , and yours is unclean . ' 
` You ask all the officers whether my breath is unclean . ' 
And ever since then I had it in my mind . 
Not long ago I was sitting here as I am now , when I saw that very general come in who came here for Easter , and I asked him : ` Your Excellency , ' said I , ` can a lady 's breath be unpleasant ? ' 
` Yes , ' he answered ; ` you ought to open a window-pane or open the door , for the air is not fresh here . ' 
And they all go on like that ! 
And what is my breath to them ? 
The dead smell worse still ! . ' 
I wo n't spoil the air , ' said I , ` I 'll order some slippers and go away . ' 
My darlings , do n't blame your own mother ! 
Nikolay Ilyitch , how is it I ca n't please you ? 
There 's only Ilusha who comes home from school and loves me . 
Yesterday he brought me an apple . 
Forgive your own mother - forgive a poor lonely creature ! 
Why has my breath become unpleasant to you ? '' 
And the poor mad woman broke into sobs , and tears streamed down her cheeks . 
The captain rushed up to her . 
`` Mamma , mamma , my dear , give over ! 
You are not lonely . 
Everyone loves you , everyone adores you . '' 
He began kissing both her hands again and tenderly stroking her face ; taking the dinner-napkin , he began wiping away her tears . 
Alyosha fancied that he too had tears in his eyes . 
`` There , you see , you hear ? '' 
he turned with a sort of fury to Alyosha , pointing to the poor imbecile . 
`` I see and hear , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` Father , father , how can you - with him ! 
Let him alone ! '' 
cried the boy , sitting up in his bed and gazing at his father with glowing eyes . 
`` Do give over fooling , showing off your silly antics which never lead to anything ! 
shouted Varvara , stamping her foot with passion . 
`` Your anger is quite just this time , Varvara , and I 'll make haste to satisfy you . 
Come , put on your cap , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and I 'll put on mine . 
We will go out . 
I have a word to say to you in earnest , but not within these walls . 
This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina ; I forgot to introduce her to you . 
She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who has flown down to us mortals , ... if you can understand . '' 
`` There he is shaking all over , as though he is in convulsions ! '' 
Varvara went on indignantly . 
`` And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now , she is a heavenly angel incarnate too , and she has good reason to call me so . 
Come along , Alexey Fyodorovitch , we must make an end . '' 
And , snatching Alyosha 's hand , he drew him out of the room into the street . 
And in the Open Air `` THE air is fresh , but in my apartment it is not so in any sense of the word . 
Let us walk slowly , sir . 
I should be glad of your kind interest . '' 
`` I too have something important to say to you , '' observed Alyosha , `` only I do n't know how to begin . '' 
`` To be sure you must have business with me . 
You would never have looked in upon me without some object . 
Unless you come simply to complain of the boy , and that 's hardly likely . 
And , by the way , about the boy : I could not explain to you in there , but here I will describe that scene to you . 
My tow was thicker a week ago - I mean my beard . 
That 's the nickname they give to my beard , the schoolboys most of all . 
Well , your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch was pulling me by my beard , I 'd done nothing , he was in a towering rage and happened to come upon me . 
He dragged me out of the tavern into the market place ; at that moment the boys were coming out of school , and with them Ilusha . 
As soon as he saw me in such a state he rushed up to me . 
` Father , ' he cried , ` father ! ' 
He caught hold of me , hugged me , tried to pull me away , crying to my assailant , ` Let go , let go , it 's my father , forgive him ! ' 
- yes , he actually cried ` forgive him . ' 
He clutched at that hand , that very hand , in his little hands and kissed it ... . 
I remember his little face at that moment , I have n't forgotten it and I never shall ! '' 
`` I swear , '' cried Alyosha , `` that my brother will express his most deep and sincere regret , even if he has to go down on his knees in that same market-place ... . 
I 'll make him or he is no brother of mine ! 
`` Aha , then it 's only a suggestion ! 
And it does not come from him but simply from the generosity of your own warm heart . 
You should have said so . 
No , in that case allow me to tell you of your brother 's highly chivalrous soldierly generosity , for he did give expression to it at the time . 
He left off dragging me by my beard and released me : ` You are an officer , ' he said , ` and I am an officer , if you can find a decent man to be your second send me your challenge . 
I will give satisfaction , though you are a scoundrel . ' 
That 's what he said . 
A chivalrous spirit indeed ! 
I retired with Ilusha , and that scene is a family record imprinted forever on Ilusha 's soul . 
No , it 's not for us to claim the privileges of noblemen . 
Judge for yourself . 
You 've just been in our mansion , what did you see there ? 
Three ladies , one a cripple and weak-minded , another a cripple and hunchback and the third not crippled but far too clever . 
She is a student , dying to get back to Petersburg , to work for the emancipation of the Russian woman on the banks of the Neva . 
I wo n't speak of Ilusha , he is only nine . 
I am alone in the world , and if I die , what will become of all of them ? 
I simply ask you that . 
And if I challenge him and he kills me on the spot , what then ? 
What will become of them ? 
And worse still , if he does n't kill me but only cripples me : I could n't work , but I should still be a mouth to feed . 
Who would feed it and who would feed them all ? 
Must I take Ilusha from school and send him to beg in the streets ? 
That 's what it means for me to challenge him to a duel . 
It 's silly talk and nothing else . '' 
`` He will beg your forgiveness , he will bow down at your feet in the middle of the marketplace , '' cried Alyosha again , with glowing eyes . 
`` I did think of prosecuting him , '' the captain went on , `` but look in our code , could I get much compensation for a personal injury ? 
And then Agrafena Alexandrovna * sent for me and shouted at me : ` Do n't dare to dream of it ! 
If you proceed against him , I 'll publish it to all the world that he beat you for your dishonesty , and then you will be prosecuted . ' 
I call God to witness whose was the dishonesty and by whose commands I acted , was n't it by her own and Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
And what 's more , ' she went on , ` I 'll dismiss you for good and you 'll never earn another penny from me . 
I 'll speak to my merchant too ' -LRB- that 's what she calls her old man -RRB- ` and he will dismiss you ! ' 
And if he dismisses me , what can I earn then from anyone ? 
Those two are all I have to look to , for your Fyodor Pavlovitch has not only given over employing me , for another reason , but he means to make use of papers I 've signed to go to law against me . 
And so I kept quiet , and you have seen our retreat . 
But now let me ask you : did Ilusha hurt your finger much ? 
I did n't like to go into it in our mansion before him . '' 
* Grushenka . 
`` Yes , very much , and he was in a great fury . 
He was avenging you on me as a Karamazov , I see that now . 
But if only you had seen how he was throwing stones at his schoolfellows ! 
It 's very dangerous . 
They might kill him . 
They are children and stupid . 
A stone may be thrown and break somebody 's head . '' 
`` That 's just what has happened . 
He has been bruised by a stone to-day . 
Not on the head but on the chest , just above the heart . 
He came home crying and groaning and now he is ill . '' 
`` And you know he attacks them first . 
He is bitter against them on your account . 
They say he stabbed a boy called Krassotkin with a penknife not long ago . '' 
`` I 've heard about that too , it 's dangerous . 
Krassotkin is an official here , we may hear more about it . '' 
`` I would advise you , '' Alyosha went on warmly , `` not to send him to school at all for a time till he is calmer . 
and his anger is passed . '' 
`` Anger ! '' 
the captain repeated , `` that 's just what it is . 
He is a little creature , but it 's a mighty anger . 
You do n't know all , sir . 
Let me tell you more . 
Since that incident all the boys have been teasing him about the ` wisp of tow . ' 
Schoolboys are a merciless race , individually they are angels , but together , especially in schools , they are often merciless . 
Their teasing has stiffed up a gallant spirit in Ilusha . 
An ordinary boy , a weak son , would have submitted , have felt ashamed of his father , sir , but he stood up for his father against them all . 
For his father and for truth and justice . 
For what he suffered when he kissed your brother 's hand and cried to him ` Forgive father , forgive him , ' - that only God knows - and I , his father . 
For our children - not your children , but ours - the children of the poor gentlemen looked down upon by everyone - know what justice means , sir , even at nine years old . 
How should the rich know ? 
They do n't explore such depths once in their lives . 
But at that moment in the square when he kissed his hand , at that moment my Ilusha had grasped all that justice means . 
That truth entered into him and crushed him for ever , sir , '' the captain said hotly again with a sort of frenzy , and he struck his right fist against his left palm as though he wanted to show how `` the truth '' crushed Ilusha . 
`` That very day , sir , he fell ill with fever and was delirious all night . 
All that day he hardly said a word to me , but I noticed he kept watching me from the corner , though he turned to the window and pretended to be learning his lessons . 
But I could see his mind was not on his lessons . 
Next day I got drunk to forget my troubles , sinful man as I am , and I do n't remember much . 
Mamma began crying , too - I am very fond of mamma - well , I spent my last penny drowning my troubles . 
Do n't despise me for that , sir , in Russia men who drink are the best . 
The best men amongst us are the greatest drunkards . 
I lay down and I do n't remember about Ilusha , though all that day the boys had been jeering at him at school . 
` Wisp of tow , ' they shouted , ` your father was pulled out of the tavern by his wisp of tow , you ran by and begged forgiveness . ' 
`` On the third day when he came back from school , I saw he looked pale and wretched . 
` What is it ? ' 
I asked . 
He would n't answer . 
Well , there 's no talking in our mansion without mamma and the girls taking part in it . 
What 's more , the girls had heard about it the very first day . 
Varvara had begun snarling . 
` You fools and buffoons , can you ever do anything rational ? ' 
` Quite so , ' I said , ` can we ever do anything rational ? ' 
For the time I turned it off like that . 
So in the evening I took the boy out for a walk , for you must know we go for a walk every evening , always the same way , along which we are going now - from our gate to that great stone which lies alone in the road under the hurdle , which marks the beginning of the town pasture . 
A beautiful and lonely spot , sir . 
Ilusha and I walked along hand in hand as usual . 
He has a little hand , his fingers are thin and cold - he suffers with his chest , you know . 
` Father , ' said he , ` father ! ' 
` Well ? ' 
said I. I saw his eyes flashing . 
` Father , how he treated you then ! ' 
` It ca n't be helped , Ilusha , ' I said . 
` Do n't forgive him , father , do n't forgive him ! 
At school they say that he has paid you ten roubles for it . ' 
` No Ilusha , ' said I , ' I would not take money from him for anything . ' 
he began trembling all over , took my hand in both his and kissed it again . 
` Father , ' he said , ` father , challenge him to a duel , at school they say you are a coward and wo n't challenge him , and that you 'll accept ten roubles from him . ' ' 
I ca n't challenge him to a duel , Ilusha , ' I answered . 
And I told briefly what I 've just told you . 
He listened . 
` Father , ' he said , anyway do n't forgive it . 
When I grow up I 'll call him out myself and kill him . ' 
His eyes shone and glowed . 
And of course I am his father , and I had to put in a word : ` It 's a sin to kill , ' I said , ` even in a duel . ' 
` Father , ' he said , ` when I grow up , I 'll knock him down , knock the sword out of his hand , I 'll fall on him , wave my sword over him and say : `` I could kill you , but I forgive you , so there ! '' ' 
You see what the workings of his little mind have been during these two days ; he must have been planning that vengeance all day , and raving about it at night . 
`` But he began to come home from school badly beaten , I found out about it the day before yesterday , and you are right , I wo n't send him to that school any more . 
I heard that he was standing up against all the class alone and defying them all , that his heart was full of resentment , of bitterness - I was alarmed about him . 
We went for another walk . 
` Father , ' he asked , ` are the rich people stronger than anyone else on earth ? ' 
` Yes , Ilusha , ' I said , ` there are no people on earth stronger than the rich . ' 
` Father , ' he said , ' I will get rich , I will become an officer and conquer everybody . 
The Tsar will reward me , I will come back here and then no one will dare - ' Then he was silent and his lips still kept trembling . 
` Father , ' he said , ` what a horrid town this is . ' 
` Yes , Ilusha , ' I said , ` it is n't a very nice town . ' 
` Father , let us move into another town , a nice one , ' he said , ` where people do n't know about us . ' 
` We will move , we will , Ilusha , ' said I , ` only I must save up for it . ' 
I was glad to be able to turn his mind from painful thoughts , and we began to dream of how we would move to another town , how we would buy a horse and cart . 
` We will put mamma and your sisters inside , we will cover them up and we 'll walk , you shall have a lift now and then , and I 'll walk beside , for we must take care of our horse , we ca n't all ride . 
That 's how we 'll go . ' 
He was enchanted at that , most of all at the thought of having a horse and driving him . 
For of course a Russian boy is born among horses . 
We chattered a long while . 
Thank God , I thought , I have diverted his mind and comforted him . 
`` That was the day before yesterday , in the evening , but last night everything was changed . 
He had gone to school in the morning , he came back depressed , terribly depressed . 
In the evening I took him by the hand and we went for a walk ; he would not talk . 
There was a wind blowing and no sun , and a feeling of autumn ; twilight was coming on . 
We walked along , both of us depressed . 
` Well , my boy , ' said I , ` how about our setting off on our travels ? ' 
I thought I might bring him back to our talk of the day before . 
He did n't answer , but I felt his fingers trembling in my hand . 
Ah , I thought , it 's a bad job ; there 's something fresh . 
We had reached the stone where we are now . 
I sat down on the stone . 
And in the air there were lots of kites flapping and whirling . 
There were as many as thirty in sight . 
Of course , it 's just the season for the kites . 
` Look , Ilusha , ' said I , ` it 's time we got out our last year 's kite again . 
I 'll mend it ; where have you put it away ? ' 
My boy made no answer . 
He looked away and turned sideways to me . 
And then a gust of wind blew up the sand . 
He suddenly fell on me , threw both his little arms round my neck and held me tight . 
You know , when children are silent and proud , and try to keep back their tears when they are in great trouble and suddenly break down , their tears fall in streams . 
With those warm streams of tears , he suddenly wetted my face . 
He sobbed and shook as though he were in convulsions , and squeezed up against me as I sat on the stone . 
` Father , ' he kept crying , ` dear father , how he insulted you ! ' 
And I sobbed too . 
We sat shaking in each other 's arms . 
` Ilusha , ' I said to him , ` Ilusha , darling . ' 
No one saw us then . 
God alone saw us ; I hope He will record it to my credit . 
You must thank your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
No , sir , I wo n't thrash my boy for your satisfaction . '' 
He had gone back to his original tone of resentful buffoonery . 
Alyosha felt , though , that he trusted him , and that if there had been someone else in his , Alyosha 's place , the man would not have spoken so openly and would not have told what he had just told . 
This encouraged Alyosha , whose heart was trembling on the verge of tears . 
`` Ah , how I would like to make friends with your boy ! '' 
he cried . 
`` If you could arrange it - '' `` Certainly , sir , '' muttered the captain . 
`` But now listen to something quite different ! '' 
Alyosha went on . 
`` I have a message for you . 
That same brother of mine , Dmitri , has insulted his betrothed , too , a noble-hearted girl of whom you have probably heard . 
I have a right to tell you of her wrong ; I ought to do so , in fact , for , hearing of the insult done to you and learning all about your unfortunate position , she commissioned me at once - just now - to bring you this help from her - but only from her alone , not from Dmitri , who has abandoned her . 
Nor from me , his brother , nor from anyone else , but from her , only from her ! 
She entreats you to accept her help ... You have both been insulted by the same man . 
She thought of you only when she had just received a similar insult from him - similar in its cruelty , I mean . 
She comes like a sister to help a brother in misfortune ... . 
She told me to persuade you to take these two hundred roubles from her , as from a sister , knowing that you are in such need . 
No one will know of it , it can give rise to no unjust slander . 
There are the two hundred roubles , and I swear you must take them unless - unless all men are to be enemies on earth ! 
But there are brothers even on earth ... . 
You have a generous heart ... you must see that , you must , '' and Alyosha held out two new rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes . 
They were both standing at the time by the great stone close to the fence , and there was no one near . 
The notes seemed to produce a tremendous impression on the captain . 
He started , but at first only from astonishment . 
Such an outcome of their conversation was the last thing he expected . 
Nothing could have been farther from his dreams than help from anyone - and such a sum ! 
He took the notes , and for a minute he was almost unable to answer , quite a new expression came into his face . 
`` That for me ? 
So much money - two hundred roubles ! 
Good heavens ! 
Why , I have n't seen so much money for the last four years ! 
Mercy on us ! 
And she says she is a sister ... . 
And is that the truth ? '' 
`` I swear that all I told you is the truth , `` cried Alyosha . 
The captain flushed red . 
`` Listen , my dear , listen . 
If I take it , I sha n't be behaving like a scoundrel ? 
In your eyes , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I sha n't be a scoundrel ? 
No , Alexey Fyodorovitch , listen , listen , '' he hurried , touching Alyosha with both his hands . 
`` You are persuading me to take it , saying that it 's a sister sends it , but inwardly , in your heart wo n't you feel contempt for me if I take it , eh ? '' 
`` No , no , on my salvation I swear I sha n't ! 
And no one will ever know but me - I , you and she , and one other lady , her great friend . '' 
`` Never mind the lady ! 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , at a moment like this you must listen , for you ca n't understand what these two hundred roubles mean to me now . '' 
The poor fellow went on rising gradually into a sort of incoherent , almost wild enthusiasm . 
He was thrown off his balance and talked extremely fast , as though afraid he would not be allowed to say all he had to say . 
`` Besides its being honestly acquired from a ` sister , ' so highly respected and revered , do you know that now I can look after mamma and Nina , my hunchback angel daughter ? 
Doctor Herzenstube came to me in the kindness of his heart and was examining them both for a whole hour . ' 
I can make nothing of it , ' said he , but he prescribed a mineral water which is kept at a chemist 's here . 
He said it would be sure to do her good , and he ordered baths , too , with some medicine in them . 
The mineral water costs thirty copecks , and she 'd need to drink forty bottles perhaps : so I took the prescription and laid it on the shelf under the ikons , and there it lies . 
And he ordered hot baths for Nina with something dissolved in them , morning and evening . 
But how can we carry out such a cure in our mansion , without servants , without help , without a bath , and without water ? 
Nina is rheumatic all over , I do n't think I told you that . 
All her right side aches at night , she is in agony , and , would you believe it , the angel bears it without groaning for fear of waking us . 
We eat what we can get , and she 'll only take the leavings , what you 'd scarcely give to a dog . ' 
I am not worth it , I am taking it from you , I am a burden on you , ' that 's what her angel eyes try to express . 
We wait on her , but she does n't like it . ' 
I am a useless cripple , no good to anyone . ' 
As though she were not worth it , when she is the saving of all of us with her angelic sweetness . 
Without her , without her gentle word it would be hell among us ! 
She softens even Varvara . 
And do n't judge Varvara harshly either , she is an angel too , she , too , has suffered wrong . 
She came to us for the summer , and she brought sixteen roubles she had earned by lessons and saved up , to go back with to Petersburg in September , that is now . 
But we took her money and lived on it , so now she has nothing to go back with . 
Though indeed she could n't go back , for she has to work for us like a slave . 
She is like an overdriven horse with all of us on her back . 
She waits on us all , mends and washes , sweeps the floor , puts mamma to bed . 
And mamma is capricious and tearful and insane ! 
And now I can get a servant with this money , you understand , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I can get medicines for the dear creatures , I can send my student to Petersburg , I can buy beef , I can feed them properly . 
Good Lord , but it 's a dream ! '' 
Alyosha was delighted that he had brought him such happiness and that the poor fellow had consented to be made happy . 
`` Stay , Alexey Fyodorovitch , stay , '' the captain began to talk with frenzied rapidity , carried away by a new day-dream . 
`` Do you know that Ilusha and I will perhaps really carry out our dream . 
We will buy a horse and cart , a black horse , he insists on its being black , and we will set off as we pretended the other day . 
I have an old friend , a lawyer in K. province , and I heard through a trustworthy man that if I were to go he 'd give me a place as clerk in his office , so , who knows , maybe he would . 
So I 'd just put mamma and Nina in the cart , and Ilusha could drive , and I 'd walk , I 'd walk ... . 
Why , if I only succeed in getting one debt paid that 's owing me , I should have perhaps enough for that too ! '' 
`` There would be enough ! '' 
