`` Now , Alyosha , take a glass , show what you can do ! 
What shall we drink to ? 
The gates of paradise ? 
Take a glass , Grushenka , you drink to the gates of paradise , too . '' 
`` What gates of paradise ? '' 
She took a glass , Alyosha took his , tasted it and put it back . 
`` No , I 'd better not , '' he smiled gently . 
`` And you bragged ! '' 
cried Rakitin . 
`` Well , if so , I wo n't either , '' chimed in Grushenka , `` I really do n't want any . 
You can drink the whole bottle alone , Rakitin . 
If Alyosha has some , I will . '' 
`` What touching sentimentality ! '' 
said Rakitin tauntingly ; `` and she 's sitting on his knee , too ! 
He 's got something to grieve over , but what 's the matter with you ? 
He is rebelling against his God and ready to eat sausage ... '' `` How so ? '' 
`` His elder died to-day , Father Zossima , the saint . '' 
`` So Father Zossima is dead , '' cried Grushenka . 
`` Good God , I did not know ! '' 
She crossed herself devoutly . 
`` Goodness , what have I been doing , sitting on his knee like this at such a moment ! 
She started up as though in dismay , instantly slipped off his knee and sat down on the sofa . 
Alyosha bent a long wondering look upon her and a light seemed to dawn in his face . 
`` Rakitin , '' he said suddenly , in a firm and loud voice ; `` do n't taunt me with having rebelled against God . 
I do n't want to feel angry with you , so you must be kinder , too ; I 've lost a treasure such as you have never had , and you can not judge me now . 
You had much better look at her - do you see how she has pity on me ? 
I came here to find a wicked soul - I felt drawn to evil because I was base and evil myself , and I 've found a true sister ; I have found a treasure - a loving heart . 
She had pity on me just now ... . 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , I am speaking of you . 
You 've raised my soul from the depths . '' 
Alyosha 's lips were quivering and he caught his breath . 
`` She has saved you , it seems , '' laughed Rakitin spitefully . 
`` And she meant to get you in her clutches , do your realise that ? '' 
`` Stay , Rakitin . '' 
Grushenka jumped up . 
`` Hush , both of you . 
Now I 'll tell you all about it . 
Hush , Alyosha , your words make me ashamed , for I am bad and not good - that 's what I am . 
And you hush , Rakitin , because you are telling lies . 
I had the low idea of trying to get him in my clutches , but now you are lying , now it 's all different . 
And do n't let me hear anything more from you , Rakitin . '' 
All this Grushenka said with extreme emotion . 
`` They are both crazy , '' said Rakitin , looking at them with amazement . 
`` I feel as though I were in a madhouse . 
They 're both getting so feeble they 'll begin crying in a minute . '' 
`` I shall begin to cry , I shall , '' repeated Grushenka . 
`` He called me his sister and I shall never forget that . 
Only let me tell you , Rakitin , though I am bad , I did give away an onion . '' 
`` An onion ? 
Hang it all , you really are crazy . '' 
Rakitin wondered at their enthusiasm . 
He was aggrieved and annoyed , though he might have reflected that each of them was just passing through a spiritual crisis such as does not come often in a lifetime . 
But though Rakitin was very sensitive about everything that concerned himself , he was very obtuse as regards the feelings and sensations of others - partly from his youth and inexperience , partly from his intense egoism . 
`` You see , Alyosha , '' Grushenka turned to him with a nervous laugh . 
`` I was boasting when I told Rakitin I had given away an onion , but it 's not to boast I tell you about it . 
It 's only a story , but it 's a nice story . 
I used to hear it when I was a child from Matryona , my cook , who is still with me . 
It 's like this . 
Once upon a time there was a peasant woman and a very wicked woman she was . 
And she died and did not leave a single good deed behind . 
The devils caught her and plunged her into the lake of fire . 
So her guardian angel stood and wondered what good deed of hers he could remember to tell to God ; ` She once pulled up an onion in her garden , ' said he , ` and gave it to a beggar woman . ' 
And God answered : ` You take that onion then , hold it out to her in the lake , and let her take hold and be pulled out . 
And if you can pull her out of the lake , let her come to Paradise , but if the onion breaks , then the woman must stay where she is . ' 
The angel ran to the woman and held out the onion to her . 
` Come , ' said he , ` catch hold and I 'll pull you out . ' 
he began cautiously pulling her out . 
He had just pulled her right out , when the other sinners in the lake , seeing how she was being drawn out , began catching hold of her so as to be pulled out with her . 
But she was a very wicked woman and she began kicking them . 
` I 'm to be pulled out , not you . 
It 's my onion , not yours . ' 
As soon as she said that , the onion broke . 
And the woman fell into the lake and she is burning there to this day . 
So the angel wept and went away . 
So that 's the story , Alyosha ; I know it by heart , for I am that wicked woman myself . 
I boasted to Rakitin that I had given away an onion , but to you I 'll say : ` I 've done nothing but give away one onion all my life , that 's the only good deed I 've done . ' 
do n't praise me , Alyosha , do n't think me good , I am bad , I am a wicked woman and you make me ashamed if you praise me . 
Eh , I must confess everything . 
Listen , Alyosha . 
I was so anxious to get hold of you that I promised Rakitin twenty-five roubles if he would bring you to me . 
Stay , Rakitin , wait ! '' 
She went with rapid steps to the table , opened a drawer , pulled out a purse and took from it a twenty-five rouble note . 
`` What nonsense ! 
What nonsense ! '' 
cried Rakitin , disconcerted . 
`` Take it . 
Rakitin , I owe it you , there 's no fear of your refusing it , you asked for it yourself . '' 
And she threw the note to him . 
`` Likely I should refuse it , '' boomed Rakitin , obviously abashed , but carrying off his confusion with a swagger . 
`` That will come in very handy ; fools are made for wise men 's profit . '' 
`` And now hold your tongue , Rakitin , what I am going to say now is not for your ears . 
Sit down in that corner and keep quiet . 
You do n't like us , so hold your tongue . '' 
`` What should I like you for ? '' 
Rakitin snarled , not concealing his ill-humour . 
He put the twenty-five rouble note in his pocket and he felt ashamed at Alyosha 's seeing it . 
He had reckoned on receiving his payment later , without Alyosha 's knowing of it , and now , feeling ashamed , he lost his temper . 
Till that moment he had thought it discreet not to contradict Grushenka too flatly in spite of her snubbing , since he had something to get out of her . 
But now he , too , was angry : `` One loves people for some reason , but what have either of you done for me ? '' 
`` You should love people without a reason , as Alyosha does . '' 
`` How does he love you ? 
How has he shown it , that you make such a fuss about it ? '' 
Grushenka was standing in the middle of the room ; she spoke with heat and there were hysterical notes in her voice . 
`` Hush , Rakitin , you know nothing about us ! 
And do n't dare to speak to me like that again . 
How dare you be so familiar ! 
Sit in that corner and be quiet , as though you were my footman ! 
And now , Alyosha , I 'll tell you the whole truth , that you may see what a wretch I am ! 
I am not talking to Rakitin , but to you . 
I wanted to ruin you , Alyosha , that 's the holy truth ; I quite meant to . 
I wanted to so much , that I bribed Rakitin to bring you . 
And why did I want to do such a thing ? 
You knew nothing about it , Alyosha , you turned away from me ; if you passed me , you dropped your eyes . 
And I 've looked at you a hundred times before to-day ; I began asking everyone about you . 
Your face haunted my heart . 
` He despises me , ' I thought ; ` he wo n't even look at me . ' 
And I felt it so much at last that I wondered at myself for being so frightened of a boy . 
I 'll get him in my clutches and laugh at him . 
I was full of spite and anger . 
Would you believe it , nobody here dares talk or think of coming to Agrafena Alexandrovna with any evil purpose . 
Old Kuzma is the only man I have anything to do with here ; I was bound and sold to him ; Satan brought us together , but there has been no one else . 
But looking at you , I thought , I 'll get him in my clutches and laugh at him . 
You see what a spiteful cur I am , and you called me your sister ! 
And now that man who wronged me has come ; I sit here waiting for a message from him . 
And do you know what that man has been to me ? 
Five years ago , when Kuzma brought me here , I used to shut myself up , that no one might have sight or sound of me . 
I was a silly slip of a girl ; I used to sit here sobbing ; I used to lie awake all night , thinking : ` Where is he now , the man who wronged me ? 
He is laughing at me with another woman , most likely . 
If only I could see him , if I could meet him again , I 'd pay him out , I 'd pay him out ! ' 
At night I used to lie sobbing into my pillow in the dark , and I used to brood over it ; I used to tear my heart on purpose and gloat over my anger . 
` I 'll pay him out , I 'll pay him out ! 
That 's what I used to cry out in the dark . 
And when I suddenly thought that I should really do nothing to him , and that he was laughing at me then , or perhaps had utterly forgotten me , I would fling myself on the floor , melt into helpless tears , and lie there shaking till dawn . 
In the morning I would get up more spiteful than a dog , ready to tear the whole world to pieces . 
And then what do you think ? 
I began saving money , I became hardhearted , grew stout - grew wiser , would you say ? 
No , no one in the whole world sees it , no one knows it , but when night comes on , I sometimes lie as I did five years ago , when I was a silly girl , clenching my teeth and crying all night , thinking , ` I 'll pay him out , I 'll pay him out ! ' 
Do you hear ? 
Well then , now you understand me . 
A month ago a letter came to me - he was coming , he was a widower , he wanted to see me . 
It took my breath away ; then I suddenly thought : ` If he comes and whistles to call me , I shall creep back to him like a beaten dog . ' 
I could n't believe myself . 
Am I so abject ? 
Shall I run to him or not ? 
And I 've been in such a rage with myself all this month that I am worse than I was five years ago . 
Do you see now , Alyosha , what a violent , vindictive creature I am ? 
I have shown you the whole truth ! 
I played with Mitya to keep me from running to that other . 
Hush , Rakitin , it 's not for you to judge me , I am not speaking to you . 
Before you came in , I was lying here waiting , brooding , deciding my whole future life , and you can never know what was in my heart . 
Yes , Alyosha , tell your young lady not to be angry with me for what happened the day before yesterday ... . 
Nobody in the whole world knows what I am going through now , and no one ever can know ... . 
For perhaps I shall take a knife with me to-day , I ca n't make up my mind ... '' And at this `` tragic '' phrase Grushenka broke down , hid her face in her hands , flung herself on the sofa pillows , and sobbed like a little child . 
Alyosha got up and went to Rakitin . 
`` Misha , '' he said , `` do n't be angry . 
She wounded you , but do n't be angry . 
You heard what she said just now ? 
You must n't ask too much of human endurance , one must be merciful . '' 
Alyosha said this at the instinctive prompting of his heart . 
He felt obliged to speak and he turned to Rakitin . 
If Rakitin had not been there , he would have spoken to the air . 
But Rakitin looked at him ironically and Alyosha stopped short . 
`` You were so primed up with your elder 's reading last night that now you have to let it off on me , Alexey , man of God ! '' 
said Rakitin , with a smile of hatred . 
`` Do n't laugh , Rakitin , do n't smile , do n't talk of the dead - he was better than anyone in the world ! '' 
cried Alyosha , with tears in his voice . 
`` I did n't speak to you as a judge but as the lowest of the judged . 
What am I beside her ? 
I came here seeking my ruin , and said to myself , ` What does it matter ? ' 
in my cowardliness , but she , after five years in torment , as soon as anyone says a word from the heart to her - it makes her forget everything , forgive everything , in her tears ! 
The man who has wronged her has come back , he sends for her and she forgives him everything , and hastens joyfully to meet him and she wo n't take a knife with her . 
She wo n't ! 
No , I am not like that . 
I do n't know whether you are , Misha , but I am not like that . 
It 's a lesson to me ... . 
She is more loving than we ... . 
Have you heard her speak before of what she has just told us ? 
No , you have n't ; if you had , you 'd have understood her long ago ... and the person insulted the day before yesterday must forgive her , too ! 
She will , when she knows ... and she shall know ... . 
This soul is not yet at peace with itself , one must be tender with ... there may be a treasure in that soul ... '' Alyosha stopped , because he caught his breath . 
In spite of his ill-humour Rakitin looked at him with astonishment . 
He had never expected such a tirade from the gentle Alyosha . 
`` She 's found someone to plead her cause ! 
Why , are you in love with her ? 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , our monk 's really in love with you , you 've made a conquest ! '' 
he cried , with a coarse laugh . 
Grushenka lifted her head from the pillow and looked at Alyosha with a tender smile shining on her tear-stained face . 
`` Let him alone , Alyosha , my cherub ; you see what he is , he is not a person for you to speak to . 
Mihail Osipovitch , '' she turned to Rakitin , `` I meant to beg your pardon for being rude to you , but now I do n't want to . 
Alyosha , come to me , sit down here . '' 
She beckoned to him with a happy smile . 
`` That 's right , sit here . 
Tell me , '' she took him by the hand and peeped into his face , smiling , `` tell me , do I love that man or not ? 
The man who wronged me , do I love him or not ? 
Before you came , I lay here in the dark , asking my heart whether I loved him . 
Decide for me , Alyosha , the time has come , it shall be as you say . 
Am I to forgive him or not ? '' 
`` But you have forgiven him already , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Yes , I really have forgiven him , '' Grushenka murmured thoughtfully . 
`` What an abject heart ! 
To my abject heart ! '' 
She snatched up a glass from the table , emptied it at a gulp , lifted it in the air and flung it on the floor . 
The glass broke with a crash . 
A little cruel line came into her smile . 
`` Perhaps I have n't forgiven him , though , '' she said , with a sort of menace in her voice , and she dropped her eyes to the ground as though she were talking to herself . 
`` Perhaps my heart is only getting ready to forgive . 
I shall struggle with my heart . 
You see , Alyosha , I 've grown to love my tears in these five years ... . 
Perhaps I only love my resentment , not him ... '' `` Well , I should n't care to be in his shoes , '' hissed Rakitin . 
`` Well , you wo n't be , Rakitin , you 'll never be in his shoes . 
You shall black my shoes , Rakitin , that 's the place you are fit for . 
You 'll never get a woman like me ... and he wo n't either , perhaps ... '' `` Wo n't he ? 
Then why are you dressed up like that ? '' 
said Rakitin , with a venomous sneer . 
`` Do n't taunt me with dressing up , Rakitin , you do n't know all that is in my heart ! 
If I choose to tear off my finery , I 'll tear it off at once , this minute , '' she cried in a resonant voice . 
`` You do n't know what that finery is for , Rakitin ! 
Perhaps I shall see him and say : ` Have you ever seen me look like this before ? ' 
He left me a thin , consumptive cry-baby of seventeen . 
I 'll sit by him , fascinate him and work him up . 
` Do you see what I am like now ? ' 
I 'll say to him ; ` well , and that 's enough for you , my dear sir , there 's many a slip twixt the cup and the lip ! 
That may be what the finery is for , Rakitin . '' 
Grushenka finished with a malicious laugh . 
`` I 'm violent and resentful , Alyosha , I 'll tear off my finery , I 'll destroy my beauty , I 'll scorch my face , slash it with a knife , and turn beggar . 
If I choose , I wo n't go anywhere now to see anyone . 
If I choose , I 'll send Kuzma back all he has ever given me , to-morrow , and all his money and I 'll go out charing for the rest of my life . 
You think I would n't do it , Rakitin , that I would not dare to do it ? 
I would , I would , I could do it directly , only do n't exasperate me ... and I 'll send him about his business , I 'll snap my fingers in his face , he shall never see me again ! '' 
She uttered the last words in an hysterical scream , but broke down again , hid her face in her hands , buried it in the pillow and shook with sobs . 
Rakitin got up . 
`` It 's time we were off , '' he said , `` it 's late , we shall be shut out of the monastery . '' 
Grushenka leapt up from her place . 
`` Surely you do n't want to go , Alyosha ! '' 
she cried , in mournful surprise . 
`` What are you doing to me ? 
You 've stirred up my feeling , tortured me , and now you 'll leave me to face this night alone ! '' 
`` He can hardly spend the night with you ! 
Though if he wants to , let him ! 
I 'll go alone , '' Rakitin scoffed jeeringly . 
`` Hush , evil tongue ! '' 
Grushenka cried angrily at him ; `` you never said such words to me as he has come to say . '' 
`` What has he said to you so special ? '' 
asked Rakitin irritably . 
`` I ca n't say , I do n't know . 
I do n't know what he said to me , it went straight to my heart ; he has wrung my heart ... . 
He is the first , the only one who has pitied me , that 's what it is . 
Why did you not come before , you angel ? '' 
She fell on her knees before him as though in a sudden frenzy . 
`` I 've been waiting all my life for someone like you , I knew that someone like you would come and forgive me . 
I believed that , nasty as I am , someone would really love me , not only with a shameful love ! '' 
`` What have I done to you ? '' 
answered Alyosha , bending over her with a tender smile , and gently taking her by the hands ; `` I only gave you an onion , nothing but a tiny little onion , that was all ! '' 
He was moved to tears himself as he said it . 
At that moment there was a sudden noise in the passage , someone came into the hall . 
Grushenka jumped up , seeming greatly alarmed . 
Fenya ran noisily into the room , crying out : `` Mistress , mistress darling , a messenger has galloped up , '' she cried , breathless and joyful . 
`` A carriage from Mokroe for you , Timofey the driver , with three horses , they are just putting in fresh horses ... . 
A letter , here 's the letter , mistress . '' 
A letter was in her hand and she waved it in the air all the while she talked . 
Grushenka snatched the letter from her and carried it to the candle . 
It was only a note , a few lines . 
She read it in one instant . 
`` He has sent for me , '' she cried , her face white and distorted , with a wan smile ; `` he whistles ! 
Crawl back , little dog ! '' 
But only for one instant she stood as though hesitating ; suddenly the blood rushed to her head and sent a glow to her cheeks . 
`` I will go , '' she cried ; `` five years of my life ! 
Good-bye ! 
Good-bye , Alyosha , my fate is sealed . 
Go , go , leave me all of you , do n't let me see you again ! 
Grushenka is flying to a new life ... . 
Do n't you remember evil against me either , Rakitin . 
I may be going to my death ! 
Ugh ! 
I feel as though I were drunk ! '' 
She suddenly left them and ran into her bedroom . 
`` Well , she has no thoughts for us now ! '' 
grumbled Rakitin . 
`` Let 's go , or we may hear that feminine shriek again . 
I am sick of all these tears and cries . '' 
Alyosha mechanically let himself be led out . 
In the yard stood a covered cart . 
Horses were being taken out of the shafts , men were running to and fro with a lantern . 
Three fresh horses were being led in at the open gate . 
But when Alyosha and Rakitin reached the bottom of the steps , Grushenka 's bedroom window was suddenly opened and she called in a ringing voice after Alyosha : `` Alyosha , give my greetings to your brother Mitya and tell him not to remember evil against me , though I have brought him misery . 
And tell him , too , in my words : ` Grushenka has fallen to a scoundrel , and not to you , noble heart . ' 
And add , too , that Grushenka loved him only one hour , only one short hour she loved him - so let him remember that hour all his life-say , ` Grushenka tells you to ! ' 
She ended in a voice full of sobs . 
The window was shut with a slam . 
`` H 'm , h 'm ! '' 
growled Rakitin , laughing , `` she murders your brother Mitya and then tells him to remember it all his life ! 
What ferocity ! '' 
Alyosha made no reply , he seemed not to have heard . 
He walked fast beside Rakitin as though in a terrible hurry . 
He was lost in thought and moved mechanically . 
Rakitin felt a sudden twinge as though he had been touched on an open wound . 
He had expected something quite different by bringing Grushenka and Alyosha together . 
Something very different from what he had hoped for had happened . 
`` He is a Pole , that officer of hers , '' he began again , restraining himself ; `` and indeed he is not an officer at all now . 
He served in the customs in Siberia , somewhere on the Chinese frontier , some puny little beggar of a Pole , I expect . 
Lost his job , they say . 
He 's heard now that Grushenka 's saved a little money , so he 's turned up again - that 's the explanation of the mystery . '' 
Again Alyosha seemed not to hear . 
Rakitin could not control himself . 
`` Well , so you 've saved the sinner ? '' 
he laughed spitefully . 
`` Have you turned the Magdalene into the true path ? 
Driven out the seven devils , eh ? 
So you see the miracles you were looking out for just now have come to pass ! '' 
`` Hush , Rakitin , '' Alyosha , answered with an aching heart . 
`` So you despise me now for those twenty-five roubles ? 
I 've sold my friend , you think . 
But you are not Christ , you know , and I am not Judas . '' 
`` Oh , Rakitin , I assure you I 'd forgotten about it , '' cried Alyosha , `` you remind me of it yourself ... '' But this was the last straw for Rakitin . 
`` Damnation take you all and each of you '' he cried suddenly , `` why the devil did I take you up ? 
I do n't want to know you from this time forward . 
Go alone , there 's your road ! '' 
And he turned abruptly into another street , leaving Alyosha alone in the dark . 
Alyosha came out of the town and walked across the fields to the monastery . 
Cana of Galilee IT was very late , according to the monastery ideas , when Alyosha returned to the hermitage ; the door-keeper let him in by a special entrance . 
It had struck nine o'clock - the hour of rest and repose after a day of such agitation for all . 
Alyosha timidly opened the door and went into the elder 's cell where his coffin was now standing . 
There was no one in the cell but Father Paissy , reading the Gospel in solitude over the coffin , and the young novice Porfiry , who , exhausted by the previous night 's conversation and the disturbing incidents of the day , was sleeping the deep sound sleep of youth on the floor of the other room . 
Though Father Paissy heard Alyosha come in , he did not even look in his direction . 
Alyosha turned to the right from the door to the corner , fell on his knees and began to pray . 
His soul was overflowing but with mingled feelings ; no single sensation stood out distinctly ; on the contrary , one drove out another in a slow , continual rotation . 
But there was a sweetness in his heart and , strange to say , Alyosha was not surprised at it . 
Again he saw that coffin before him , the hidden dead figure so precious to him , but the weeping and poignant grief of the morning was no longer aching in his soul . 
As soon as he came in , he fell down before the coffin as before a holy shrine , but joy , joy was glowing in his mind and in his heart . 
The one window of the cell was open , the air was fresh and cool . 
`` So the smell must have become stronger , if they opened the window , '' thought Alyosha . 
But even this thought of the smell of corruption , which had seemed to him so awful and humiliating a few hours before , no longer made him feel miserable or indignant . 
He began quietly praying , but he soon felt that he was praying almost mechanically . 
Fragments of thought floated through his soul , flashed like stars and went out again at once , to be succeeded by others . 
But yet there was reigning in his soul a sense of the wholeness of things - something steadfast and comforting - and he was aware of it himself . 
Sometimes he began praying ardently , he longed to pour out his thankfulness and love ... But when he had begun to pray , he passed suddenly to something else , and sank into thought , forgetting both the prayer and what had interrupted it . 
He began listening to what Father Paissy was reading , but worn out with exhaustion he gradually began to doze . 
`` And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee , '' read Father Paissy . 
`` And the mother of Jesus was there ; And both Jesus was there ; And both Jesus was called , and his disciples , to the marriage . '' 
`` Marriage ? 
What 's that ? 
... A marriage ! '' 
floated whirling through Alyosha 's mind . 
`` There is happiness for her , too ... She has gone to the feast ... . 
No , she has not taken the knife ... . 
That was only a tragic phrase ... . 
Well ... tragic phrases should be forgiven , they must be . 
Tragic phrases comfort the heart ... Without them , sorrow would be too heavy for men to bear . 
Rakitin has gone off to the back alley . 
As long as Rakitin broods over his wrongs , he will always go off to the back alley ... . 
But the high road ... The road is wide and straight and bright as crystal , and the sun is at the end of it ... . 
Ah ! 
... What 's being read ? '' 
... `` And when they wanted wine , the mother of Jesus saith unto him , They have no wine '' ... Alyosha heard . 
`` Ah , yes , I was missing that , and I did n't want to miss it , I love that passage : it 's Cana of Galilee , the first miracle ... . 
Ah , that miracle ! 
Ah , that sweet miracle ! 
It was not men 's grief , but their joy Christ visited , He worked His first miracle to help men 's gladness ... ` He who loves men loves their gladness , too ' ... He was always repeating that , it was one of his leading ideas ... ` There 's no living without joy , ' Mitya says ... . 
Yes , Mitya ... ` Everything that is true and good is always full of forgiveness , ' he used to say that , too '' ... `` Jesus saith unto her , Woman , what has it to do with thee or me ? 
Mine hour not yet come . 
`` His mother saith unto the servants , Whatsoever he saith unto you , do it '' ... `` Do it ... . 
Gladness , the gladness of some poor , very poor , people ... . 
Of course they were poor , since they had n't wine enough even at a wedding ... . 
The historians write that , in those days , the people living about the Lake of Gennesaret were the poorest that can possibly be imagined ... and another great heart , that other great being , His Mother , knew that He had come not only to make His great terrible sacrifice . 
She knew that His heart was open even to the simple , artless merrymaking of some obscure and unlearned people , who had warmly bidden Him to their poor wedding . 
` Mine hour is not yet come , ' He said , with a soft smile -LRB- He must have smiled gently to her -RRB- . 
And , indeed , was it to make wine abundant at poor weddings He had come down to earth ? 
And yet He went and did as she asked Him ... . 
Ah , he is reading again '' ... `` Jesus saith unto them , Fill the waterpots with water . 
And they filled them up to the brim . 
`` And he saith unto them , Draw out now and bear unto the governor of the feast . 
And they bear it . 
`` When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine , and knew not whence it was -LRB- but the servants which drew the water knew -RRB- ; the governor of the feast called the bridegroom , `` And saith unto him , Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine ; and when men have well drunk , that which is worse ; but thou hast kept the good wine until now . '' 
`` But what 's this , what 's this ? 
Why is the room growing wider ? 
... Ah , yes ... It 's the marriage , the wedding ... yes , of course . 
Here are the guests , here are the young couple sitting , and the merry crowd and ... Where is the wise governor of the feast ? 
But who is this ? 
Who ? 
Again the walls are receding ... . 
Who is getting up there from the great table ? 
What ! 
... He here , too ? 
But he 's in the coffin ... but he 's here , too . 
He has stood up , he sees me , he is coming here ... . 
God ! '' 
... Yes , he came up to him , to him , he , the little , thin old man , with tiny wrinkles on his face , joyful and laughing softly . 
There was no coffin now , and he was in the same dress as he had worn yesterday sitting with them , when the visitors had gathered about him . 
His face was uncovered , his eyes were shining . 
How was this , then ? 
He , too , had been called to the feast . 
He , too , at the marriage of Cana in Galilee ... `` Yes , my dear , I am called , too , called and bidden , '' he heard a soft voice saying over him . 
`` Why have you hidden yourself here , out of sight ? 
You come and join us too . '' 
It was his voice , the voice of Father Zossima . 
And it must be he , since he called him ! 
The elder raised Alyosha by the hand and he rose from his knees . 
`` We are rejoicing , '' the little , thin old man went on . 
`` We are drinking the new wine , the wine of new , great gladness ; do you see how many guests ? 
Here are the bride and bridegroom , here is the wise governor of the feast , he is tasting the new wine . 
Why do you wonder at me ? 
I gave an onion to a beggar , so I , too , am here . 
And many here have given only an onion each - only one little onion ... . 
What are all our deeds ? 
And you , my gentle one , you , my kind boy , you too have known how to give a famished woman an onion to-day . 
Begin your work , dear one , begin it , gentle one ! 
Do you see our Sun , do you see Him ? '' 
`` I am afraid ... I dare not look , '' whispered Alyosha . 
`` Do not fear Him . 
He is terrible in His greatness , awful in His sublimity , but infinitely merciful . 
He has made Himself like unto us from love and rejoices with us . 
He is changing the water into wine that the gladness of the guests may not be cut short . 
He is expecting new guests , He is calling new ones unceasingly for ever and ever ... . 
There they are bringing new wine . 
Do you see they are bringing the vessels ... '' Something glowed in Alyosha 's heart , something filled it till it ached , tears of rapture rose from his soul ... . 
He stretched out his hands , uttered a cry and waked up . 
Again the coffin , the open window , and the soft , solemn , distinct reading of the Gospel . 
But Alyosha did not listen to the reading . 
It was strange , he had fallen asleep on his knees , but now he was on his feet , and suddenly , as though thrown forward , with three firm rapid steps he went right up to the coffin . 
His shoulder brushed against Father Paissy without his noticing it . 
Father Paissy raised his eyes for an instant from his book , but looked away again at once , seeing that something strange was happening to the boy . 
Alyosha gazed for half a minute at the coffin , at the covered , motionless dead man that lay in the coffin , with the ikon on his breast and the peaked cap with the octangular cross on his head . 
He had only just been hearing his voice , and that voice was still ringing in his ears . 
He was listening , still expecting other words , but suddenly he turned sharply and went out of the cell . 
He did not stop on the steps either , but went quickly down ; his soul , overflowing with rapture , yearned for freedom , space , openness . 
The vault of heaven , full of soft , shining stars , stretched vast and fathomless above him . 
The Milky Way ran in two pale streams from the zenith to the horizon . 
The fresh , motionless , still night enfolded the earth . 
The white towers and golden domes of the cathedral gleamed out against the sapphire sky . 
The gorgeous autumn flowers , in the beds round the house , were slumbering till morning . 
The silence of earth seemed to melt into the silence of the heavens . 
The mystery of earth was one with the mystery of the stars ... . 
Alyosha stood , gazed , and suddenly threw himself down on the earth . 
He did not know why he embraced it . 
He could not have told why he longed so irresistibly to kiss it , to kiss it all . 
But he kissed it weeping , sobbing , and watering it with his tears , and vowed passionately to love it , to love it for ever and ever . 
`` Water the earth with the tears of your joy and love those tears , '' echoed in his soul . 
What was he weeping over ? 
Oh ! 
in his rapture he was weeping even over those stars , which were shining to him from the abyss of space , and `` he was not ashamed of that ecstasy . '' 
There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds of God , linking his soul to them , and it was trembling all over `` in contact with other worlds . '' 
He longed to forgive everyone and for everything , and to beg forgiveness . 
Oh , not for himself , but for all men , for all and for everything . 
`` And others are praying for me too , '' echoed again in his soul . 
But with every instant he felt clearly and , as it were , tangibly , that something firm and unshakable as that vault of heaven had entered into his soul . 
It was as though some idea had seized the sovereignty of his mind - and it was for all his life and for ever and ever . 
He had fallen on the earth a weak boy , but he rose up a resolute champion , and he knew and felt it suddenly at the very moment of his ecstasy . 
And never , never , his life long , could Alyosha forget that minute . 
`` Someone visited my soul in that hour , '' he used to say afterwards , with implicit faith in his words . 
Within three days he left the monastery in accordance with the words of his elder , who had bidden him `` sojourn in the world . '' 
Kuzma Samsonov BUT Dmitri , to whom Grushenka , flying away to a new life , had left her last greetings , bidding him remember the hour of her love for ever , knew nothing of what had happened to her , and was at that moment in a condition of feverish agitation and activity . 
For the last two days he had been in such an inconceivable state of mind that he might easily have fallen ill with brain fever , as he said himself afterwards . 
Alyosha had not been able to find him the morning before , and Ivan had not succeeded in meeting him at the tavern on the same day . 
The people at his lodgings , by his orders , concealed his movements . 
He had spent those two days literally rushing in all directions , `` struggling with his destiny and trying to save himself , '' as he expressed it himself afterwards , and for some hours he even made a dash out of the town on urgent business , terrible as it was to him to lose sight of Grushenka for a moment . 
All this was explained afterwards in detail , and confirmed by documentary evidence ; but for the present we will only note the most essential incidents of those two terrible days immediately preceding the awful catastrophe that broke so suddenly upon him . 
Though Grushenka had , it is true , loved him for an hour , genuinely and sincerely , yet she tortured him sometimes cruelly and mercilessly . 
The worst of it was that he could never tell what she meant to do . 
To prevail upon her by force or kindness was also impossible : she would yield to nothing . 
She would only have become angry and turned away from him altogether , he knew that well already . 
He suspected , quite correctly , that she , too , was passing through an inward struggle , and was in a state of extraordinary indecision , that she was making up her mind to something , and unable to determine upon it . 
And so , not without good reason , he divined , with a sinking heart , that at moments she must simply hate him and his passion . 
And so , perhaps , it was , but what was distressing Grushenka he did not understand . 
For him the whole tormenting question lay between him and Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Here , we must note , by the way , one certain fact : he was firmly persuaded that Fyodor Pavlovitch would offer , or perhaps had offered , Grushenka lawful wedlock , and did not for a moment believe that the old voluptuary hoped to gain his object for three thousand roubles . 
Mitya had reached this conclusion from his knowledge of Grushenka and her character . 
That was how it was that he could believe at times that all Grushenka 's uneasiness rose from not knowing which of them to choose , which was most to her advantage . 
Strange to say , during those days it never occurred to him to think of the approaching return of the `` officer , '' that is , of the man who had been such a fatal influence in Grushenka 's life , and whose arrival she was expecting with such emotion and dread . 
It is true that of late Grushenka had been very silent about it . 
Yet he was perfectly aware of a letter she had received a month ago from her seducer , and had heard of it from her own lips . 
He partly knew , too , what the letter contained . 
In a moment of spite Grushenka had shown him that letter , but to her astonishment he attached hardly any consequence to it . 
It would be hard to say why this was . 
Perhaps , weighed down by all the hideous horror of his struggle with his own father for this woman , he was incapable of imagining any danger more terrible , at any rate for the time . 
He simply did not believe in a suitor who suddenly turned up again after five years ' disappearance , still less in his speedy arrival . 
Moreover , in the `` officer 's '' first letter which had been shown to Mitya , the possibility of his new rival 's visit was very vaguely suggested . 
The letter was very indefinite , high-flown , and full of sentimentality . 
It must be noted that Grushenka had concealed from him the last lines of the letter , in which his return was alluded to more definitely . 
He had , besides , noticed at that moment , he remembered afterwards , a certain involuntary proud contempt for this missive from Siberia on Grushenka 's face . 
Grushenka told him nothing of what had passed later between her and this rival ; so that by degrees he had completely forgotten the officer 's existence . 
He felt that whatever might come later , whatever turn things might take , his final conflict with Fyodor Pavlovitch was close upon him , and must be decided before anything else . 
With a sinking heart he was expecting every moment Grushenka 's decision , always believing that it would come suddenly , on the impulse of the moment . 
All of a sudden she would say to him : `` Take me , I 'm yours for ever , '' and it would all be over . 
He would seize her and bear her away at once to the ends of the earth . 
Oh , then he would bear her away at once , as far , far away as possible ; to the farthest end of Russia , if not of the earth , then he would marry her , and settle down with her incognito , so that no one would know anything about them , there , here , or anywhere . 
Then , oh then , a new life would begin at once ! 
Of this different , reformed and `` virtuous '' life -LRB- `` it must , it must be virtuous '' -RRB- he dreamed feverishly at every moment . 
He thirsted for that reformation and renewal . 
The filthy morass , in which he had sunk of his own free will , was too revolting to him , and , like very many men in such cases , he put faith above all in change of place . 
If only it were not for these people , if only it were not for these circumstances , if only he could fly away from this accursed place - he would be altogether regenerated , would enter on a new path . 
That was what he believed in , and what he was yearning for . 
But all this could only be on condition of the first , the happy solution of the question . 
There was another possibility , a different and awful ending . 
Suddenly she might say to him : `` Go away . 
I have just come to terms with Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
I am going to marry him and do n't want you '' - and then ... but then ... But Mitya did not know what would happen then . 
Up to the last hour he did n't know . 
That must be said to his credit . 
He had no definite intentions , had planned no crime . 
He was simply watching and spying in agony , while he prepared himself for the first , happy solution of his destiny . 
