She deserves what she gets . 
I shall have my own story to tell , Alexey . '' 
He smiled bitterly again . 
`` Only ... only Grusha , Grusha ! 
Good Lord ! 
Why should she have such suffering to bear ? '' 
he exclaimed suddenly , with tears . 
`` Grusha 's killing me ; the thought of her 's killing me , killing me . 
She was with me just now ... '' `` She told me she was very much grieved by you to-day . '' 
`` I know . 
Confound my temper ! 
It was jealousy . 
I was sorry , I kissed her as she was going . 
I did n't ask her forgiveness . '' 
`` Why did n't you ? '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
Suddenly Mitya laughed almost mirthfully . 
`` God preserve you , my dear boy , from ever asking forgiveness for a fault from a woman you love . 
From one you love especially , however greatly you may have been in fault . 
For a woman - devil only knows what to make of a woman ! 
I know something about them , anyway . 
But try acknowledging you are in fault to a woman . 
Say , ' I am sorry , forgive me , ' and a shower of reproaches will follow ! 
Nothing will make her forgive you simply and directly , she 'll humble you to the dust , bring forward things that have never happened , recall everything , forget nothing , add something of her own , and only then forgive you . 
And even the best , the best of them do it . 
She 'll scrape up all the scrapings and load them on your head . 
They are ready to flay you alive , I tell you , every one of them , all these angels without whom we can not live ! 
I tell you plainly and openly , dear boy , every decent man ought to be under some woman 's thumb . 
That 's my conviction - not conviction , but feeling . 
A man ought to be magnanimous , and it 's no disgrace to a man ! 
No disgrace to a hero , not even a Caesar ! 
But do n't ever beg her pardon all the same for anything . 
Remember that rule given you by your brother Mitya , who 's come to ruin through women . 
No , I 'd better make it up to Grusha somehow , without begging pardon . 
I worship her , Alexey , worship her . 
Only she does n't see it . 
No , she still thinks I do n't love her enough . 
And she tortures me , tortures me with her love . 
The past was nothing ! 
In the past it was only those infernal curves of hers that tortured me , but now I 've taken all her soul into my soul and through her I 've become a man myself . 
Will they marry us ? 
If they do n't , I shall die of jealousy . 
I imagine something every day ... . 
What did she say to you about me ? '' 
Alyosha repeated all Grushenka had said to him that day . 
Mitya listened , made him repeat things , and seemed pleased . 
`` Then she is not angry at my being jealous ? '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` She is a regular woman ! 
` I 've a fierce heart myself ! ' 
Ah , I love such fierce hearts , though I ca n't bear anyone 's being jealous of me . 
I ca n't endure it . 
We shall fight . 
But I shall love her , I shall love her infinitely . 
Will they marry us ? 
Do they let convicts marry ? 
That 's the question . 
And without her I ca n't exist ... '' Mitya walked frowning across the room . 
It was almost dark . 
He suddenly seemed terribly worried . 
`` So there 's a secret , she says , a secret ? 
We have got up a plot against her , and Katya is mixed up in it , she thinks . 
No , my good Grushenka , that 's not it . 
You are very wide of the mark , in your foolish feminine way . 
Alyosha , darling , well , here goes ! 
I 'll tell you our secret ! '' 
He looked round , went close up quickly to Alyosha , who was standing before him , and whispered to him with an air of mystery , though in reality no one could hear them : the old warder was dozing in the corner , and not a word could reach the ears of the soldiers on guard . 
`` I will tell you all our secret , '' Mitya whispered hurriedly . 
`` I meant to tell you later , for how could I decide on anything without you ? 
You are everything to me . 
Though I say that Ivan is superior to us , you are my angel . 
It 's your decision will decide it . 
Perhaps it 's you that is superior and not Ivan . 
You see , it 's a question of conscience , question of the higher conscience - the secret is so important that I ca n't settle it myself , and I 've put it off till I could speak to you . 
But anyway it 's too early to decide now , for we must wait for the verdict . 
As soon as the verdict is given , you shall decide my fate . 
Do n't decide it now . 
I 'll tell you now . 
You listen , but do n't decide . 
Stand and keep quiet . 
I wo n't tell you everything . 
I 'll only tell you the idea , without details , and you keep quiet . 
Not a question , not a movement . 
You agree ? 
But , goodness , what shall I do with your eyes ? 
I 'm afraid your eyes will tell me your decision , even if you do n't speak . 
Oo ! 
I 'm afraid ! 
Alyosha , listen ! 
Ivan suggests my escaping . 
I wo n't tell you the details : it 's all been thought out : it can all be arranged . 
Hush , do n't decide . 
I should go to America with Grusha . 
You know I ca n't live without Grusha ! 
What if they wo n't let her follow me to Siberia ? 
Do they let convicts get married ? 
Ivan thinks not . 
And without Grusha what should I do there underground with a hammer ? 
I should only smash my skull with the hammer ! 
But , on the other hand , my conscience ? 
I should have run away from suffering . 
A sign has come , I reject the sign . 
I have a way of salvation and I turn my back on it . 
Ivan says that in America , ` with the goodwill , ' I can be of more use than underground . 
But what becomes of our hymn from underground ? 
What 's America ? 
America is vanity again ! 
And there 's a lot of swindling in America , too , I expect . 
I should have run away from crucifixion ! 
I tell you , you know , Alexey , because you are the only person who can understand this . 
There 's no one else . 
It 's folly , madness to others , all I 've told you of the hymn . 
They 'll say I 'm out of my mind or a fool . 
I am not out of my mind and I am not a fool . 
Ivan understands about the hymn , too . 
He understands , only he does n't answer - he does n't speak . 
He does n't believe in the hymn . 
Do n't speak , do n't speak . 
I see how you look ! 
You have already decided . 
Do n't decide , spare me ! 
I ca n't live without Grusha . 
Wait till after the trial ! '' 
Mitya ended beside himself . 
He held Alyosha with both hands on his shoulders , and his yearning , feverish eyes were fixed on his brother 's . 
`` They do n't let convicts marry , do they ? '' 
he repeated for the third time in a supplicating voice . 
Alyosha listened with extreme surprise and was deeply moved . 
`` Tell me one thing , '' he said . 
`` Is Ivan very keen on it , and whose idea was it ? '' 
`` His , his , and he is very keen on it . 
He did n't come to see me at first , then he suddenly came a week ago and he began about it straight away . 
He is awfully keen on it . 
He does n't ask me , but orders me to escape . 
He does n't doubt of my obeying him , though I showed him all my heart as I have to you , and told him about the hymn , too . 
He told me he 'd arrange it ; he 's found out about everything . 
But of that later . 
He 's simply set on it . 
It 's all a matter of money : he 'll pay ten thousand for escape and give me twenty thousand for America . 
And he says we can arrange a magnificent escape for ten thousand . '' 
`` And he told you on no account to tell me ? '' 
Alyosha asked again . 
`` To tell no one , and especially not you ; on no account to tell you . 
He is afraid , no doubt , that you 'll stand before me as my conscience . 
Do n't tell him I told you . 
Do n't tell him , for anything . '' 
`` You are right , '' Alyosha pronounced ; `` it 's impossible to decide anything before the trial is over . 
After the trial you 'll decide of yourself . 
Then you 'll find that new man in yourself and he will decide . '' 
`` A new man , or a Bernard who 'll decide a la Bernard , for I believe I 'm a contemptible Bernard myself , '' said Mitya , with a bitter grin . 
`` But , brother , have you no hope then of being acquitted ? '' 
Mitya shrugged his shoulders nervously and shook his head . 
`` Alyosha , darling , it 's time you were going , '' he said , with a sudden haste . 
`` There 's the superintendent shouting in the yard . 
He 'll be here directly . 
We are late ; it 's irregular . 
Embrace me quickly . 
Kiss me ! 
Sign me with the cross , darling , for the cross I have to bear to-morrow . '' 
They embraced and kissed . 
`` Ivan , '' said Mitya suddenly , `` suggests my escaping ; but , of course , he believes I did it . '' 
A mournful smile came on to his lips . 
`` Have you asked him whether he believes it ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` No , I have n't . 
I wanted to , but I could n't . 
I had n't the courage . 
But I saw it from his eyes . 
Well , good-bye ! '' 
Once more they kissed hurriedly , and Alyosha was just going out , when Mitya suddenly called him back . 
`` Stand facing me ! 
That 's right ! '' 
And again he seized Alyosha , putting both hands on his shoulders . 
His face became suddenly quite pale , so that it was dreadfully apparent , even through the gathering darkness . 
His lips twitched , his eyes fastened upon Alyosha . 
`` Alyosha , tell me the whole truth , as you would before God . 
Do you believe I did it ? 
Do you , do you in yourself , believe it ? 
The whole truth , do n't lie ! '' 
he cried desperately . 
Everything seemed heaving before Alyosha , and he felt something like a stab at his heart . 
`` Hush ! 
What do you mean ? '' 
he faltered helplessly . 
`` The whole truth , the whole , do n't lie ! '' 
repeated Mitya . 
`` I 've never for one instant believed that you were the murderer ! '' 
broke in a shaking voice from Alyosha 's breast , and he raised his right hand in the air , as though calling God to witness his words . 
Mitya 's whole face was lighted up with bliss . 
`` Thank you ! '' 
he articulated slowly , as though letting a sigh escape him after fainting . 
`` Now you have given me new life . 
Would you believe it , till this moment I 've been afraid to ask you , you , even you . 
Well , go ! 
You 've given me strength for to-morrow . 
God bless you ! 
Come , go along ! 
Love Ivan ! '' 
was Mitya 's last word . 
Alyosha went out in tears . 
Such distrustfulness in Mitya , such lack of confidence even to him , to Alyosha - all this suddenly opened before Alyosha an unsuspected depth of hopeless grief and despair in the soul of his unhappy brother . 
Intense , infinite compassion overwhelmed him instantly . 
There was a poignant ache in his torn heart . 
`` Love Ivan '' - he suddenly recalled Mitya 's words . 
And he was going to Ivan . 
He badly wanted to see Ivan all day . 
He was as much worried about Ivan as about Mitya , and more than ever now . 
Not You , Not You ! 
ON the way to Ivan he had to pass the house where Katerina Ivanovna was living . 
There was light in the windows . 
He suddenly stopped and resolved to go in . 
He had not seen Katerina Ivanovna for more than a week . 
But now it struck him that Ivan might be with her , especially on the eve of the terrible day . 
Ringing , and mounting the staircase , which was dimly lighted by a Chinese lantern , he saw a man coming down , and as they met , he recognised him as his brother . 
So he was just coming from Katerina Ivanovna . 
`` Ah , it 's only you , '' said Ivan dryly . 
`` Well , good-bye ! 
You are going to her ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` I do n't advise you to ; she 's upset and you 'll upset her more . '' 
A door was instantly flung open above , and a voice cried suddenly : `` No , no ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , have you come from him ? '' 
`` Yes , I have been with him . '' 
`` Has he sent me any message ? 
Come up , Alyosha , and you , Ivan Fyodorovitch , you must come back , you must . 
Do you hear ? '' 
There was such a peremptory note in Katya 's voice that Ivan , after a moment 's hesitation , made up his mind to go back with Alyosha . 
`` She was listening , '' he murmured angrily to himself , but Alyosha heard it . 
`` Excuse my keeping my greatcoat on , '' said Ivan , going into the drawing-room . 
`` I wo n't sit down . 
I wo n't stay more than a minute . '' 
`` Sit down , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' said Katerina Ivanovna , though she remained standing . 
She had changed very little during this time , but there was an ominous gleam in her dark eyes . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards that she had struck him as particularly handsome at that moment . 
`` What did he ask you to tell me ? '' 
`` Only one thing , '' said Alyosha , looking her straight in the face , `` that you would spare yourself and say nothing at the trial of what '' -LRB- he was a little confused -RRB- '' ... passed between you ... at the time of your first acquaintance ... in that town . '' 
`` Ah ! 
that I bowed down to the ground for that money ! '' 
She broke into a bitter laugh . 
`` Why , is he afraid for me or for himself ? 
He asks me to spare - whom ? 
Him or myself ? 
Tell me , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! '' 
Alyosha watched her intently , trying to understand her . 
`` Both yourself and him , '' he answered softly . 
`` I am glad to hear it , '' she snapped out maliciously , and she suddenly blushed . 
`` You do n't know me yet , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she said menacingly . 
`` And I do n't know myself yet . 
Perhaps you 'll want to trample me under foot after my examination to-morrow . '' 
`` You will give your evidence honourably , '' said Alyosha ; `` that 's all that 's wanted . '' 
`` Women are often dishonourable , '' she snarled . 
`` Only an hour ago I was thinking I felt afraid to touch that monster ... as though he were a reptile ... but no , he is still a human being to me ! 
But did he do it ? 
Is he the murderer ? '' 
she cried , all of a sudden , hysterically , turning quickly to Ivan . 
Alyosha saw at once that she had asked Ivan that question before , perhaps only a moment before he came in , and not for the first time , but for the hundredth , and that they had ended by quarrelling . 
`` I 've been to see Smerdyakov ... . 
It was you , you who persuaded me that he murdered his father . 
It 's only you I believed '' she continued , still addressing Ivan . 
He gave her a sort of strained smile . 
Alyosha started at her tone . 
He had not suspected such familiar intimacy between them . 
`` Well , that 's enough , anyway , '' Ivan cut short the conversation . 
`` I am going . 
I 'll come to-morrow . '' 
And turning at once , he walked out of the room and went straight downstairs . 
With an imperious gesture , Katerina Ivanovna seized Alyosha by both hands . 
`` Follow him ! 
Overtake him ! 
Do n't leave him alone for a minute ! '' 
she said , in a hurried whisper . 
`` He 's mad ! 
Do n't you know that he 's mad ? 
He is in a fever , nervous fever . 
The doctor told me so . 
Go , run after him ... '' Alyosha jumped up and ran after Ivan , who was not fifty paces ahead of him . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
He turned quickly on Alyosha , seeing that he was running after him . 
`` She told you to catch me up , because I 'm mad . 
I know it all by heart , '' he added irritably . 
`` She is mistaken , of course ; but she is right that you are ill , '' said Alyosha . 
`` I was looking at your face just now . 
You look very ill , Ivan . '' 
Ivan walked on without stopping . 
Alyosha followed him . 
`` And do you know , Alexey Fyodorovitch , how people do go out of their minds ? '' 
Ivan asked in a a voice suddenly quiet , without a trace of irritation , with a note of the simplest curiosity . 
`` No , I do n't . 
I suppose there are all kinds of insanity . '' 
`` And can one observe that one 's going mad oneself ? '' 
`` I imagine one ca n't see oneself clearly in such circumstances , '' Alyosha answered with surprise . 
Ivan paused for half a minute . 
`` If you want to talk to me , please change the subject , '' he said suddenly . 
`` Oh , while I think of it , I have a letter for you , '' said Alyosha timidly , and he took Lise 's note from his pocket and held it out to Ivan . 
They were just under a lamp-post . 
Ivan recognised the handwriting at once . 
`` Ah , from that little demon ! '' 
he laughed maliciously , and , without opening the envelope , he tore it into bits and threw it in the air . 
The bits were scattered by the wind . 
`` She 's not sixteen yet , I believe , and already offering herself , '' he said contemptuously , striding along the street again . 
`` How do you mean , offering herself ? '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
`` As wanton women offer themselves , to be sure . '' 
`` How can you , Ivan , how can you ? '' 
Alyosha cried warmly , in a grieved voice . 
`` She is a child ; you are insulting a child ! 
She is ill ; she is very ill , too . 
She is on the verge of insanity , too , perhaps ... . 
I had hoped to hear something from you ... that would save her . '' 
`` You 'll hear nothing from me . 
If she is a child , I am not her nurse . 
Be quiet , Alexey . 
Do n't go on about her . 
I am not even thinking about it . '' 
They were silent again for a moment . 
`` She will be praying all night now to the Mother of God to show her how to act to-morrow at the trial , '' he said sharply and angrily again . 
`` You ... you mean Katerina Ivanovna ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Whether she 's to save Mitya or ruin him . 
She 'll pray for light from above . 
She ca n't make up her mind for herself , you see . 
She has not had time to decide yet . 
She takes me for her nurse , too . 
She wants me to sing lullabies to her . '' 
`` Katerina Ivanovna loves you , brother , '' said Alyosha sadly . 
`` Perhaps ; but I am not very keen on her . '' 
`` She is suffering . 
Why do you ... sometimes say things to her that give her hope ? '' 
Alyosha went on , with timid reproach . 
`` I know that you 've given her hope . 
Forgive me for speaking to you like this , '' he added . 
`` I ca n't behave to her as I ought - break off altogether and tell her so straight out , '' said Ivan , irritably . 
`` I must wait till sentence is passed on the murderer . 
If I break off with her now , she will avenge herself on me by ruining that scoundrel to-morrow at the trial , for she hates him and knows she hates him . 
It 's all a lie - lie upon lie ! 
As long as I do n't break off with her , she goes on hoping , and she wo n't ruin that monster , knowing how I want to get him out of trouble . 
If only that damned verdict would come ! '' 
The words `` murderer '' and `` monster '' echoed painfully in Alyosha 's heart . 
`` But how can she ruin Mitya ? '' 
he asked , pondering on Ivan 's words . 
`` What evidence can she give that would ruin Mitya ? '' 
`` You do n't know that yet . 
She 's got a document in her hands , in Mitya 's own writing , that proves conclusively that he did murder Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
`` That 's impossible ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
`` Why is it impossible ? 
I 've read it myself . '' 
`` There ca n't be such a document ! '' 
Alyosha repeated warmly . 
`` There ca n't be , because he 's not the murderer . 
It 's not he murdered father , not he ! '' 
Ivan suddenly stopped . 
`` Who is the murderer then , according to you ? '' 
he asked , with apparent coldness . 
There was even a supercilious note in his voice . 
`` You know who , '' Alyosha pronounced in a low , penetrating voice . 
`` Who ? 
You mean the myth about that crazy idiot , the epileptic , Smerdyakov ? '' 
Alyosha suddenly felt himself trembling all over . 
`` You know who , '' broke helplessly from him . 
He could scarcely breathe . 
`` Who ? 
Who ? '' 
Ivan cried almost fiercely . 
All his restraint suddenly vanished . 
`` I only know one thing , '' Alyosha went on , still almost in a whisper , `` it was n't you killed father . '' '' 
` Not you ' ! 
What do you mean by ` not you ' ? '' 
Ivan was thunderstruck . 
`` It was not you killed father , not you ! 
Alyosha repeated firmly . 
The silence lasted for half a minute . 
`` I know I did n't . 
Are you raving ? '' 
said Ivan , with a pale , distorted smile . 
His eyes were riveted on Alyosha . 
They were standing again under a lamp-post . 
`` No , Ivan . 
You 've told yourself several times that you are the murderer . '' 
`` When did I say so ? 
I was in Moscow ... . 
When have I said so ? '' 
Ivan faltered helplessly . 
`` You 've said so to yourself many times , when you 've been alone during these two dreadful months , '' Alyosha went on softly and distinctly as before . 
Yet he was speaking now , as it were , not of himself , not of his own will , but obeying some irresistible command . 
`` You have accused yourself and have confessed to yourself that you are the murderer and no one else . 
But you did n't do it : you are mistaken : you are not the murderer . 
Do you hear ? 
It was not you ! 
God has sent me to tell you so . '' 
They were both silent . 
The silence lasted a whole long minute . 
They were both standing still , gazing into each other 's eyes . 
They were both pale . 
Suddenly Ivan began trembling all over , and clutched Alyosha 's shoulder . 
`` You 've been in my room ! '' 
he whispered hoarsely . 
`` You 've been there at night , when he came ... . 
Confess ... have you seen him , have you seen him ? '' 
`` Whom do you mean - Mitya ? '' 
Alyosha asked , bewildered . 
`` Not him , damn the monster ! '' 
Ivan shouted , in a frenzy , `` Do you know that he visits me ? 
How did you find out ? 
Speak ! '' 
`` Who is he ? 
I do n't know whom you are talking about , '' Alyosha faltered , beginning to be alarmed . 
`` Yes , you do know . 
or how could you - ? 
It 's impossible that you do n't know . '' 
Suddenly he seemed to check himself . 
He stood still and seemed to reflect . 
A strange grin contorted his lips . 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha began again , in a shaking voice , `` I have said this to you , because you 'll believe my word , I know that . 
I tell you once and for all , it 's not you . 
You hear , once for all ! 
God has put it into my heart to say this to you , even though it may make you hate me from this hour . '' 
But by now Ivan had apparently regained his self-control . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' he said , with a cold smile , `` I ca n't endure prophets and epileptics - messengers from God especially - and you know that only too well . 
I break off all relations with you from this moment and probably for ever . 
I beg you to leave me at this turning . 
It 's the way to your lodgings , too . 
You 'd better be particularly careful not to come to me to-day ! 
Do you hear ? '' 
He turned and walked on with a firm step , not looking back . 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha called after him , `` if anything happens to you to-day , turn to me before anyone ! '' 
But Ivan made no reply . 
Alyosha stood under the lamp-post at the cross roads , till Ivan had vanished into the darkness . 
Then he turned and walked slowly homewards . 
Both Alyosha and Ivan were living in lodgings ; neither of them was willing to live in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's empty house . 
Alyosha had a furnished room in the house of some working people . 
Ivan lived some distance from him . 
He had taken a roomy and fairly comfortable lodge attached to a fine house that belonged to a well-to-do lady , the widow of an official . 
But his only attendant was a deaf and rheumatic old crone who went to bed at six o'clock every evening and got up at six in the morning . 
Ivan had become remarkably indifferent to his comforts of late , and very fond of being alone . 
He did everything for himself in the one room he lived in , and rarely entered any of the other rooms in his abode . 
He reached the gate of the house and had his hand on the bell , when he suddenly stopped . 
He felt that he was trembling all over with anger . 
Suddenly he let go of the bell , turned back with a curse , and walked with rapid steps in the opposite direction . 
He walked a mile and a half to a tiny , slanting , wooden house , almost a hut , where Marya Kondratyevna , the neighbour who used to come to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and to whom Smerdyakov had once sung his songs and played on the guitar , was now lodging . 
She had sold their little house , and was now living here with her mother . 
Smerdyakov , who was ill - almost dying-had been with them ever since Fyodor Pavlovitch 's death . 
It was to him Ivan was going now , drawn by a sudden and irresistible prompting . 
The First Interview with Smerdyakov THIS was the third time that Ivan had been to see Smerdyakov since his return from Moscow . 
The first time he had seen him and talked to him was on the first day of his arrival , then he had visited him once more , a fortnight later . 
But his visits had ended with that second one , so that it was now over a month since he had seen him . 
And he had scarcely heard anything of him . 
Ivan had only returned five days after his father 's death , so that he was not present at the funeral , which took place the day before he came back . 
The cause of his delay was that Alyosha , not knowing his Moscow address , had to apply to Katerina Ivanovna to telegraph to him , and she , not knowing his address either , telegraphed to her sister and aunt , reckoning on Ivan 's going to see them as soon as he arrived in Moscow . 
But he did not go to them till four days after his arrival . 
When he got the telegram , he had , of course , set off post-haste to our town . 
The first to meet him was Alyosha , and Ivan was greatly surprised to find that , in opposition to the general opinion of the town , he refused to entertain a suspicion against Mitya , and spoke openly of Smerdyakov as the murderer . 
Later on , after seeing the police captain and the prosecutor , and hearing the details of the charge and the arrest , he was still more surprised at Alyosha , and ascribed his opinion only to his exaggerated brotherly feeling and sympathy with Mitya , of whom Alyosha , as Ivan knew , was very fond . 
By the way , let us say a word or two of Ivan 's feeling to his brother Dmitri . 
He positively disliked him ; at most , felt sometimes a compassion for him , and even that was mixed with great contempt , almost repugnance . 
Mitya 's whole personality , even his appearance , was extremely unattractive to him . 
Ivan looked with indignation on Katerina Ivanovna 's love for his brother . 
Yet he went to see Mitya on the first day of his arrival , and that interview , far from shaking Ivan 's belief in his guilt , positively strengthened it . 
He found his brother agitated , nervously excited . 
Mitya had been talkative , but very absent-minded and incoherent . 
He used violent language , accused Smerdyakov , and was fearfully muddled . 
He talked principally about the three thousand roubles , which he said had been `` stolen '' from him by his father . 
`` The money was mine , it was my money , '' Mitya kept repeating . 
`` Even if I had stolen it , I should have had the right . '' 
He hardly contested the evidence against him , and if he tried to turn a fact to his advantage , it was in an absurd and incoherent way . 
He hardly seemed to wish to defend himself to Ivan or anyone else . 
Quite the contrary , he was angry and proudly scornful of the charges against him ; he was continually firing up and abusing everyone . 
He only laughed contemptuously at Grigory 's evidence about the open door , and declared that it was `` the devil that opened it . '' 
But he could not bring forward any coherent explanation of the fact . 
He even succeeded in insulting Ivan during their first interview , telling him sharply that it was not for people who declared that `` everything was lawful , '' to suspect and question him . 
Altogether he was anything but friendly with Ivan on that occasion . 
Immediately after that interview with Mitya , Ivan went for the first time to see Smerdyakov . 
In the railway train on his way from Moscow , he kept thinking of Smerdyakov and of his last conversation with him on the evening before he went away . 
Many things seemed to him puzzling and suspicious . 
when he gave his evidence to the investigating lawyer Ivan said nothing , for the time , of that conversation . 
He put that off till he had seen Smerdyakov , who was at that time in the hospital . 
Doctor Herzenstube and Varvinsky , the doctor he met in the hospital , confidently asserted in reply to Ivan 's persistent questions , that Smerdyakov 's epileptic attack was unmistakably genuine , and were surprised indeed at Ivan asking whether he might not have been shamming on the day of the catastrophe . 
They gave him to understand that the attack was an exceptional one , the fits persisting and recurring several times , so that the patient 's life was positively in danger , and it was only now , after they had applied remedies , that they could assert with confidence that the patient would survive . 
`` Though it might well be , '' added Doctor Herzenstube , `` that his reason would be impaired for a considerable period , if not permanently . '' 
On Ivan 's asking impatiently whether that meant that he was now mad , they told him that this was not yet the case , in the full sense of the word , but that certain abnormalities were perceptible . 
Ivan decided to find out for himself what those abnormalities were . 
At the hospital he was at once allowed to see the patient . 
Smerdyakov was lying on a truckle-bed in a separate ward . 
There was only one other bed in the room , and in it lay a tradesman of the town , swollen with dropsy , who was obviously almost dying ; he could be no hindrance to their conversation . 
Smerdyakov grinned uncertainly on seeing Ivan , and for the first instant seemed nervous . 
So at least Ivan fancied . 
But that was only momentary . 
For the rest of the time he was struck , on the contrary , by Smerdyakov 's composure . 
From the first glance Ivan had no doubt that he was very ill . 
He was very weak ; he spoke slowly , seeming to move his tongue with difficulty ; he was much thinner and sallower.Throughout the interview , which lasted twenty minutes , he kept complaining of headache and of pain in all his limbs . 
His thin emasculate face seemed to have become so tiny ; his hair was ruffled , and his crest of curls in front stood up in a thin tuft . 
But in the left eye , which was screwed up and seemed to be insinuating something , Smerdyakov showed himself unchanged . 
`` It 's always worth while speaking to a clever man . '' 
Ivan was reminded of that at once . 
He sat down on the stool at his feet . 
Smerdyakov , with painful effort , shifted his position in bed , but he was not the first to speak . 
He remained dumb , and did not even look much interested . 
`` Can you . 
talk to me ? '' 
asked Ivan . 
