`` But he said I was a stinking lackey . 
He thinks that I might be unruly . 
He is mistaken there . 
If I had a certain sum in my pocket , I would have left here long ago . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is lower than any lackey in his behaviour , in his mind , and in his poverty . 
He does n't know how to do anything , and yet he is respected by everyone . 
I may be only a soup-maker , but with luck I could open a cafe restaurant in Petrovka , in Moscow , for my cookery is something special , and there 's no one in Moscow , except the foreigners , whose cookery is anything special . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is a beggar , but if he were to challenge the son of the first count in the country , he 'd fight him . 
Though in what way is he better than I am ? 
For he is ever so much stupider than I am . 
Look at the money he has wasted without any need ! '' 
`` It must be lovely , a duel , '' Marya Kondratyevna observed suddenly . 
`` How so ? '' 
`` It must be so dreadful and so brave , especially when young officers with pistols in their hands pop at one another for the sake of some lady . 
A perfect picture ! 
Ah , if only girls were allowed to look on , I 'd give anything to see one ! '' 
`` It 's all very well when you are firing at someone , but when he is firing straight in your mug , you must feel pretty silly . 
You 'd be glad to run away , Marya Kondratyevna . '' 
`` You do n't mean you would run away ? '' 
But Smerdyakov did not deign to reply . 
After a moment 's silence the guitar tinkled again , and he sang again in the same falsetto : Whatever you may say , I shall go far away . 
Life will be bright and gay In the city far away . 
I shall not grieve , I shall not grieve at all , I do n't intend to grieve at all . 
Then something unexpected happened . 
Alyosha suddenly sneezed . 
They were silent . 
Alyosha got up and walked towards them . 
He found Smerdyakov dressed up and wearing polished boots , his hair pomaded , and perhaps curled . 
The guitar lay on the garden-seat . 
His companion was the daughter of the house , wearing a light-blue dress with a train two yards long . 
She was young and would not have been bad-looking , but that her face was so round and terribly freckled . 
`` Will my brother Dmitri soon be back ? 
asked Alyosha with as much composure as he could . 
Smerdyakov got up slowly ; Marya Kondratyevna rose too . 
`` How am I to know about Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
It 's not as if I were his keeper , '' answered Smerdyakov quietly , distinctly , and superciliously . 
`` But I simply asked whether you do know ? '' 
Alyosha explained . 
`` I know nothing of his whereabouts and do n't want to . '' 
`` But my brother told me that you let him know all that goes on in the house , and promised to let him know when Agrafena Alexandrovna comes . '' 
Smerdyakov turned a deliberate , unmoved glance upon him . 
`` And how did you get in this time , since the gate was bolted an hour ago ? '' 
he asked , looking at Alyosha . 
`` I came in from the back-alley , over the fence , and went straight to the summer-house . 
I hope you 'll forgive me , he added addressing Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` I was in a hurry to find my brother . '' 
`` Ach , as though we could take it amiss in you ! '' 
drawled Marya Kondratyevna , flattered by Alyosha 's apology . 
`` For Dmitri Fyodorovitch often goes to the summer-house in that way . 
We do n't know he is here and he is sitting in the summer-house . '' 
`` I am very anxious to find him , or to learn from you where he is now . 
Believe me , it 's on business of great importance to him . '' 
`` He never tells us , '' lisped Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` Though I used to come here as a friend , '' Smerdyakov began again , `` Dmitri Fyodorovitch has pestered me in a merciless way even here by his incessant questions about the master . 
` What news ? ' 
he 'll ask . 
` What 's going on in there now ? 
Who 's coming and going ? ' 
and ca n't I tell him something more . 
Twice already he 's threatened me with death `` With death ? '' 
Alyosha exclaimed in surprise . 
`` Do you suppose he 'd think much of that , with his temper , which you had a chance of observing yourself yesterday ? 
He says if I let Agrafena Alexandrovna in and she passes the night there , I 'll be the first to suffer for it . 
I am terribly afraid of him , and if I were not even more afraid of doing so , I ought to let the police know . 
God only knows what he might not do ! '' 
`` His honour said to him the other day , ` I 'll pound you in a mortar ! ' '' 
added Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` Oh , if it 's pounding in a mortar , it may be only talk , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` If I could meet him , I might speak to him about that too . '' 
`` Well , the only thing I can tell you is this , '' said Smerdyakov , as though thinking better of it ; `` I am here as an old friend and neighbour , and it would be odd if I did n't come . 
On the other hand , Ivan Fyodorovitch sent me first thing this morning to your brother 's lodging in Lake Street , without a letter , but with a message to Dmitri Fyodorovitch to go to dine with him at the restaurant here , in the marketplace . 
I went , but did n't find Dmitri Fyodorovitch at home , though it was eight o'clock . 
` He 's been here , but he is quite gone , ' those were the very words of his landlady . 
It 's as though there was an understanding between them . 
Perhaps at this moment he is in the restaurant with Ivan Fyodorovitch , for Ivan Fyodorovitch has not been home to dinner and Fyodor Pavlovitch dined alone an hour ago , and is gone to lie down . 
But I beg you most particularly not to speak of me and of what I have told you , for he 'd kill me for nothing at all . '' 
`` Brother Ivan invited Dmitri to the restaurant to-day ? '' 
repeated Alyosha quickly . 
`` That 's so . '' 
`` The Metropolis tavern in the marketplace ? '' 
`` The very same . '' 
`` That 's quite likely , '' cried Alyosha , much excited . 
`` Thank you , Smerdyakov ; that 's important . 
I 'll go there at once . '' 
`` Do n't betray me , '' Smerdyakov called after him . 
`` Oh , no , I 'll go to the tavern as though by chance . 
Do n't be anxious . '' 
`` But wait a minute , I 'll open the gate to you , '' cried Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` No ; it 's a short cut , I 'll get over the fence again . '' 
What he had heard threw Alyosha into great agitation . 
He ran to the tavern . 
It was impossible for him to go into the tavern in his monastic dress , but he could inquire at the entrance for his brothers and call them down . 
But just as he reached the tavern , a window was flung open , and his brother Ivan called down to him from it . 
`` Alyosha , ca n't you come up here to me ? 
I shall be awfully grateful . '' 
`` To be sure I can , only I do n't quite know whether in this dress - '' `` But I am in a room apart . 
Come up the steps ; I 'll run down to meet you . '' 
A minute later Alyosha was sitting beside his brother . 
Ivan was alone dining . 
The Brothers Make Friends IVAN was not , however , in a separate room , but only in a place shut off by a screen , so that it was unseen by other people in the room . 
It was the first room from the entrance with a buffet along the wall . 
Waiters were continually darting to and fro in it . 
The only customer in the room was an old retired military man drinking tea in a corner . 
But there was the usual bustle going on in the other rooms of the tavern ; there were shouts for the waiters , the sound of popping corks , the click of billiard balls , the drone of the organ . 
Alyosha knew that Ivan did not usually visit this tavern and disliked taverns in general . 
So he must have come here , he reflected , simply to meet Dmitri by arrangement . 
Yet Dmitri was not there . 
`` Shall I order you fish , soup , or anything . 
You do n't live on tea alone , I suppose , '' cried Ivan , apparently delighted at having got hold of Alyosha . 
He had finished dinner and was drinking tea . 
`` Let me have soup , and tea afterwards , I am hungry , '' said Alyosha gaily . 
`` And cherry jam ? 
They have it here . 
You remember how you used to love cherry jam when you were little ? '' 
`` You remember that ? 
Let me have jam too , I like it still . '' 
Ivan rang for the waiter and ordered soup , jam , and tea . 
`` I remember everything , Alyosha , I remember you till you were eleven , I was nearly fifteen . 
There 's such a difference between fifteen and eleven that brothers are never companions at those ages . 
I do n't know whether I was fond of you even . 
When I went away to Moscow for the first few years I never thought of you at all . 
Then , when you came to Moscow yourself , we only met once somewhere , I believe . 
And now I 've been here more than three months , and so far we have scarcely said a word to each other . 
To-morrow I am going away , and I was just thinking as I sat here how I could see you to say good-bye and just then you passed . '' 
`` Were you very anxious to see me , then ? '' 
`` Very . 
I want to get to know you once for all , and I want you to know me . 
And then to say good-bye . 
I believe it 's always best to get to know people just before leaving them . 
I 've noticed how you 've been looking at me these three months . 
There has been a continual look of expectation in your eyes , and I ca n't endure that . 
That 's how it is I 've kept away from you . 
But in the end I have learned to respect you . 
The little man stands firm , I thought . 
Though I am laughing , I am serious . 
You do stand firm , do n't you ? 
I like people who are firm like that whatever it is they stand by , even if they are such little fellows as you . 
Your expectant eyes ceased to annoy me , I grew fond of them in the end , those expectant eyes . 
You seem to love me for some reason , Alyosha ? '' 
`` I do love you , Ivan . 
Dmitri says of you - Ivan is a tomb ! 
I say of you , Ivan is a riddle . 
You are a riddle to me even now . 
But I understand something in you , and I did not understand it till this morning . '' 
`` What 's that ? '' 
laughed Ivan . 
`` You wo n't be angry ? '' 
Alyosha laughed too . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` That you are just as young as other young men of three and twenty , that you are just a young and fresh and nice boy , green in fact ! 
Now , have I insulted you dreadfully ? '' 
`` On the contrary , I am struck by a coincidence , '' cried Ivan , warmly and good-humouredly . 
`` Would you believe it that ever since that scene with her , I have thought of nothing else but my youthful greenness , and just as though you guessed that , you begin about it . 
Do you know I 've been sitting here thinking to myself : that if I did n't believe in life , if I lost faith in the woman I love , lost faith in the order of things , were convinced , in fact , that everything is a disorderly , damnable , and perhaps devil-ridden chaos , if I were struck by every horror of man 's disillusionment - still I should want to live and , having once tasted of the cup , I would not turn away from it till I had drained it ! 
At thirty , though , I shall be sure to leave the cup , even if I 've not emptied it , and turn away - where I do n't know . 
But till I am thirty , I know that my youth will triumph over everything - every disillusionment , every disgust with life . 
I 've asked myself many times whether there is in the world any despair that would overcome this frantic and perhaps unseemly thirst for life in me , and I 've come to the conclusion that there is n't , that is till I am thirty , and then I shall lose it of myself , I fancy . 
Some drivelling consumptive moralists - and poets especially - often call that thirst for life base . 
It 's a feature of the Karamazovs , it 's true , that thirst for life regardless of everything ; you have it no doubt too , but why is it base ? 
The centripetal force on our planet is still fearfully strong , Alyosha . 
I have a longing for life , and I go on living in spite of logic . 
Though I may not believe in the order of the universe , yet I love the sticky little leaves as they open in spring . 
I love the blue sky , I love some people , whom one loves you know sometimes without knowing why . 
I love some great deeds done by men , though I 've long ceased perhaps to have faith in them , yet from old habit one 's heart prizes them . 
Here they have brought the soup for you , eat it , it will do you good . 
It 's first-rate soup , they know how to make it here . 
I want to travel in Europe , Alyosha , I shall set off from here . 
And yet I know that I am only going to a graveyard , but it 's a most precious graveyard , that 's what it is ! 
Precious are the dead that lie there , every stone over them speaks of such burning life in the past , of such passionate faith in their work , their truth , their struggle and their science , that I know I shall fall on the ground and kiss those stones and weep over them ; though I 'm convinced in my heart that it 's long been nothing but a graveyard . 
And I shall not weep from despair , but simply because I shall be happy in my tears , I shall steep my soul in emotion . 
I love the sticky leaves in spring , the blue sky - that 's all it is . 
It 's not a matter of intellect or logic , it 's loving with one 's inside , with one 's stomach . 
One loves the first strength of one 's youth . 
Do you understand anything of my tirade , Alyosha ? '' 
Ivan laughed suddenly . 
`` I understand too well , Ivan . 
One longs to love with one 's inside , with one 's stomach . 
You said that so well and I am awfully glad that you have such a longing for life , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` I think everyone should love life above everything in the world . '' 
`` Love life more than the meaning of it ? '' 
`` Certainly , love it , regardless of logic as you say , it must be regardless of logic , and it 's only then one will understand the meaning of it . 
I have thought so a long time . 
Half your work is done , Ivan , you love life , now you 've only to try to do the second half and you are saved . '' 
`` You are trying to save me , but perhaps I am not lost ! 
And what does your second half mean ? '' 
`` Why , one has to raise up your dead , who perhaps have not died after all . 
Come , let me have tea . 
I am so glad of our talk , Ivan . '' 
`` I see you are feeling inspired . 
I am awfully fond of such professions de foi * from such - novices . 
You are a steadfast person , Alexey . 
Is it true that you mean to leave the monastery ? '' 
* Professions of faith . 
`` Yes , my elder sends me out into the world . '' 
`` We shall see each other then in the world . 
We shall meet before I am thirty , when I shall begin to turn aside from the cup . 
Father does n't want to turn aside from his cup till he is seventy , he dreams of hanging on to eighty in fact , so he says . 
He means it only too seriously , though he is a buffoon . 
He stands on a firm rock , too , he stands on his sensuality though after we are thirty , indeed , there may be nothing else to stand on ... . 
But to hang on to seventy is nasty , better only to thirty ; one might retain ' a shadow of nobility ' by deceiving oneself . 
Have you seen Dmitri to-day ? '' 
`` No , but I saw Smerdyakov , '' and Alyosha rapidly , though minutely , described his meeting with Smerdyakov . 
Ivan began listening anxiously and questioned him . 
`` But he begged me not to tell Dmitri that he had told me about him , '' added Alyosha . 
Ivan frowned and pondered . 
`` Are you frowning on Smerdyakov 's account ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , on his account . 
Damn him , I certainly did want to see Dmitri , but now there 's no need , '' said Ivan reluctantly . 
`` But are you really going so soon , brother ? '' 
`` What of Dmitri and father ? 
how will it end ? '' 
asked Alyosha anxiously . 
`` You are always harping upon it ! 
What have I to do with it ? 
Am I my brother Dmitri 's keeper ? '' 
Ivan snapped irritably , but then he suddenly smiled bitterly . 
`` Cain 's answer about his murdered brother , was n't it ? 
Perhaps that 's what you 're thinking at this moment ? 
Well damn it all , I ca n't stay here to be their keeper , can I ? 
I 've finished what I had to do , and I am going . 
Do you imagine I am jealous of Dmitri , that I 've been trying to steal his beautiful Katerina Ivanovna for the last three months ? 
Nonsense , I had business of my own . 
I finished it . 
I am going . 
I finished it just now , you were witness . '' 
`` At Katerina Ivanovna 's ? '' 
`` Yes , and I 've released myself once for all . 
And after all , what have I to do with Dmitri ? 
Dmitri does n't come in . 
I had my own business to settle with Katerina Ivanovna . 
You know , on the contrary , that Dmitri behaved as though there was an understanding between us . 
I did n't ask to do it , but he solemnly handed her over to me and gave us his blessing . 
It 's all too funny . 
Ah , Alyosha , if you only knew how light my heart is now ! 
Would you believe it , I sat here eating my dinner and was nearly ordering champagne to celebrate my first hour of freedom . 
Tfoo ! 
It 's been going on nearly six months , and all at once I 've thrown it off . 
I could never have guessed even yesterday , how easy it would be to put an end to it if I wanted . '' 
`` You are speaking of your love , Ivan ? '' 
`` Of my love , if you like . 
I fell in love with the young lady , I worried myself over her and she worried me . 
I sat watching over her ... and all at once it 's collapsed ! 
I spoke this morning with inspiration , but I went away and roared with laughter . 
Would you believe it ? 
Yes , it 's the literal truth . '' 
`` You seem very merry about it now , '' observed Alyosha , looking into his face , which had suddenly grown brighter . 
`` But how could I tell that I did n't care for her a bit ! 
Ha ha ! 
It appears after all I did n't . 
And yet how she attracted me ! 
How attractive she was just now when I made my speech ! 
And do you know she attracts me awfully even now , yet how easy it is to leave her . 
Do you think I am boasting ? '' 
`` No , only perhaps it was n't love . '' 
`` Alyosha , '' laughed Ivan , `` do n't make reflections about love , it 's unseemly for you . 
How you rushed into the discussion this morning ! 
I 've forgotten to kiss you for it ... . 
But how she tormented me ! 
It certainly was sitting by a ` laceration . ' 
Ah , she knew how I loved her ! 
She loved me and not Dmitri , '' Ivan insisted gaily . 
`` Her feeling for Dmitri was simply a self-laceration . 
All I told her just now was perfectly true , but the worst of it is , it may take her fifteen or twenty years to find out that she does n't care for Dmitri , and loves me whom she torments , and perhaps she may never find it out at all , in spite of her lesson to-day . 
Well , it 's better so ; I can simply go away for good . 
By the way , how is she now ? 
What happened after I departed ? '' 
Alyosha told him she had been hysterical , and that she was now , he heard , unconscious and delirious . 
`` Is n't Madame Hohlakov laying it on ? '' 
`` I think not . '' 
`` I must find out . 
Nobody dies of hysterics , though . 
They do n't matter . 
God gave woman hysterics as a relief . 
I wo n't go to her at all . 
Why push myself forward again ? '' 
`` But you told her that she had never cared for you . '' 
`` I did that on purpose . 
Alyosha , shall I call for some champagne ? 
Let us drink to my freedom . 
Ah , if only you knew how glad I am ! '' 
`` No , brother , we had better not drink , '' said Alyosha suddenly . 
`` Besides I feel somehow depressed . '' 
`` Yes , you 've been depressed a long time , I 've noticed it . '' 
`` Have you settled to go to-morrow morning , then ? '' 
`` Morning ? 
I did n't say I should go in the morning ... . 
But perhaps it may be the morning . 
Would you believe it , I dined here to-day only to avoid dining with the old man , I loathe him so . 
I should have left long ago , so far as he is concerned . 
But why are you so worried about my going away ? 
We 've plenty of time before I go , an eternity ! '' 
`` If you are going away to-morrow , what do you mean by an eternity ? '' 
`` But what does it matter to us ? '' 
laughed Ivan . 
`` We 've time enough for our talk , for what brought us here . 
Why do you look so surprised ? 
Answer : why have we met here ? 
To talk of my love for Katerina Ivanovna , of the old man and Dmitri ? 
of foreign travel ? 
of the fatal position of Russia ? 
of the Emperor Napoleon ? 
Is that it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Then you know what for . 
It 's different for other people ; but we in our green youth have to settle the eternal questions first of all . 
That 's what we care about . 
Young Russia is talking about nothing but the eternal questions now . 
just when the old folks are all taken up with practical questions . 
Why have you been looking at me in expectation for the last three months ? 
To ask me , ` What do you believe , or do n't you believe at all ? ' 
That 's what your eyes have been meaning for these three months , have n't they ? '' 
`` Perhaps so , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` You are not laughing at me , now , Ivan ? 
`` Me laughing ! 
I do n't want to wound my little brother who has been watching me with such expectation for three months . 
Alyosha , look straight at me ! 
Of course , I am just such a little boy as you are , only not a novice . 
And what have Russian boys been doing up till now , some of them , I mean ? 
In this stinking tavern , for instance , here , they meet and sit down in a corner . 
They 've never met in their lives before and , when they go out of the tavern , they wo n't meet again for forty years . 
And what do they talk about in that momentary halt in the tavern ? 
Of the eternal questions , of the existence of God and immortality . 
And those who do not believe in God talk of socialism or anarchism , of the transformation of all humanity on a new pattern , so that it all comes to the same , they 're the same questions turned inside out . 
And masses , masses of the most original Russian boys do nothing but talk of the eternal questions ! 
Is n't it so ? '' 
`` Yes , for real Russians the questions of God 's existence and of immortality , or , as you say , the same questions turned inside out , come first and foremost , of course , and so they should , '' said Alyosha , still watching his brother with the same gentle and inquiring smile . 
`` Well , Alyosha , it 's sometimes very unwise to be a Russian at all , but anything stupider than the way Russian boys spend their time one can hardly imagine . 
But there 's one Russian boy called Alyosha I am awfully fond of . '' 
`` How nicely you put that in ! '' 
Alyosha laughed suddenly . 
`` Well , tell me where to begin , give your orders . 
The existence of God , eh ? '' 
`` Begin where you like . 
You declared yesterday at father 's that there was no God . '' 
Alyosha looked searchingly at his brother . 
`` I said that yesterday at dinner on purpose to tease you and I saw your eyes glow . 
But now I 've no objection to discussing with you , and I say so very seriously . 
I want to be friends with you , Alyosha , for I have no friends and want to try it . 
Well , only fancy , perhaps I too accept God , '' laughed Ivan ; `` that 's a surprise for you , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes of course , if you are not joking now . '' 
`` Joking ? 
I was told at the elder 's yesterday that I was joking . 
You know , dear boy , there was an old sinner in the eighteenth century who declared that , if there were no God , he would have to be invented . 
S'il n'existait pas Dieu , il faudrait l'inventer . 
And man has actually invented God . 
And what 's strange , what would be marvellous , is not that God should really exist ; the marvel is that such an idea , the idea of the necessity of God , could enter the head of such a savage , vicious beast as man . 
So holy it is , so touching , so wise and so great a credit it does to man . 
As for me , I 've long resolved not to think whether man created God or God man . 
And I wo n't go through all the axioms laid down by Russian boys on that subject , all derived from European hypotheses ; for what 's a hypothesis there is an axiom with the Russian boy , and not only with the boys but with their teachers too , for our Russian professors are often just the same boys themselves . 
And so I omit all the hypotheses . 
For what are we aiming at now ? 
I am trying to explain as quickly as possible my essential nature , that is what manner of man I am , what I believe in , and for what I hope , that 's it , is n't it ? 
And therefore I tell you that I accept God simply . 
But you must note this : if God exists and if He really did create the world , then , as we all know , He created it according to the geometry of Euclid and the human mind with the conception of only three dimensions in space . 
Yet there have been and still are geometricians and philosophers , and even some of the most distinguished , who doubt whether the whole universe , or to speak more widely , the whole of being , was only created in Euclid 's geometry ; they even dare to dream that two parallel lines , which according to Euclid can never meet on earth , may meet somewhere in infinity . 
I have come to the conclusion that , since I ca n't understand even that , I ca n't expect to understand about God . 
I acknowledge humbly that I have no faculty for settling such questions , I have a Euclidian earthly mind , and how could I solve problems that are not of this world ? 
And I advise you never to think about it either , my dear Alyosha , especially about God , whether He exists or not . 
All such questions are utterly inappropriate for a mind created with an idea of only three dimensions . 
And so I accept God and am glad to , and what 's more , I accept His wisdom , His purpose which are utterly beyond our ken ; I believe in the underlying order and the meaning of life ; I believe in the eternal harmony in which they say we shall one day be blended . 
I believe in the Word to Which the universe is striving , and Which Itself was ` with God , ' and Which Itself is God and so on , and so on , to infinity . 
There are all sorts of phrases for it . 
I seem to be on the right path , do n't I ' ? 
Yet would you believe it , in the final result I do n't accept this world of God 's , and , although I know it exists , I do n't accept it at all . 
It 's not that I do n't accept God , you must understand , it 's the world created by Him I do n't and can not accept . 
Let me make it plain . 
I believe like a child that suffering will be healed and made up for , that all the humiliating absurdity of human contradictions will vanish like a pitiful mirage , like the despicable fabrication of the impotent and infinitely small Euclidian mind of man , that in the world 's finale , at the moment of eternal harmony , something so precious will come to pass that it will suffice for all hearts , for the comforting of all resentments , for the atonement of all the crimes of humanity , of all the blood they 've shed ; that it will make it not only possible to forgive but to justify all that has happened with men - but thought all that may come to pass , I do n't accept it . 
I wo n't accept it . 
Even if parallel lines do meet and I see it myself , I shall see it and say that they 've met , but still I wo n't accept it . 
That 's what 's at the root of me , Alyosha ; that 's my creed . 
I am in earnest in what I say . 
I began our talk as stupidly as I could on purpose , but I 've led up to my confession , for that 's all you want . 
You did n't want to hear about God , but only to know what the brother you love lives by . 
And so I 've told you . '' 
Ivan concluded his long tirade with marked and unexpected feeling . 
`` And why did you begin ` as stupidly as you could ' ? '' 
asked Alyosha , looking dreamily at him . 
`` To begin with , for the sake of being Russian . 
Russian conversations on such subjects are always carried on inconceivably stupidly . 
And secondly , the stupider one is , the closer one is to reality . 
The stupider one is , the clearer one is . 
Stupidity is brief and artless , while intelligence wriggles and hides itself . 
Intelligence is a knave , but stupidity is honest and straight forward . 
I 've led the conversation to my despair , and the more stupidly I have presented it , the better for me . '' 
`` You will explain why you do n't accept the world ? '' 
said Alyosha . 
`` To be sure I will , it 's not a secret , that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
Dear little brother , I do n't want to corrupt you or to turn you from your stronghold , perhaps I want to be healed by you . '' 
Ivan smiled suddenly quite like a little gentle child . 
Alyosha had never seen such a smile on his face before . 
Rebellion `` I MUST make one confession '' Ivan began . 
`` I could never understand how one can love one 's neighbours . 
It 's just one 's neighbours , to my mind , that one ca n't love , though one might love those at a distance . 
I once read somewhere of John the Merciful , a saint , that when a hungry , frozen beggar came to him , he took him into his bed , held him in his arms , and began breathing into his mouth , which was putrid and loathsome from some awful disease . 
I am convinced that he did that from ` self-laceration , ' from the self-laceration of falsity , for the sake of the charity imposed by duty , as a penance laid on him . 
For anyone to love a man , he must be hidden , for as soon as he shows his face , love is gone . '' 
`` Father Zossima has talked of that more than once , '' observed Alyosha ; `` he , too , said that the face of a man often hinders many people not practised in love , from loving him . 
But yet there 's a great deal of love in mankind , and almost Christ-like love . 
I know that myself , Ivan . '' 
`` Well , I know nothing of it so far , and ca n't understand it , and the innumerable mass of mankind are with me there . 
The question is , whether that 's due to men 's bad qualities or whether it 's inherent in their nature . 
To my thinking , Christ-like love for men is a miracle impossible on earth . 
He was God . 
But we are not gods . 
Suppose I , for instance , suffer intensely . 
Another can never know how much I suffer , because he is another and not I. And what 's more , a man is rarely ready to admit another 's suffering -LRB- as though it were a distinction -RRB- . 
Why wo n't he admit it , do you think ? 
Because I smell unpleasant , because I have a stupid face , because I once trod on his foot . 
Besides , there is suffering and suffering ; degrading , humiliating suffering such as humbles me - hunger , for instance - my benefactor will perhaps allow me ; but when you come to higher suffering - for an idea , for instance - he will very rarely admit that , perhaps because my face strikes him as not at all what he fancies a man should have who suffers for an idea . 
And so he deprives me instantly of his favour , and not at all from badness of heart . 
Beggars , especially genteel beggars , ought never to show themselves , but to ask for charity through the newspapers . 
One can love one 's neighbours in the abstract , or even at a distance , but at close quarters it 's almost impossible . 
If it were as on the stage , in the ballet , where if beggars come in , they wear silken rags and tattered lace and beg for alms dancing gracefully , then one might like looking at them . 
But even then we should not love them . 
But enough of that . 
I simply wanted to show you my point of view . 
I meant to speak of the suffering of mankind generally , but we had better confine ourselves to the sufferings of the children . 
That reduces the scope of my argument to a tenth of what it would be . 
Still we 'd better keep to the children , though it does weaken my case . 
But , in the first place , children can be loved even at close quarters , even when they are dirty , even when they are ugly -LRB- I fancy , though , children never are ugly -RRB- . 
The second reason why I wo n't speak of grown-up people is that , besides being disgusting and unworthy of love , they have a compensation - they 've eaten the apple and know good and evil , and they have become ` like gods . ' 
They go on eating it still . 
But the children have n't eaten anything , and are so far innocent . 
Are you fond of children , Alyosha ? 
I know you are , and you will understand why I prefer to speak of them . 
If they , too , suffer horribly on earth , they must suffer for their fathers ' sins , they must be punished for their fathers , who have eaten the apple ; but that reasoning is of the other world and is incomprehensible for the heart of man here on earth . 
The innocent must not suffer for another 's sins , and especially such innocents ! 
You may be surprised at me , Alyosha , but I am awfully fond of children , too . 
And observe , cruel people , the violent , the rapacious , the Karamazovs are sometimes very fond of children . 
Children while they are quite little - up to seven , for instance - are so remote from grown-up people they are different creatures , as it were , of a different species . 
I knew a criminal in prison who had , in the course of his career as a burglar , murdered whole families , including several children . 
But when he was in prison , he had a strange affection for them . 
He spent all his time at his window , watching the children playing in the prison yard . 
He trained one little boy to come up to his window and made great friends with him ... . 
You do n't know why I am telling you all this , Alyosha ? 
My head aches and I am sad . '' 
`` You speak with a strange air , '' observed Alyosha uneasily , `` as though you were not quite yourself . '' 
`` By the way , a Bulgarian I met lately in Moscow , '' Ivan went on , seeming not to hear his brother 's words , `` told me about the crimes committed by Turks and Circassians in all parts of Bulgaria through fear of a general rising of the Slavs . 
They burn villages , murder , outrage women and children , they nail their prisoners by the ears to the fences , leave them so till morning , and in the morning they hang them - all sorts of things you ca n't imagine . 
People talk sometimes of bestial cruelty , but that 's a great injustice and insult to the beasts ; a beast can never be so cruel as a man , so artistically cruel . 
The tiger only tears and gnaws , that 's all he can do . 
He would never think of nailing people by the ears , even if he were able to do it . 
These Turks took a pleasure in torturing children , - too ; cutting the unborn child from the mothers womb , and tossing babies up in the air and catching them on the points of their bayonets before their mothers ' eyes . 
Doing it before the mothers ' eyes was what gave zest to the amusement . 
Here is another scene that I thought very interesting . 
Imagine a trembling mother with her baby in her arms , a circle of invading Turks around her . 
They 've planned a diversion : they pet the baby , laugh to make it laugh . 
They succeed , the baby laughs . 
At that moment a Turk points a pistol four inches from the baby 's face . 
The baby laughs with glee , holds out its little hands to the pistol , and he pulls the trigger in the baby 's face and blows out its brains . 
Artistic , was n't it ? 
By the way , Turks are particularly fond of sweet things , they say . '' 
`` Brother , what are you driving at ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` I think if the devil does n't exist , but man has created him , he has created him in his own image and likeness . '' 
`` Just as he did God , then ? '' 
observed Alyosha . '' 
` It 's wonderful how you can turn words , ' as Polonius says in Hamlet , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` You turn my words against me . 
Well , I am glad . 
Yours must be a fine God , if man created Him in his image and likeness . 
You asked just now what I was driving at . 
You see , I am fond of collecting certain facts , and , would you believe , I even copy anecdotes of a certain sort from newspapers and books , and I 've already got a fine collection . 
The Turks , of course , have gone into it , but they are foreigners . 
I have specimens from home that are even better than the Turks . 
You know we prefer beating - rods and scourges - that 's our national institution . 
Nailing ears is unthinkable for us , for we are , after all , Europeans . 
But the rod and the scourge we have always with us and they can not be taken from us . 
Abroad now they scarcely do any beating . 
Manners are more humane , or laws have been passed , so that they do n't dare to flog men now . 
But they make up for it in another way just as national as ours . 
And so national that it would be practically impossible among us , though I believe we are being inoculated with it , since the religious movement began in our aristocracy . 
I have a charming pamphlet , translated from the French , describing how , quite recently , five years ago , a murderer , Richard , was executed - a young man , I believe , of three and twenty , who repented and was converted to the Christian faith at the very scaffold . 
This Richard was an illegitimate child who was given as a child of six by his parents to some shepherds on the Swiss mountains . 
They brought him up to work for them . 
He grew up like a little wild beast among them . 
The shepherds taught him nothing , and scarcely fed or clothed him , but sent him out at seven to herd the flock in cold and wet , and no one hesitated or scrupled to treat him so . 
Quite the contrary , they thought they had every right , for Richard had been given to them as a chattel , and they did not even see the necessity of feeding him . 
Richard himself describes how in those years , like the Prodigal Son in the Gospel , he longed to eat of the mash given to the pigs , which were fattened for sale . 
But they would n't even give that , and beat him when he stole from the pigs . 
And that was how he spent all his childhood and his youth , till he grew up and was strong enough to go away and be a thief . 
The savage began to earn his living as a day labourer in Geneva . 
He drank what he earned , he lived like a brute , and finished by killing and robbing an old man . 
He was caught , tried , and condemned to death . 
They are not sentimentalists there . 
And in prison he was immediately surrounded by pastors , members of Christian brotherhoods , philanthropic ladies , and the like . 
They taught him to read and write in prison , and expounded the Gospel to him . 
They exhorted him , worked upon him , drummed at him incessantly , till at last he solemnly confessed his crime . 
He was converted . 
He wrote to the court himself that he was a monster , but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown grace . 
All Geneva was in excitement about him - all philanthropic and religious Geneva . 
All the aristocratic and well-bred society of the town rushed to the prison , kissed Richard and embraced him ; ` You are our brother , you have found grace . ' 
And Richard does nothing but weep with emotion , ` Yes , I 've found grace ! 
All my youth and childhood I was glad of pigs ' food , but now even I have found grace . 
I am dying in the Lord . ' 
` Yes , Richard , die in the Lord ; you have shed blood and must die . 
Though it 's not your fault that you knew not the Lord , when you coveted the pigs ' food and were beaten for stealing it -LRB- which was very wrong of you , for stealing is forbidden -RRB- ; but you 've shed blood and you must die . 
` And on the last day , Richard , perfectly limp , did nothing but cry and repeat every minute : ` This is my happiest day . 
I am going to the Lord . ' 
