Answering certain questions about Grushenka and carried away by the loftiness of his own sentiments and his success , of which he was , of course , conscious , he went so far as to speak somewhat contemptuously of Agrafena Alexandrovna as `` the kept mistress of Samsonov . '' 
He would have given a good deal to take back his words afterwards , for Fetyukovitch caught him out over it at once . 
And it was all because Rakitin had not reckoned on the lawyer having been able to become so intimately acquainted with every detail in so short a time . 
`` Allow me to ask , '' began the counsel for the defence , with the most affable and even respectful smile , `` you are , of course , the same Mr. Rakitin whose pamphlet , The Life of the Deceased Elder , Father Zossima , published by the diocesan authorities , full of profound and religious reflections and preceded by an excellent and devout dedication to the bishop , I have just read with such pleasure ? '' 
`` I did not write it for publication ... it was published afterwards , '' muttered Rakitin , for some reason fearfully disconcerted and almost ashamed . 
`` Oh , that 's excellent ! 
A thinker like you can , and indeed ought to , take the widest view of every social question . 
Your most instructive pamphlet has been widely circulated through the patronage of the bishop , and has been of appreciable service ... . 
But this is the chief thing I should like to learn from you . 
You stated just now that you were very intimately acquainted with Madame Svyetlov . '' 
-LRB- It must be noted that Grushenka 's surname was Svyetlov . 
I heard it for the first time that day , during the case . -RRB- 
`` I can not answer for all my acquaintances ... . 
I am a young man ... and who can be responsible for everyone he meets ? '' 
cried Rakitin , flushing all over . 
`` I understand , I quite understand , '' cried Fetyukovitch ; as though he , too , were embarrassed and in haste to excuse himself . 
`` You , like any other , might well be interested in an acquaintance with a young and beautiful woman who would readily entertain the elite of the youth of the neighbourhood , but ... I only wanted to know ... It has come to my knowledge , that Madame Svyetlov was particularly anxious a couple of months ago to make the acquaintance of the younger Karamazov , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and promised you twenty-five roubles , if you would bring him to her in his monastic dress . 
And that actually took place on the evening of the day on which the terrible crime , which is the subject of the present investigation , was committed . 
You brought Alexey Karamazov to Madame Svyetlov , and did you receive the twenty-five roubles from Madame Svyetlov as a reward , that 's what I wanted to hear from you ? '' 
`` It was a joke ... . 
I do n't , see of what interest that can be to you ... . 
I took it for a joke ... meaning to give it back later ... '' `` Then you did take - but you have not given it back yet ... or have you ? '' 
`` That 's of no consequence , '' muttered Rakitin , `` I refuse to answer such questions ... . 
Of course , I shall give it back . '' 
The President intervened , but Fetyukovitch declared he had no more questions to ask of the witness . 
Mr. Rakitin left the witness-box not absolutely without a stain upon his character . 
The effect left by the lofty idealism of his speech was somewhat marred , and Fetyukovitch 's expression , as he watched him walk away , seemed to suggest to the public `` this is a specimen of the lofty-minded persons who accuse him . '' 
I remember that this incident , too , did not pass off without an outbreak from Mitya . 
Enraged by the tone in which Rakitin had referred to Grushenka , he suddenly shouted `` Bernard ! '' 
When , after Rakitin 's cross-examination , the President asked the prisoner if he had anything to say , Mitya cried loudly : `` Since I 've been arrested , he has borrowed money from me ! 
He is a contemptible Bernard and opportunist , and he does n't believe in God ; he took the bishop in ! '' 
Mitya of course , was pulled up again for the intemperance of his language , but Rakitin was done for . 
Captain Snegiryov 's evidence was a failure , too , but from quite a different reason . 
He appeared in ragged and dirty clothes , muddy boots , and in spite of the vigilance and expert observation of the police officers , he turned out to be hopelessly drunk . 
On being asked about Mitya 's attack upon him , he refused to answer . 
`` God bless him . 
Ilusha told me not to . 
God will make it up to me yonder . '' 
`` Who told you not to tell ? 
Of whom are you talking ? '' 
`` Ilusha , my little son . 
` Father , father , how he insulted you ! ' 
He said that at the stone . 
Now he is dying ... '' The captain suddenly began sobbing , and plumped down on His knees before the President . 
He was hurriedly led away amidst the laughter of the public . 
The effect prepared by the prosecutor did not come off at all . 
Fetyukovitch went on making the most of every opportunity , and amazed people more and more by his minute knowledge of the case . 
Thus , for example , Trifon Borissovitch made a great impression , of course , very prejudicial to Mitya . 
He calculated almost on his fingers that on his first visit to Mokroe , Mitya must have spent three thousand roubles , `` or very little less . 
Just think what he squandered on those gypsy girls alone ! 
And as for our lousy peasants , it was n't a case of flinging half a rouble in the street , he made them presents of twenty-five roubles each , at least , he did n't give them less . 
And what a lot of money was simply stolen from him ! 
And if anyone did steal , he did not leave a receipt . 
How could one catch the thief when he was flinging his money away all the time ? 
Our peasants are robbers , you know ; they have no care for their souls . 
And the way he went on with the girls , our village girls ! 
They 're completely set up since then , I tell you , they used to be poor . '' 
He recalled , in fact , every item of expense and added it all up . 
So the theory that only fifteen hundred had been spent and the rest had been put aside in a little bag seemed inconceivable . 
`` I saw three thousand as clear as a penny in his hands , I saw it with my own eyes ; I should think I ought to know how to reckon money , '' cried Trifon Borissovitch , doing his best to satisfy `` his betters . '' 
When Fetyukovitch had to cross-examine him , he scarcely tried to refute his evidence , but began asking him about an incident at the first carousal at Mokroe , a month before the arrest , when Timofey and another peasant called Akim had picked up on the floor in the passage a hundred roubles dropped by Mitya when he was drunk , and had given them to Trifon Borissovitch and received a rouble each from him for doing so . 
`` Well , '' asked the lawyer , '' did you give that hundred roubles back to Mr. Karamazov ? '' 
Trifon Borissovitch shuffled in vain ... . 
He was obliged , after the peasants had been examined , to admit the finding of the hundred roubles , only adding that he had religiously returned it all to Dmitri Fyodorovitch `` in perfect honesty , and it 's only because his honour was in liquor at the time , he would n't remember it . '' 
But , as he had denied the incident of the hundred roubles till the peasants had been called to prove it , his evidence as to returning the money to Mitya was naturally regarded with great suspicion . 
So one of the most dangerous witnesses brought forward by the prosecution was again discredited . 
The same thing happened with the Poles . 
They took up an attitude of pride and independence ; they vociferated loudly that they had both been in the service of the Crown , and that `` Pan Mitya '' had offered them three thousand `` to buy their honour , '' and that they had seen a large sum of money in his hands . 
Pan Mussyalovitch introduced a terrible number of Polish words into his sentences , and seeing that this only increased his consequence in the eyes of the President and the prosecutor , grew more and more pompous , and ended by talking in Polish altogether . 
But Fetyukovitch caught them , too , in his snares . 
Trifon Borissovitch , recalled , was forced , in spite of his evasions , to admit that Pan Vrublevsky had substituted another pack of cards for the one he had provided , and that Pan Mussyalovitch had cheated during the game . 
Kalgonov confirmed this , and both the Poles left the witness-box with damaged reputations , amidst laughter from the public . 
Then exactly the same thing happened with almost all the most dangerous witnesses . 
Fetyukovitch succeeded in casting a slur on all of them , and dismissing them with a certain derision . 
The lawyers and experts were lost in admiration , and were only at a loss to understand what good purpose could be served by it , for all , I repeat , felt that the case for the prosecution could not be refuted , but was growing more and more tragically overwhelming . 
But from the confidence of the `` great magician '' they saw that he was serene , and they waited , feeling that `` such a man '' had not come from Petersburg for nothing , and that he was not a man to return unsuccessful . 
The Medical Experts and a Pound of Nuts THE evidence of the medical experts , too , was of little use to the prisoner . 
And it appeared later that Fetyukovitch had not reckoned much upon it . 
The medical line of defence had only been taken up through the insistence of Katerina Ivanovna , who had sent for a celebrated doctor from Moscow on purpose . 
The case for the defence could , of course , lose nothing by it and might , with luck , gain something from it . 
There was , however , an element of comedy about it , through the difference of opinion of the doctors . 
The medical experts were the famous doctor from Moscow , our doctor , Herzenstube , and the young doctor , Varvinsky . 
The two latter appeared also as witnesses for the prosecution . 
The first to be called in the capacity of expert was Doctor Herzenstube . 
He was a grey and bald old man of seventy , of middle height and sturdy build . 
He was much esteemed and respected by everyone in the town . 
He was a conscientious doctor and an excellent and pious man , a Hernguter or Moravian brother , I am not quite sure which . 
He had been living amongst us for many years and behaved with wonderful dignity . 
He was a kind-hearted and humane man . 
He treated the sick poor and peasants for nothing , visited them in their slums and huts , and left money for medicine , but he was as obstinate as a mule . 
If once he had taken an idea into his head , there was no shaking it . 
Almost everyone in the town was aware , by the way , that the famous doctor had , within the first two or three days of his presence among us , uttered some extremely offensive allusions to Doctor Herzenstube 's qualifications . 
Though the Moscow doctor asked twenty-five roubles for a visit , several people in the town were glad to take advantage of his arrival , and rushed to consult him regardless of expense . 
All these had , of course , been previously patients of Doctor Herzenstube , and the celebrated doctor had criticised his treatment with extreme harshness . 
Finally , he had asked the patients as soon as he saw them , `` Well , who has been cramming you with nostrums ? 
Herzenstube ? 
He he ! '' 
Doctor Herzenstube , of course , heard all this , and now all the three doctors made their appearance , one after another , to be examined . 
Doctor Herzenstube roundly declared that the abnormality of the prisoner 's mental faculties was self-evident . 
Then giving his grounds for this opinion , which I omit here , he added that the abnormality was not only evident in many of the prisoner 's actions in the past , but was apparent even now at this very moment . 
When he was asked to explain how it was apparent now at this moment , the old doctor , with simple-hearted directness , pointed out that the prisoner had `` an extraordinary air , remarkable in the circumstances '' ; that he had `` marched in like a soldier , looking straight before him , though it would have been more natural for him to look to the left where , among the public , the ladies were sitting , seeing that he was a great admirer of the fair sex and must be thinking much of what the ladies are saying of him now , '' the old man concluded in his peculiar language . 
I must add that he spoke Russian readily , but every phrase was formed in German style , which did not , however , trouble him , for it had always been a weakness of his to believe that he spoke Russian perfectly , better indeed than Russians . 
And he was very fond of using Russian proverbs , always declaring that the Russian proverbs were the best and most expressive sayings in the whole world . 
I may remark , too , that in conversation , through absent-mindedness he often forgot the most ordinary words , which sometimes went out of his head , though he knew them perfectly . 
The same thing happened , though , when he spoke German , and at such times he always waved his hand before his face as though trying to catch the lost word , and no one could induce him to go on speaking till he had found the missing word . 
His remark that the prisoner ought to have looked at the ladies on entering roused a whisper of amusement in the audience . 
All our ladies were very fond of our old doctor ; they knew , too , that having been all his life a bachelor and a religious man of exemplary conduct , he looked upon women as lofty creatures . 
And so his unexpected observation struck everyone as very queer . 
The Moscow doctor , being questioned in his turn , definitely and emphatically repeated that he considered the prisoner 's mental condition abnormal in the highest degree . 
He talked at length and with erudition of `` aberration '' and `` mania , '' and argued that , from all the facts collected , the prisoner had undoubtedly been in a condition of aberration for several days before his arrest , and , if the crime had been committed by him , it must , even if he were conscious of it , have been almost involuntary , as he had not the power to control the morbid impulse that possessed him . 
But apart from temporary aberration , the doctor diagnosed mania , which promised , in his words , to lead to complete insanity in the future . 
-LRB- It must be noted that I report this in my own words , the doctor made use of very learned and professional language . -RRB- 
`` All his actions are in contravention of common sense and logic , '' he continued . 
`` Not to refer to what I have not seen , that is , the crime itself and the whole catastrophe , the day before yesterday , while he was talking to me , he had an unaccountably fixed look in his eye . 
He laughed unexpectedly when there was nothing to laugh at . 
He showed continual and inexplicable irritability , using strange words , ` Bernard ! ' 
` Ethics ! ' 
and others equally inappropriate . '' 
But the doctor detected mania , above all , in the fact that the prisoner could not even speak of the three thousand roubles , of which he considered himself to have been cheated , without extraordinary irritation , though he could speak comparatively lightly of other misfortunes and grievances . 
According to all accounts , he had even in the past , whenever the subject of the three thousand roubles was touched on , flown into a perfect frenzy , and yet he was reported to be a disinterested and not grasping man . 
`` As to the opinion of my learned colleague , '' the Moscow doctor added ironically in conclusion `` that the prisoner would , entering the court , have naturally looked at the ladies and not straight before him , I will only say that , apart from the playfulness of this theory , it is radically unsound . 
For though I fully agree that the prisoner , on entering the court where his fate will be decided , would not naturally look straight before him in that fixed way , and that that may really be a sign of his abnormal mental condition , at the same time I maintain that he would naturally not look to the left at the ladies , but , on the contrary , to the right to find his legal adviser , on whose help all his hopes rest and on whose defence all his future depends . '' 
The doctor expressed his opinion positively and emphatically . 
But the unexpected pronouncement of Doctor Varvinsky gave the last touch of comedy to the difference of opinion between the experts . 
In his opinion the prisoner was now , and had been all along , in a perfectly normal condition , and , although he certainly must have been in a nervous and exceedingly excited state before his arrest , this might have been due to several perfectly obvious causes , jealousy , anger , continual drunkenness , and so on . 
But this nervous condition would not involve the mental abberation of which mention had just been made . 
As to the question whether the prisoner should have looked to the left or to the right on entering the court , `` in his modest opinion , '' the prisoner would naturally look straight before him on entering the court , as he had in fact done , as that was where the judges , on whom his fate depended , were sitting . 
So that it was just by looking straight before him that he showed his perfectly normal state of mind at the present . 
The young doctor concluded his `` modest '' testimony with some heat . 
`` Bravo , doctor ! '' 
cried Mitya , from his seat , `` just so ! '' 
Mitya , of course , was checked , but the young doctor 's opinion had a decisive influence on the judges and on the public , and , as appeared afterwards , everyone agreed with him . 
But Doctor Herzenstube , when called as a witness , was quite unexpectedly of use to Mitya . 
As an old resident in the town , who had known the Karamazov family for years , he furnished some facts of great value for the prosecution , and suddenly , as though recalling something , he added : `` But the poor young man might have had a very different life , for he had a good heart both in childhood and after childhood , that I know . 
But the Russian proverb says , ` If a man has one head , it 's good , but if another clever man comes to visit him , it would be better still , for then there will be two heads and not only one . '' ' 
`` One head is good , but two are better , '' the prosecutor put in impatiently . 
He knew the old man 's habit of talking slowly and deliberately , regardless of the impression he was making and of the delay he was causing , and highly prizing his flat , dull and always gleefully complacent German wit . 
The old man was fond of making jokes . 
`` Oh , yes , that 's what I say , '' he went on stubbornly . 
`` One head is good , but two are much better , but he did not meet another head with wits , and his wits went . 
Where did they go ? 
I 've forgotten the word . '' 
He went on , passing his hand before his eyes , `` Oh , yes , spazieren . '' 
* * Promenading . 
`` Wandering ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , wandering , that 's what I say . 
Well , his wits went wandering and fell in such a deep hole that he lost himself . 
And yet he was a grateful and sensitive boy . 
Oh , I remember him very well , a little chap so high , left neglected by his father in the back yard , when he ran about without boots on his feet , and his little breeches hanging by one button . '' 
A note of feeling and tenderness suddenly came into the honest old man 's voice . 
Fetyukovitch positively started , as though scenting something , and caught at it instantly . 
`` Oh , yes , I was a young man then ... . 
I was ... well , I was forty-five then , and had only just come here . 
And I was so sorry for the boy then ; I asked myself why should n't I buy him a pound of ... a pound of what ? 
I 've forgotten what it 's called . 
A pound of what children are very fond of , what is it , what is it ? '' 
The doctor began waving his hands again . 
`` It grows on a tree and is gathered and given to everyone ... '' `` Apples ? '' 
`` Oh , no , no . 
You have a dozen of apples , not a pound ... . 
No , there are a lot of them , and call little . 
You put them in the mouth and crack . '' 
`` Quite so , nuts , I say so . '' 
The doctor repeated in the calmest way as though he had been at no loss for a word . 
`` And I bought him a pound of nuts , for no one had ever bought the boy a pound of nuts before . 
And I lifted my finger and said to him , ` Boy , Gott der Vater . ' 
He laughed and said , ` Gott der Vater ' ... ` Gott der Sohn . ' 
He laughed again and lisped ` Gott der Sohn . ' 
` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
Then he laughed and said as best he could , ` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
I went away , and two days after I happened to be passing , and he shouted to me of himself , ` Uncle , Gott der Vater , Gott der Sohn , ' and he had only forgotten ` Gott der heilige Geist . ' 
But I reminded him of it and I felt very sorry for him again . 
But he was taken away , and I did not see him again . 
Twenty-three years passed . 
I am sitting one morning in my study , a white-haired old man , when there walks into the room a blooming young man , whom I should never have recognised , but he held up his finger and said , laughing , ` Gott der Vater , Gott der Sohn , and Gott der heilige Geist . 
I have just arrived and have come to thank you for that pound of nuts , for no one else ever bought me a pound of nuts ; you are the only one that ever did . ' 
then I remembered my happy youth and the poor child in the yard , without boots on his feet , and my heart was touched and I said , ` You are a grateful young man , for you have remembered all your life the pound of nuts I bought you in your childhood . ' 
And I embraced him and blessed him . 
And I shed tears . 
He laughed , but he shed tears , too ... for the Russian often laughs when he ought to be weeping . 
But he did weep ; I saw it . 
And now , alas ! 
... '' `` And I am weeping now , German , I am weeping now , too , you saintly man , '' Mitya cried suddenly . 
In any case the anecdote made a certain favourable impression on the public . 
But the chief sensation in Mitya 's favour was created by the evidence of Katerina Ivanovna , which I will describe directly . 
Indeed , when the witnesses a decharge , that is , called the defence , began giving evidence , fortune seemed all at once markedly more favourable to Mitya , and what was particularly striking , this was a surprise even to the counsel for the defence . 
But before Katerina Ivanovna was called , Alyosha was examined , and he recalled a fact which seemed to furnish positive evidence against one important point made by the prosecution . 
Fortune Smiles on Mitya IT came quite as a surprise even to Alyosha himself . 
He was not required to take the oath , and I remember that both sides addressed him very gently and sympathetically . 
It was evident that his reputation for goodness had preceded him . 
Alyosha gave his evidence modestly and with restraint , but his warm sympathy for his unhappy brother was unmistakable . 
In answer to one question , he sketched his brother 's character as that of a man , violent-tempered perhaps and carried away by his passions , but at the same time honourable , proud and generous , capable of self-sacrifice , if necessary . 
He admitted , however , that , through his passion for Grushenka and his rivalry with his father , his brother had been of late in an intolerable position . 
But he repelled with indignation the suggestion that his brother might have committed a murder for the sake of gain , though he recognised that the three thousand roubles had become almost an obsession with Mitya ; that upon them as part of the inheritance he had been cheated of by his father , and that , indifferent as he was to money as a rule , he could not even speak of that three thousand without fury . 
As for the rivalry of the two `` ladies , '' as the prosecutor expressed it - that is , of Grushenka and Katya - he answered evasively and was even unwilling to answer one or two questions altogether . 
`` Did your brother tell you , anyway , that he intended to kill your father ? '' 
asked the prosecutor . 
`` You can refuse to answer if you think necessary , '' he added . 
`` He did not tell me so directly , '' answered Alyosha . 
`` How so ? 
Did he indirectly ? '' 
`` He spoke to me once of his hatred for our father and his fear that at an extreme moment ... at a moment of fury , he might perhaps murder him . '' 
`` And you believed him ? '' 
`` I am afraid to say that I did . 
But I never doubted that some higher feeling would always save him at that fatal moment , as it has indeed saved him , for it was not he killed my father , '' Alyosha said firmly , in a loud voice that was heard throughout the court . 
The prosecutor started like a war-horse at the sound of a trumpet . 
`` Let me assure you that I fully believe in the complete sincerity of your conviction and do not explain it by or identify it with your affection for your unhappy brother . 
Your peculiar view of the whole tragic episode is known to us already from the preliminary investigation . 
I wo n't attempt to conceal from you that it is highly individual and contradicts all the other evidence collected by the prosecution . 
And so I think it essential to press you to tell me what facts have led you to this conviction of your brother 's innocence and of the guilt of another person against whom you gave evidence at the preliminary inquiry ? '' 
`` I only answered the questions asked me at the preliminary inquiry , '' replied Alyosha , slowly and calmly . 
`` I made no accusation against Smerdyakov of myself . '' 
`` Yet you gave evidence against him ? '' 
`` I was led to do so by my brother Dmitri 's words . 
I was told what took place at his arrest and how he had pointed to Smerdyakov before I was examined . 
I believe absolutely that my brother is innocent , and if he did n't commit the murder , then - '' `` Then Smerdyakov ? 
Why Smerdyakov ? 
And why are you so completely persuaded of your brother 's innocence ? '' 
`` I can not help believing my brother . 
I know he would n't lie to me . 
I saw from his face he was n't lying . '' 
`` Only from his face ? 
Is that all the proof you have ? '' 
`` I have no other proof . '' 
`` And of Smerdyakov 's guilt you have no proof whatever but your brother 's word and the expression of his face ? '' 
`` No , I have no other proof . '' 
The prosecutor dropped the examination at this point . 
The impression left by Alyosha 's evidence on the public was most disappointing . 
There had been talk about Smerdyakov before the trial ; someone had heard something , someone had pointed out something else , it was said that Alyosha had gathered together some extraordinary proofs of his brother 's innocence and Smerdyakov 's guilt , and after all there was nothing , no evidence except certain moral convictions so natural in a brother . 
But Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
On his asking Alyosha when it was that the prisoner had told him of his hatred for his father and that he might kill him , and whether he had heard it , for instance , at their last meeting before the catastrophe , Alyosha started as he answered , as though only just recollecting and understanding something . 
`` I remember one circumstance now which I 'd quite forgotten myself . 
It was n't clear to me at the time , but now - '' And , obviously only now for the first time struck by an idea , he recounted eagerly how , at his last interview with Mitya that evening under the tree , on the road to the monastery , Mitya had struck himself on the breast , `` the upper part of the breast , '' and had repeated several times that he had a means of regaining his honour , that that means was here , here on his breast . 
`` I thought , when he struck himself on the breast , he meant that it was in his heart , '' Alyosha continued , `` that he might find in his heart strength to save himself from some awful disgrace which was awaiting him and which he did not dare confess even to me . 
I must confess I did think at the time that he was speaking of our father , and that the disgrace he was shuddering at was the thought of going to our father and doing some violence to him . 
Yet it was just then that he pointed to something on his breast , so that I remember the idea struck me at the time that the heart is not on that part of the breast , but below , and that he struck himself much too high , just below the neck , and kept pointing to that place . 
My idea seemed silly to me at the time , but he was perhaps pointing then to that little bag in which he had fifteen hundred roubles ! '' 
`` Just so , Mitya cried from his place . 
`` That 's right , Alyosha , it was the little bag I struck with my fist . '' 
Fetyukovitch flew to him in hot haste entreating him to keep quiet , and at the same instant pounced on Alyosha . 
Alyosha , carried away himself by his recollection , warmly expressed his theory that this disgrace was probably just that fifteen hundred roubles on him , which he might have returned to Katerina Ivanovna as half of what he owed her , but which he had yet determined not to repay her and to use for another purpose - namely , to enable him to elope with Grushenka , if she consented . 
`` It is so , it must be so , '' exclaimed Alyosha , in sudden excitement . 
`` My brother cried several times that half of the disgrace , half of it -LRB- he said half several times -RRB- he could free himself from at once , but that he was so unhappy in his weakness of will that he would n't do it ... that he knew beforehand he was incapable of doing it ! '' 
`` And you clearly , confidently remember that he struck himself just on this part of the breast ? '' 
Fetyukovitch asked eagerly . 
`` Clearly and confidently , for I thought at the time , ` Why does he strike himself up there when the heart is lower down ? ' 
and the thought seemed stupid to me at the time ... I remember its seeming stupid ... it flashed through my mind . 
That 's what brought it back to me just now . 
How could I have forgotten it till now ? 
It was that little bag he meant when he said he had the means but would n't give back that fifteen hundred . 
And when he was arrested at Mokroe he cried out - I know , I was told it - that he considered it the most disgraceful act of his life that when he had the means of repaying Katerina Ivanovna half -LRB- half , note ! -RRB- 
what he owed her , he yet could not bring himself to repay the money and preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather than part with it . 
And what torture , what torture that debt has been to him ! '' 
Alyosha exclaimed in conclusion . 
The prosecutor , of course , intervened . 
He asked Alyosha to describe once more how it had all happened , and several times insisted on the question , `` Had the prisoner seemed to point to anything ? 
Perhaps he had simply struck himself with his fist on the breast ? '' 
`` But it was not with his fist , '' cried Alyosha ; `` he pointed with his fingers and pointed here , very high up ... . 
How could I have so completely forgotten it till this moment ? '' 
The President asked Mitya what he had to say to the last witness 's evidence . 
Mitya confirmed it , saying that he had been pointing to the fifteen hundred roubles which were on his breast , just below the neck , and that that was , of course , the disgrace , `` A disgrace I can not deny , the most shameful act of my whole life , '' cried Mitya . 
`` I might have repaid it and did n't repay it . 
I preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather than give it back . 
And the most shameful part of it was that I knew beforehand I should n't give it back ! 
You are right , Alyosha ! 
Thanks , Alyosha ! '' 
So Alyosha 's cross-examination ended . 
What was important and striking about it was that one fact at least had been found , and even though this were only one tiny bit of evidence , a mere hint at evidence , it did go some little way towards proving that the bag had existed and had contained fifteen hundred roubles and that the prisoner had not been lying at the preliminary inquiry when he alleged at Mokroe that those fifteen hundred roubles were `` his own . '' 
Alyosha was glad . 
With a flushed face he moved away to the seat assigned to him . 
He kept repeating to himself : `` How was it I forgot ? 
How could I have forgotten it ? 
And what made it come back to me now ? '' 
Katerina Ivanovna was called to the witness-box . 
As she entered something extraordinary happened in the court . 
The ladies clutched their lorgnettes and opera-glasses . 
There was a stir among the men : some stood up to get a better view . 
Everybody alleged afterwards that Mitya had turned `` white as a sheet '' on her entrance . 
All in black , she advanced modestly , almost timidly . 
It was impossible to tell from her face that she was agitated ; but there was a resolute gleam in her dark and gloomy eyes . 
I may remark that many people mentioned that she looked particularly handsome at that moment . 
She spoke softly but clearly , so that she was heard all over the court . 
She expressed herself with composure , or at least tried to appear composed . 
The President began his examination discreetly and very respectfully , as though afraid to touch on `` certain chords , '' and showing consideration for her great unhappiness . 
But in answer to one of the first questions Katerina Ivanovna replied firmly that she had been formerly betrothed to the prisoner , `` until he left me of his own accord ... '' she added quietly . 
When they asked her about the three thousand she had entrusted to Mitya to post to her relations , she said firmly , `` I did n't give him the money simply to send it off . 
I felt at the time that he was in great need of money ... . 
I gave him the three thousand on the understanding that he should post it within the month if he cared to . 
There was no need for him to worry himself about that debt afterwards . '' 
I will not repeat all the questions asked her and all her answers in detail . 
I will only give the substance of her evidence . 
`` I was firmly convinced that he would send off that sum as soon as he got money from his father , '' she went on . 
`` I have never doubted his disinterestedness and his honesty ... his scrupulous honesty ... in money matters . 
He felt quite certain that he would receive the money from his father , and spoke to me several times about it . 
I knew he had a feud with his father and have always believed that he had been unfairly treated by his father . 
I do n't remember any threat uttered by him against his father . 
He certainly never uttered any such threat before me . 
If he had come to me at that time , I should have at once relieved his anxiety about that unlucky three thousand roubles , but he had given up coming to see me ... and I myself was put in such a position ... that I could not invite him ... . 
And I had no right , indeed , to be exacting as to that money , she added suddenly , and there was a ring of resolution in her voice . 
`` I was once indebted to him for assistance in money for more than three thousand , and I took it , although I could not at that time foresee that I should ever be in a position to repay my debt . '' 
There was a note of defiance in her voice . 
It was then Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
`` Did that take place not here , but at the beginning of your acquaintance ? '' 
Fetyukovitch suggested cautiously , feeling his way , instantly scenting something favourable . 
I must mention in parenthesis that , though Fetyukovitch had been brought from Petersburg partly at the instance of Katerina Ivanovna herself , he knew nothing about the episode of the four thousand roubles given her by Mitya , and of her `` bowing to the ground to him . '' 
She concealed this from him and said nothing about it , and that was strange . 
It may be pretty certainly assumed that she herself did not know till the very last minute whether she would speak of that episode in the court , and waited for the inspiration of the moment . 
No , I can never forget those moments . 
She began telling her story . 
She told everything , the whole episode that Mitya had told Alyosha , and her bowing to the ground , and her reason . 
She told about her father and her going to Mitya , and did not in one word , in a single hint , suggest that Mitya had himself , through her sister , proposed they should `` send him Katerina Ivanovna '' to fetch the money . 
She generously concealed that and was not ashamed to make it appear as though she had of her own impulse run to the young officer , relying on something ... to beg him for the money . 
It was something tremendous ! 
I turned cold and trembled as I listened . 
The court was hushed , trying to catch each word . 
It was something unexampled . 
Even from such a self-willed and contemptuously proud girl as she was , such an extremely frank avowal , such sacrifice , such self-immolation , seemed incredible . 
And for what , for whom ? 
To save the man who had deceived and insulted her and to help , in however small a degree , in saving him , by creating a strong impression in his favour . 
And , indeed , the figure of the young officer who , with a respectful bow to the innocent girl , handed her his last four thousand roubles - all he had in the world - was thrown into a very sympathetic and attractive light , but ... I had a painful misgiving at heart ! 
I felt that calumny might come of it later -LRB- and it did , in fact , it did -RRB- . 
It was repeated all over the town afterwards with spiteful laughter that was perhaps not quite complete - that is , in the statement that the officer had let the young lady depart `` with nothing but a respectful bow . '' 
It was hinted that something was here omitted . 
`` And even if nothing had been omitted , if this were the whole story , '' the most highly respected of our ladies maintained , `` even then it 's very doubtful whether it was creditable for a young girl to behave in that way , even for the sake of saving her father . '' 
And can Katerina Ivanovna , with her intelligence , her morbid sensitiveness , have failed to understand that people would talk like that ? 
She must have understood it , yet she made up her mind to tell everything . 
Of course , all these nasty little suspicions as to the truth of her story only arose afterwards and at the first moment all were deeply impressed by it . 
As for the judges and the lawyers , they listened in reverent , almost shamefaced silence to Katerina Ivanovna . 
The prosecutor did not venture upon even one question on the subject . 
Fetyukovitch made a low bow to her . 
Oh , he was almost triumphant ! 
Much ground had been gained . 
For a man to give his last four thousand on a generous impulse and then for the same man to murder his father for the sake of robbing him of three thousand - the idea seemed too incongruous . 
Fetyukovitch felt that now the charge of theft , at least , was as good as disproved . 
`` The case '' was thrown into quite a different light . 
There was a wave of sympathy for Mitya . 
As for him ... . 
I was told that once or twice , while Katerina Ivanovna was giving her evidence , he jumped up from his seat , sank back again , and hid his face in his hands . 
But when she had finished , he suddenly cried in a sobbing voice : `` Katya , why have you ruined me ? '' 
and his sobs were audible all over the court . 
But he instantly restrained himself , and cried again : `` Now I am condemned ! '' 
Then he sat rigid in his place , with his teeth clenched and his arms across his chest . 
Katerina Ivanovna remained in the court and sat down in her place . 
She was pale and sat with her eyes cast down . 
Those who were sitting near her declared that for a long time she shivered all over as though in a fever . 
Grushenka was called . 
I am approaching the sudden catastrophe which was perhaps the final cause of Mitya 's ruin . 
For I am convinced , so is everyone - all the lawyers said the same afterwards - that if the episode had not occurred , the prisoner would at least have been recommended to mercy . 
But of that later . 
A few words first about Grushenka . 
She , too , was dressed entirely in black , with her magnificent black shawl on her shoulders . 
She walked to the witness-box with her smooth , noiseless tread , with the slightly swaying gait common in women of full figure . 
She looked steadily at the President , turning her eyes neither to the right nor to the left . 
To my thinking she looked very handsome at that moment , and not at all pale , as the ladies alleged afterwards . 
They declared , too , that she had a concentrated and spiteful expression . 
I believe that she was simply irritated and painfully conscious of the contemptuous and inquisitive eyes of our scandal-loving public . 
She was proud and could not stand contempt . 
She was one of those people who flare up , angry and eager to retaliate , at the mere suggestion of contempt . 
There was an element of timidity , too , of course , and inward shame at her own timidity , so it was not strange that her tone kept changing . 
At one moment it was angry , contemptuous and rough , and at another there was a sincere note of self-condemnation . 
Sometimes she spoke as though she were taking a desperate plunge ; as though she felt , `` I do n't care what happens , I 'll say it ... '' Apropos of her acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch , she remarked curtly , `` That 's all nonsense , and was it my fault that he would pester me ? '' 
But a minute later she added , `` It was all my fault . 
I was laughing at them both - at the old man and at him , too - and I brought both of them to this . 
It was all on account of me it happened . '' 
Samsonov 's name came up somehow . 
`` That 's nobody 's business , '' she snapped at once , with a sort of insolent defiance . 
`` He was my benefactor ; he took me when I had n't a shoe to my foot , when my family had turned me out . '' 
The President reminded her , though very politely , that she must answer the questions directly , without going off into irrelevant details . 
Grushenka crimsoned and her eyes flashed . 
The envelope with the notes in it she had not seen , but had only heard from `` that wicked wretch '' that Fyodor Pavlovitch had an envelope with notes for three thousand in it . 
`` But that was all foolishness . 
I was only laughing . 
I would n't have gone to him for anything . '' 
`` To whom are you referring as ` that wicked wretch ' ? '' 
inquired the prosecutor . 
`` The lackey , Smerdyakov , who murdered his master and hanged himself last night . '' 
She was , of course , at once asked what ground she had for such a definite accusation ; but it appeared that she , too , had no grounds for it . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch told me so himself ; you can believe him . 
The woman who came between us has ruined him ; she is the cause of it all , let me tell you , '' Grushenka added . 
She seemed to be quivering with hatred , and there was a vindictive note in her voice . 
She was again asked to whom she was referring . 
`` The young lady , Katerina Ivanovna there . 
She sent for me , offered me chocolate , tried to fascinate me . 
There 's not much true shame about her , I can tell you that ... '' At this point the President checked her sternly , begging her to moderate her language . 
But the jealous woman 's heart was burning , and she did not care what she did . 
`` When the prisoner was arrested at Mokroe , '' the prosecutor asked , `` everyone saw and heard you run out of the next room and cry out : ` It 's all my fault . 
We 'll go to Siberia together ! ' 
So you already believed him to have murdered his father ? '' 
`` I do n't remember what I felt at the time , '' answered Grushenka . 
`` Everyone was crying out that he had killed his father , and I felt that it was my fault , that it was on my account he had murdered him . 
But when he said he was n't guilty , I believed him at once , and I believe him now and always shall believe him . 
He is not the man to tell a lie . '' 
Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
I remember that among other things he asked about Rakitin and the twenty-five roubles `` you paid him for bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov to see you . '' 
`` There was nothing strange about his taking the money , '' sneered Grushenka , with angry contempt . 
`` He was always coming to me for money : he used to get thirty roubles a month at least out of me , chiefly for luxuries : he had enough to keep him without my help . '' 
`` What led you to be so liberal to Mr. Rakitin ? '' 
Fetyukovitch asked , in spite of an uneasy movement on the part of the President . 
`` Why , he is my cousin . 
His mother was my mother 's sister . 
But he 's always besought me not to tell anyone here of it , he is so dreadfully ashamed of me . '' 
This fact was a complete surprise to everyone ; no one in the town nor in the monastery , not even Mitya , knew of it . 
I was told that Rakitin turned purple with shame where he sat . 
Grushenka had somehow heard before she came into the court that he had given evidence against Mitya , and so she was angry . 
The whole effect on the public , of Rakitin 's speech , of his noble sentiments , of his attacks upon serfdom and the political disorder of Russia , was this time finally ruined . 
Fetyukovitch was satisfied : it was another godsend . 
Grushenka 's cross-examination did not last long and , of course , there could be nothing particularly new in her evidence . 
She left a very disagreeable impression on the public ; hundreds of contemptuous eyes were fixed upon her , as she finished giving her evidence and sat down again in the court , at a good distance from Katerina Ivanovna . 
Mitya was silent throughout her evidence . 
He sat as though turned to stone , with his eyes fixed on the ground . 
Ivan was called to give evidence . 
A Sudden Catastrophe I MAY note that he had been called before Alyosha . 
But the usher of the court announced to the President that , owing to an attack of illness or some sort of fit , the witness could not appear at the moment , but was ready to give his evidence as soon as he recovered . 
But no one seemed to have heard it and it only came out later . 
His entrance was for the first moment almost unnoticed . 
The principal witnesses , especially the two rival ladies , had already been questioned . 
Curiosity was satisfied for the time ; the public was feeling almost fatigued . 
Several more witnesses were still to be heard , who probably had little information to give after all that had been given . 
Time was passing . 
Ivan walked up with extraordinary slowness , looking at no one , and with his head bowed , as though plunged in gloomy thought . 
He was irreproachably dressed , but his face made a painful impression , on me at least : there was an earthy look in it , a look like a dying man 's . 
His eyes were lustreless ; he raised them and looked slowly round the court . 
Alyosha jumped up from his seat and moaned `` Ah ! '' 
I remember that , but it was hardly noticed . 
The President began by informing him that he was a witness not on oath , that he might answer or refuse to answer , but that , of course , he must bear witness according to his conscience , and so on , and so on . 
Ivan listened and looked at him blankly , but his face gradually relaxed into a smile , and as soon as the President , looking at him in astonishment , finished , he laughed outright . 
`` Well , and what else ? '' 
he asked in a loud voice . 
There was a hush in the court ; there was a feeling of something strange . 
The President showed signs of uneasiness . 
`` You ... are perhaps still unwell ? '' 
he began , looking everywhere for the usher . 
`` Do n't trouble yourself , your excellency , I am well enough and can tell you something interesting , '' Ivan answered with sudden calmness and respectfulness . 
`` You have some special communication to make ? '' 
the President went on , still mistrustfully . 
Ivan looked down , waited a few seconds and , raising his head , answered , almost stammering : `` No ... I have n't . 
I have nothing particular . '' 
They began asking him questions . 
He answered , as it were , reluctantly , with extreme brevity , with a sort of disgust which grew more and more marked , though he answered rationally . 
To many questions he answered that he did not know . 
He knew nothing of his father 's money relations with Dmitri . 
`` I was n't interested in the subject , '' he added . 
Threats to murder his father he had heard from the prisoner . 
Of the money in the envelope he had heard from Smerdyakov . 
`` The same thing over and over again , '' he interrupted suddenly , with a look of weariness . 
`` I have nothing particular to tell the court . '' 
`` I see you are unwell and understand your feelings , '' the President began . 
He turned to the prosecutor and the counsel for the defence to invite them to examine the witness , if necessary , when Ivan suddenly asked in an exhausted voice : `` Let me go , your excellency , I feel very ill . '' 
And with these words , without waiting for permission , he turned to walk out of the court . 
But after taking four steps he stood still , as though he had reached a decision , smiled slowly , and went back . 
`` I am like the peasant girl , your excellency ... you know . 
How does it go ? 
` I 'll stand up if I like , and I wo n't if I do n't . ' 
They were trying to put on her sarafan to take her to church to be married , and she said , ` I 'll stand up if I like , and I wo n't if I do n't . ' 
... It 's in some book about the peasantry . '' 
`` What do you mean by that ? '' 
the President asked severely . 
`` Why , this , '' Ivan suddenly pulled out a roll of notes . 
`` Here 's the money ... the notes that lay in that envelope '' -LRB- he nodded towards the table on which lay the material evidence -RRB- , `` for the sake of which our father was murdered . 
Where shall I put them ? 
Mr. Superintendent , take them . '' 
The usher of the court took the whole roll and handed it to the President . 
`` How could this money have come into your possession if it is the same money ? '' 
the President asked wonderingly . 
`` I got them from Smerdyakov , from the murderer , yesterday ... . 
I was with him just before he hanged himself . 
It was he , not my brother , killed our father . 
He murdered him and I incited him to do it ... Who does n't desire his father 's death ? '' 
`` Are you in your right mind ? '' 
broke involuntarily from the President . 
`` I should think I am in my right mind ... in the same nasty mind as all of you ... as all these ... ugly faces . '' 
He turned suddenly to the audience . 
`` My father has been murdered and they pretend they are horrified , '' he snarled , with furious contempt . 
`` They keep up the sham with one another . 
Liars ! 
They all desire the death of their fathers . 
One reptile devours another ... . 
If there had n't been a murder , they 'd have been angry and gone home ill-humoured . 
It 's a spectacle they want ! 
Panem et circenses . 
* Though I am one to talk ! 
Have you any water ? 
Give me a drink for Christ 's sake ! '' 
He suddenly clutched his head . 
* Bread and circuses . 
The usher at once approached him . 
Alyosha jumped up and cried , `` He is ill . 
Do n't believe him : he has brain fever . '' 
Katerina Ivanovna rose impulsively from her seat and , rigid with horror , gazed at Ivan . 
Mitya stood up and greedily looked at his brother and listened to him with a wild , strange smile . 
`` Do n't disturb yourselves . 
I am not mad , I am only a murderer , '' Ivan began again . 
`` You ca n't expect eloquence from a murderer , '' he added suddenly for some reason and laughed a queer laugh . 
The prosecutor bent over to the President in obvious dismay . 
The two other judges communicated in agitated whispers . 
Fetyukovitch pricked up his ears as he listened : the hall was hushed in expectation . 
The President seemed suddenly to recollect himself . 
`` Witness , your words are incomprehensible and impossible here . 
Calm yourself , if you can , and tell your story ... if you really have something to tell . 
How can you confirm your statement ... if indeed you are not delirious ? '' 
