And I am told that his son , a boy , quite a child , who is at the school here , saw it and ran beside them crying and begging for his father , appealing to everyone to defend him , while everyone laughed . 
You must forgive me , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I can not think without indignation of that disgraceful action of his ... one of those actions of which only Dmitri Fyodorovitch would be capable in his anger ... and in his passions ! 
I ca n't describe it even ... . 
I ca n't find my words . 
I 've made inquiries about his victim , and find he is quite a poor man . 
His name is Snegiryov . 
He did something wrong in the army and was discharged . 
I ca n't tell you what . 
And now he has sunk into terrible destitution , with his family - an unhappy family of sick children , and , I believe , an insane wife . 
He has been living here a long time ; he used to work as a copying clerk , but now he is getting nothing . 
I thought if you ... that is I thought ... I do n't know . 
I am so confused . 
You see , I wanted to ask you , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , to go to him , to find some excuse to go to them - I mean to that captain - oh , goodness , how badly I explain it ! 
- and delicately , carefully , as only you know how to '' -LRB- Alyosha blushed -RRB- , `` manage to give him this assistance , these two hundred roubles . 
He will be sure to take it ... . 
I mean , persuade him to take it ... . 
Or , rather , what do I mean ? 
You see it 's not by way of compensation to prevent him from taking proceedings -LRB- for I believe he meant to -RRB- , but simply a token of sympathy , of a desire to assist him from me , Dmitri Fyodorovitch 's betrothed , not from himself ... . 
But you know ... . 
I would go myself , but you 'll know how to do it ever so much better . 
He lives in Lake Street in the house of a woman called Kalmikov ... . 
For God 's sake , Alexey Fyodorovitch , do it for me , and now ... now I am rather ... tired ... Good-bye ! '' 
She turned and disappeared behind the portiere so quickly that Alyosha had not time to utter a word , though he wanted to speak . 
He longed to beg her pardon , to blame himself , to say something , for his heart was full and he could not bear to go out of the room without it . 
But Madame Hohlakov took him by the hand and drew him along with her . 
In the hall she stopped him again as before . 
`` She is proud , she is struggling with herself ; but kind , charming , generous , `` she exclaimed , in a half-whisper . 
`` Oh , how I love her , especially sometimes , and how glad I am again of everything ! 
Dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , you did n't know , but I must tell you , that we all , all - both her aunts , I and all of us , Lise , even - have been hoping and praying for nothing for the last month but that she may give up your favourite Dmitri , who takes no notice of her and does not care for her , and may marry Ivan Fyodorovitch - such an excellent and cultivated young man , who loves her more than anything in the world . 
We are in a regular plot to bring it about , and I am even staying on here perhaps on that account . '' 
`` But she has been crying - she has been wounded again , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` Never trust a woman 's tears , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I am never for the women in such cases . 
I am always on the side of the men . '' 
`` Mamma , you are spoiling him , '' Lise 's little voice cried from behind the door . 
`` No , it was all my fault . 
I am horribly to blame , '' Alyosha repeated unconsoled , hiding his face in his hands in an agony of remorse for his indiscretion . 
`` Quite the contrary ; you behaved like an angel , like an angel . 
I am ready to say so a thousand times over . '' 
`` Mamma , how has he behaved like an angel ? '' 
Lise 's voice was heard again . 
`` I somehow fancied all at once , '' Alyosha went on as though he had not heard Lise , `` that she loved Ivan , and so I said that stupid thing ... . 
What will happen now ? '' 
`` To whom , to whom ? '' 
cried Lise . 
`` Mamma , you really want to be the death of me . 
I ask you and you do n't answer . '' 
At the moment the maid ran in . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna is ill ... . 
She is crying , struggling ... hysterics . '' 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
cried Lise , in a tone of real anxiety . 
`` Mamma , I shall be having hysterics , and not she ! '' 
`` Lise , for mercy 's sake , do n't scream , do n't persecute me . 
At your age one ca n't know everything that grown-up people know . 
I 'll come and tell you everything you ought to know . 
Oh , mercy on us ! 
I am coming , I am coming ... . 
Hysterics is a good sign , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; it 's an excellent thing that she is hysterical . 
That 's just as it ought to be . 
In such cases I am always against the woman , against all these feminine tears and hysterics . 
Run and say , Yulia , that I 'll fly to her . 
As for Ivan Fyodorovitch 's going away like that , it 's her own fault . 
But he wo n't go away . 
Lise , for mercy 's sake , do n't scream ! 
Oh , yes ; you are not screaming . 
It 's I am screaming . 
Forgive your mamma ; but I am delighted , delighted , delighted ! 
Did you notice , Alexey Fyodorovitch , how young , how young Ivan Fyodorovitch was just now when he went out , when he said all that and went out ? 
I thought he was so learned , such a savant , and all of a sudden he behaved so warmly , openly , and youthfully , with such youthful inexperience , and it was all so fine , like you ... . 
And the way he repeated that German verse , it was just like you ! 
But I must fly , I must fly ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , make haste to carry out her commission , and then make haste back . 
Lise , do you want anything now ? 
For mercy 's sake , do n't keep Alexey Fyodorovitch a minute . 
He will come back to you at once . '' 
Madame Hohlakov at last ran off . 
Before leaving , Alyosha would have opened the door to see Lise . 
`` On no account , '' cried Lise . 
`` On no account now . 
Speak through the door . 
How have you come to be an angel ? 
That 's the only thing I want to know . '' 
`` For an awful piece of stupidity , Lise ! 
Goodbye ! '' 
`` Do n't dare to go away like that ! '' 
Lise was beginning . 
`` Lise , I have a real sorrow ! 
I 'll be back directly , but I have a great , great sorrow ! 
And he ran out of the room . 
A Laceration in the Cottage HE certainly was really grieved in a way he had seldom been before . 
He had rushed in like a fool , and meddled in what ? 
In a love-affair . 
`` But what do I know about it ? 
What can I tell about such things ? '' 
he repeated to himself for the hundredth time , flushing crimson . 
`` Oh , being ashamed would be nothing ; shame is only the punishment I deserve . 
The trouble is I shall certainly have caused more unhappiness ... . 
And Father Zossima sent me to reconcile and bring them together . 
Is this the way to bring them together ? '' 
