Alyosha asked , bewildered . 
`` Not him , damn the monster ! '' 
Ivan shouted , in a frenzy , `` Do you know that he visits me ? 
How did you find out ? 
Speak ! '' 
`` Who is he ? 
I do n't know whom you are talking about , '' Alyosha faltered , beginning to be alarmed . 
`` Yes , you do know . 
or how could you - ? 
It 's impossible that you do n't know . '' 
Suddenly he seemed to check himself . 
He stood still and seemed to reflect . 
A strange grin contorted his lips . 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha began again , in a shaking voice , `` I have said this to you , because you 'll believe my word , I know that . 
I tell you once and for all , it 's not you . 
You hear , once for all ! 
God has put it into my heart to say this to you , even though it may make you hate me from this hour . '' 
But by now Ivan had apparently regained his self-control . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' he said , with a cold smile , `` I ca n't endure prophets and epileptics - messengers from God especially - and you know that only too well . 
I break off all relations with you from this moment and probably for ever . 
I beg you to leave me at this turning . 
It 's the way to your lodgings , too . 
You 'd better be particularly careful not to come to me to-day ! 
Do you hear ? '' 
He turned and walked on with a firm step , not looking back . 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha called after him , `` if anything happens to you to-day , turn to me before anyone ! '' 
But Ivan made no reply . 
Alyosha stood under the lamp-post at the cross roads , till Ivan had vanished into the darkness . 
Then he turned and walked slowly homewards . 
Both Alyosha and Ivan were living in lodgings ; neither of them was willing to live in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's empty house . 
Alyosha had a furnished room in the house of some working people . 
Ivan lived some distance from him . 
He had taken a roomy and fairly comfortable lodge attached to a fine house that belonged to a well-to-do lady , the widow of an official . 
But his only attendant was a deaf and rheumatic old crone who went to bed at six o'clock every evening and got up at six in the morning . 
Ivan had become remarkably indifferent to his comforts of late , and very fond of being alone . 
He did everything for himself in the one room he lived in , and rarely entered any of the other rooms in his abode . 
He reached the gate of the house and had his hand on the bell , when he suddenly stopped . 
He felt that he was trembling all over with anger . 
Suddenly he let go of the bell , turned back with a curse , and walked with rapid steps in the opposite direction . 
He walked a mile and a half to a tiny , slanting , wooden house , almost a hut , where Marya Kondratyevna , the neighbour who used to come to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and to whom Smerdyakov had once sung his songs and played on the guitar , was now lodging . 
She had sold their little house , and was now living here with her mother . 
Smerdyakov , who was ill - almost dying-had been with them ever since Fyodor Pavlovitch 's death . 
It was to him Ivan was going now , drawn by a sudden and irresistible prompting . 
The First Interview with Smerdyakov THIS was the third time that Ivan had been to see Smerdyakov since his return from Moscow . 
The first time he had seen him and talked to him was on the first day of his arrival , then he had visited him once more , a fortnight later . 
But his visits had ended with that second one , so that it was now over a month since he had seen him . 
And he had scarcely heard anything of him . 
Ivan had only returned five days after his father 's death , so that he was not present at the funeral , which took place the day before he came back . 
The cause of his delay was that Alyosha , not knowing his Moscow address , had to apply to Katerina Ivanovna to telegraph to him , and she , not knowing his address either , telegraphed to her sister and aunt , reckoning on Ivan 's going to see them as soon as he arrived in Moscow . 
But he did not go to them till four days after his arrival . 
When he got the telegram , he had , of course , set off post-haste to our town . 
The first to meet him was Alyosha , and Ivan was greatly surprised to find that , in opposition to the general opinion of the town , he refused to entertain a suspicion against Mitya , and spoke openly of Smerdyakov as the murderer . 
Later on , after seeing the police captain and the prosecutor , and hearing the details of the charge and the arrest , he was still more surprised at Alyosha , and ascribed his opinion only to his exaggerated brotherly feeling and sympathy with Mitya , of whom Alyosha , as Ivan knew , was very fond . 
By the way , let us say a word or two of Ivan 's feeling to his brother Dmitri . 
He positively disliked him ; at most , felt sometimes a compassion for him , and even that was mixed with great contempt , almost repugnance . 
Mitya 's whole personality , even his appearance , was extremely unattractive to him . 
Ivan looked with indignation on Katerina Ivanovna 's love for his brother . 
Yet he went to see Mitya on the first day of his arrival , and that interview , far from shaking Ivan 's belief in his guilt , positively strengthened it . 
He found his brother agitated , nervously excited . 
Mitya had been talkative , but very absent-minded and incoherent . 
He used violent language , accused Smerdyakov , and was fearfully muddled . 
He talked principally about the three thousand roubles , which he said had been `` stolen '' from him by his father . 
`` The money was mine , it was my money , '' Mitya kept repeating . 
`` Even if I had stolen it , I should have had the right . '' 
He hardly contested the evidence against him , and if he tried to turn a fact to his advantage , it was in an absurd and incoherent way . 
He hardly seemed to wish to defend himself to Ivan or anyone else . 
Quite the contrary , he was angry and proudly scornful of the charges against him ; he was continually firing up and abusing everyone . 
He only laughed contemptuously at Grigory 's evidence about the open door , and declared that it was `` the devil that opened it . '' 
But he could not bring forward any coherent explanation of the fact . 
He even succeeded in insulting Ivan during their first interview , telling him sharply that it was not for people who declared that `` everything was lawful , '' to suspect and question him . 
Altogether he was anything but friendly with Ivan on that occasion . 
Immediately after that interview with Mitya , Ivan went for the first time to see Smerdyakov . 
In the railway train on his way from Moscow , he kept thinking of Smerdyakov and of his last conversation with him on the evening before he went away . 
Many things seemed to him puzzling and suspicious . 
when he gave his evidence to the investigating lawyer Ivan said nothing , for the time , of that conversation . 
He put that off till he had seen Smerdyakov , who was at that time in the hospital . 
Doctor Herzenstube and Varvinsky , the doctor he met in the hospital , confidently asserted in reply to Ivan 's persistent questions , that Smerdyakov 's epileptic attack was unmistakably genuine , and were surprised indeed at Ivan asking whether he might not have been shamming on the day of the catastrophe . 
They gave him to understand that the attack was an exceptional one , the fits persisting and recurring several times , so that the patient 's life was positively in danger , and it was only now , after they had applied remedies , that they could assert with confidence that the patient would survive . 
`` Though it might well be , '' added Doctor Herzenstube , `` that his reason would be impaired for a considerable period , if not permanently . '' 
On Ivan 's asking impatiently whether that meant that he was now mad , they told him that this was not yet the case , in the full sense of the word , but that certain abnormalities were perceptible . 
Ivan decided to find out for himself what those abnormalities were . 
At the hospital he was at once allowed to see the patient . 
Smerdyakov was lying on a truckle-bed in a separate ward . 
There was only one other bed in the room , and in it lay a tradesman of the town , swollen with dropsy , who was obviously almost dying ; he could be no hindrance to their conversation . 
Smerdyakov grinned uncertainly on seeing Ivan , and for the first instant seemed nervous . 
So at least Ivan fancied . 
But that was only momentary . 
For the rest of the time he was struck , on the contrary , by Smerdyakov 's composure . 
From the first glance Ivan had no doubt that he was very ill . 
He was very weak ; he spoke slowly , seeming to move his tongue with difficulty ; he was much thinner and sallower.Throughout the interview , which lasted twenty minutes , he kept complaining of headache and of pain in all his limbs . 
His thin emasculate face seemed to have become so tiny ; his hair was ruffled , and his crest of curls in front stood up in a thin tuft . 
But in the left eye , which was screwed up and seemed to be insinuating something , Smerdyakov showed himself unchanged . 
`` It 's always worth while speaking to a clever man . '' 
Ivan was reminded of that at once . 
He sat down on the stool at his feet . 
Smerdyakov , with painful effort , shifted his position in bed , but he was not the first to speak . 
He remained dumb , and did not even look much interested . 
`` Can you . 
talk to me ? '' 
asked Ivan . 
