They might kill him . 
They are children and stupid . 
A stone may be thrown and break somebody 's head . '' 
`` That 's just what has happened . 
He has been bruised by a stone to-day . 
Not on the head but on the chest , just above the heart . 
He came home crying and groaning and now he is ill . '' 
`` And you know he attacks them first . 
He is bitter against them on your account . 
They say he stabbed a boy called Krassotkin with a penknife not long ago . '' 
`` I 've heard about that too , it 's dangerous . 
Krassotkin is an official here , we may hear more about it . '' 
`` I would advise you , '' Alyosha went on warmly , `` not to send him to school at all for a time till he is calmer . 
and his anger is passed . '' 
`` Anger ! '' 
the captain repeated , `` that 's just what it is . 
He is a little creature , but it 's a mighty anger . 
You do n't know all , sir . 
Let me tell you more . 
Since that incident all the boys have been teasing him about the ` wisp of tow . ' 
Schoolboys are a merciless race , individually they are angels , but together , especially in schools , they are often merciless . 
Their teasing has stiffed up a gallant spirit in Ilusha . 
An ordinary boy , a weak son , would have submitted , have felt ashamed of his father , sir , but he stood up for his father against them all . 
For his father and for truth and justice . 
For what he suffered when he kissed your brother 's hand and cried to him ` Forgive father , forgive him , ' - that only God knows - and I , his father . 
For our children - not your children , but ours - the children of the poor gentlemen looked down upon by everyone - know what justice means , sir , even at nine years old . 
How should the rich know ? 
They do n't explore such depths once in their lives . 
But at that moment in the square when he kissed his hand , at that moment my Ilusha had grasped all that justice means . 
That truth entered into him and crushed him for ever , sir , '' the captain said hotly again with a sort of frenzy , and he struck his right fist against his left palm as though he wanted to show how `` the truth '' crushed Ilusha . 
`` That very day , sir , he fell ill with fever and was delirious all night . 
All that day he hardly said a word to me , but I noticed he kept watching me from the corner , though he turned to the window and pretended to be learning his lessons . 
But I could see his mind was not on his lessons . 
Next day I got drunk to forget my troubles , sinful man as I am , and I do n't remember much . 
Mamma began crying , too - I am very fond of mamma - well , I spent my last penny drowning my troubles . 
Do n't despise me for that , sir , in Russia men who drink are the best . 
The best men amongst us are the greatest drunkards . 
I lay down and I do n't remember about Ilusha , though all that day the boys had been jeering at him at school . 
` Wisp of tow , ' they shouted , ` your father was pulled out of the tavern by his wisp of tow , you ran by and begged forgiveness . ' 
`` On the third day when he came back from school , I saw he looked pale and wretched . 
` What is it ? ' 
I asked . 
He would n't answer . 
Well , there 's no talking in our mansion without mamma and the girls taking part in it . 
What 's more , the girls had heard about it the very first day . 
Varvara had begun snarling . 
` You fools and buffoons , can you ever do anything rational ? ' 
` Quite so , ' I said , ` can we ever do anything rational ? ' 
For the time I turned it off like that . 
So in the evening I took the boy out for a walk , for you must know we go for a walk every evening , always the same way , along which we are going now - from our gate to that great stone which lies alone in the road under the hurdle , which marks the beginning of the town pasture . 
A beautiful and lonely spot , sir . 
Ilusha and I walked along hand in hand as usual . 
He has a little hand , his fingers are thin and cold - he suffers with his chest , you know . 
` Father , ' said he , ` father ! ' 
` Well ? ' 
said I. I saw his eyes flashing . 
` Father , how he treated you then ! ' 
` It ca n't be helped , Ilusha , ' I said . 
` Do n't forgive him , father , do n't forgive him ! 
At school they say that he has paid you ten roubles for it . ' 
` No Ilusha , ' said I , ' I would not take money from him for anything . ' 
he began trembling all over , took my hand in both his and kissed it again . 
` Father , ' he said , ` father , challenge him to a duel , at school they say you are a coward and wo n't challenge him , and that you 'll accept ten roubles from him . ' ' 
I ca n't challenge him to a duel , Ilusha , ' I answered . 
And I told briefly what I 've just told you . 
He listened . 
` Father , ' he said , anyway do n't forgive it . 
When I grow up I 'll call him out myself and kill him . ' 
His eyes shone and glowed . 
And of course I am his father , and I had to put in a word : ` It 's a sin to kill , ' I said , ` even in a duel . ' 
` Father , ' he said , ` when I grow up , I 'll knock him down , knock the sword out of his hand , I 'll fall on him , wave my sword over him and say : `` I could kill you , but I forgive you , so there ! '' ' 
You see what the workings of his little mind have been during these two days ; he must have been planning that vengeance all day , and raving about it at night . 
`` But he began to come home from school badly beaten , I found out about it the day before yesterday , and you are right , I wo n't send him to that school any more . 
I heard that he was standing up against all the class alone and defying them all , that his heart was full of resentment , of bitterness - I was alarmed about him . 
We went for another walk . 
` Father , ' he asked , ` are the rich people stronger than anyone else on earth ? ' 
` Yes , Ilusha , ' I said , ` there are no people on earth stronger than the rich . ' 
` Father , ' he said , ' I will get rich , I will become an officer and conquer everybody . 
The Tsar will reward me , I will come back here and then no one will dare - ' Then he was silent and his lips still kept trembling . 
` Father , ' he said , ` what a horrid town this is . ' 
` Yes , Ilusha , ' I said , ` it is n't a very nice town . ' 
` Father , let us move into another town , a nice one , ' he said , ` where people do n't know about us . ' 
` We will move , we will , Ilusha , ' said I , ` only I must save up for it . ' 
I was glad to be able to turn his mind from painful thoughts , and we began to dream of how we would move to another town , how we would buy a horse and cart . 
` We will put mamma and your sisters inside , we will cover them up and we 'll walk , you shall have a lift now and then , and I 'll walk beside , for we must take care of our horse , we ca n't all ride . 
That 's how we 'll go . ' 
He was enchanted at that , most of all at the thought of having a horse and driving him . 
For of course a Russian boy is born among horses . 
We chattered a long while . 
Thank God , I thought , I have diverted his mind and comforted him . 
`` That was the day before yesterday , in the evening , but last night everything was changed . 
He had gone to school in the morning , he came back depressed , terribly depressed . 
In the evening I took him by the hand and we went for a walk ; he would not talk . 
There was a wind blowing and no sun , and a feeling of autumn ; twilight was coming on . 
We walked along , both of us depressed . 
` Well , my boy , ' said I , ` how about our setting off on our travels ? ' 
I thought I might bring him back to our talk of the day before . 
He did n't answer , but I felt his fingers trembling in my hand . 
Ah , I thought , it 's a bad job ; there 's something fresh . 
We had reached the stone where we are now . 
