Since he has openly abandoned his betrothed for her , he does n't despise her . 
There 's something here , my dear boy , that you do n't understand yet . 
A man will fall in love with some beauty , with a woman 's body , or even with a part of a woman 's body -LRB- a sensualist can understand that -RRB- , and he 'll abandon his own children for her , sell his father and mother , and his country , Russia , too . 
If he 's honest , he 'll steal ; if he 's humane , he 'll murder ; if he 's faithful , he 'll deceive . 
Pushkin , the poet of women 's feet , sung of their feet in his verse . 
Others do n't sing their praises , but they ca n't look at their feet without a thrill - and it 's not only their feet . 
Contempt 's no help here , brother , even if he did despise Grushenka . 
He does , but he ca n't tear himself away . '' 
`` I understand that , '' Alyosha jerked out suddenly . 
`` Really ? 
Well , I dare say you do understand , since you blurt it out at the first word , '' said Rakitin , malignantly . 
`` That escaped you unawares , and the confession 's the more precious . 
So it 's a familiar subject ; you 've thought about it already , about sensuality , I mean ! 
Oh , you virgin soul ! 
You 're a quiet one , Alyosha , you 're a saint , I know , but the devil only knows what you 've thought about , and what you know already ! 
You are pure , but you 've been down into the depths ... . 
I 've been watching you a long time . 
You 're a Karamazov yourself ; you 're a thorough Karamazov - no doubt birth and selection have something to answer for . 
You 're a sensualist from your father , a crazy saint from your mother . 
Why do you tremble ? 
Is it true , then ? 
Do you know , Grushenka has been begging me to bring you along . 
` I 'll pull off his cassock , ' she says . 
You ca n't think how she keeps begging me to bring you . 
I wondered why she took such an interest in you . 
Do you know , she 's an extraordinary woman , too ! '' 
`` Thank her and say I 'm not coming , '' said Alyosha , with a strained smile . 
`` Finish what you were saying , Misha . 
I 'll tell you . 
my idea after . '' 
`` There 's nothing to finish . 
It 's all clear . 
It 's the same old tune , brother . 
If even you are a sensualist at heart , what of your brother , Ivan ? 
He 's a Karamazov , too . 
What is at the root of all you Karamazovs is that you 're all sensual , grasping and crazy ! 
Your brother Ivan writes theological articles in joke , for some idiotic , unknown motive of his own , though he 's an atheist , and he admits it 's a fraud himself - that 's your brother Ivan . 
He 's trying to get Mitya 's betrothed for himself , and I fancy he 'll succeed , too . 
And what 's more , it 's with Mitya 's consent . 
For Mitya will surrender his betrothed to him to be rid of her , and escape to Grushenka . 
And he 's ready to do that in spite of all his nobility and disinterestedness . 
Observe that . 
Those are the most fatal people ! 
Who the devil can make you out ? 
He recognises his vileness and goes on with it ! 
Let me tell you , too , the old man , your father , is standing in Mitya 's way now . 
He has suddenly gone crazy over Grushenka . 
His mouth waters at the sight of her . 
It 's simply on her account he made that scene in the cell just now , simply because Miusov called her an ` abandoned creature . ' 
He 's worse than a tom-cat in love . 
At first she was only employed by him in connection with his taverns and in some other shady business , but now he has suddenly realised all she is and has gone wild about her . 
He keeps pestering her with his offers , not honourable ones , of course . 
And they 'll come into collision , the precious father and son , on that path ! 
But Grushenka favours neither of them , she 's still playing with them , and teasing them both , considering which she can get most out of . 
For though she could filch a lot of money from the papa he would n't marry her , and maybe he 'll turn stingy in the end , and keep his purse shut . 
That 's where Mitya 's value comes in ; he has no money , but he 's ready to marry her . 
Yes , ready to marry her ! 
to abandon his betrothed , a rare beauty , Katerina Ivanovna , who 's rich , and the daughter of a colonel , and to marry Grushenka , who has been the mistress of a dissolute old merchant , Samsonov , a coarse , uneducated , provincial mayor . 
Some murderous conflict may well come to pass from all this , and that 's what your brother Ivan is waiting for . 
It would suit him down to the ground . 
He 'll carry off Katerina Ivanovna , for whom he is languishing , and pocket her dowry of sixty thousand . 
That 's very alluring to start with , for a man of no consequence and a beggar . 
And , take note , he wo n't be wronging Mitya , but doing him the greatest service . 
For I know as a fact that Mitya only last week , when he was with some Gipsy girls drunk in a tavern , cried out aloud that he was unworthy of his betrothed , Katya , but that his brother Ivan , he was the man who deserved her . 
And Katerina Ivanovna will not in the end refuse such a fascinating man as Ivan . 
She 's hesitating between the two of them already . 
And how has that Ivan won you all , so that you all worship him ? 
He is laughing at you , and enjoying himself at your expense . '' 
`` How do you know ? 
How can you speak so confidently ? '' 
Alyosha asked sharply , frowning . 
`` Why do you ask , and are frightened at my answer ? 
It shows that you know I 'm speaking the truth . '' 
`` You do n't like Ivan . 
Ivan would n't be tempted by money . '' 
`` Really ? 
And the beauty of Katerina Ivanovna ? 
It 's not only the money , though a fortune of sixty thousand is an attraction . '' 
`` Ivan is above that . 
He would n't make up to anyone for thousands . 
It is not money , it 's not comfort Ivan is seeking . 
Perhaps it 's suffering he is seeking . '' 
`` What wild dream now ? 
Oh , you - aristocrats ! '' 
`` Ah , Misha , he has a stormy spirit . 
His mind is in bondage . 
He is haunted by a great , unsolved doubt . 
He is one of those who do n't want millions , but an answer to their questions . '' 
`` That 's plagiarism , Alyosha . 
You 're quoting your elder 's phrases . 
Ah , Ivan has set you a problem ! '' 
cried Rakitin , with undisguised malice . 
His face changed , and his lips twitched . 
`` And the problem 's a stupid one . 
It is no good guessing it . 
Rack your brains - you 'll understand it . 
His article is absurd and ridiculous . 
And did you hear his stupid theory just now : if there 's no immortality of the soul , then there 's no virtue , and everything is lawful . 
-LRB- And by the way , do you remember how your brother Mitya cried out : ' I will remember ! ' -RRB- 
An attractive theory for scoundrels ! 
