So that 's where the envelope lay , in the corner behind the ikons . 
It would have been absurd to keep it under the mattress ; the box , anyway , could be locked . 
But all believe it was under the mattress . 
A stupid thing to believe . 
So if Dmitri Fyodorovitch had committed the murder , finding nothing , he would either have run away in a hurry , afraid of every sound , as always happens with murderers , or he would have been arrested . 
So I could always have clambered up to the ikons and have taken away the money next moming or even that night , and it would have all been put down to Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I could reckon upon that . '' 
`` But what if he did not kill him , but only knocked him down ? '' 
`` If he did not kill him , of course , I would not have ventured to take the money , and nothing would have happened . 
But I calculated that he would beat him senseless , and I should have time to take it then , and then I 'd make out to Fyodor Pavlovitch that it was no one but Dmitri Fyodorovitch who had taken the money after beating him . '' 
`` Stop ... I am getting mixed . 
Then it was Dmitri after all who killed him ; you only took the money ? '' 
`` No , he did n't kill him . 
Well , I might as well have told you now that he was the murderer ... . 
But I do n't want to lie to you now because ... because if you really have n't understood till now , as I see for myself , and are not pretending , so as to throw your guilt on me to my very face , you are still responsible for it all , since you knew of the murder and charged me to do it , and went away knowing all about it . 
And so I want to prove to your face this evening that you are the only real murderer in the whole affair , and I am not the real murderer , though I did kill him . 
You are the rightful murderer . '' 
`` Why , why , am I a murderer ? 
Oh , God ! '' 
Ivan cried , unable to restrain himself at last , and forgetting that he had put off discussing himself till the end of the conversation . 
`` You still mean that Tchermashnya ? 
Stay , tell me , why did you want my consent , if you really took Tchermashnya for consent ? 
How will you explain that now ? '' 
`` Assured of your consent , I should have known that you would n't have made an outcry over those three thousand being lost , even if I 'd been suspected , instead of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , or as his accomplice ; on the contrary , you would have protected me from others ... . 
And when you got your inheritance you would have rewarded me when you were able , all the rest of your life . 
For you 'd have received your inheritance through me , seeing that if he had married Agrafena Alexandrovna , you would n't have had a farthing . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Then you intended to worry me all my life afterwards , '' snarled Ivan . 
`` And what if I had n't gone away then , but had informed against you ? '' 
`` What could you have informed ? 
That I persuaded you to go to Tcherinashnya ? 
That 's all nonsense . 
Besides , after our conversation you would either have gone away or have stayed . 
If you had stayed , nothing would have happened . 
I should have known that you did n't want it done , and should have attempted nothing . 
As you went away , it meant you assured me that you would n't dare to inform against me at the trial , and that you 'd overlook my having the three thousand . 
And , indeed , you could n't have prosecuted me afterwards , because then I should have told it all in the court ; that is , not that I had stolen the money or killed him - I should n't have said that - but that you 'd put me up to the theft and the murder , though I did n't consent to it . 
That 's why I needed your consent , so that you could n't have cornered me afterwards , for what proof could you have had ? 
I could always have cornered you , revealing your eagerness for your father 's death , and I tell you the public would have believed it all , and you would have been ashamed for the rest of your life . '' 
`` Was I then so eager , was I ? '' 
Ivan snarled again . 
`` To be sure you were , and by your consent you silently sanctioned my doing it . '' 
Smerdyakov looked resolutely at Ivan . 
He was very weak and spoke slowly and wearily , but some hidden inner force urged him on . 
He evidently had some design . 
Ivan felt that . 
`` Go on , '' he said . 
`` Tell me what happened that night . '' 
`` What more is there to tell ! 
I lay there and I thought I heard the master shout . 
And before that Grigory Vassilyevitch had suddenly got up and came out , and he suddenly gave a scream , and then all was silence and darkness . 
I lay there waiting , my heart beating ; I could n't bear it . 
I got up at last , went out . 
I saw the window open on the left into the garden , and I stepped to the left to listen whether he was sitting there alive , and I heard the master moving about , sighing , so I knew he was alive . 
` Ech ! ' 
I thought . 
I went to the window and shouted to the master , ` It 's I. ' And he shouted to me , ` He 's been , he 's been ; he 's run away . ' 
He meant Dmitri Fyodorovitch had been . 
` He 's killed Grigory ! 
`` Where ? ' 
I whispered . 
` There , in the corner , ' he pointed . 
He was whispering , too . 
` Wait a bit , '' I said . 
I went to the corner of the garden to look , and there I came upon Grigory Vassilyevitch lying by the wall , covered with blood , senseless . 
So it 's true that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here , was the thought that came into my head , and I determined on the spot to make an end of it , as Grigory Vassilyevitch , even if he were alive , would see nothing of it , as he lay there senseless . 
The only risk was that Marfa Ignatyevna might wake up . 
I felt that at the moment , but the longing to get it done came over me , till I could scarcely breathe . 
I went back to the window to the master and said , ` She 's here , she 's come ; Agrafena Alexandrovna has come , wants to be let in . ' 
And he started like a baby . 
` Where is she ? ' 
he fairly gasped , but could n't believe it . 
` She 's standing there , ' said I. ` Open . ' 
He looked out of the window at me , half believing and half distrustful , but afraid to open . 
` Why , he is afraid of me now , ' I thought . 
And it was funny . 
I bethought me to knock on the window-frame those taps we 'd agreed upon as a signal that Grushenka had come , in his presence , before his eyes . 
He did n't seem to believe my word , but as soon as he heard the taps , he ran at once to open the door . 
He opened it . 
I would have gone in , but he stood in the way to prevent me passing . 
` Where is she ? 
Where is she ? ' 
He looked at me , all of a tremble . 
` Well , ' thought I , ` if he 's so frightened of me as all that , it 's a bad lookout ! ' 
And my legs went weak with fright that he would n't let me in or would call out , or Marfa Ignatyevna would run up , or something else might happen . 
I do n't remember now , but I must have stood pale , facing him . 
I whispered to him , ` Why , she 's there , there , under the window ; how is it you do n't see her ? ' 
I said . 
` Bring her then , bring her . ' 
` She 's afraid , ' said I ; ` she was frightened at the noise , she 's hidden in the bushes ; go and call to her yourself from the study . ' 
He ran to the window , put the candle in the window . 
` Grushenka , ' he cried , ` Grushenka , are you here ? ' 
Though he cried that , he did n't want to lean out of the window , he did n't want to move away from me , for he was panic-stricken ; he was so frightened he did n't dare to turn his back on me . 
` Why , here she is , ' said I. I went up to the window and leaned right out of it . 
` Here she is ; she 's in the bush , laughing at you , do n't you see her ? ' 
He suddenly believed it ; he was all of a shake - he was awfully crazy about her - and he leaned right out of the window . 
I snatched up that iron paper-weight from his table ; do you remember , weighing about three pounds ? 
I swung it and hit him on the top of the skull with the corner of it . 
He did n't even cry out . 
He only sank down suddenly , and I hit him again and a third time . 
