He had even begun to notice in himself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for the creature . 
Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact that when Ivan first came to the neighbourhood he had felt quite differently . 
Then he had taken a marked interest in Smerdyakov , and had even thought him very original . 
He had encouraged him to talk to him , although he had always wondered at a certain incoherence , or rather restlessness , in his mind , and could not understand what it was that so continually and insistently worked upon the brain of `` the contemplative . '' 
They discussed philosophical questions and even how there could have been light on the first day when the sun , moon , and stars were only created on the fourth day , and how that was to be understood . 
But Ivan soon saw that , though the sun , moon , and stars might be an interesting subject , yet that it was quite secondary to Smerdyakov , and that he was looking for something altogether different . 
In one way and another , he began to betray a boundless vanity , and a wounded vanity , too , and that Ivan disliked . 
It had first given rise to his aversion . 
Later on , there had been trouble in the house . 
Grushenka had come on the scene , and there had been the scandals with his brother Dmitri - they discussed that , too . 
But though Smerdyakov always talked of that with great excitement , it was impossible to discover what he desired to come of it . 
There was , in fact , something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some of his desires , accidentally betrayed and always vaguely expressed . 
Smerdyakov was always inquiring , putting certain indirect but obviously premeditated questions , but what his object was he did not explain , and usually at the most important moment he would break off and relapse into silence or pass to another subject . 
But what finally irritated Ivan most and confirmed his dislike for him was the peculiar , revolting familiarity which Smerdyakov began to show more and more markedly . 
Not that he forgot himself and was rude ; on the contrary , he always spoke very respectfully , yet he had obviously begun to consider - goodness knows why ! 
- that there was some sort of understanding between him and Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
He always spoke in a tone that suggested that those two had some kind of compact , some secret between them , that had at some time been expressed on both sides , only known to them and beyond the comprehension of those around them . 
But for a long while Ivan did not recognise the real cause of his growing dislike and he had only lately realised what was at the root of it . 
With a feeling of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gate without speaking or looking at Smerdyakov . 
But Smerdyakov rose from the bench , and from that action alone , Ivan knew instantly that he wanted particularly to talk to him . 
Ivan looked at him and stopped , and the fact that he did stop , instead of passing by , as he meant to the minute before , drove him to fury . 
With anger and repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov 's emasculate , sickly face , with the little curls combed forward on his forehead . 
His left eye winked and he grinned as if to say , `` Where are you going ? 
You wo n't pass by ; you see that we two clever people have something to say to each other . '' 
Ivan shook . 
`` Get away , miserable idiot . 
What have I to do with you ? '' 
was on the tip of his tongue , but to his profound astonishment he heard himself say , `` Is my father still asleep , or has he waked ? '' 
He asked the question softly and meekly , to his own surprise , and at once , again to his own surprise , sat down on the bench . 
For an instant he felt almost frightened ; he remembered it afterwards . 
Smerdyakov stood facing him , his hands behind his back , looking at him with assurance and almost severity . 
`` His honour is still asleep , '' he articulated deliberately -LRB- `` You were the first to speak , not I , '' he seemed to say -RRB- . 
`` I am surprised at you , sir , '' he added , after a pause , dropping his eyes affectedly , setting his right foot forward , and playing with the tip of his polished boot . 
`` Why are you surprised at me ? '' 
Ivan asked abruptly and sullenly , doing his utmost to restrain himself , and suddenly realising , with disgust , that he was feeling intense curiosity and would not , on any account , have gone away without satisfying it . 
`` Why do n't you go to Tchermashnya , sir ? '' 
Smerdyakov suddenly raised his eyes and smiled familiarly . 
`` Why I smile you must understand of yourself , if you are a clever man , '' his screwed-up left eye seemed to say . 
`` Why should I go to Tchermashnya ? '' 
Ivan asked in surprise . 
Smerdyakov was silent again . 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you to , '' he said at last , slowly and apparently attaching no significance to his answer . 
`` I put you off with a secondary reason , '' he seemed to suggest , `` simply to say something . '' 
`` Damn you ! 
Speak out what you want ! '' 
Ivan cried angrily at last , passing from meekness to violence . 
Smerdyakov drew his right foot up to his left , pulled himself up , but still looked at him with the same serenity and the same little smile . 
`` Substantially nothing - but just by way of conversation . '' 
Another silence followed . 
They did not speak for nearly a minute . 
Ivan knew that he ought to get up and show anger , and Smerdyakov stood before him and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he would be angry or not . 
So at least it seemed to Ivan . 
At last he moved to get up . 
Smerdyakov seemed to seize the moment . 
`` I 'm in an awful position , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't know how to help myself , '' he said resolutely and distinctly , and at his last word he sighed . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch sat down again . 
`` They are both utterly crazy , they are no better than little children , '' Smerdyakov went on . 
`` I am speaking of your parent and your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and begin worrying me every minute , ` Has she come ? 
Why has n't she come ? ' 
and so on up till midnight and even after midnight . 
And if Agrafena Alexandrovna does n't come -LRB- for very likely she does not mean to come at all -RRB- then he will be at me again to-morrow morning , ` Why has n't she come ? 
When will she come ? ' 
- as though I were to blame for it . 
On the other side it 's no better . 
As soon as it gets dark , or even before , your brother will appear with his gun in his hands : ` Look out , you rogue , you soup-maker . 
If you miss her and do n't let me know she 's been - I 'll kill you before anyone . ' 
When the night 's over , in the morning , he , too , like Fyodor Pavlovitch , begins worrying me to death . 
` Why has n't she come ? 
Will she come soon ? ' 
And he , too , thinks me to blame because his lady has n't come . 
And every day and every hour they get angrier and angrier , so that I sometimes think I shall kill myself in a fright . 
I ca n't depend them , sir . '' 
`` And why have you meddled ? 
Why did you begin to spy for Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
said Ivan irritably . 
`` How could I help meddling ? 
Though , indeed , I have n't meddled at all , if you want to know the truth of the matter . 
I kept quiet from the very beginning , not daring to answer ; but he pitched on me to be his servant . 
He has had only one thing to say since : ` I 'll kill you , you scoundrel , if you miss her . ' 
I feel certain , sir , that I shall have a long fit to-morrow . '' 
`` What do you mean by ' a long fit ' ? '' 
`` A long fit , lasting a long time - several hours , or perhaps a day or two . 
Once it went on for three days . 
I fell from the garret that time . 
The struggling ceased and then began again , and for three days I could n't come back to my senses . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube , the doctor here , and he put ice on my head and tried another remedy , too ... . 
I might have died . '' 
`` But they say one ca n't tell with epilepsy when a fit is coming . 
What makes you say you will have one to-morrow ? '' 
Ivan inquired , with a peculiar , irritable curiosity . 
`` That 's just so . 
You ca n't tell beforehand . '' 
`` Besides , you fell from the garret then . '' 
`` I climb up to the garret every day . 
I might fall from the garret again to-morrow . 
And , if not , I might fall down the cellar steps . 
I have to go into the cellar every day , too . '' 
Ivan took a long look at him . 
