Yes , I am the soul of honour , while in Pyotr Alexandrovitch there is wounded vanity and nothing else . 
I came here perhaps to have a look and speak my mind . 
My son , Alexey , is here , being saved . 
I am his father ; I care for his welfare , and it is my duty to care . 
While I 've been playing the fool , I have been listening and having a look on the sly ; and now I want to give you the last act of the performance . 
You know how things are with us ? 
As a thing falls , so it lies . 
As a thing once has fallen , so it must lie for ever . 
Not a bit of it ! 
I want to get up again . 
Holy Father , I am indignant with you . 
Confession is a great sacrament , before which I am ready to bow down reverently ; but there in the cell , they all kneel down and confess aloud . 
Can it be right to confess aloud ? 
It was ordained by the holy Fathers to confess in secret : then only your confession will be a mystery , and so it was of old . 
But how can I explain to him before everyone that I did this and that ... well , you understand what - sometimes it would not be proper to talk about it - so it is really a scandal ! 
No , Fathers , one might be carried along with you to the Flagellants , I dare say ... . 
at the first opportunity I shall write to the Synod , and I shall take my son , Alexey , home . '' 
We must note here that Fyodor Pavlovitch knew where to look for the weak spot . 
There had been at one time malicious rumours which had even reached the Archbishop -LRB- not only regarding our monastery , but in others where the institution of elders existed -RRB- that too much respect was paid to the elders , even to the detriment of the authority of the Superior , that the elders abused the sacrament of confession and so on and so on - absurd charges which had died away of themselves everywhere . 
But the spirit of folly , which had caught up Fyodor Pavlovitch and was bearing him on the current of his own nerves into lower and lower depths of ignominy , prompted him with this old slander . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not understand a word of it , and he could not even put it sensibly , for on this occasion no one had been kneeling and confessing aloud in the elder 's cell , so that he could not have seen anything of the kind . 
He was only speaking from confused memory of old slanders . 
But as soon as he had uttered his foolish tirade , he felt he had been talking absurd nonsense , and at once longed to prove to his audience , and above all to himself , that he had not been talking nonsense . 
And , though he knew perfectly well that with each word he would be adding more and more absurdity , he could not restrain himself , and plunged forward blindly . 
`` How disgraceful ! '' 
cried Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
`` Pardon me ! '' 
said the Father Superior . 
`` It was said of old , ` Many have begun to speak against me and have uttered evil sayings about me . 
And hearing it I have said to myself : it is the correction of the Lord and He has sent it to heal my vain soul . ' 
And so we humbly thank you , honoured guest ! '' 
and he made Fyodor Pavlovitch a low bow . 
`` Tut - tut - tut - sanctimoniousness and stock phrases ! 
Old phrases and old gestures . 
The old lies and formal prostrations . 
We know all about them . 
A kiss on the lips and a dagger in the heart , as in Schiller 's Robbers . 
I do n't like falsehood , Fathers , I want the truth . 
But the truth is not to be found in eating gudgeon and that I proclaim aloud ! 
Father monks , why do you fast ? 
Why do you expect reward in heaven for that ? 
Why , for reward like that I will come and fast too ! 
No , saintly monk , you try being virtuous in the world , do good to society , without shutting yourself up in a monastery at other people 's expense , and without expecting a reward up aloft for it - you 'll find that a bit harder . 
I can talk sense , too , Father Superior . 
What have they got here ? '' 
He went up to the table . 
`` Old port wine , mead brewed by the Eliseyev Brothers . 
Fie , fie , fathers ! 
That is something beyond gudgeon . 
Look at the bottles the fathers have brought out , he he he ! 
And who has provided it all ? 
The Russian peasant , the labourer , brings here the farthing earned by his horny hand , wringing it from his family and the tax-gatherer ! 
You bleed the people , you know , holy Fathers . '' 
`` This is too disgraceful ! '' 
said Father Iosif . 
Father Paissy kept obstinately silent . 
Miusov rushed from the room , and Kalgonov after him . 
`` Well , Father , I will follow Pyotr Alexandrovitch ! 
I am not coming to see you again . 
You may beg me on your knees , I sha n't come . 
I sent you a thousand roubles , so you have begun to keep your eye on me . 
He he he ! 
No , I 'll say no more . 
I am taking my revenge for my youth , for all the humiliation I endured . '' 
He thumped the table with his fist in a paroxysm of simulated feeling . 
`` This monastery has played a great part in my life ! 
It has cost me many bitter tears . 
You used to set my wife , the crazy one , against me . 
You cursed me with bell and book , you spread stories about me all over the place . 
Enough , fathers ! 
This is the age of Liberalism , the age of steamers and railways . 
Neither a thousand , nor a hundred roubles , no , nor a hundred farthings will you get out of me ! '' 
It must be noted again that our monastery never had played any great part in his life , and he never had shed a bitter tear owing to it . 
But he was so carried away by his simulated emotion , that he was for one moment almost believing it himself . 
He was so touched he was almost weeping . 
But at that very instant , he felt that it was time to draw back . 
The Father Superior bowed his head at his malicious lie , and again spoke impressively : `` It is written again , ` Bear circumspectly and gladly dishonour that cometh upon thee by no act of thine own , be not confounded and hate not him who hath dishonoured thee . ' 
And so will we . '' 
`` Tut , tut , tut ! 
Bethinking thyself and the rest of the rigmarole . 
Bethink yourselves Fathers , I will go . 
But I will take my son , Alexey , away from here for ever , on my parental authority . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch , my most dutiful son , permit me to order you to follow me . 
Von Sohn , what have you to stay for ? 
Come and see me now in the town . 
It is fun there . 
It is only one short verst ; instead of lenten oil , I will give you sucking-pig and kasha . 
We will have dinner with some brandy and liqueur to it ... . 
I 've cloudberry wine . 
Hey , von Sohn , do n't lose your chance . '' 
He went out , shouting and gesticulating . 
It was at that moment Rakitin saw him and pointed him out to Alyosha . 
`` Alexey ! '' 
his father shouted , from far off , catching sight of him . 
`` You come home to me to-day , for good , and bring your pillow and mattress , and leave no trace behind . '' 
Alyosha stood rooted to the spot , watching the scene in silence . 
Meanwhile , Fyodor Pavlovitch had got into the carriage , and Ivan was about to follow him in grim silence without even turning to say good-bye to Alyosha . 
But at this point another almost incredible scene of grotesque buffoonery gave the finishing touch to the episode . 
Maximov suddenly appeared by the side of the carriage . 
He ran up , panting , afraid of being too late . 
