The fathers and mothers present applauded . 
Shrieks and exclamations were heard from the gallery , where the ladies were sitting . 
Handkerchiefs were waved . 
The President began ringing his bell with all his might . 
He was obviously irritated by the behaviour of the audience , but did not venture to clear the court as he had threatened . 
Even persons of high position , old men with stars on their breasts , sitting on specially reserved seats behind the judges , applauded the orator and waved their handkerchiefs . 
So that when the noise died down , the President confined himself to repeating his stern threat to clear the court , and Fetyukovitch , excited and triumphant , continued his speech . -RRB- 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , you remember that awful night of which so much has been said to-day , when the son got over the fence and stood face to face with the enemy and persecutor who had begotten him . 
I insist most emphatically it was not for money he ran to his father 's house : the charge of robbery is an absurdity , as I proved before . 
And it was not to murder him he broke into the house , oh , no ! 
If he had had that design he would , at least , have taken the precaution of arming himself beforehand . 
The brass pestle he caught up instinctively without knowing why he did it . 
Granted that he deceived his father by tapping at the window , granted that he made his way in - I 've said already that I do not for a moment believe that legend , but let it be so , let us suppose it for a moment . 
Gentlemen , I swear to you by all that 's holy , if it had not been his father , but an ordinary enemy , he would , after running through the rooms and satisfying himself that the woman was not there , have made off , post-haste , without doing any harm to his rival . 
He would have struck him , pushed him away perhaps , nothing more , for he had no thought and no time to spare for that . 
What he wanted to know was where she was . 
But his father , his father ! 
The mere sight of the father who had hated him from his childhood , had been his enemy , his persecutor , and now his unnatural rival , was enough ! 
A feeling of hatred came over him involuntarily , irresistibly , clouding his reason . 
It all surged up in one moment ! 
It was an impulse of madness and insanity , but also an impulse of nature , irresistibly and unconsciously -LRB- like everything in nature -RRB- avenging the violation of its eternal laws . 
`` But the prisoner even then did not murder him - I maintain that , I cry that aloud ! 
- no , he only brandished the pestle in a burst of indignant disgust , not meaning to kill him , not knowing that he would kill him . 
Had he not had this fatal pestle in his hand , he would have only knocked his father down perhaps , but would not have killed him . 
As he ran away , he did not know whether he had killed the old man . 
Such a murder is not a murder . 
Such a murder is not a parricide . 
No , the murder of such a father can not be called parricide . 
Such a murder can only be reckoned parricide by prejudice . 
`` But I appeal to you again and again from the depths of my soul ; did this murder actually take place ? 
Gentlemen of the jury , if we convict and punish him , he will say to himself : ` These people have done nothing for my bringing up , for my education , nothing to improve my lot , nothing to make me better , nothing to make me a man . 
These people have not given me to eat and to drink , have not visited me in prison and nakedness , and here they have sent me to penal servitude . 
I am quits , I owe them nothing now , and owe no one anything for ever . 
They are wicked and I will be wicked . 
They are cruel and I will be cruel . ' 
That is what he will say , gentlemen of the jury . 
And I swear , by finding him guilty you will only make it easier for him : you will ease his conscience , he will curse the blood he has shed and will not regret it . 
At the same time you will destroy in him the possibility of becoming a new man , for he will remain in his wickedness and blindness all his life . 
`` But do you want to punish him fearfully , terribly , with the most awful punishment that could be imagined , and at the same time to save him and regenerate his soul ? 
If so , overwhelm him with your mercy ! 
You will see , you will hear how he will tremble and be horror-struck . 
` How can I endure this mercy ? 
How can I endure so much love ? 
Am I worthy of it ? ' 
That 's what he will exclaim . 
`` Oh , I know , I know that heart , that wild but grateful heart , gentlemen of the jury ! 
It will bow before your mercy ; it thirsts for a great and loving action , it will melt and mount upwards . 
There are souls which , in their limitation , blame the whole world . 
But subdue such a soul with mercy , show it love , and it will curse its past , for there are many good impulses in it . 
Such a heart will expand and see that God is merciful and that men are good and just . 
He will be horror-stricken ; he will be crushed by remorse and the vast obligation laid upon him henceforth . 
And he will not say then , ' I am quits , ' but will say , ' I am guilty in the sight of all men and am more unworthy than all . ' 
With tears of penitence and poignant , tender anguish , he will exclaim : ` Others are better than I , they wanted to save me , not to ruin me ! ' 
Oh , this act of mercy is so easy for you , for in the absence of anything like real evidence it will be too awful for you to pronounce : ` Yes , he is guilty . ' 
`` Better acquit ten guilty men than punish one innocent man ! 
Do you hear , do you hear that majestic voice from the past century of our glorious history ? 
It is not for an insignificant person like me to remind you that the Russian court does not exist for the punishment only , but also for the salvation of the criminal ! 
Let other nations think of retribution and the letter of the law , we will cling to the spirit and the meaning - the salvation and the reformation of the lost . 
If this is true , if Russia and her justice are such , she may go forward with good cheer ! 
Do not try to scare us with your frenzied troikas from which all the nations stand aside in disgust . 
Not a runaway troika , but the stately chariot of Russia will move calmly and majestically to its goal . 
In your hands is the fate of my client , in your hands is the fate of Russian justice . 
You will defend it , you will save it , you will prove that there are men to watch over it , that it is in good hands ! '' 
The Peasants Stand Firm THIS was how Fetyukovitch concluded his speech , and the enthusiasm of the audience burst like an irresistible storm . 
It was out of the question to stop it : the women wept , many of the men wept too , even two important personages shed tears . 
The President submitted , and even postponed ringing his bell . 
The suppression of such an enthusiasm would be the suppression of something sacred , as the ladies cried afterwards . 
The orator himself was genuinely touched . 
And it was at this moment that Ippolit Kirillovitch got up to make certain objections . 
People looked at him with hatred . 
`` What ? 
What 's the meaning of it ? 
He positively dares to make objections , '' the ladies babbled . 
But if the whole world of ladies , including his wife , had protested he could not have been stopped at that moment . 
He was pale , he was shaking with emotion , his first phrases were even unintelligible , he gasped for breath , could hardly speak clearly , lost the thread . 
But he soon recovered himself . 
Of this new speech of his I will quote only a few sentences . '' 
... I am reproached with having woven a romance . 
But what is this defence if not one romance on the top of another ? 
All that was lacking was poetry . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , while waiting for his mistress , tears open the envelope and throws it on the floor . 
We are even told what he said while engaged in this strange act . 
Is not this a flight of fancy ? 
And what proof have we that he had taken out the money ? 
Who heard what he said ? 
The weak-minded idiot , Smerdyakov , transformed into a Byronic hero , avenging society for his illegitimate birth - is n't this a romance in the Byronic style ? 
And the son who breaks into his father 's house and murders him without murdering him is not even a romance - this is a sphinx setting us a riddle which he can not solve himself . 
If he murdered him , he murdered him , and what 's the meaning of his murdering him without having murdered him - who can make head or tail of this ? 
`` Then we are admonished that our tribune is a tribune of true and sound ideas and from this tribune of ` sound ideas ' is heard a solemn declaration that to call the murder of a father ` parricide ' is nothing but a prejudice ! 
But if parricide is a prejudice , and if every child is to ask his father why he is to love him , what will become of us ? 
What will become of the foundations of society ? 
What will become of the family ? 
Parricide , it appears , is only a bogy of Moscow merchants ' wives . 
The most precious , the most sacred guarantees for the destiny and future of Russian justice are presented to us in a perverted and frivolous form , simply to attain an object - to obtain the justification of something which can not be justified . 
` Oh , crush him by mercy , ' cries the counsel for the defence ; but that 's all the criminal wants , and to-morrow it will be seen how much he is crushed . 
And is not the counsel for the defence too modest in asking only for the acquittal of the prisoner ? 
Why not found a charity in the honour of the parricide to commemorate his exploit among future generations ? 
Religion and the Gospel are corrected - that 's all mysticism , we are told , and ours is the only true Christianity which has been subjected to the analysis of reason and common sense . 
And so they set up before us a false semblance of Christ ! 
` What measure ye mete so it shall be meted unto you again , ' cried the counsel for the defence , and instantly deduces that Christ teaches us to measure as it is measured to us and this from the tribune of truth and sound sense ! 
