My mother began weeping , and , careful not to alarm my brother , she entreated him to go to church , to confess and take the sacrament , as he was still able to move about . 
This made him angry , and he said something profane about the church . 
He grew thoughtful , however ; he guessed at once that he was seriously ill , and that that was why his mother was begging him to confess and take the sacrament . 
He had been aware , indeed , for a long time past , that he was far from well , and had a year before coolly observed at dinner to your mother and me , `` My life wo n't be long among you , I may not live another year , '' which seemed now like a prophecy . 
Three days passed and Holy Week had come . 
And on Tuesday morning my brother began going to church . 
`` I am doing this simply for your sake , mother , to please and comfort you , '' he said . 
My mother wept with joy and grief . 
`` His end must be near , '' she thought , `` if there 's such a change in him . '' 
But he was not able to go to church long , he took to his bed , so he had to confess and take the sacrament at home . 
It was a late Easter , and the days were bright , fine , and full of fragrance . 
I remember he used to cough all night and sleep badly , but in the morning he dressed and tried to sit up in an arm-chair . 
That 's how I remember him sitting , sweet and gentle , smiling , his face bright and joyous , in spite of his illness . 
A marvellous change passed over him , his spirit seemed transformed . 
The old nurse would come in and say , `` Let me light the lamp before the holy image , my dear . '' 
And once he would not have allowed it and would have blown it out . 
`` Light it , light it , dear , I was a wretch to have prevented you doing it . 
You are praying when you light the lamp , and I am praying when I rejoice seeing you . 
So we are praying to the same God . '' 
Those words seemed strange to us , and mother would go to her room and weep , but when she went in to him she wiped her eyes and looked cheerful . 
`` Mother , do n't weep , darling , '' he would say , `` I 've long to live yet , long to rejoice with you , and life is glad and joyful . '' 
`` Ah , dear boy , how can you talk of joy when you lie feverish at night , coughing as though you would tear yourself to pieces . '' 
`` Do n't cry , mother , '' he would answer , `` life is paradise , and we are all in paradise , but we wo n't see it ; if we would , we should have heaven on earth the next day . '' 
Everyone wondered at his words , he spoke so strangely and positively ; we were all touched and wept . 
Friends came to see us . 
`` Dear ones , '' he would say to them , `` what have I done that you should love me so , how can you love anyone like me , and how was it I did not know , I did not appreciate it before ? '' 
When the servants came in to him he would say continually , `` Dear , kind people , why are you doing so much for me , do I deserve to be waited on ? 
If it were God 's will for me to live , I would wait on you , for all men should wait on one another . '' 
Mother shook her head as she listened . 
`` My darling , it 's your illness makes you talk like that . '' 
`` Mother darling , '' he would say , `` there must be servants and masters , but if so I will be the servant of my servants , the same as they are to me . 
And another thing , mother , every one of us has sinned against all men , and I more than any . '' 
Mother positively smiled at that , smiled through her tears . 
`` Why , how could you have sinned against all men , more than all ? 
Robbers and murderers have done that , but what sin have you committed yet , that you hold yourself more guilty than all ? '' 
`` Mother , little heart of mine , '' he said -LRB- he had begun using such strange caressing words at that time -RRB- , `` little heart of mine , my joy , believe me , everyone is really responsible to all men for all men and for everything . 
I do n't know how to explain it to you , but I feel it is so , painfully even . 
And how is it we went on then living , getting angry and not knowing ? '' 
So he would get up every day , more and more sweet and joyous and full of love . 
When the doctor , an old German called Eisenschmidt , came : `` Well , doctor , have I another day in this world ? '' 
he would ask , joking . 
`` You 'll live many days yet , '' the doctor would answer , `` and months and years too . '' 
`` Months and years ! '' 
he would exclaim . 
`` Why reckon the days ? 
One day is enough for a man to know all happiness . 
My dear ones , why do we quarrel , try to outshine each other and keep grudges against each other ? 
Let 's go straight into the garden , walk and play there , love , appreciate , and kiss each other , and glorify life . '' 
`` Your son can not last long , '' the doctor told my mother , as she accompanied him the door . 
`` The disease is affecting his brain . '' 
The windows of his room looked out into the garden , and our garden was a shady one , with old trees in it which were coming into bud . 
The first birds of spring were flitting in the branches , chirruping and singing at the windows . 
And looking at them and admiring them , he began suddenly begging their forgiveness too : `` Birds of heaven , happy birds , forgive me , for I have sinned against you too . '' 
None of us could understand that at the time , but he shed tears of joy . 
`` Yes , '' he said , `` there was such a glory of God all about me : birds , trees , meadows , sky ; only I lived in shame and dishonoured it all and did not notice the beauty and glory . '' 
`` You take too many sins on yourself , '' mother used to say , weeping . 
`` Mother , darling , it 's for joy , not for grief I am crying . 
Though I ca n't explain it to you , I like to humble myself before them , for I do n't know how to love them enough . 
If I have sinned against everyone , yet all forgive me , too , and that 's heaven . 
Am I not in heaven now ? '' 
And there was a great deal more I do n't remember . 
I remember I went once into his room when there was no one else there . 
It was a bright evening , the sun was setting , and the whole room was lighted up . 
He beckoned me , and I went up to him . 
He put his hands on my shoulders and looked into my face tenderly , lovingly ; he said nothing for a minute , only looked at me like that . 
`` Well , '' he said , `` run and play now , enjoy life for me too . '' 
I went out then and ran to play . 
And many times in my life afterwards I remembered even with tears how he told me to enjoy life for him too . 
There were many other marvellous and beautiful sayings of his , though we did not understand them at the time . 
He died the third week after Easter . 
He was fully conscious though he could not talk ; up to his last hour he did not change . 
He looked happy , his eyes beamed and sought us , he smiled at us , beckoned us . 
There was a great deal of talk even in the town about his death . 
I was impressed by all this at the time , but not too much so , though I cried a good deal at his funeral . 
I was young then , a child , but a lasting impression , a hidden feeling of it all , remained in my heart , ready to rise up and respond when the time came . 
So indeed it happened . 
-LRB- b -RRB- Of the Holy Scriptures in the Life of Father Zossima . 
I was left alone with my mother . 
Her friends began advising her to send me to Petersburg as other parents did . 
`` You have only one son now , '' they said , `` and have a fair income , and you will be depriving him perhaps of a brilliant career if you keep him here . '' 
They suggested I should be sent to Petersburg to the Cadet Corps , that I might afterwards enter the Imperial Guard . 
My mother hesitated for a long time , it was awful to part with her only child , but she made up her mind to it at last , though not without many tears , believing she was acting for my happiness . 
She brought me to Petersburg and put me into the Cadet Corps , and I never saw her again . 
For she too died three years afterwards . 
She spent those three years mourning and grieving for both of us . 
From the house of my childhood I have brought nothing but precious memories , for there are no memories more precious than those of early childhood in one 's first home . 
And that is almost always so if there is any love and harmony in the family at all . 
Indeed , precious memories may remain even of a bad home , if only the heart knows how to find what is precious . 
With my memories of home I count , too , my memories of the Bible , which , child as I was , I was very eager to read at home . 
I had a book of Scripture history then with excellent pictures , called A Hundred and Four Stories from the Old and New Testament , and I learned to read from it . 
I have it lying on my shelf now ; I keep it as a precious relic of the past . 
But even before I learned to read , I remember first being moved to devotional feeling at eight years old . 
My mother took me alone to mass -LRB- I do n't remember where my brother was at the time -RRB- on the Monday before Easter . 
It was a fine day , and I remember to-day , as though I saw it now , how the incense rose from the censer and softly floated upwards and , overhead in the cupola , mingled in rising waves with the sunlight that streamed in at the little window . 
I was stirred by the sight , and for the first time in my life I consciously received the seed of God 's word in my heart . 
A youth came out into the middle of the church carrying a big book , so large that at the time I fancied he could scarcely carry it . 
He laid it on the reading desk , opened it , and began reading , and suddenly for the first time I understood something read in the church of God . 
In the land of Uz , there lived a man , righteous and God-fearing , and he had great wealth , so many camels , so many sheep and asses , and his children feasted , and he loved them very much and prayed for them . 
`` It may be that my sons have sinned in their feasting . '' 
Now the devil came before the Lord together with the sons of God , and said to the Lord that he had gone up and down the earth and under the earth . 
