Was not one moment of her love worth all the rest of life , even in the agonies of disgrace ? 
This wild question clutched at his heart . 
`` To her , to her alone , to see her , to hear her , to think of nothing , to forget everything , if only for that night , for an hour , for a moment ! '' 
Just as he turned from the balcony into the passage , he came upon the landlord , Trifon Borissovitch . 
He thought he looked gloomy and worried , and fancied he had come to find him . 
`` What is it , Trifon Borissovitch ? 
Are you looking for me ? '' 
`` No , sir , '' The landlord seemed disconcerted . 
`` Why should I be looking for you ? 
Where have you been ? '' 
`` Why do you look so glum ? 
You 're not angry , are you ? 
Wait a bit , you shall soon get to bed ... . 
What 's the time ? '' 
`` It 'll be three o'clock . 
Past three , it must be . '' 
`` We 'll leave off soon . 
We 'll leave off . '' 
`` Do n't mention it ; it does n't matter . 
Keep it up as long as you like ... '' `` What 's the matter with him ? '' 
Mitya wondered for an instant , and he ran back to the room where the girls were dancing . 
But she was not there . 
She was not in the blue room either ; there was no one but Kalgonov asleep on the sofa . 
Mitya peeped behind the curtain - she was there . 
She was sitting in the corner , on a trunk . 
Bent forward , with her head and arms on the bed close by , she was crying bitterly , doing her utmost to stifle her sobs that she might not be heard . 
Seeing Mitya , she beckoned him to her , and when he ran to her , she grasped his hand tightly . 
`` Mitya , Mitya , I loved him , you know . 
How I have loved him these five years , all that time ! 
Did I love him or only my own anger ? 
No , him , him ! 
It 's a lie that it was my anger I loved and not him . 
Mitya , I was only seventeen then ; he was so kind to me , so merry ; he used to sing to me ... . 
Or so it seemed to a silly girl like me ... . 
And now , O Lord , it 's not the same man . 
Even his face is not the same ; he 's different altogether . 
I should n't have known him . 
I drove here with Timofey , and all the way I was thinking how I should meet him , what I should say to him , how we should look at one another . 
My soul was faint , and all of a sudden it was just as though he had emptied a pail of dirty water over me . 
He talked to me like a schoolmaster , all so grave and learned ; he met me so solemnly that I was struck dumb . 
I could n't get a word in . 
At first I thought he was ashamed to talk before his great big Pole . 
I sat staring at him and wondering why I could n't say a word to him now . 
It must have been his wife that ruined him ; you know he threw me up to get married . 
She must have changed him like that . 
Mitya , how shameful it is ! 
Oh , Mitya , I 'm ashamed , I 'm ashamed for all my life . 
Curse it , curse it , curse those five years ! '' 
And again she burst into tears , but clung tight to Mitya 's hand and did not let it go . 
`` Mitya , darling , stay , do n't go away . 
I want to say one word to you , '' she whispered , and suddenly raised her face to him . 
`` Listen , tell me who it is I love ? 
I love one man here . 
Who is that man ? 
That 's what you must tell me . '' 
A smile lighted up her face that was swollen with weeping , and her eyes shone in the half darkness . 
`` A falcon flew in , and my heart sank . 
`` Fool ! 
that 's the man you love ! ' 
That was what my heart whispered to me at once . 
You came in and all grew bright . 
What 's he afraid of ? 
I wondered . 
For you were frightened ; you could n't speak . 
It 's not them he 's afraid of - could you be frightened of anyone ? 
It 's me he 's afraid of , I thought , only me . 
So Fenya told you , you little stupid , how I called to Alyosha out of the window that I 'd loved Mityenka for one hour , and that I was going now to love ... another . 
Mitya , Mitya , how could I be such a fool as to think I could love anyone after you ? 
Do you forgive me , Mitya ? 
Do you forgive me or not ? 
Do you love me ? 
Do you love me ? '' 
She jumped up and held him with both hands on his shoulders . 
Mitya , dumb with rapture , gazed into her eyes , at her face , at her smile , and suddenly clasped her tightly his arms and kissed her passionately . 
`` You will forgive me for having tormented you ? 
It was through spite I tormented you all . 
It was for spite I drove the old man out of his mind ... . 
Do you remember how you drank at my house one day and broke the wine-glass ? 
I remembered that and I broke a glass to-day and drank ` to my vile heart . ' 
Mitya , my falcon , why do n't you kiss me ? 
He kissed me once , and now he draws back and looks and listens . 
Why listen to me ? 
Kiss me , kiss me hard , that 's right . 
if you love , well , then , love ! 
I 'll be your slave now , your slave for the rest of my life . 
It 's sweet to be a slave . 
Kiss me ! 
Beat me , ill-treat me , do what you will with me ... . 
And I do deserve to suffer . 
Stay , wait , afterwards , I wo n't have that ... '' she suddenly thrust him away . 
`` Go along , Mitya , I 'll come and have some wine , I want to be drunk , I 'm going to get drunk and dance ; I must , I must ! '' 
She tore herself away from him and disappeared behind the curtain . 
Mitya followed like a drunken man . 
`` Yes , come what may - whatever may happen now , for one minute I 'd give the whole world , '' he thought . 
Grushenka did , in fact , toss off a whole glass of champagne at one gulp , and became at once very tipsy . 
She sat down in the same chair as before , with a blissful smile on her face . 
Her cheeks were glowing , her lips were burning , her flashing eyes were moist ; there was passionate appeal in her eyes . 
Even Kalgonov felt a stir at the heart and went up to her . 
`` Did you feel how I kissed you when you were asleep just now ? '' 
she said thickly . 
