P.S. - I write my curse , but I adore you ! 
I hear it in my heart . 
One string is left , and it vibrates . 
Better tear my heart in two ! 
I shall kill myself , but first of all that cur . 
I shall tear three thousand from him and fling it to you . 
Though I 've been a scoundrel to you , I am not a thief ! 
You can expect three thousand . 
The cur keeps it under his mattress , in pink ribbon . 
I am not a thief , but I 'll murder my thief . 
Katya , do n't look disdainful . 
Dmitri is not a thief ! 
but a murderer ! 
He has murdered his father and ruined himself to hold his ground , rather than endure your pride . 
And he does n't love you . 
P.P.S. - I kiss your feet , farewel ! 
P.P.P.S. - Katya , pray to God that someone 'll give me the money . 
Then I shall not be steeped in gore , and if no one does - I shall ! 
Kill me ! 
Your slave and enemy , D. KARAMAZOV When Ivan read this `` document '' he was convinced . 
So then it was his brother , not Smerdyakov . 
And if not Smerdyakov , then not he , Ivan . 
This letter at once assumed in his eyes the aspect of a logical proof . 
There could be no longer the slightest doubt of Mitya 's guilt . 
The suspicion never occurred to Ivan , by the way , that Mitya might have committed the murder in conjunction with Smerdyakov , and , indeed , such a theory did not fit in with the facts . 
Ivan was completely reassured . 
The next morning he only thought of Smerdyakov and his gibes with contempt . 
A few days later he positively wondered how he could have been so horribly distressed at his suspicions . 
He resolved to dismiss him with contempt and forget him . 
So passed a month . 
He made no further inquiry about Smerdyakov , but twice he happened to hear that he was very ill and out of his mind . 
`` He 'll end in madness , '' the young doctor Varvinsky observed about him , and Ivan remembered this . 
During the last week of that month Ivan himself began to feel very ill . 
He went to consult the Moscow doctor who had been sent for by Katerina Ivanovna just before the trial . 
And just at that time his relations with Katerina Ivanovna became acutely strained . 
They were like two enemies in love with one another . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's `` returns '' to Mitya , that is , her brief but violent revulsions of feeling in his favour , drove Ivan to perfect frenzy . 
Strange to say , until that last scene described above , when Alyosha came from Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna , Ivan had never once , during that month , heard her express a doubt of Mitya 's guilt , in spite of those `` returns '' that were so hateful to him . 
It is remarkable , too , that while he felt that he hated Mitya more and more every day , he realised that it was not on account of Katya 's `` returns '' that he hated him , but just because he was the murderer of his father . 
He was conscious of this and fully recognised it to himself Nevertheless , he went to see Mitya ten days before the trial and proposed to him a plan of escape - a plan he had obviously thought over a long time . 
He was partly impelled to do this by a sore place still left in his heart from a phrase of Smerdyakov 's , that it was to his , Ivan 's , advantage that his brother should be convicted , as that would increase his inheritance and Alyosha 's from forty to sixty thousand roubles . 
He determined to sacrifice thirty thousand on arranging Mitya 's escape . 
On his return from seeing him , he was very mournful and dispirited ; he suddenly began to feel that he was anxious for Mitya 's escape , not only to heal that sore place by sacrificing thirty thousand , but for another reason . 
`` Is it because I am as much a murderer at heart ? '' 
he asked himself . 
Something very deep down seemed burning and rankling in his soul . 
His pride above all suffered cruelly all that month . 
But of that later ... . 
When , after his conversation with Alyosha , Ivan suddenly decided with his hand on the bell of his lodging to go to Smerdyakov , he obeyed a sudden and peculiar impulse of indignation . 
He suddenly remembered how Katerina Ivanovna had only just cried out to him in Alyosha 's presence : `` It was you , you , persuaded me of his '' -LRB- that is , Mitya 's -RRB- `` guilt ! '' 
Ivan was thunderstruck when he recalled it . 
He had never once tried to persuade her that Mitya was the murderer ; on the contrary , he had suspected himself in her presence , that time when he came back from Smerdyakov . 
It was she , she , who had produced that `` document '' and proved his brother 's guilt . 
And now she suddenly exclaimed : `` I 've been at Smerdyakov 's myself ! '' 
When had she been there ? 
Ivan had known nothing of it . 
So she was not at all so sure of Mitya 's guilt ! 
And what could Smerdyakov have told her ? 
What , what , had he said to her ? 
His heart burned with violent anger . 
He could not understand how he could , half an hour before , have let those words pass and not have cried out at the moment . 
He let go of the bell and rushed off to Smerdyakov . 
`` I shall kill him , perhaps , this time , '' he thought on the way . 
The Third and Last Interview with Smerdyakov WHEN he was half-way there , the keen dry wind that had been blowing early that morning rose again , and a fine dry snow began falling thickly . 
It did not lie on the ground , but was whirled about by the wind , and soon there was a regular snowstorm . 
There were scarcely any lamp-posts in the part of the town where Smerdyakov lived . 
Ivan strode alone in the darkness , unconscious of the storm , instinctively picking out his way . 
His head ached and there was a painful throbbing in his temples . 
He felt that his hands were twitching convulsively . 
Not far from Marya Kondratyevna 's cottage , Ivan suddenly came upon a solitary drunken little peasant . 
He was wearing a coarse and patched coat , and was walking in zigzags , grumbling and swearing to himself . 
Then suddenly he would begin singing in a husky drunken voice : Ach , Vanka 's gone to Petersburg ; I wo n't wait till he comes back . 
But he broke off every time at the second line and began swearing again ; then he would begin the same song again . 
Ivan felt an intense hatred for him before he had thought about him at all . 
Suddenly he realised his presence and felt an irresistible impulse to knock him down . 
At that moment they met , and the peasant with a violent lurch fell full tilt against Ivan , who pushed him back furiously . 
The peasant went flying backwards and fell like a log on the frozen ground . 
He uttered one plaintive `` O - oh ! '' 
and then was silent . 
Ivan stepped up to him . 
He was lying on his back , without movement or consciousness . 
`` He will be frozen , '' thought Ivan , and he went on his way to Smerdyakov 's . 
In the passage , Marya Kondratyevna , who ran out to open the door with a candle in her hand , whispered that Smerdyakov was very ill ; `` It 's not that he 's laid up , but he seems not himself , and he even told us to take the tea away ; he would n't have any . '' 
`` Why , does he make a row ? '' 
asked Ivan coarsely . 
`` Oh dear no , quite the contrary , he 's very quiet . 
Only please do n't talk to him too long , '' Marya Kondratyevna begged him . 
Ivan opened the door and stepped into the room . 
It was over-heated as before , but there were changes in the room . 
One of the benches at the side had been removed , and in its place had been put a large old mahogany leather sofa , on which a bed had been made up , with fairly clean white pillows . 
Smerdyakov was sitting on the sofa , wearing the same dressing-gown . 
The table had been brought out in front of the sofa , so that there was hardly room to move . 
On the table lay a thick book in yellow cover , but Smerdyakov was not reading it . 
He seemed to be sitting doing nothing . 
He met Ivan with a slow silent gaze , and was apparently not at all surprised at his coming . 
There was a great change in his face ; he was much thinner and sallower . 
His eyes were sunken and there were blue marks under them . 
`` Why , you really are ill ? '' 
Ivan stopped short . 
`` I wo n't keep you long , I wont even take off my coat . 
