When Pyotr Ilyitch , though still unwilling to believe in it , threatened to tell someone so as to prevent the suicide , Mitya had answered grinning : `` You 'll be too late . '' 
So they must make haste to Mokroe to find the criminal , before he really did shoot himself . 
`` That 's clear , that 's clear ! '' 
repeated the prosecutor in great excitement . 
`` That 's just the way with mad fellows like that : ' I shall kill myself to-morrow , so I 'll make merry till I die ! ' '' 
The story of how he had bought the wine and provisions excited the prosecutor more than ever . 
`` Do you remember the fellow that murdered a merchant called Olsufyev , gentlemen ? 
He stole fifteen hundred , went at once to have his hair curled , and then , without even hiding the money , carrying it almost in his hand in the same way , he went off to the girls . '' 
All were delayed , however , by the inquiry , the search , and the formalities , etc. , in the house of Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
It all took time and so , two hours before starting , they sent on ahead to Mokroe the officer of the rural police , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch Schmertsov , who had arrived in the town the morning before to get his pay . 
He was instructed to avoid raising the alarm when he reached Mokroe , but to keep constant watch over the `` criminal '' till the arrival of the proper authorities , to procure also witnesses for the arrest , police constables , and so on . 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch did as he was told , preserving his incognito , and giving no one but his old acquaintance , Trifon Borissovitch , the slightest hint of his secret business . 
He had spoken to him just before Mitya met the landlord in the balcony , looking for him in the dark , and noticed at once a change in Trifon Borissovitch 's face and voice . 
So neither Mitya nor anyone else knew that he was being watched . 
The box with the pistols had been carried off by Trifon Borissovitch and put in a suitable place . 
Only after four o'clock , almost at sunrise , all the officials , the police captain , the prosecutor , the investigating lawyer , drove up in two carriages , each drawn by three horses . 
The doctor remained at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's to make a post-mortem next day on the body . 
But he was particularly interested in the condition of the servant , Smerdyakov . 
`` Such violent and protracted epileptic fits , recurring continually for twenty-four hours , are rarely to be met with , and are of interest to science , '' he declared enthusiastically to his companions , and as they left they laughingly congratulated him on his find . 
The prosecutor and the investigating lawyer distinctly remembered the doctor 's saying that Smerdyakov could not outlive the night . 
After these long , but I think necessary explanations , we will return to that moment of our tale at which we broke off . 
The Sufferings of a Soul The First Ordeal AND so Mitya sat looking wildly at the people round him , not understanding what was said to him . 
Suddenly he got up , flung up his hands , and shouted aloud : `` I 'm not guilty ! 
I 'm not guilty of that blood ! 
I 'm not guilty of my father 's blood ... . 
I meant to kill him . 
But I 'm not guilty . 
Not I. '' But he had hardly said this , before Grushenka rushed from behind the curtain and flung herself at the police captain 's feet . 
`` It was my fault ! 
Mine ! 
My wickedness ! '' 
she cried , in a heart-rending voice , bathed in tears , stretching out her clasped hands towards them . 
`` He did it through me . 
I tortured him and drove him to it . 
I tortured that poor old man that 's dead , too , in my wickedness , and brought him to this ! 
It 's my fault , mine first , mine most , my fault ! '' 
`` Yes , it 's your fault ! 
You 're the chief criminal ! 
You fury ! 
You harlot ! 
You 're the most to blame ! '' 
shouted the police captain , threatening her with his hand . 
But he was quickly and resolutely suppressed . 
The prosecutor positively seized hold of him . 
`` This is absolutely irregular , Mihail Makarovitch ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You are positively hindering the inquiry ... . 
You 're ruining the case . '' 
he almost gasped . 
`` Follow the regular course ! 
Follow the regular course ! '' 
cried Nikolay Parfenovitch , fearfully excited too , `` otherwise it 's absolutely impossible ! 
... '' `` Judge us together ! '' 
Grushenka cried frantically , still kneeling . 
`` Punish us together . 
I will go with him now , if it 's to death ! '' 
`` Grusha , my life , my blood , my holy one ! '' 
Mitya fell on his knees beside her and held her tight in his arms . 
`` Do n't believe her , '' he cried , `` she 's not guilty of anything , of any blood , of anything ! '' 
He remembered afterwards that he was forcibly dragged away from her by several men , and that she was led out , and that when he recovered himself he was sitting at the table . 
Beside him and behind him stood the men with metal plates . 
Facing him on the other side of the table sat Nikolay Parfenovitch , the investigating lawyer . 
He kept persuading him to drink a little water out of a glass that stood on the table . 
`` That will refresh you , that will calm you . 
Be calm , do n't be frightened , '' he added , extremely politely . 
Mitya -LRB- he remembered it afterwards -RRB- became suddenly intensely interested in his big rings , one with an amethyst , and another with a transparent bright yellow stone , of great brilliance . 
And long afterwards he remembered with wonder how those rings had riveted his attention through all those terrible hours of interrogation , so that he was utterly unable to tear himself away from them and dismiss them , as things that had nothing to do with his position . 
On Mitya 's left side , in the place where Maximov had been sitting at the beginning of the evening , the prosecutor was now seated , and on Mitya 's right hand , where Grushenka had been , was a rosy-cheeked young man in a sort of shabby hunting-jacket , with ink and paper before him . 
This was the secretary of the investigating lawyer , who had brought him with him . 
The police captain was now standing by the window at the other end of the room , beside Kalganov , who was sitting there . 
`` Drink some water , '' said the investigating lawyer softly , for the tenth time . 
`` I have drunk it , gentlemen , I have ... but come gentlemen , crush me , punish me , decide my fate ! '' 
cried Mitya , staring with terribly fixed wide-open eyes at the investigating lawyer . 
`` So you positively declare that you are not guilty of the death of your father , Fyodor Pavlovitch ? '' 
asked the investigating lawyer , softly but insistently . 
`` I am not guilty . 
I am guilty of the blood of another old man , but not of my father 's . 
And I weep for it ! 
I killed , I killed the old man and knocked him down ... . 
But it 's hard to have to answer for that murder with another , a terrible murder of which I am not guilty ... It 's a terrible accusation , gentlemen , a knockdown blow . 
But who has killed my father , who has killed him ? 
Who can have killed him if I did n't ? 
It 's marvellous , extraordinary , impossible . '' 
`` Yes , who can have killed him ? '' 
the investigating lawyer was beginning , but Ippolit Kirillovitch , the prosecutor , glancing at him , addressed Mitya . 
`` You need not worry yourself about the old servant , Grigory Vasilyevitch . 
He is alive , he has recovered , and in spite of the terrible blows inflicted , according to his own and your evidence , by you , there seems no doubt that he will live , so the doctor says , at least . '' 
`` Alive ? 
He 's alive ? '' 
cried Mitya , flinging up his hands . 
His face beamed . 
`` Lord , I thank Thee for the miracle Thou has wrought for me , a sinner and evildoer . 
That 's an answer to my prayer . 
I 've been praying all night . '' 
And he crossed himself three times . 
He was almost breathless . 
`` So from this Grigory we have received such important evidence concerning you , that - '' The prosecutor would have continued , but Mitya suddenly jumped up from his chair . 
`` One minute , gentlemen , for God 's sake , one minute ; I will run to her - '' `` Excuse me , at this moment it 's quite impossible , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch almost shrieked . 
He , too , leapt to his feet . 
Mitya was seized by the men with the metal plates , but he sat down of his own accord ... `` Gentlemen , what a pity ! 
