And there 's a whole life in that , in knowing that the sun is there . 
Alyosha , my angel , all these philosophies are the death of me . 
Damn them ! 
Brother Ivan - '' `` What of brother Ivan ? '' 
interrupted Alyosha , but Mitya did not hear . 
`` You see , I never had any of these doubts before , but it was all hidden away in me . 
It was perhaps just because ideas I did not understand were surging up in me , that I used to drink and fight and rage . 
It was to stifle them in myself , to still them , to smother them . 
Ivan is not Rakitin , there is an idea in him . 
Ivan is a sphinx and is silent ; he is always silent . 
It 's God that 's worrying me . 
That 's the only thing that 's worrying me . 
What if He does n't exist ? 
What if Rakitin 's right - that it 's an idea made up by men ? 
Then if He does n't exist , man is the chief of the earth , of the universe . 
Magnificent ! 
Only how is he going to be good without God ? 
That 's the question . 
I always come back to that . 
For whom is man going to love then ? 
To whom will he be thankful ? 
To whom will he sing the hymn ? 
Rakitin laughs . 
Rakitin says that one can love humanity without God . 
Well , only a snivelling idiot can maintain that . 
I ca n't understand it . 
Life 's easy for Rakitin . 
` You 'd better think about the extension of civic rights , or even of keeping down the price of meat . 
You will show your love for humanity more simply and directly by that , than by philosophy . ' 
I answered him , ` Well , but you , without a God , are more likely to raise the price of meat , if it suits you , and make a rouble on every copeck . ' 
He lost his temper . 
But after all , what is goodness ? 
Answer me that , Alexey . 
Goodness is one thing with me and another with a Chinaman , so it 's a relative thing . 
Or is n't it ? 
Is it not relative ? 
A treacherous question ! 
You wo n't laugh if I tell you it 's kept me awake two nights . 
I only wonder now how people can live and think nothing about it . 
Vanity ! 
Ivan has no God . 
He has an idea . 
It 's beyond me . 
But he is silent . 
I believe he is a Freemason . 
I asked him , but he is silent . 
I wanted to drink from the springs of his soul - he was silent . 
But once he did drop a word . '' 
`` What did he say ? '' 
Alyosha took it up quickly . 
`` I said to him , ` Then everything is lawful , if it is so ? ' 
He frowned . 
` Fyodor Pavlovitch , our papa , ' he said , ` was a pig , but his ideas were right enough . ' 
That was what he dropped . 
That was all he said . 
That was going one better than Rakitin . '' 
`` Yes , '' Alyosha assented bitterly . 
`` When was he with you ? '' 
`` Of that later ; now I must speak of something else . 
I have said nothing about Ivan to you before . 
I put it off to the last . 
When my business here is over and the verdict has been given , then I 'll tell you something . 
I 'll tell you everything . 
We 've something tremendous on hand ... . 
And you shall be my judge in it . 
But do n't begin about that now ; be silent . 
You talk of to-morrow , of the trial ; but , would you believe it , I know nothing about it . '' 
`` Have you talked to the counsel ? '' 
`` What 's the use of the counsel ? 
I told him all about it . 
He 's a soft , city-bred rogue - a Bernard ! 
But he does n't believe me - not a bit of it . 
Only imagine , he believes I did it . 
I see it . 
` In that case , ' I asked him , ` why have you come to defend me ? ' 
Hang them all ! 
They 've got a doctor down , too , want to prove I 'm mad . 
I wo n't have that ! 
Katerina Ivanovna wants to do her ` duty ' to the end , whatever the strain ! '' 
Mitya smiled bitterly . 
`` The cat ! 
Hard-hearted creature ! 
She knows that I said of her at Mokroe that she was a woman of ` great wrath . ' 
They repeated it . 
Yes , the facts against me have grown numerous as the sands of the sea . 
Grigory sticks to his point . 
Grigory 's honest , but a fool . 
Many people are honest because they are fools : that 's Rakitin 's idea . 
Grigory 's my enemy . 
And there are some people who are better as foes than friends . 
I mean Katerina Ivanovna . 
I am afraid , oh , I am afraid she will tell how she bowed to the ground after that four thousand . 
She 'll pay it back to the last farthing . 
I do n't want her sacrifice ; they 'll put me to shame at the trial . 
I wonder how I can stand it . 
Go to her , Alyosha , ask her not to speak of that in the court , ca n't you ? 
But damn it all , it does n't matter ! 
I shall get through somehow . 
I do n't pity her . 
It 's her own doing . 
