Darkness and destruction ! 
No need to explain . 
You 'll find out in due time . 
The filthy back-alley and the she-devil . 
Good-bye . 
Do n't pray for me , I 'm not worth it . 
And there 's no need , no need at all ... . 
I do n't need it ! 
Away ! '' 
And he suddenly retreated , this time finally . 
Alyosha went towards the monastery . 
`` What ? 
I shall never see him again ! 
What is he saying ? '' 
he wondered wildly . 
`` Why , I shall certainly see him to-morrow . 
I shall look him up . 
I shall make a point of it . 
What does he mean ? '' 
He went round the monastery , and crossed the pine-wood to the hermitage . 
The door was opened to him , though no one was admitted at that hour . 
There was a tremor in his heart as he went into Father Zossima 's cell . 
`` Why , why , had he gone forth ? 
Why had he sent him into the world ? 
Here was peace . 
Here was holiness . 
But there was confusion , there was darkness in which one lost one 's way and went astray at once ... '' In the cell he found the novice Porfiry and Father Paissy , who came every hour to inquire after Father Zossima . 
Alyosha learnt with alarm that he was getting worse and worse . 
Even his usual discourse with the brothers could not take place that day . 
As a rule every evening after service the monks flocked into Father Zossima 's cell , and all confessed aloud their sins of the day , their sinful thoughts and temptations ; even their disputes , if there had been any . 
Some confessed kneeling . 
The elder absolved , reconciled , exhorted , imposed penance , blessed , and dismissed them . 
It was against this general `` confession '' that the opponents of `` elders '' protested , maintaining that it was a profanation of the sacrament of confession , almost a sacrilege , though this was quite a different thing . 
They even represented to the diocesan authorities that such confessions attained no good object , but actually to a large extent led to sin and temptation . 
Many of the brothers disliked going to the elder , and went against their own will because everyone went , and for fear they should be accused of pride and rebellious ideas . 
People said that some of the monks agreed beforehand , saying , `` I 'll confess I lost my temper with you this morning , and you confirm it , '' simply in order to have something to say . 
Alyosha knew that this actually happened sometimes . 
He knew , too , that there were among the monks some who deep resented the fact that letters from relations were habitually taken to the elder , to be opened and read by him before those to whom they were addressed . 
It was assumed , of course , that all this was done freely , and in good faith , by way of voluntary submission and salutary guidance . 
But , in fact , there was sometimes no little insincerity , and much that was false and strained in this practice . 
Yet the older and more experienced of the monks adhered to their opinion , arguing that `` for those who have come within these walls sincerely seeking salvation , such obedience and sacrifice will certainly be salutary and of great benefit ; those , on the other hand , who find it irksome , and repine , are no true monks , and have made a mistake in entering the monastery - their proper place is in the world . 
Even in the temple one can not be safe from sin and the devil . 
So it was no good taking it too much into account . '' 
`` He is weaker , a drowsiness has come over him , '' Father Paissy whispered to Alyosha , as he blessed him . 
`` It 's difficult to rouse him . 
And he must not be roused . 
He waked up for five minutes , sent his blessing to the brothers , and begged their prayers for him at night . 
He intends to take the sacrament again in the morning . 
He remembered you , Alexey . 
He asked whether you had gone away , and was told that you were in the town . ' 
I blessed him for that work , ' he said , ` his place is there , not here , for awhile . ' 
Those were his words about you . 
He remembered you lovingly , with anxiety ; do you understand how he honoured you ? 
But how is it that he has decided that you shall spend some time in the world ? 
He must have foreseen something in your destiny ! 
Understand , Alexey , that if you return to the world , it must be to do the duty laid upon you by your elder , and not for frivolous vanity and worldly pleasures . '' 
Father Paissy went out . 
Alyosha had no doubt that Father Zossima was dying , though he might live another day or two . 
Alyosha firmly and ardently resolved that in spite of his promises to his father , the Hohlakovs , and Katerina Ivanovna , he would not leave the monastery next day , but would remain with his elder to the end . 
His heart glowed with love , and he reproached himself bitterly for having been able for one instant to forget him whom he had left in the monastery on his death bed , and whom he honoured above everyone in the world . 
He went into Father Zossima 's bedroom , knelt down , and bowed to the ground before the elder , who slept quietly without stirring , with regular , hardly audible breathing and a peaceful face . 
Alyosha returned to the other room , where Father Zossima received his guests in the morning . 
Taking off his boots , he lay down on the hard , narrow , leathern sofa , which he had long used as a bed , bringing nothing but a pillow . 
The mattress , about which his father had shouted to him that morning , he had long forgotten to lie on . 
He took off his cassock , which he used as a covering . 
But before going to bed , he fell on his knees and prayed a long time . 
In his fervent prayer he did not beseech God to lighten his darkness but only thirsted for the joyous emotion , which always visited his soul after the praise and adoration , of which his evening prayer usually consisted . 
That joy always brought him light untroubled sleep . 
As he was praying , he suddenly felt in his pocket the little pink note the servant had handed him as he left Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
He was disturbed , but finished his prayer . 
Then , after some hesitation , he opened the envelope . 
In it was a letter to him , signed by Lise , the young daughter of Madame Hohlakov , who had laughed at him before the elder in the morning . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she wrote , `` I am writing to you without anyone 's knowledge , even mamma 's , and I know how wrong it is . 
But I can not live without telling you the feeling that has sprung up in my heart , and this no one but us two must know for a time . 
But how am I to say what I want so much to tell you ? 
Paper , they say , does not blush , but I assure you it 's not true and that it 's blushing just as I am now , all over . 
Dear Alyosha , I love you , I 've loved you from my childhood , since our Moscow days , when you were very different from what you are now , and I shall love you all my life . 
My heart has chosen you , to unite our lives , and pass them together till our old age . 
Of course , on condition that you will leave the monastery . 
As for our age we will wait for the time fixed by the law . 
By that time I shall certainly be quite strong , I shall be walking and dancing . 
There can be no doubt of that . 
`` You see how I 've thought of everything . 
There 's only one thing I ca n't imagine : what you 'll think of me when you read this . 
I 'm always laughing and being naughty . 
I made you angry this morning , but I assure you before I took up my pen , I prayed before the Image of the Mother of God , and now I 'm praying , and almost crying . 
`` My secret is in your hands . 
When you come to-morrow , I do n't know how I shall look at you . 
Ah , Alexey Fyodorovitch , what if I ca n't restrain myself like a silly and laugh when I look at you as I did to-day . 
You 'll think I 'm a nasty girl making fun of you , and you wo n't believe my letter . 
And so I beg you , dear one , if you 've any pity for me , when you come to-morrow , do n't look me straight in the face , for if I meet your eyes , it will be sure to make me laugh , especially as you 'll be in that long gown . 
I feel cold all over when I think of it , so when you come , do n't look at me at all for a time , look at mamma or at the window ... `` Here I 've written you a love-letter . 
Oh , dear , what have I done ? 
Alyosha , do n't despise me , and if I 've done something very horrid and wounded you , forgive me . 
Now the secret of my reputation , ruined perhaps for ever , is in your hands . 
`` I shall certainly cry to-day . 
Good-bye till our meeting , our awful meeting . 
- Lise . 
`` P.S. - Alyosha ! 
You must , must , must come ! 
