`` And the old man ? '' 
`` The kiss glows in his heart , but the old man adheres to his idea . '' 
`` And you with him , you too ? '' 
cried Alyosha , mournfully . 
Ivan laughed . 
`` Why , it 's all nonsense , Alyosha . 
It 's only a senseless poem of a senseless student , who could never write two lines of verse . 
Why do you take it so seriously ? 
Surely you do n't suppose I am going straight off to the Jesuits , to join the men who are correcting His work ? 
Good Lord , it 's no business of mine . 
I told you , all I want is to live on to thirty , and then ... dash the cup to the ground ! '' 
`` But the little sticky leaves , and the precious tombs , and the blue sky , and the woman you love ! 
How will you live , how will you love them ? '' 
Alyosha cried sorrowfully . 
`` With such a hell in your heart and your head , how can you ? 
No , that 's just what you are going away for , to join them ... if not , you will kill yourself , you ca n't endure it ! '' 
`` There is a strength to endure everything , '' Ivan said with a cold smile . 
`` The strength of the Karamazovs - the strength of the Karamazov baseness . '' 
`` To sink into debauchery , to stifle your soul with corruption , yes ? '' 
`` Possibly even that ... only perhaps till I am thirty I shall escape it , and then - '' `` How will you escape it ? 
By what will you escape it ? 
That 's impossible with your ideas . '' 
`` In the Karamazov way , again . '' '' 
` Everything is lawful , ' you mean ? 
Everything is lawful , is that it ? '' 
Ivan scowled , and all at once turned strangely pale . 
`` Ah , you 've caught up yesterday 's phrase , which so offended Muisov - and which Dmitri pounced upon so naively and paraphrased ! '' 
he smiled queerly . 
`` Yes , if you like , ` everything is lawful ' since the word has been said , I wo n't deny it . 
And Mitya 's version is n't bad . '' 
Alyosha looked at him in silence . 
`` I thought that going away from here I have you at least , '' Ivan said suddenly , with unexpected feeling ; `` but now I see that there is no place for me even in your heart , my dear hermit . 
The formula , ` all is lawful , ' I wo n't renounce - will you renounce me for that , yes ? '' 
Alyosha got up , went to him and softly kissed him on the lips . 
`` That 's plagiarism , '' cried Ivan , highly delighted . 
`` You stole that from my poem . 
Thank you though . 
Get up , Alyosha , it 's time we were going , both of us . '' 
They went out , but stopped when they reached the entrance of the restaurant . 
`` Listen , Alyosha , '' Ivan began in a resolute voice , `` if I am really able to care for the sticky little leaves I shall only love them , remembering you . 
It 's enough for me that you are somewhere here , and I sha n't lose my desire for life yet . 
Is that enough for you ? 
Take it as a declaration of love if you like . 
And now you go to the right and I to the left . 
And it 's enough , do you hear , enough . 
I mean even if I do n't go away to-morrow -LRB- I think I certainly shall go -RRB- and we meet again , do n't say a word more on these subjects . 
I beg that particularly . 
And about Dmitri too , I ask you specially , never speak to me again , '' he added , with sudden irritation ; `` it 's all exhausted , it has all been said over and over again , has n't it ? 
And I 'll make you one promise in return for it . 
When at thirty , I want to ` dash the cup to the ground , ' wherever I may be I 'll come to have one more talk with you , even though it were from America , you may be sure of that . 
I 'll come on purpose . 
It will be very interesting to have a look at you , to see what you 'll be by that time . 
It 's rather a solemn promise , you see . 
And we really may be parting for seven years or ten . 
Come , go now to your Pater Seraphicus , he is dying . 
If he dies without you , you will be angry with me for having kept you . 
Good-bye , kiss me once more ; that 's right , now go . '' 
Ivan turned suddenly and went his way without looking back . 
It was just as Dmitri had left Alyosha the day before , though the parting had been very different . 
The strange resemblance flashed like an arrow through Alyosha 's mind in the distress and dejection of that moment . 
He waited a little , looking after his brother . 
He suddenly noticed that Ivan swayed as he walked and that his right shoulder looked lower than his left . 
He had never noticed it before . 
But all at once he turned too , and almost ran to the monastery . 
It was nearly dark , and he felt almost frightened ; something new was growing up in him for which he could not account . 
The wind had risen again as on the previous evening , and the ancient pines murmured gloomily about him when he entered the hermitage copse . 
He almost ran . 
`` Pater Seraphicus - he got that name from somewhere - where from ? '' 
Alyosha wondered . 
`` Ivan , poor Ivan , and when shall I see you again ? 
... Here is the hermitage . 
Yes , yes , that he is , Pater Seraphicus , he will save me - from him and for ever ! '' 
Several times afterwards he wondered how he could , on leaving Ivan , so completely forget his brother Dmitri , though he had that morning , only a few hours before , so firmly resolved to find him and not to give up doing so , even should he be unable to return to the monastery that night . 
For Awhile a Very Obscure One AND Ivan , on parting from Alyosha , went home to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house . 
But , strange to say , he was overcome by insufferable depression , which grew greater at every step he took towards the house . 
There was nothing strange in his being depressed ; what was strange was that Ivan could not have said what was the cause of it . 
He had often been depressed before , and there was nothing surprising at his feeling so at such a moment , when he had broken off with everything had brought him here , and was preparing that day to make a new start and enter upon a new , unknown future . 
He would again be as solitary as ever , and though he had great hopes , and great - too great - expectations from life , he could not have given any definite account of his hopes , his expectations , or even his desires . 
Yet at that moment , though the apprehension of the new and unknown certainly found place in his heart , what was worrying him was something quite different . 
`` Is it loathing for my father 's house ? '' 
he wondered . 
`` Quite likely ; I am so sick of it ; and though it 's the last time I shall cross its hateful threshold , still I loathe it ... . 
No , it 's not that either . 
Is it the parting with Alyosha and the conversation I had with him ? 
For so many years I 've been silent with the whole world and not deigned to speak , and all of a sudden I reel off a rigmarole like that . '' 
certainly might have been the youthful vexation of youthful inexperience and vanity - vexation at having failed to express himself , especially with such a being as Alyosha , on whom his heart had certainly been reckoning . 
No doubt that came in , that vexation , it must have done indeed ; but yet that was not it , that was not it either . 
`` I feel sick with depression and yet I ca n't tell what I want . 
Better not think , perhaps . '' 
Ivan tried `` not to think , '' but that , too , was no use . 
What made his depression so vexatious and irritating was that it had a kind of casual , external character - he felt that . 
Some person or thing seemed to be standing out somewhere , just as something will sometimes obtrude itself upon the eye , and though one may be so busy with work or conversation that for a long time one does not notice it , yet it irritates and almost torments one till at last one realises , and removes the offending object , often quite a trifling and ridiculous one - some article left about in the wrong place , a handkerchief on the floor , a book not replaced on the shelf , and so on . 
At last , feeling very cross and ill-humoured , Ivan arrived home , and suddenly , about fifteen paces from the garden gate , he guessed what was fretting and worrying him . 
On a bench in the gateway the valet Smerdyakov was sitting enjoying the coolness of the evening , and at the first glance at him Ivan knew that the valet Smerdyakov was on his mind , and that it was this man that his soul loathed . 
It all dawned upon him suddenly and became clear . 
just before , when Alyosha had been telling him of his meeting with Smerdyakov , he had felt a sudden twinge of gloom and loathing , which had immediately stirred responsive anger in his heart . 
Afterwards , as he talked , Smerdyakov had been forgotten for the time ; but still he had been in his mind , and as soon as Ivan parted with Alyosha and was walking home , the forgotten sensation began to obtrude itself again . 
`` Is it possible that a miserable , contemptible creature like that can worry me so much ? '' 
he wondered , with insufferable irritation . 
It was true that Ivan had come of late to feel an intense dislike for the man , especially during the last few days . 
