`` Stay , did you tell the prosecutor and the investigating lawyer about those knocks ? '' 
`` I told them everything just as it was . '' 
Ivan wondered inwardly again . 
`` If I thought of anything then , '' he began again , `` it was solely of some wickedness on your part . 
Dmitri might kill him , but that he would steal - I did not believe that then ... . 
But I was prepared for any wickedness from you . 
You told me yourself you could sham a fit . 
What did you say that for ? '' 
`` It was just through my simplicity , and I never have shammed a fit on purpose in my life . 
And I only said so then to boast to you . 
It was just foolishness . 
I liked you so much then , and was open-hearted with you . '' 
`` My brother directly accuses you of the murder and theft . '' 
`` What else is left for him to do ? '' 
said Smerdyakov , with a bitter grin . 
`` And who will believe him with all the proofs against him ? 
Grigory Vassilyevitch saw the door open . 
What can he say after that ? 
But never mind him ! 
He is trembling to save himself . '' 
He slowly ceased speaking ; then suddenly , as though on reflection , added : `` And look here again . 
He wants to throw it on me and make out that it is the work of my hands - I 've heard that already . 
But as to my being clever at shamming a fit : should I have told you beforehand that I could sham one , if I really had had such a design against your father ? 
If I had been planning such a murder could I have been such a fool as to give such evidence against myself beforehand ? 
And to his son , too ! 
Upon my word ! 
Is that likely ? 
As if that could be ; such a thing has never happened . 
No one hears this talk of ours now , except Providence itself , and if you were to tell of it to the prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch you might defend me completely by doing so , for who would be likely to be such a criminal , if he is so open-hearted beforehand ? 
Anyone can see that . '' 
`` Well , '' and Ivan got up to cut short the conversation , struck by Smerdyakov 's last argument . 
`` I do n't suspect you at all , and I think it 's absurd , indeed , to suspect you . 
On the contrary , I am grateful to you for setting my mind at rest . 
Now I am going , but I 'll come again . 
Meanwhile , good-bye . 
Get well . 
Is there anything you want ? '' 
`` I am very thankful for everything . 
Marfa Ignatyevna does not forget me , and provides me anything I want , according to her kindness . 
Good people visit me every day . '' 
`` Good-bye . 
But I sha n't say anything of your being able to sham a fit , and I do n't advise you to , either , '' something made Ivan say suddenly . 
`` I quite understand . 
And if you do n't speak of that , I shall say nothing of that conversation of ours at the gate . '' 
Then it happened that Ivan went out , and only when he had gone a dozen steps along the corridor , he suddenly felt that there was an insulting significance in Smerdyakov 's last words . 
He was almost on the point of turning back , but it was only a passing impulse , and muttering , `` Nonsense ! '' 
he went out of the hospital . 
His chief feeling was one of relief at the fact that it was not Smerdyakov , but Mitya , who had committed the murder , though he might have been expected to feel the opposite . 
He did not want to analyse the reason for this feeling , and even felt a positive repugnance at prying into his sensations . 
He felt as though he wanted to make haste to forget something . 
In the following days he became convinced of Mitya 's guilt , as he got to know all the weight of evidence against him . 
There was evidence of people of no importance , Fenya and her mother , for instance , but the effect of it was almost overpowering . 
As to Perhotin , the people at the tavern , and at Plotnikov 's shop , as well as the witnesses at Mokroe , their evidence seemed conclusive . 
It was the details that were so damning . 
The secret of the knocks impressed the lawyers almost as much as Grigory 's evidence as to the open door . 
Grigory 's wife , Marfa , in answer to Ivan 's questions , declared that Smerdyakov had been lying all night the other side of the partition wall , `` He was not three paces from our bed , '' and that although she was a sound sleeper she waked several times and heard him moaning , `` He was moaning the whole time , moaning continually . '' 
Talking to Herzenstube , and giving it as his opinion that Smerdyakov was not mad , but only rather weak , Ivan only evoked from the old man a subtle smile . 
`` Do you know how he spends his time now ? '' 
he asked ; `` learning lists of French words by heart . 
He has an exercise-book under his pillow with the French words written out in Russian letters for him by someone , he he he ! '' 
Ivan ended by dismissing all doubts . 
He could not think of Dmitri without repulsion . 
Only one thing was strange , however . 
Alyosha persisted that Dmitri was not the murderer , and that `` in all probability '' Smerdyakov was . 
Ivan always felt that Alyosha 's opinion meant a great deal to him , and so he was astonished at it now . 
Another thing that was strange was that Alyosha did not make any attempt to talk about Mitya with Ivan , that he never began on the subject and only answered his questions . 
This , too , struck Ivan particularly . 
But he was very much preoccupied at that time with something quite apart from that . 
On his return from Moscow , he abandoned himself hopelessly to his mad and consuming passion for Katerina Ivanovna . 
This is not the time to begin to speak of this new passion of Ivan 's , which left its mark on all the rest of his life : this would furnish the subject for another novel , which I may perhaps never write . 
But I can not omit to mention here that when Ivan , on leaving Katerina Ivanovna with Alyosha , as I 've related already , told him , `` I am not keen on her , '' it was an absolute lie : he loved her madly , though at times he hated her so that he might have murdered her . 
Many causes helped to bring about this feeling . 
Shattered by what had happened with Mitya , she rushed on Ivan 's return to meet him as her one salvation . 
She was hurt , insulted and humiliated in her feelings . 
And here the man had come back to her , who had loved her so ardently before -LRB- oh ! 
she knew that very well -RRB- , and whose heart and intellect she considered so superior to her own . 
But the sternly virtuous girl did not abandon herself altogether to the man she loved , in spite of the Karamazov violence of his passions and the great fascination he had for her . 
She was continually tormented at the same time by remorse for having deserted Mitya , and in moments of discord and violent anger -LRB- and they were numerous -RRB- she told Ivan so plainly . 
This was what he had called to Alyosha `` lies upon lies . '' 
There was , of course , much that was false in it , and that angered Ivan more than anything ... . 
But of all this later . 
He did , in fact , for a time almost forget Smerdyakov 's existence , and yet , a fortnight after his first visit to him , he began to be haunted by the same strange thoughts as before . 
It 's enough to say that he was continually asking himself , why was it that on that last night in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house he had crept out on to the stairs like a thief and listened to hear what his father was doing below ? 
Why had he recalled that afterwards with repulsion ? 
Why next morning , had he been suddenly so depressed on the journey ? 
Why , as he reached Moscow , had he said to himself , `` I am a scoundrel '' ? 
And now he almost fancied that these tormenting thoughts would make him even forget Katerina Ivanovna , so completely did they take possession of him again . 
It was just after fancying this , that he met Alyosha in the street . 
He stopped him at once , and put a question to him : `` Do you remember when Dmitri burst in after dinner and beat father , and afterwards I told you in the yard that I reserved ` the right to desire ' ? 
... Tell me , did you think then that I desired father 's death or not ? '' 
`` I did think so , '' answered Alyosha , softly . 
`` It was so , too ; it was not a matter of guessing . 
But did n't you fancy then that what I wished was just that one reptile should devour another ' ; that is , just that Dmitri should kill father , and as soon as possible ... and that I myself was even prepared to help to bring that about ? '' 
Alyosha turned rather pale , and looked silently into his brother 's face . 
`` Speak ! '' 
cried Ivan , `` I want above everything to know what you thought then . 
I want the truth , the truth ! '' 
He drew a deep breath , looking angrily at Alyosha before his answer came . 
`` Forgive me , I did think that , too , at the time , '' whispered Alyosha , and he did not add one softening phrase . 
`` Thanks , '' snapped Ivan , and , leaving Alyosha , he went quickly on his way . 
