If you wo n't , I am glad to see you ... '' `` Me , me frighten you ? '' 
cried Mitya , flinging up his hands . 
`` Oh , pass me by , go your way , I wo n't hinder you ! 
... '' And suddenly he surprised them all , and no doubt himself as well , by flinging himself on a chair , and bursting into tears , turning his head away to the opposite wall , while his arms clasped the back of the chair tight , as though embracing it . 
`` Come , come , what a fellow you are ! '' 
cried Grushenka reproachfully . 
`` That 's just how he comes to see me - he begins talking , and I ca n't make out what he means . 
He cried like that once before , and now he 's crying again ! 
It 's shamefull Why are you crying ? 
As though you had anything to cry for ! '' 
she added enigmatically , emphasising each word with some irritability . 
`` I. . . 
I 'm not crying ... . 
Well , good evening ! '' 
He instantly turned round in his chair , and suddenly laughed , not his abrupt wooden laugh , but a long , quivering , inaudible nervous laugh . 
`` Well , there you are again ... . 
Come , cheer up , cheer up ! '' 
Grushenka said to him persuasively . 
`` I 'm very glad you 've come , very glad , Mitya , do you hear , I 'm very glad ! 
I want him to stay here with us , '' she said peremptorily , addressing the whole company , though her words were obviously meant for the man sitting on the sofa . 
`` I wish it , I wish it ! 
And if he goes away I shall go , too ! '' 
she added with flashing eyes . 
`` What my queen commands is law ! '' 
pronounced the Pole , gallantly kissing Grushenka 's hand . 
`` I beg you , panie , to join our company , '' he added politely , addressing Mitya . 
Mitya was jumping up with the obvious intention of delivering another tirade , but the words did not come . 
`` Let 's drink , Panie , '' he blurted out instead of making a speech . 
Everyone laughed . 
`` Good heavens ! 
I thought he was going to begin again ! '' 
Grushenka exclaimed nervously . 
`` Do you hear , Mitya , '' she went on insistently , `` do n't prance about , but it 's nice you 've brought the champagne . 
I want some myself , and I ca n't bear liqueurs . 
And best of all , you 've come yourself . 
We were fearfully dull here ... . 
You 've come for a spree again , I suppose ? 
But put your money in your pocket . 
Where did you get such a lot ? '' 
Mitya had been , all this time , holding in his hand the crumpled bundle of notes on which the eyes of all , especially of the Poles , were fixed . 
In confusion he thrust them hurriedly into his pocket . 
He flushed . 
At that moment the innkeeper brought in an uncorked bottle of champagne , and glasses on a tray . 
Mitya snatched up the bottle , but he was so bewildered that he did not know what to do with it . 
Kalgonov took it from him and poured out the champagne . 
`` Another ! 
Another bottle ! '' 
Mitya cried to the inn-keeper , and , forgetting to clink glasses with the Pole whom he had so solemnly invited to drink to their good understanding , he drank off his glass without waiting for anyone else . 
His whole countenance suddenly changed . 
The solemn and tragic expression with which he had entered vanished completely , and a look of something childlike came into his face . 
He seemed to have become suddenly gentle and subdued . 
He looked shyly and happily at everyone , with a continual nervous little laugh , and the blissful expression of a dog who has done wrong , been punished , and forgiven . 
He seemed to have forgotten everything , and was looking round at everyone with a childlike smile of delight . 
He looked at Grushenka , laughing continually , and bringing his chair close up to her . 
By degrees he had gained some idea of the two Poles , though he had formed no definite conception of them yet . 
The Pole on the sofa struck him by his dignified demeanour and his Polish accent ; and , above all , by his pipe . 
`` Well , what of it ? 
It 's a good thing he 's smoking a pipe , '' he reflected . 
The Pole 's puffy , middle-aged face , with its tiny nose and two very thin , pointed , dyed and impudent-looking moustaches , had not so far roused the faintest doubts in Mitya . 
He was not even particularly struck by the Pole 's absurd wig made in Siberia , with love-locks foolishly combed forward over the temples . 
`` I suppose it 's all right since he wears a wig , '' he went on , musing blissfully . 
The other , younger Pole , who was staring insolently and defiantly at the company and listening to the conversation with silent contempt , still only impressed Mitya by his great height , which was in striking contrast to the Pole on the sofa . 
`` If he stood up he 'd be six foot three . '' 
The thought flitted through Mitya 's mind . 
It occurred to him , too , that this Pole must be the friend of the other , as it were , a `` bodyguard , '' and no doubt the big Pole was at the disposal of the little Pole with the pipe . 
But this all seemed to Mitya perfectly right and not to be questioned . 
In his mood of doglike submissiveness all feeling of rivalry had died away . 
Grushenka 's mood and the enigmatic tone of some of her words he completely failed to grasp . 
All he understood , with thrilling heart , was that she was kind to him , that she had forgiven him , and made him sit by her . 
He was beside himself with delight , watching her sip her glass of champagne . 
The silence of the company seemed somehow to strike him , however , and he looked round at everyone with expectant eyes . 
`` Why are we sitting here though , gentlemen ? 
Why do n't you begin doing something ? '' 
his smiling eyes seemed to ask . 
`` He keeps talking nonsense , and we were all laughing , '' Kalgonov began suddenly , as though divining his thought , and pointing to Maximov . 
Mitya immediately stared at Kalgonov and then at Maximov `` He 's talking nonsense ? '' 
he laughed , his short , wooden laugh , seeming suddenly delighted at something - `` ha ha ! '' 
`` Yes . 
Would you believe it , he will have it that all our cavalry officers in the twenties married Polish women . 
That 's awful rot , is n't it ? '' 
`` Polish women ? '' 
repeated Mitya , perfectly ecstatic . 
Kalgonov was well aware of Mitya 's attitude to Grushenka , and he guessed about the Pole , too , but that did not so much interest him , perhaps did not interest him at all ; what he was interested in was Maximov . 
He had come here with Maximov by chance , and he met the Poles here at the inn for the first time in his life . 
Grushenka he knew before , and had once been with someone to see her ; but she had not taken to him . 
But here she looked at him very affectionately : before Mitya 's arrival , she had been making much of him , but he seemed somehow to be unmoved by it . 
He was a boy , not over twenty , dressed like a dandy , with a very charming fair-skinned face , and splendid thick , fair hair . 
From his fair face looked out beautiful pale blue eyes , with an intelligent and sometimes even deep expression , beyond his age indeed , although the young man sometimes looked and talked quite like a child , and was not at all ashamed of it , even when he was aware of it himself . 
As a rule he was very wilful , even capricious , though always friendly . 
Sometimes there was something fixed and obstinate in his expression . 
He would look at you and listen , seeming all the while to be persistently dreaming over something else . 
Often he was listless and lazy ; at other times he would grow excited , sometimes , apparently , over the most trivial matters . 
`` Only imagine , I 've been taking him about with me for the last four days , '' he went on , indolently drawling his words , quite naturally though , without the slightest affectation . 
`` Ever since your brother , do you remember , shoved him off the carriage and sent him flying . 
That made me take an interest in him at the time , and I took him into the country , but he keeps talking such rot I 'm ashamed to be with him . 
I 'm taking him back . '' 
`` The gentleman has not seen Polish ladies , and says what is impossible , '' the Pole with the pipe observed to Maximov . 
He spoke Russian fairly well , much better , anyway , than he pretended . 
If he used Russian words , he always distorted them into a Polish form . 
`` But I was married to a Polish lady myself , '' tittered Maximov . 
