`` Have pity on me ! '' 
Katya said , with bitter reproach , and she burst into tears . 
`` Then you will come , '' said Alyosha firmly , seeing her tears . 
`` I 'll go and tell him you will come directly . '' 
`` No , do n't tell him so on any account , '' cried Katya in alarm . 
`` I will come , but do n't tell him beforehand , for perhaps I may go , but not go in ... I do n't know yet - '' Her voice failed her . 
She gasped for breath . 
Alyosha got up to go . 
`` And what if I meet anyone ? '' 
she said suddenly , in a low voice , turning white again . 
`` That 's just why you must go now , to avoid meeting anyone . 
There will be no one there , I can tell you that for certain . 
We will expect you , '' he concluded emphatically , and went out of the room . 
For a Moment the Lie Becomes Truth HE hurried to the hospital where Mitya was lying now . 
The day after his fate was determined , Mitya had fallen ill with nervous fever , and was sent to the prison division of the town hospital . 
But at the request of several persons -LRB- Alyosha , Madame Hohlakov , Lise , etc. -RRB- , Doctor Varvinsky had put Mitya not with other prisoners , but in a separate little room , the one where Smerdyakov had been . 
It is true that there was a sentinel at the other end of the corridor , and there was a grating over the window , so that Varvinsky could be at ease about the indulgence he had shown , which was not quite legal , indeed ; but he was a kind-hearted and compassionate young man . 
He knew how hard it would be for a man like Mitya to pass at once so suddenly into the society of robbers and murderers , and that he must get used to it by degrees . 
The visits of relations and friends were informally sanctioned by the doctor and overseer , and even by the police captain . 
But only Alyosha and Grushenka had visited Mitya . 
Rakitin had tried to force his way in twice , but Mitya persistently begged Varvinsky not to admit him . 
Alyosha found him sitting on his bed in a hospital dressing gown , rather feverish , with a towel , soaked in vinegar and water , on his head . 
He looked at Alyosha as he came in with an undefined expression , but there was a shade of something like dread discernible in it . 
He had become terribly preoccupied since the trial ; sometimes he would be silent for half an hour together , and seemed to be pondering something heavily and painfully , oblivious of everything about him . 
If he roused himself from his brooding and began to talk , he always spoke with a kind of abruptness and never of what he really wanted to say . 
He looked sometimes with a face of suffering at his brother . 
He seemed to be more at ease with Grushenka than with Alyosha . 
It is true , he scarcely spoke to her at all , but as soon as she came in , his whole face lighted up with joy . 
Alyosha sat down beside him on the bed in silence . 
This time Mitya was waiting for Alyosha in suspense , but he did not dare ask him a question . 
He felt it almost unthinkable that Katya would consent to come , and at the same time he felt that if she did not come , something inconceivable would happen . 
Alyosha understood his feelings . 
`` Trifon Borissovitch , '' Mitya began nervously , `` has pulled his whole inn to pieces , I am told . 
He 's taken up the flooring , pulled apart the planks , split up all the gallery , I am told . 
He is seeking treasure all the time - the fifteen hundred roubles which the prosecutor said I 'd hidden there . 
He began playing these tricks , they say , as soon as he got home . 
Serve him right , the swindler ! 
The guard here told me yesterday ; he comes from there . '' 
`` Listen , '' began Alyosha . 
`` She will come , but I do n't know when . 
Perhaps to-day , perhaps in a few days , that I ca n't tell . 
But she will come , she will , that 's certain . '' 
Mitya started , would have said something , but was silent . 
The news had a tremendous effect on him . 
It was evident that he would have liked terribly to know what had been said , but he was again afraid to ask . 
Something cruel and contemptuous from Katya would have cut him like a knife at that moment . 
`` This was what she said among other things ; that I must be sure to set your conscience at rest about escaping . 
If Ivan is not well by then she will see to it all herself . '' 
`` You 've spoken of that already , '' Mitya observed musingly . 
`` And you have repeated it to Grusha , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` Yes , '' Mitya admitted . 
`` She wo n't come this morning . '' 
He looked timidly at his brother . 
`` She wo n't come till the evening . 
When I told her yesterday that Katya was taking measures , she was silent , but she set her mouth . 
She only whispered , ` Let her ! ' 
She understood that it was important . 
I did not dare to try her further . 
She understands now , I think , that Katya no longer cares for me , but loves Ivan . '' 
`` Does she ? '' 
broke from Alyosha . 
`` Perhaps she does not . 
Only she is not coming this morning , '' Mitya hastened to explain again ; `` I asked her to do something for me . 
You know , Ivan is superior to all of us . 
He ought to live , not us . 
He will recover . '' 
`` Would you believe it , though Katya is alarmed about him , she scarcely doubts of his recovery , '' said Alyosha . 
`` That means that she is convinced he will die . 
It 's because she is frightened she 's so sure he will get well . '' 
`` Ivan has a strong constitution , and I , too , believe there 's every hope that he will get well , '' Alyosha observed anxiously . 
`` Yes , he will get well . 
But she is convinced that he will die . 
She has a great deal of sorrow to bear ... '' A silence followed . 
A grave anxiety was fretting Mitya . 
`` Alyosha , I love Grusha terribly , '' he said suddenly in a shaking voice , full of tears . 
`` They wo n't let her go out there to you , '' Alyosha put in at once . 
`` And there is something else I wanted tell you , '' Mitya went on , with a sudden ring in his voice . 
`` If they beat me on the way or out there , I wo n't submit to it . 
I shall kill someone , and shall be shot for it . 
And this will be going on for twenty years ! 
They speak to me rudely as it is . 
I 've been lying here all night , passing judgment on myself . 
I am not ready ! 
I am not able to resign myself . 
I wanted to sing a ` hymn ' ; but if a guard speaks rudely to me , I have not the strength to bear it . 
For Grusha I would bear anything ... anything except blows ... . 
But she wo n't be allowed to come there . '' 
Alyosha smiled gently . 
`` Listen , brother , once for all , '' he said . 
`` This is what I think about it . 
And you know that I would not tell you a lie . 
Listen : you are not ready , and such a cross is not for you . 
What 's more , you do n't need such a martyr 's cross when you are not ready for it . 
If you had murdered our father , it would grieve me that you should reject your punishment . 
But you are innocent , and such a cross is too much for you . 
You wanted to make yourself another man by suffering . 
I say , only remember that other man always , all your life and wherever you go ; and that will be enough for you . 
Your refusal of that great cross will only serve to make you feel all your life even greater duty , and that constant feeling will do more to make you a new man , perhaps , than if you went there . 
For there you would not endure it and would repine , and perhaps at last would say : ' I am quits . ' 
The lawyer was right about that . 
