I sat down on the stone . 
And in the air there were lots of kites flapping and whirling . 
There were as many as thirty in sight . 
Of course , it 's just the season for the kites . 
` Look , Ilusha , ' said I , ` it 's time we got out our last year 's kite again . 
I 'll mend it ; where have you put it away ? ' 
My boy made no answer . 
He looked away and turned sideways to me . 
And then a gust of wind blew up the sand . 
He suddenly fell on me , threw both his little arms round my neck and held me tight . 
You know , when children are silent and proud , and try to keep back their tears when they are in great trouble and suddenly break down , their tears fall in streams . 
With those warm streams of tears , he suddenly wetted my face . 
He sobbed and shook as though he were in convulsions , and squeezed up against me as I sat on the stone . 
` Father , ' he kept crying , ` dear father , how he insulted you ! ' 
And I sobbed too . 
We sat shaking in each other 's arms . 
` Ilusha , ' I said to him , ` Ilusha , darling . ' 
No one saw us then . 
God alone saw us ; I hope He will record it to my credit . 
You must thank your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
No , sir , I wo n't thrash my boy for your satisfaction . '' 
He had gone back to his original tone of resentful buffoonery . 
Alyosha felt , though , that he trusted him , and that if there had been someone else in his , Alyosha 's place , the man would not have spoken so openly and would not have told what he had just told . 
This encouraged Alyosha , whose heart was trembling on the verge of tears . 
`` Ah , how I would like to make friends with your boy ! '' 
he cried . 
`` If you could arrange it - '' `` Certainly , sir , '' muttered the captain . 
`` But now listen to something quite different ! '' 
Alyosha went on . 
`` I have a message for you . 
That same brother of mine , Dmitri , has insulted his betrothed , too , a noble-hearted girl of whom you have probably heard . 
I have a right to tell you of her wrong ; I ought to do so , in fact , for , hearing of the insult done to you and learning all about your unfortunate position , she commissioned me at once - just now - to bring you this help from her - but only from her alone , not from Dmitri , who has abandoned her . 
Nor from me , his brother , nor from anyone else , but from her , only from her ! 
She entreats you to accept her help ... You have both been insulted by the same man . 
She thought of you only when she had just received a similar insult from him - similar in its cruelty , I mean . 
She comes like a sister to help a brother in misfortune ... . 
She told me to persuade you to take these two hundred roubles from her , as from a sister , knowing that you are in such need . 
No one will know of it , it can give rise to no unjust slander . 
There are the two hundred roubles , and I swear you must take them unless - unless all men are to be enemies on earth ! 
But there are brothers even on earth ... . 
You have a generous heart ... you must see that , you must , '' and Alyosha held out two new rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes . 
They were both standing at the time by the great stone close to the fence , and there was no one near . 
The notes seemed to produce a tremendous impression on the captain . 
He started , but at first only from astonishment . 
Such an outcome of their conversation was the last thing he expected . 
Nothing could have been farther from his dreams than help from anyone - and such a sum ! 
He took the notes , and for a minute he was almost unable to answer , quite a new expression came into his face . 
`` That for me ? 
So much money - two hundred roubles ! 
Good heavens ! 
Why , I have n't seen so much money for the last four years ! 
Mercy on us ! 
And she says she is a sister ... . 
And is that the truth ? '' 
`` I swear that all I told you is the truth , `` cried Alyosha . 
The captain flushed red . 
`` Listen , my dear , listen . 
If I take it , I sha n't be behaving like a scoundrel ? 
In your eyes , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I sha n't be a scoundrel ? 
No , Alexey Fyodorovitch , listen , listen , '' he hurried , touching Alyosha with both his hands . 
`` You are persuading me to take it , saying that it 's a sister sends it , but inwardly , in your heart wo n't you feel contempt for me if I take it , eh ? '' 
`` No , no , on my salvation I swear I sha n't ! 
And no one will ever know but me - I , you and she , and one other lady , her great friend . '' 
`` Never mind the lady ! 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , at a moment like this you must listen , for you ca n't understand what these two hundred roubles mean to me now . '' 
The poor fellow went on rising gradually into a sort of incoherent , almost wild enthusiasm . 
He was thrown off his balance and talked extremely fast , as though afraid he would not be allowed to say all he had to say . 
`` Besides its being honestly acquired from a ` sister , ' so highly respected and revered , do you know that now I can look after mamma and Nina , my hunchback angel daughter ? 
Doctor Herzenstube came to me in the kindness of his heart and was examining them both for a whole hour . ' 
I can make nothing of it , ' said he , but he prescribed a mineral water which is kept at a chemist 's here . 
He said it would be sure to do her good , and he ordered baths , too , with some medicine in them . 
The mineral water costs thirty copecks , and she 'd need to drink forty bottles perhaps : so I took the prescription and laid it on the shelf under the ikons , and there it lies . 
And he ordered hot baths for Nina with something dissolved in them , morning and evening . 
But how can we carry out such a cure in our mansion , without servants , without help , without a bath , and without water ? 
Nina is rheumatic all over , I do n't think I told you that . 
All her right side aches at night , she is in agony , and , would you believe it , the angel bears it without groaning for fear of waking us . 
We eat what we can get , and she 'll only take the leavings , what you 'd scarcely give to a dog . ' 
I am not worth it , I am taking it from you , I am a burden on you , ' that 's what her angel eyes try to express . 
We wait on her , but she does n't like it . ' 
I am a useless cripple , no good to anyone . ' 
As though she were not worth it , when she is the saving of all of us with her angelic sweetness . 
Without her , without her gentle word it would be hell among us ! 
She softens even Varvara . 
And do n't judge Varvara harshly either , she is an angel too , she , too , has suffered wrong . 
She came to us for the summer , and she brought sixteen roubles she had earned by lessons and saved up , to go back with to Petersburg in September , that is now . 
But we took her money and lived on it , so now she has nothing to go back with . 
Though indeed she could n't go back , for she has to work for us like a slave . 
She is like an overdriven horse with all of us on her back . 
She waits on us all , mends and washes , sweeps the floor , puts mamma to bed . 
And mamma is capricious and tearful and insane ! 
And now I can get a servant with this money , you understand , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I can get medicines for the dear creatures , I can send my student to Petersburg , I can buy beef , I can feed them properly . 
Good Lord , but it 's a dream ! '' 
Alyosha was delighted that he had brought him such happiness and that the poor fellow had consented to be made happy . 
`` Stay , Alexey Fyodorovitch , stay , '' the captain began to talk with frenzied rapidity , carried away by a new day-dream . 
`` Do you know that Ilusha and I will perhaps really carry out our dream . 
We will buy a horse and cart , a black horse , he insists on its being black , and we will set off as we pretended the other day . 
I have an old friend , a lawyer in K. province , and I heard through a trustworthy man that if I were to go he 'd give me a place as clerk in his office , so , who knows , maybe he would . 
So I 'd just put mamma and Nina in the cart , and Ilusha could drive , and I 'd walk , I 'd walk ... . 
Why , if I only succeed in getting one debt paid that 's owing me , I should have perhaps enough for that too ! '' 
`` There would be enough ! '' 
