Why do you wonder at me ? 
I gave an onion to a beggar , so I , too , am here . 
And many here have given only an onion each - only one little onion ... . 
What are all our deeds ? 
And you , my gentle one , you , my kind boy , you too have known how to give a famished woman an onion to-day . 
Begin your work , dear one , begin it , gentle one ! 
Do you see our Sun , do you see Him ? '' 
`` I am afraid ... I dare not look , '' whispered Alyosha . 
`` Do not fear Him . 
He is terrible in His greatness , awful in His sublimity , but infinitely merciful . 
He has made Himself like unto us from love and rejoices with us . 
He is changing the water into wine that the gladness of the guests may not be cut short . 
He is expecting new guests , He is calling new ones unceasingly for ever and ever ... . 
There they are bringing new wine . 
Do you see they are bringing the vessels ... '' Something glowed in Alyosha 's heart , something filled it till it ached , tears of rapture rose from his soul ... . 
He stretched out his hands , uttered a cry and waked up . 
Again the coffin , the open window , and the soft , solemn , distinct reading of the Gospel . 
But Alyosha did not listen to the reading . 
It was strange , he had fallen asleep on his knees , but now he was on his feet , and suddenly , as though thrown forward , with three firm rapid steps he went right up to the coffin . 
His shoulder brushed against Father Paissy without his noticing it . 
Father Paissy raised his eyes for an instant from his book , but looked away again at once , seeing that something strange was happening to the boy . 
Alyosha gazed for half a minute at the coffin , at the covered , motionless dead man that lay in the coffin , with the ikon on his breast and the peaked cap with the octangular cross on his head . 
He had only just been hearing his voice , and that voice was still ringing in his ears . 
He was listening , still expecting other words , but suddenly he turned sharply and went out of the cell . 
He did not stop on the steps either , but went quickly down ; his soul , overflowing with rapture , yearned for freedom , space , openness . 
The vault of heaven , full of soft , shining stars , stretched vast and fathomless above him . 
The Milky Way ran in two pale streams from the zenith to the horizon . 
The fresh , motionless , still night enfolded the earth . 
The white towers and golden domes of the cathedral gleamed out against the sapphire sky . 
The gorgeous autumn flowers , in the beds round the house , were slumbering till morning . 
The silence of earth seemed to melt into the silence of the heavens . 
The mystery of earth was one with the mystery of the stars ... . 
Alyosha stood , gazed , and suddenly threw himself down on the earth . 
He did not know why he embraced it . 
He could not have told why he longed so irresistibly to kiss it , to kiss it all . 
But he kissed it weeping , sobbing , and watering it with his tears , and vowed passionately to love it , to love it for ever and ever . 
`` Water the earth with the tears of your joy and love those tears , '' echoed in his soul . 
What was he weeping over ? 
Oh ! 
in his rapture he was weeping even over those stars , which were shining to him from the abyss of space , and `` he was not ashamed of that ecstasy . '' 
There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds of God , linking his soul to them , and it was trembling all over `` in contact with other worlds . '' 
He longed to forgive everyone and for everything , and to beg forgiveness . 
Oh , not for himself , but for all men , for all and for everything . 
`` And others are praying for me too , '' echoed again in his soul . 
But with every instant he felt clearly and , as it were , tangibly , that something firm and unshakable as that vault of heaven had entered into his soul . 
It was as though some idea had seized the sovereignty of his mind - and it was for all his life and for ever and ever . 
He had fallen on the earth a weak boy , but he rose up a resolute champion , and he knew and felt it suddenly at the very moment of his ecstasy . 
And never , never , his life long , could Alyosha forget that minute . 
`` Someone visited my soul in that hour , '' he used to say afterwards , with implicit faith in his words . 
Within three days he left the monastery in accordance with the words of his elder , who had bidden him `` sojourn in the world . '' 
Kuzma Samsonov BUT Dmitri , to whom Grushenka , flying away to a new life , had left her last greetings , bidding him remember the hour of her love for ever , knew nothing of what had happened to her , and was at that moment in a condition of feverish agitation and activity . 
For the last two days he had been in such an inconceivable state of mind that he might easily have fallen ill with brain fever , as he said himself afterwards . 
Alyosha had not been able to find him the morning before , and Ivan had not succeeded in meeting him at the tavern on the same day . 
The people at his lodgings , by his orders , concealed his movements . 
He had spent those two days literally rushing in all directions , `` struggling with his destiny and trying to save himself , '' as he expressed it himself afterwards , and for some hours he even made a dash out of the town on urgent business , terrible as it was to him to lose sight of Grushenka for a moment . 
All this was explained afterwards in detail , and confirmed by documentary evidence ; but for the present we will only note the most essential incidents of those two terrible days immediately preceding the awful catastrophe that broke so suddenly upon him . 
Though Grushenka had , it is true , loved him for an hour , genuinely and sincerely , yet she tortured him sometimes cruelly and mercilessly . 
The worst of it was that he could never tell what she meant to do . 
To prevail upon her by force or kindness was also impossible : she would yield to nothing . 
She would only have become angry and turned away from him altogether , he knew that well already . 
He suspected , quite correctly , that she , too , was passing through an inward struggle , and was in a state of extraordinary indecision , that she was making up her mind to something , and unable to determine upon it . 
And so , not without good reason , he divined , with a sinking heart , that at moments she must simply hate him and his passion . 
And so , perhaps , it was , but what was distressing Grushenka he did not understand . 
For him the whole tormenting question lay between him and Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Here , we must note , by the way , one certain fact : he was firmly persuaded that Fyodor Pavlovitch would offer , or perhaps had offered , Grushenka lawful wedlock , and did not for a moment believe that the old voluptuary hoped to gain his object for three thousand roubles . 
Mitya had reached this conclusion from his knowledge of Grushenka and her character . 
That was how it was that he could believe at times that all Grushenka 's uneasiness rose from not knowing which of them to choose , which was most to her advantage . 
Strange to say , during those days it never occurred to him to think of the approaching return of the `` officer , '' that is , of the man who had been such a fatal influence in Grushenka 's life , and whose arrival she was expecting with such emotion and dread . 
It is true that of late Grushenka had been very silent about it . 
Yet he was perfectly aware of a letter she had received a month ago from her seducer , and had heard of it from her own lips . 
He partly knew , too , what the letter contained . 
In a moment of spite Grushenka had shown him that letter , but to her astonishment he attached hardly any consequence to it . 
It would be hard to say why this was . 
Perhaps , weighed down by all the hideous horror of his struggle with his own father for this woman , he was incapable of imagining any danger more terrible , at any rate for the time . 
He simply did not believe in a suitor who suddenly turned up again after five years ' disappearance , still less in his speedy arrival . 
Moreover , in the `` officer 's '' first letter which had been shown to Mitya , the possibility of his new rival 's visit was very vaguely suggested . 
The letter was very indefinite , high-flown , and full of sentimentality . 
It must be noted that Grushenka had concealed from him the last lines of the letter , in which his return was alluded to more definitely . 
He had , besides , noticed at that moment , he remembered afterwards , a certain involuntary proud contempt for this missive from Siberia on Grushenka 's face . 
Grushenka told him nothing of what had passed later between her and this rival ; so that by degrees he had completely forgotten the officer 's existence . 
He felt that whatever might come later , whatever turn things might take , his final conflict with Fyodor Pavlovitch was close upon him , and must be decided before anything else . 
With a sinking heart he was expecting every moment Grushenka 's decision , always believing that it would come suddenly , on the impulse of the moment . 
All of a sudden she would say to him : `` Take me , I 'm yours for ever , '' and it would all be over . 
He would seize her and bear her away at once to the ends of the earth . 
Oh , then he would bear her away at once , as far , far away as possible ; to the farthest end of Russia , if not of the earth , then he would marry her , and settle down with her incognito , so that no one would know anything about them , there , here , or anywhere . 
Then , oh then , a new life would begin at once ! 
Of this different , reformed and `` virtuous '' life -LRB- `` it must , it must be virtuous '' -RRB- he dreamed feverishly at every moment . 
He thirsted for that reformation and renewal . 
The filthy morass , in which he had sunk of his own free will , was too revolting to him , and , like very many men in such cases , he put faith above all in change of place . 
If only it were not for these people , if only it were not for these circumstances , if only he could fly away from this accursed place - he would be altogether regenerated , would enter on a new path . 
That was what he believed in , and what he was yearning for . 
But all this could only be on condition of the first , the happy solution of the question . 
There was another possibility , a different and awful ending . 
Suddenly she might say to him : `` Go away . 
I have just come to terms with Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
I am going to marry him and do n't want you '' - and then ... but then ... But Mitya did not know what would happen then . 
Up to the last hour he did n't know . 
That must be said to his credit . 
He had no definite intentions , had planned no crime . 
He was simply watching and spying in agony , while he prepared himself for the first , happy solution of his destiny . 
