I believe that there can be none more miserable than they . 
They tell us that it is a sin to pray for them and outwardly the Church , as it were , renounces them , but in my secret heart I believe that we may pray even for them . 
Love can never be an offence to Christ . 
For such as those I have prayed inwardly all my life , I confess it , fathers and teachers , and even now I pray for them every day . 
Oh , there are some who remain proud and fierce even in hell , in spite of their certain knowledge and contemplation of the absolute truth ; there are some fearful ones who have given themselves over to Satan and his proud spirit entirely . 
For such , hell is voluntary and ever consuming ; they are tortured by their own choice . 
For they have cursed themselves , cursing God and life . 
They live upon their vindictive pride like a starving man in the desert sucking blood out of his own body . 
But they are never satisfied , and they refuse forgiveness , they curse God Who calls them . 
They can not behold the living God without hatred , and they cry out that the God of life should be annihilated , that God should destroy Himself and His own creation . 
And they will burn in the fire of their own wrath for ever and yearn for death and annihilation . 
But they will not attain to death ... . 
Here Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov 's manuscript ends . 
I repeat , it is incomplete and fragmentary . 
Biographical details , for instance , cover only Father Zossima 's earliest youth . 
Of his teaching and opinions we find brought together sayings evidently uttered on very different occasions . 
His utterances during the last few hours have not been kept separate from the rest , but their general character can be gathered from what we have in Alexey Fyodorovitch 's manuscript . 
The elder 's death came in the end quite unexpectedly . 
For although those who were gathered about him that last evening realised that his death was approaching , yet it was difficult to imagine that it would come so suddenly . 
On the contrary , his friends , as I observed already , seeing him that night apparently so cheerful and talkative , were convinced that there was at least a temporary change for the better in his condition . 
Even five minutes before his death , they said afterwards wonderingly , it was impossible to foresee it . 
He seemed suddenly to feel an acute pain in his chest , he turned pale and pressed his hands to his heart . 
All rose from their seats and hastened to him . 
But though suffering , he still looked at them with a smile , sank slowly from his chair on to his knees , then bowed his face to the ground , stretched out his arms and as though in joyful ecstasy , praying and kissing the ground , quietly and joyfully gave up his soul to God . 
The news of his death spread at once through the hermitage and reached the monastery . 
The nearest friends of the deceased and those whose duty it was from their position began to lay out the corpse according to the ancient ritual , and all the monks gathered together in the church . 
And before dawn the news of the death reached the town . 
By the morning all the town was talking of the event , and crowds were flocking from the town to the monastery . 
But this subject will be treated in the next book ; I will only add here that before a day had passed something happened so unexpected , so strange , upsetting , and bewildering in its effect on the monks and the townspeople , that after all these years , that day of general suspense is still vividly remembered in the town . 
The Breath of Corruption THE body of Father Zossima was prepared for burial according to the established Ritual . 
As is well known , the bodies of dead monks and hermits are not washed . 
In the words of the Church Ritual : `` If any one of the monks depart in the Lord , the monk designated -LRB- that is , whose office it is -RRB- shall wipe the body with warm water , making first the sign of the cross with a sponge on the forehead of the deceased , on the breast , on the hands and feet and on the knees , and that is enough . '' 
All this was done by Father Paissy , who then clothed the deceased in his monastic garb and wrapped him in his cloak , which was , according to custom , somewhat slit to allow of its being folded about him in the form of a cross . 
On his head he put a hood with an eight-cornered cross . 
The hood was left open and the dead man 's face was covered with black gauze . 
In his hands was put an ikon of the Saviour . 
Towards morning he was put in the coffin which had been made ready long before . 
It was decided to leave the coffin all day in the cell , in the larger room in which the elder used to receive his visitors and fellow monks . 
As the deceased was a priest and monk of the strictest rule , the Gospel , not the Psalter , had to be read over his body by monks in holy orders . 
The reading was begun by Father Iosif immediately after the requiem service . 
Father Paissy desired later on to read the Gospel all day and night over his dead friend , but for the present he , as well as the Father Superintendent of the Hermitage , was very busy and occupied , for something extraordinary , an unheard-of , even `` unseemly '' excitement and impatient expectation began to be apparent in the monks , and the visitors from the monastery hostels , and the crowds of people flocking from the town . 
And as time went on , this grew more and more marked . 
Both the Superintendent and Father Paissy did their utmost to calm the general bustle and agitation . 
When it was fully daylight , some people began bringing their sick , in most cases children , with them from the town - as though they had been waiting expressly for this moment to do so , evidently persuaded that the dead elder 's remains had a power of healing , which would be immediately made manifest in accordance with their faith . 
It was only then apparent how unquestionably everyone in our town had accepted Father Zossima during his lifetime as a great saint . 
And those who came were far from being all of the humbler classes . 
This intense expectation on the part of believers displayed with such haste , such openness , even with impatience and almost insistence , impressed Father Paissy as unseemly . 
Though he had long foreseen something of the sort , the actual manifestation of the feeling was beyond anything he had looked for . 
When he came across any of the monks who displayed this excitement , Father Paissy began to reprove them . 
`` Such immediate expectation of something extraordinary , '' he said , `` shows a levity , possible to worldly people but unseemly in us . '' 
But little attention was paid him and Father Paissy noticed it uneasily . 
Yet he himself -LRB- if the whole truth must be told -RRB- , secretly at the bottom of his heart , cherished almost the same hopes and could not but be aware of it , though he was indignant at the too impatient expectation around him , and saw in it light-mindedness and vanity . 
Nevertheless , it was particularly unpleasant to him to meet certain persons , whose presence aroused in him great misgivings . 
In the crowd in the dead man 's cell he noticed with inward aversion -LRB- for which he immediately reproached himself -RRB- the presence of Rakitin and of the monk from Obdorsk , who was still staying in the monastery . 
Of both of them Father Paissy felt for some reason suddenly suspicious - though , indeed , he might well have felt the same about others . 
The monk from Obdorsk was conspicuous as the most fussy in the excited crowd . 
He was to be seen everywhere ; everywhere he was asking questions , everywhere he was listening , on all sides he was whispering with a peculiar , mysterious air . 
His expression showed the greatest impatience and even a sort of irritation . 
As for Rakitin , he , as appeared later , had come so early to the hermitage at the special request of Madame Hohlakov . 
As soon as that good-hearted but weak-minded woman , who could not herself have been admitted to the hermitage , waked and heard of the death of Father Zossima , she was overtaken with such intense curiosity that she promptly despatched Rakitin to the hermitage , to keep a careful look out and report to her by letter ever half hour or so `` everything that takes place . '' 
She regarded Rakitin as a most religious and devout young man . 
He was particularly clever in getting round people and assuming whatever part he thought most to their taste , if he detected the slightest advantage to himself from doing so . 
It was a bright , clear day , and many of the visitors were thronging about the tombs , which were particularly numerous round the church and scattered here and there about the hermitage . 
As he walked round the hermitage , Father Paissy remembered Alyosha and that he had not seen him for some time , not since the night . 
And he had no sooner thought of him than he at once noticed him in the farthest corner of the hermitage garden , sitting on the tombstone of a monk who had been famous long ago for his saintliness . 
He sat with his back to the hermitage and his face to the wall , and seemed to be hiding behind the tombstone . 
Going up to him , Father Paissy saw that he was weeping quietly but bitterly , with his face hidden in his hands , and that his whole frame was shaking with sobs . 
Father Paissy stood over him for a little . 
`` Enough , dear son , enough , dear , '' he pronounced with feeling at last . 
`` Why do you weep ? 
Rejoice and weep not . 
Do n't you know that this is the greatest of his days ? 
Think only where he is now , at this moment ! '' 
Alyosha glanced at him , uncovering his face , which was swollen with crying like a child 's , but turned away at once without uttering a word and hid his face in his hands again . 
`` Maybe it is well , '' said Father Paissy thoughtfully ; `` weep if you must ; Christ has sent you those tears . '' 
`` Your touching tears are but a relief to your spirit and will serve to gladden your dear heart , '' he added to himself , walking away from Alyosha , and thinking lovingly of him . 
He moved away quickly , however , for he felt that he too might weep looking at him . 
Meanwhile the time was passing ; the monastery services and the requiems for the dead followed in their due course . 
Father Paissy again took Father Iosif 's place by the coffin and began reading the Gospel . 
But before three o'clock in the afternoon that something took place to which I alluded at the end of the last book , something so unexpected by all of us and so contrary to the general hope , that , I repeat , this trivial incident has been minutely remembered to this day in our town and all the surrounding neighbourhood . 
I may add here , for myself personally , that I feel it almost repulsive that event which caused such frivolous agitation and was such a stumbling-block to many , though in reality it was the most natural and trivial matter . 
I should , of course , have omitted all mention of it in my story , if it had not exerted a very strong influence on the heart and soul of the chief , though future , hero of my story , Alyosha , forming a crisis and turning-point in his spiritual development , giving a shock to his intellect , which finally strengthened it for the rest of his life and gave it a definite aim . 
And so , to return to our story . 
When before dawn they laid Father Zossima 's body in the coffin and brought it into the front room , the question of opening the windows was raised among those who were around the coffin . 
But this suggestion made casually by someone was unanswered and almost unnoticed . 
Some of those present may perhaps have inwardly noticed it , only to reflect that the anticipation of decay and corruption from the body of such a saint was an actual absurdity , calling for compassion -LRB- if not a smile -RRB- for the lack of faith and the frivolity it implied . 
For they expected something quite different . 
And , behold , soon after midday there were signs of something , at first only observed in silence by those who came in and out and were evidently each afraid to communicate the thought in his mind . 
But by three o'clock those signs had become so clear and unmistakable , that the news swiftly reached all the monks and visitors in the hermitage , promptly penetrated to the monastery , throwing all the monks into amazement , and finally , in the shortest possible time , spread to the town , exciting everyone in it , believers and unbelievers alike . 
The unbelievers rejoiced , and as for the believers some of them rejoiced even more than the unbelievers , for `` men love the downfall and disgrace of the righteous , '' as the deceased elder had said in one of his exhortations . 
The fact is that a smell of decomposition began to come from the coffin , growing gradually more marked , and by three o'clock it was quite unmistakable . 
In all the past history of our monastery , no such scandal could be recalled , and in no other circumstances could such a scandal have been possible , as showed itself in unseemly disorder immediately after this discovery among the very monks themselves . 
Afterwards , even many years afterwards , some sensible monks were amazed and horrified , when they recalled that day , that the scandal could have reached such proportions . 
For in the past , monks of very holy life had died , God-fearing old men , whose saintliness was acknowledged by all , yet from their humble coffins , too , the breath of corruption had come , naturally , as from all dead bodies , but that had caused no scandal nor even the slightest excitement . 
Of course , there had been , in former times , saints in the monastery whose memory was carefully preserved and whose relics , according to tradition , showed no signs of corruption . 
This fact was regarded by the monks as touching and mysterious , and the tradition of it was cherished as something blessed and miraculous , and as a promise , by God 's grace , of still greater glory from their tombs in the future . 
One such , whose memory was particularly cherished , was an old monk , Job , who had died seventy years before at the age of a hundred and five . 
He had been a celebrated ascetic , rigid in fasting and silence , and his tomb was pointed out to all visitors on their arrival with peculiar respect and mysterious hints of great hopes connected with it . 
-LRB- That was the very tomb on which Father Paissy had found Alyosha sitting in the morning . -RRB- 
Another memory cherished in the monastery was that of the famous Father Varsonofy , who was only recently dead and had preceded Father Zossima in the eldership . 
