His dark brown hair was cropped short , and combed forward on his temples . 
He had the long , determined stride of a military man . 
He stood still for a moment on the threshold , and glancing at the whole party went straight up to the elder , guessing him to be their host . 
He made him a low bow , and asked his blessing . 
Father Zossima , rising in his chair , blessed him . 
Dmitri kissed his hand respectfully , and with intense feeling , almost anger , he said : `` Be so generous as to forgive me for having kept you waiting so long , but Smerdyakov , the valet sent me by my father , in reply to my inquiries , told me twice over that the appointment was for one . 
Now I suddenly learn - '' `` Do n't disturb yourself , '' interposed the elder . 
`` No matter . 
You are a little late . 
It 's of no consequence ... '' `` I 'm extremely obliged to you , and expected no less from your goodness . '' 
Saying this , Dmitri bowed once more . 
Then , turning suddenly towards his father , made him , too , a similarly low and respectful bow . 
He had evidently considered it beforehand , and made this bow in all seriousness , thinking it his duty to show his respect and good intentions . 
Although Fyodor Pavlovitch was taken unawares , he was equal to the occasion . 
In response to Dmitri 's bow he jumped up from his chair and made his son a bow as low in return . 
His face was suddenly solemn and impressive , which gave him a positively malignant look . 
Dmitri bowed generally to all present , and without a word walked to the window with his long , resolute stride , sat down on the only empty chair , near Father Paissy , and , bending forward , prepared to listen to the conversation he had interrupted . 
Dmitri 's entrance had taken no more than two minutes , and the conversation was resumed . 
But this time Miusov thought it unnecessary to reply to Father Paissy 's persistent and almost irritable question . 
`` Allow me to withdraw from this discussion , '' he observed with a certain well-bred nonchalance . 
`` It 's a subtle question , too . 
Here Ivan Fyodorovitch is smiling at us . 
He must have something interesting to say about that also . 
Ask him . '' 
`` Nothing special , except one little remark , '' Ivan replied at once . 
`` European Liberals in general , and even our liberal dilettanti , often mix up the final results of socialism with those of Christianity . 
This wild notion is , of course , a characteristic feature . 
But it 's not only Liberals and dilettanti who mix up socialism and Christianity , but , in many cases , it appears , the police - the foreign police , of course - do the same . 
Your Paris anecdote is rather to the point , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . '' 
`` I ask your permission to drop this subject altogether , '' Miusov repeated . 
`` I will tell you instead , gentlemen , another interesting and rather characteristic anecdote of Ivan Fyodorovitch himself . 
Only five days ago , in a gathering here , principally of ladies , he solemnly declared in argument that there was nothing in the whole world to make men love their neighbours . 
That there was no law of nature that man should love mankind , and that , if there had been any love on earth hitherto , it was not owing to a natural law , but simply because men have believed in immortality . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch added in parenthesis that the whole natural law lies in that faith , and that if you were to destroy in mankind the belief in immortality , not only love but every living force maintaining the life of the world would at once be dried up . 
Moreover , nothing then would be immoral , everything would be lawful , even cannibalism . 
That 's not all . 
He ended by asserting that for every individual , like ourselves , who does not believe in God or immortality , the moral law of nature must immediately be changed into the exact contrary of the former religious law , and that egoism , even to crime , must become not only lawful but even recognised as the inevitable , the most rational , even honourable outcome of his position . 
From this paradox , gentlemen , you can judge of the rest of our eccentric and paradoxical friend Ivan Fyodorovitch 's theories . '' 
`` Excuse me , '' Dmitri cried suddenly ; `` if I 've heard aright , crime must not only be permitted but even recognised as the inevitable and the most rational outcome of his position for every infidel ! 
Is that so or not ? '' 
`` Quite so , '' said Father Paissy . 
`` I 'll remember it . '' 
Having uttered these words Dmitri ceased speaking as suddenly as he had begun . 
Everyone looked at him with curiosity . 
`` Is that really your conviction as to the consequences of the disappearance of the faith in immortality ? '' 
the elder asked Ivan suddenly . 
`` Yes . 
That was my contention . 
There is no virtue if there is no immortality . '' 
`` You are blessed in believing that , or else most unhappy . '' 
`` Why unhappy ? '' 
Ivan asked smiling . 
`` Because , in all probability you do n't believe yourself in the immortality of your soul , nor in what you have written yourself in your article on Church Jurisdiction . '' 
`` Perhaps you are right ! 
... But I was n't altogether joking , '' Ivan suddenly and strangely confessed , flushing quickly . 
`` You were not altogether joking . 
That 's true . 
The question is still fretting your heart , and not answered . 
But the martyr likes sometimes to divert himself with his despair , as it were driven to it by despair itself . 
Meanwhile , in your despair , you , too , divert yourself with magazine articles , and discussions in society , though you do n't believe your own arguments , and with an aching heart mock at them inwardly ... . 
That question you have not answered , and it is your great grief , for it clamours for an answer . '' 
`` But can it be answered by me ? 
Answered in the affirmative ? '' 
Ivan went on asking strangely , still looking at the elder with the same inexplicable smile . 
`` If it ca n't be decided in the affirmative , it will never be decided in the negative . 
You know that that is the peculiarity of your heart , and all its suffering is due to it . 
But thank the Creator who has given you a lofty heart capable of such suffering ; of thinking and seeking higher things , for our dwelling is in the heavens . 
God grant that your heart will attain the answer on earth , and may God bless your path . '' 
The elder raised his hand and would have made the sign of the cross over Ivan from where he stood . 
But the latter rose from his seat , went up to him , received his blessing , and kissing his hand went back to his place in silence . 
His face looked firm and earnest . 
This action and all the preceding conversation , which was so surprising from Ivan , impressed everyone by its strangeness and a certain solemnity , so that all were silent for a moment , and there was a look almost of apprehension in Alyosha 's face . 
But Miusov suddenly shrugged his shoulders . 
And at the same moment Fyodor Pavlovitch jumped up from his seat . 
`` Most pious and holy elder , '' he cried pointing to Ivan , `` that is my son , flesh of my flesh , the dearest of my flesh ! 
He is my most dutiful Karl Moor , so to speak , while this son who has just come in , Dmitri , against whom I am seeking justice from you , is the undutiful Franz Moor - they are both out of Schiller 's Robbers , and so I am the reigning Count von Moor ! 
Judge and save us ! 
We need not only your prayers but your prophecies ! '' 
`` Speak without buffoonery , and do n't begin by insulting the members of your family , '' answered the elder , in a faint , exhausted voice . 
He was obviously getting more and more fatigued , and his strength was failing . 
`` An unseemly farce which I foresaw when I came here ! '' 
cried Dmitri indignantly . 
He too leapt up . 
`` Forgive it , reverend Father , '' he added , addressing the elder . 
`` I am not a cultivated man , and I do n't even know how to address you properly , but you have been deceived and you have been too good-natured in letting us meet here . 
All my father wants is a scandal . 
Why he wants it only he can tell . 
He always has some motive . 
But I believe I know why - '' `` They all blame me , all of them ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch in his turn . 
`` Pyotr Alexandrovitch here blames me too . 
You have been blaming me , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , you have ! '' 
he turned suddenly to Miusov , although the latter was not dreaming of interrupting him . 
`` They all accuse me of having hidden the children 's money in my boots , and cheated them , but is n't there a court of law ? 
There they will reckon out for you , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , from your notes , your letters , and your agreements , how much money you had , how much you have spent , and how much you have left . 
Why does Pyotr Alexandrovitch refuse to pass judgment ? 
Dmitri is not a stranger to him . 
Because they are all against me , while Dmitri Fyodorovitch is in debt to me , and not a little , but some thousands of which I have documentary proof . 
The whole town is echoing with his debaucheries . 
And where he was stationed before , he several times spent a thousand or two for the seduction of some respectable girl ; we know all about that , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , in its most secret details . 
