asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , he did , long ago . 
Would you believe it , he told me three weeks ago ? 
You do n't suppose he too came to murder me , do you ? 
He must have had some object in coming . '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
Why do you say such things ? '' 
said Alyosha , troubled . 
`` He does n't ask for money , it 's true , but yet he wo n't get a farthing from me . 
I intend living as long as possible , you may as well know , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , and so I need every farthing , and the longer I live , the more I shall need it , '' he continued , pacing from one corner of the room to the other , keeping his hands in the pockets of his loose greasy overcoat made of yellow cotton material . 
`` I can still pass for a man at five and fifty , but I want to pass for one for another twenty years . 
As I get older , you know , I sha n't be a pretty object . 
The wenches wo n't come to me of their own accord , so I shall want my money . 
So I am saving up more and more , simply for myself , my dear son Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
You may as well know . 
For I mean to go on in my sins to the end , let me tell you . 
For sin is sweet ; all abuse it , but all men live in it , only others do it on the sly , and I openly . 
And so all the other sinners fall upon me for being so simple . 
And your paradise , Alexey Fyodorovitch , is not to my taste , let me tell you that ; and it 's not the proper place for a gentleman , your paradise , even if it exists . 
I believe that I fall asleep and do n't wake up again , and that 's all . 
You can pray for my soul if you like . 
And if you do n't want to , do n't , damn you ! 
That 's my philosophy . 
Ivan talked well here yesterday , though we were all drunk . 
Ivan is a conceited coxcomb , but he has no particular learning ... nor education either . 
He sits silent and smiles at one without speaking - that 's what pulls him through . '' 
Alyosha listened to him in silence . 
`` Why wo n't he talk to me ? 
If he does speak , he gives himself airs . 
Your Ivan is a scoundrel ! 
And I 'll marry Grushenka in a minute if I want to . 
For if you 've money , Alexey Fyodorovitch , you have only to want a thing and you can have it . 
That 's what Ivan is afraid of , he is on the watch to prevent me getting married and that 's why he is egging on Mitya to marry Grushenka himself . 
He hopes to keep me from Grushenka by that -LRB- as though I should leave him my money if I do n't marry her ! -RRB- . 
Besides if Mitya marries Grushenka , Ivan will carry off his rich betrothed , that 's what he 's reckoning on ! 
He is a scoundrel , your Ivan ! '' 
`` How cross you are ! 
It 's because of yesterday ; you had better lie down , '' said Alyosha . 
`` There ! 
you say that , '' the old man observed suddenly , as though it had struck him for the first time , `` and I am not angry with you . 
But if Ivan said it , I should be angry with him . 
It is only with you I have good moments , else you know I am an ill-natured man . '' 
`` You are not ill-natured , but distorted , '' said Alyosha with a smile . 
`` Listen . 
I meant this morning to get that ruffian Mitya locked up and I do n't know now what I shall decide about it . 
Of course in these fashionable days fathers and mothers are looked upon as a prejudice , but even now the law does not allow you to drag your old father about by the hair , to kick him in the face in his own house , and brag of murdering him outright - all in the presence of witnesses . 
If I liked , I could crush him and could have him locked up at once for what he did yesterday . '' 
`` Then you do n't mean to take proceedings ? '' 
`` Ivan has dissuaded me . 
I should n't care about Ivan , but there 's another thing . '' 
And bending down to Alyosha , he went on in a confidential half-whisper . 
`` If I send the ruffian to prison , she 'll hear of it and run to see him at once . 
But if she hears that he has beaten me , a weak old man , within an inch of my life , she may give him up and come to me ... For that 's her way , everything by contraries . 
I know her through and through ! 
Wo n't you have a drop of brandy ? 
Take some cold coffee and I 'll pour a quarter of a glass of brandy into it , it 's delicious , my boy . '' 
`` No , thank you . 
I 'll take that roll with me if I may , '' said Alyosha , and taking a halfpenny French roll he put it in the pocket of his cassock . 
`` And you 'd better not have brandy , either , '' he suggested apprehensively , looking into the old man 's face . 
`` You are quite right , it irritates my nerves instead of soothing them . 
Only one little glass . 
I 'll get it out of the cupboard . '' 
He unlocked the cupboard , poured out a glass , drank it , then locked the cupboard and put the key back in his pocket . 
`` That 's enough . 
One glass wo n't kill me . '' 
`` You see you are in a better humour now , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Um ! 
I love you even without the brandy , but with scoundrels I am a scoundrel . 
Ivan is not going to Tchermashnya - why is that ? 
He wants to spy how much I give Grushenka if she comes . 
They are all scoundrels ! 
But I do n't recognise Ivan , I do n't know him at all . 
Where does he come from ? 
He is not one of us in soul . 
As though I 'd leave him anything ! 
I sha n't leave a will at all , you may as well know . 
And I 'll crush Mitya like a beetle . 
I squash black-beetles at night with my slipper ; they squelch when you tread on them . 
And your Mitya will squelch too . 
Your Mitya , for you love him . 
Yes you love him and I am not afraid of your loving him . 
But if Ivan loved him I should be afraid for myself at his loving him . 
But Ivan loves nobody . 
Ivan is not one of us . 
People like Ivan are not our sort , my boy . 
They are like a cloud of dust . 
When the wind blows , the dust will be gone ... . 
I had a silly idea in my head when I told you to come to-day ; I wanted to find out from you about Mitya . 
If I were to hand him over a thousand or maybe two now , would the beggarly wretch agree to take himself off altogether for five years or , better still , thirty-five , and without Grushenka , and give her up once for all , eh ? '' 
`` I - I 'll ask him , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` If you would give him three thousand , perhaps he - '' `` That 's nonsense ! 
You need n't ask him now , no need ! 
I 've changed my mind . 
It was a nonsensical idea of mine . 
I wo n't give him anything , not a penny , I want my money myself , '' cried the old man , waving his hand . 
`` I 'll crush him like a beetle without it . 
Do n't say anything to him or else he will begin hoping . 
There 's nothing for you to do here , you need n't stay . 
Is that betrothed of his , Katerina Ivanovna , whom he has kept so carefully hidden from me all this time , going to marry him or not ? 
You went to see her yesterday , I believe ? '' 
