Something shapeless and even incomprehensible . 
What is excommunication ? 
What sort of exclusion ? 
I suspect you are simply amusing yourself , Ivan Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` Yes , but you know , in reality it is so now , '' said the elder suddenly , and all turned to him at once . 
`` If it were not for the Church of Christ there would be nothing to restrain the criminal from evil-doing , no real chastisement for it afterwards ; none , that is , but the mechanical punishment spoken of just now , which in the majority of cases only embitters the heart ; and not the real punishment , the only effectual one , the only deterrent and softening one , which lies in the recognition of sin by conscience . '' 
`` How is that , may one inquire ? '' 
asked Miusov , with lively curiosity . 
`` Why , '' began the elder , `` all these sentences to exile with hard labour , and formerly with flogging also , reform no one , and what 's more , deter hardly a single criminal , and the number of crimes does not diminish but is continually on the increase . 
You must admit that . 
Consequently the security of society is not preserved , for , although the obnoxious member is mechanically cut off and sent far away out of sight , another criminal always comes to take his place at once , and often two of them . 
If anything does preserve society , even in our time , and does regenerate and transform the criminal , it is only the law of Christ speaking in his conscience . 
It is only by recognising his wrongdoing as a son of a Christian society - that is , of the Church - that he recognises his sin against society - that is , against the Church . 
So that it is only against the Church , and not against the State , that the criminal of to-day can recognise that he has sinned . 
If society , as a Church , had jurisdiction , then it would know when to bring back from exclusion and to reunite to itself . 
Now the Church having no real jurisdiction , but only the power of moral condemnation , withdraws of her own accord from punishing the criminal actively . 
She does not excommunicate him but simply persists in motherly exhortation of him . 
What is more , the Church even tries to preserve all Christian communion with the criminal . 
She admits him to church services , to the holy sacrament , gives him alms , and treats him more a captive than as a convict . 
And what would become of the criminal , O Lord , if even the Christian society - that is , the Church - were to reject him even as the civil law rejects him and cuts him off ? 
What would become of him if the Church punished him with her excommunication as the direct consequence of the secular law ? 
There could be no more terrible despair , at least for a Russian criminal , for Russian criminals still have faith . 
Though , who knows , perhaps then a fearful thing would happen , perhaps the despairing heart of the criminal would lose its faith and then what would become of him ? 
But the Church , like a tender , loving mother , holds aloof from active punishment herself , as the sinner is too severely punished already by the civil law , and there must be at least someone to have pity on him . 
The Church holds aloof , above all , because its judgment is the only one that contains the truth , and therefore can not practically and morally be united to any other judgment even as a temporary compromise . 
She can enter into no compact about that . 
The foreign criminal , they say , rarely repents , for the very doctrines of to-day confirm him in the idea that his crime is not a crime , but only a reaction against an unjustly oppressive force . 
Society cuts him off completely by a force that triumphs over him mechanically and -LRB- so at least they say of themselves in Europe -RRB- accompanies this exclusion with hatred , forgetfulness , and the most profound indifference as to the ultimate fate of the erring brother . 
In this way , it all takes place without the compassionate intervention of the Church , for in many cases there are no churches there at all , for though ecclesiastics and splendid church buildings remain , the churches themselves have long ago striven to pass from Church into State and to disappear in it completely . 
So it seems at least in Lutheran countries . 
As for Rome , it was proclaimed a State instead of a Church a thousand years ago . 
And so the criminal is no longer conscious of being a member of the Church and sinks into despair . 
If he returns to society , often it is with such hatred that society itself instinctively cuts him off . 
You can judge for yourself how it must end . 
In many cases it would seem to be the same with us , but the difference is that besides the established law courts we have the Church too , which always keeps up relations with the criminal as a dear and still precious son . 
And besides that , there is still preserved , though only in thought , the judgment of the Church , which though no longer existing in practice is still living as a dream for the future , and is , no doubt , instinctively recognised by the criminal in his soul . 
What was said here just now is true too , that is , that if the jurisdiction of the Church were introduced in practice in its full force , that is , if the whole of the society were changed into the Church , not only the judgment of the Church would have influence on the reformation of the criminal such as it never has now , but possibly also the crimes themselves would be incredibly diminished . 
And there can be no doubt that the Church would look upon the criminal and the crime of the future in many cases quite differently and would succeed in restoring the excluded , in restraining those who plan evil , and in regenerating the fallen . 
It is true , '' said Father Zossima , with a smile , `` the Christian society now is not ready and is only resting on some seven righteous men , but as they are never lacking , it will continue still unshaken in expectation of its complete transformation from a society almost heathen in character into a single universal and all-powerful Church . 
So be it , so be it ! 
Even though at the end of the ages , for it is ordained to come to pass ! 
And there is no need to be troubled about times and seasons , for the secret of the times and seasons is in the wisdom of God , in His foresight , and His love . 
And what in human reckoning seems still afar off , may by the Divine ordinance be close at hand , on the eve of its appearance . 
And so be it , so be it ! 
`` So be it , so be it ! '' 
Father Paissy repeated austerely and reverently . 
`` Strange , extremely strange '' Miusov pronounced , not so much with heat as with latent indignation . 
`` What strikes you as so strange ? '' 
Father Iosif inquired cautiously . 
`` Why , it 's beyond anything ! '' 
cried Miusov , suddenly breaking out ; `` the State is eliminated and the Church is raised to the position of the State . 
It 's not simply Ultramontanism , it 's arch-Ultramontanism ! 
It 's beyond the dreams of Pope Gregory the Seventh ! '' 
`` You are completely misunderstanding it , '' said Father Paissy sternly . 
`` Understand , the Church is not to be transformed into the State . 
That is Rome and its dream . 
That is the third temptation of the devil . 
On the contrary , the State is transformed into the Church , will ascend and become a Church over the whole world - which is the complete opposite of Ultramontanism and Rome , and your interpretation , and is only the glorious destiny ordained for the Orthodox Church . 
This star will arise in the east ! '' 
Miusov was significantly silent . 
His whole figure expressed extraordinary personal dignity . 
A supercilious and condescending smile played on his lips . 
Alyosha watched it all with a throbbing heart . 
The whole conversation stirred him profoundly . 
He glanced casually at Rakitin , who was standing immovable in his place by the door listening and watching intently though with downcast eyes . 
But from the colour in his cheeks Alyosha guessed that Rakitin was probably no less excited , and he knew what caused his excitement . 
`` Allow me to tell you one little anecdote , gentlemen , '' Miusov said impressively , with a peculiarly majestic air . 
`` Some years ago , soon after the coup d'etat of December , I happened to be calling in Paris on an extremely influential personage in the Government , and I met a very interesting man in his house . 
This individual was not precisely a detective but was a sort of superintendent of a whole regiment of political detectives - a rather powerful position in its own way . 
I was prompted by curiosity to seize the opportunity of conversation with him . 
And as he had not come as a visitor but as a subordinate official bringing a special report , and as he saw the reception given me by his chief , he deigned to speak with some openness , to a certain extent only , of course . 
He was rather courteous than open , as Frenchmen know how to be courteous , especially to a foreigner . 
But I thoroughly understood him . 
The subject was the socialist revolutionaries who were at that time persecuted . 
I will quote only one most curious remark dropped by this person . 
` We are not particularly afraid , ' said he , ` of all these socialists , anarchists , infidels , and revolutionists ; we keep watch on them and know all their goings on . 
But there are a few peculiar men among them who believe in God and are Christians , but at the same time are socialists . 
These are the people we are most afraid of . 
They are dreadful people The socialist who is a Christian is more to be dreaded than a socialist who is an atheist . ' 
The words struck me at the time , and now they have suddenly come back to me here , gentlemen . '' 
`` You apply them to us , and look upon us as socialists ? '' 
Father Paissy asked directly , without beating about the bush . 
But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer , the door opened , and the guest so long expected , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , came in . 
They had , in fact , given up expecting him , and his sudden appearance caused some surprise for a moment . 
Why Is Such a Man Alive ? 
DMITRI FYODOROVITCH , a young man of eight and twenty , of medium height and agreeable countenance , looked older than his years . 
He was muscular , and showed signs of considerable physical strength . 
Yet there was something not healthy in his face . 
It was rather thin , his cheeks were hollow , and there was an unhealthy sallowness in their colour . 
His rather large , prominent , dark eyes had an expression of firm determination , and yet there was a vague look in them , too . 
Even when he was excited and talking irritably , his eyes somehow did not follow his mood , but betrayed something else , sometimes quite incongruous with what was passing . 
`` It 's hard to tell what he 's thinking , '' those who talked to him sometimes declared . 
People who saw something pensive and sullen in his eyes were startled by his sudden laugh , which bore witness to mirthful and light-hearted thoughts at the very time when his eyes were so gloomy . 
A certain strained look in his face was easy to understand at this moment . 
Everyone knew , or had heard of , the extremely restless and dissipated life which he had been leading of late , as well as of the violent anger to which he had been roused in his quarrels with his father . 
There were several stories current in the town about it . 
It is true that he was irascible by nature , `` of an unstable and unbalanced mind , '' as our justice of the peace , Katchalnikov , happily described him . 
He was stylishly and irreproachably dressed in a carefully buttoned frock-coat . 
He wore black gloves and carried a top hat . 
Having only lately left the army , he still had moustaches and no beard . 
