Lost his job , they say . 
He 's heard now that Grushenka 's saved a little money , so he 's turned up again - that 's the explanation of the mystery . '' 
Again Alyosha seemed not to hear . 
Rakitin could not control himself . 
`` Well , so you 've saved the sinner ? '' 
he laughed spitefully . 
`` Have you turned the Magdalene into the true path ? 
Driven out the seven devils , eh ? 
So you see the miracles you were looking out for just now have come to pass ! '' 
`` Hush , Rakitin , '' Alyosha , answered with an aching heart . 
`` So you despise me now for those twenty-five roubles ? 
I 've sold my friend , you think . 
But you are not Christ , you know , and I am not Judas . '' 
`` Oh , Rakitin , I assure you I 'd forgotten about it , '' cried Alyosha , `` you remind me of it yourself ... '' But this was the last straw for Rakitin . 
`` Damnation take you all and each of you '' he cried suddenly , `` why the devil did I take you up ? 
I do n't want to know you from this time forward . 
Go alone , there 's your road ! '' 
And he turned abruptly into another street , leaving Alyosha alone in the dark . 
Alyosha came out of the town and walked across the fields to the monastery . 
Cana of Galilee IT was very late , according to the monastery ideas , when Alyosha returned to the hermitage ; the door-keeper let him in by a special entrance . 
It had struck nine o'clock - the hour of rest and repose after a day of such agitation for all . 
Alyosha timidly opened the door and went into the elder 's cell where his coffin was now standing . 
There was no one in the cell but Father Paissy , reading the Gospel in solitude over the coffin , and the young novice Porfiry , who , exhausted by the previous night 's conversation and the disturbing incidents of the day , was sleeping the deep sound sleep of youth on the floor of the other room . 
Though Father Paissy heard Alyosha come in , he did not even look in his direction . 
Alyosha turned to the right from the door to the corner , fell on his knees and began to pray . 
His soul was overflowing but with mingled feelings ; no single sensation stood out distinctly ; on the contrary , one drove out another in a slow , continual rotation . 
But there was a sweetness in his heart and , strange to say , Alyosha was not surprised at it . 
Again he saw that coffin before him , the hidden dead figure so precious to him , but the weeping and poignant grief of the morning was no longer aching in his soul . 
As soon as he came in , he fell down before the coffin as before a holy shrine , but joy , joy was glowing in his mind and in his heart . 
The one window of the cell was open , the air was fresh and cool . 
`` So the smell must have become stronger , if they opened the window , '' thought Alyosha . 
But even this thought of the smell of corruption , which had seemed to him so awful and humiliating a few hours before , no longer made him feel miserable or indignant . 
He began quietly praying , but he soon felt that he was praying almost mechanically . 
Fragments of thought floated through his soul , flashed like stars and went out again at once , to be succeeded by others . 
But yet there was reigning in his soul a sense of the wholeness of things - something steadfast and comforting - and he was aware of it himself . 
Sometimes he began praying ardently , he longed to pour out his thankfulness and love ... But when he had begun to pray , he passed suddenly to something else , and sank into thought , forgetting both the prayer and what had interrupted it . 
He began listening to what Father Paissy was reading , but worn out with exhaustion he gradually began to doze . 
`` And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee , '' read Father Paissy . 
`` And the mother of Jesus was there ; And both Jesus was there ; And both Jesus was called , and his disciples , to the marriage . '' 
`` Marriage ? 
What 's that ? 
... A marriage ! '' 
floated whirling through Alyosha 's mind . 
`` There is happiness for her , too ... She has gone to the feast ... . 
No , she has not taken the knife ... . 
That was only a tragic phrase ... . 
Well ... tragic phrases should be forgiven , they must be . 
Tragic phrases comfort the heart ... Without them , sorrow would be too heavy for men to bear . 
Rakitin has gone off to the back alley . 
As long as Rakitin broods over his wrongs , he will always go off to the back alley ... . 
But the high road ... The road is wide and straight and bright as crystal , and the sun is at the end of it ... . 
Ah ! 
... What 's being read ? '' 
... `` And when they wanted wine , the mother of Jesus saith unto him , They have no wine '' ... Alyosha heard . 
`` Ah , yes , I was missing that , and I did n't want to miss it , I love that passage : it 's Cana of Galilee , the first miracle ... . 
Ah , that miracle ! 
Ah , that sweet miracle ! 
It was not men 's grief , but their joy Christ visited , He worked His first miracle to help men 's gladness ... ` He who loves men loves their gladness , too ' ... He was always repeating that , it was one of his leading ideas ... ` There 's no living without joy , ' Mitya says ... . 
Yes , Mitya ... ` Everything that is true and good is always full of forgiveness , ' he used to say that , too '' ... `` Jesus saith unto her , Woman , what has it to do with thee or me ? 
Mine hour not yet come . 
`` His mother saith unto the servants , Whatsoever he saith unto you , do it '' ... `` Do it ... . 
Gladness , the gladness of some poor , very poor , people ... . 
Of course they were poor , since they had n't wine enough even at a wedding ... . 
The historians write that , in those days , the people living about the Lake of Gennesaret were the poorest that can possibly be imagined ... and another great heart , that other great being , His Mother , knew that He had come not only to make His great terrible sacrifice . 
She knew that His heart was open even to the simple , artless merrymaking of some obscure and unlearned people , who had warmly bidden Him to their poor wedding . 
` Mine hour is not yet come , ' He said , with a soft smile -LRB- He must have smiled gently to her -RRB- . 
And , indeed , was it to make wine abundant at poor weddings He had come down to earth ? 
And yet He went and did as she asked Him ... . 
Ah , he is reading again '' ... `` Jesus saith unto them , Fill the waterpots with water . 
And they filled them up to the brim . 
`` And he saith unto them , Draw out now and bear unto the governor of the feast . 
And they bear it . 
`` When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine , and knew not whence it was -LRB- but the servants which drew the water knew -RRB- ; the governor of the feast called the bridegroom , `` And saith unto him , Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine ; and when men have well drunk , that which is worse ; but thou hast kept the good wine until now . '' 
`` But what 's this , what 's this ? 
Why is the room growing wider ? 
... Ah , yes ... It 's the marriage , the wedding ... yes , of course . 
Here are the guests , here are the young couple sitting , and the merry crowd and ... Where is the wise governor of the feast ? 
But who is this ? 
Who ? 
Again the walls are receding ... . 
Who is getting up there from the great table ? 
What ! 
... He here , too ? 
But he 's in the coffin ... but he 's here , too . 
He has stood up , he sees me , he is coming here ... . 
God ! '' 
... Yes , he came up to him , to him , he , the little , thin old man , with tiny wrinkles on his face , joyful and laughing softly . 
There was no coffin now , and he was in the same dress as he had worn yesterday sitting with them , when the visitors had gathered about him . 
His face was uncovered , his eyes were shining . 
How was this , then ? 
He , too , had been called to the feast . 
He , too , at the marriage of Cana in Galilee ... `` Yes , my dear , I am called , too , called and bidden , '' he heard a soft voice saying over him . 
`` Why have you hidden yourself here , out of sight ? 
You come and join us too . '' 
It was his voice , the voice of Father Zossima . 
And it must be he , since he called him ! 
The elder raised Alyosha by the hand and he rose from his knees . 
`` We are rejoicing , '' the little , thin old man went on . 
`` We are drinking the new wine , the wine of new , great gladness ; do you see how many guests ? 
Here are the bride and bridegroom , here is the wise governor of the feast , he is tasting the new wine . 
