He regarded this speech as his chef-d'oeuvre , the chef-d'oeuvre of his whole life , as his swan-song . 
He died , it is true , nine months later of rapid consumption , so that he had the right , as it turned out , to compare himself to a swan singing his last song . 
He had put his whole heart and all the brain he had into that speech . 
And poor Ippolit Kirillovitch unexpectedly revealed that at least some feeling for the public welfare and `` the eternal question '' lay concealed in him . 
Where his speech really excelled was in its sincerity . 
He genuinely believed in the prisoner 's guilt ; he was accusing him not as an official duty only , and in calling for vengeance he quivered with a genuine passion `` for the security of society . '' 
Even the ladies in thee audience , though they remained hostile to Ippolit Kirillovitch , admitted that he made an extraordinary impression on them . 
He began in a breaking voice , but it soon gained strength and filled the court to the end of his speech . 
But as soon as he had finished , he almost fainted . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , '' began the prosecutor , `` this case has made a stir throughout Russia . 
But what is there to wonder at , what is there so peculiarly horrifying in it for us ? 
We are so accustomed to such crimes ! 
That 's what 's so horrible , that such dark deeds have ceased to horrify us . 
What ought to horrify us is that we are so accustomed to it , and not this or that isolated crime . 
What are the causes of our indifference , our lukewarm attitude to such deeds , to such signs of the times , ominous of an unenviable future ? 
Is it our cynicism , is it the premature exhaustion of intellect and imagination in a society that is sinking into decay , in spite of its youth ? 
Is it that our moral principles are shattered to their foundations , or is it , perhaps , a complete lack of such principles among us ? 
I can not answer such questions ; nevertheless they are disturbing , and every citizen not only must , but ought to be harassed by them . 
Our newborn and still timid press has done good service to the public already , for without it we should never have heard of the horrors of unbridled violence and moral degradation which are continually made known by the press , not merely to those who attend the new jury courts established in the present reign , but to everyone . 
And what do we read almost daily ? 
Of things beside which the present case grows pale , and seems almost commonplace . 
But what is most important is that the majority of our national crimes of violence bear witness to a widespread evil , now so general among us that it is difficult to contend against it . 
`` One day we see a brilliant young officer of high society , at the very outset of his career , in a cowardly underhand way , without a pang of conscience , murdering an official who had once been his benefactor , and the servant girl , to steal his own I O U and what ready money he could find on him ; ` it will come in handy for my pleasures in the fashionable world and for my career in the future . ' 
After murdering them , he puts pillows under the head of each of his victims ; he goes away . 
Next , a young hero ` decorated for bravery ' kills the mother of his chief and benefactor , like a highwayman , and to urge his companions to join him he asserts that ` she loves him like a son , and so will follow all his directions and take no precautions . ' 
Granted that he is a monster , yet I dare not say in these days that he is unique . 
Another man will not commit the murder , but will feel and think like him , and is as dishonourable in soul . 
In silence , alone with his conscience , he asks himself perhaps , ` What is honour , and is n't the condemnation of bloodshed a prejudice ? ' 
`` Perhaps people will cry out against me that I am morbid , hysterical , that it is a monstrous slander , that I am exaggerating . 
Let them say so - and heavens ! 
I should be the first to rejoice if it were so ! 
Oh , do n't believe me , think of me as morbid , but remember my words ; if only a tenth , if only a twentieth part of what I say is true - even so it 's awful ! 
Look how our young people commit suicide , without asking themselves Hamlet 's question what there is beyond , without a sign of such a question , as though all that relates to the soul and to what awaits us beyond the grave had long been erased in their minds and buried under the sands . 
Look at our vice , at our profligates . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , the luckless victim in the present case , was almost an innocent babe compared with many of them . 
And yet we all knew him , ` he lived among us ! ' 
... `` Yes , one day perhaps the leading intellects of Russia and of Europe will study the psychology of Russian crime , for the subject is worth it . 
But this study will come later , at leisure , when all the tragic topsy-turvydom of to-day is farther behind us , so that it 's possible to examine it with more insight and more impartiality than I can do . 
Now we are either horrified or pretend to be horrified , though we really gloat over the spectacle , and love strong and eccentric sensations which tickle our cynical , pampered idleness . 
Or , like little children , we brush the dreadful ghosts away and hide our heads in the pillow so as to return to our sports and merriment as soon as they have vanished . 
But we must one day begin life in sober earnest , we must look at ourselves as a society ; it 's time we tried to grasp something of our social position , or at least to make a beginning in that direction . 
`` A great writer * of the last epoch , comparing Russia to a swift troika galloping to an unknown goal , exclaims , ` Oh , troika , birdlike troika , who invented thee ! ' 
and adds , in proud ecstasy , that all the peoples of the world stand aside respectfully to make way for the recklessly galloping troika to pass . 
That may be , they may stand aside , respectfully or no , but in my poor opinion the great writer ended his book in this way either in an excess of childish and naive optimism , or simply in fear of the censorship of the day . 
For if the troika were drawn by his heroes , Sobakevitch , Nozdryov , Tchitchikov , it could reach no rational goal , whoever might be driving it . 
And those were the heroes of an older generation , ours are worse specimens still ... '' * Gogol . 
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch 's speech was interrupted by applause . 
The liberal significance of this simile was appreciated . 
The applause was , it 's true , of brief duration , so that the President did not think it necessary to caution the public , and only looked severely in the direction of the offenders . 
But Ippolit Kirillovitch was encouraged ; he had never been applauded before ! 
He had been all his life unable to get a hearing , and now he suddenly had an opportunity of securing the ear of all Russia . 
`` What , after all , is this Karamazov family , which has gained such an unenviable notoriety throughout Russia ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Perhaps I am exaggerating , but it seems to me that certain fundamental features of the educated class of to-day are reflected in this family picture - only , of course , in miniature , ` like the sun in a drop of water . ' 
Think of that unhappy , vicious , unbridled old man , who has met with such a melancholy end , the head of a family ! 
Beginning life of noble birth , but in a poor dependent position , through an unexpected marriage he came into a small fortune . 
A petty knave , a toady and buffoon , of fairly good , though undeveloped , intelligence , he was , above all , a moneylender , who grew bolder with growing prosperity . 
His abject and servile characteristics disappeared , his , malicious and sarcastic cynicism was all that remained . 
On the spiritual side he was undeveloped , while his vitality was excessive . 
He saw nothing in life but sensual pleasure , and he brought his children up to be the same . 
He had no feelings for his duties as a father . 
He ridiculed those duties . 
He left his little children to the servants , and was glad to be rid of them , forgot about them completely . 
The old man 's maxim was Apres moi le deluge . 
* He was an example of everything that is opposed to civic duty , of the most complete and malignant individualism . 
` The world may burn for aught I care , so long as I am all right , ' and he was all right ; he was content , he was eager to go on living in the same way for another twenty or thirty years . 
He swindled his own son and spent his money , his maternal inheritance , on trying to get his mistress from him . 
No , I do n't intend to leave the prisoner 's defence altogether to my talented colleague from Petersburg . 
I will speak the truth myself , I can well understand what resentment he had heaped up in his son 's heart against him . 
* After me , the deluge . 
`` But enough , enough of that unhappy old man ; he has paid the penalty . 
Let us remember , however , that he was a father , and one of the typical fathers of to-day . 
Am I unjust , indeed , in saying that he is typical of many modern fathers ? 
Alas ! 
many of them only differ in not openly professing such cynicism , for they are better educated , more cultured , but their philosophy is essentially the same as his . 
Perhaps I am a pessimist , but you have agreed to forgive me . 
Let us agree beforehand , you need not believe me , but let me speak . 
Let me say what I have to say , and remember something of my words . 
`` Now for the children of this father , this head of a family . 
One of them is the prisoner before us , all the rest of my speech will deal with him . 
Of the other two I will speak only cursorily . 
`` The elder is one of those modern young men of brilliant education and vigorous intellect , who has lost all faith in everything . 
He has denied and rejected much already , like his father . 
We have all heard him , he was a welcome guest in local society . 
He never concealed his opinions , quite the contrary in fact , which justifies me in speaking rather openly of him now , of course , not as an individual , but as a member of the Karamazov family . 
Another personage closely connected with the case died here by his own hand last night . 
I mean an afflicted idiot , formerly the servant , and possibly the illegitimate son , of Fyodor Pavlovitch , Smerdyakov . 
At the preliminary inquiry , he told me with hysterical tears how the young Ivan Karamazov had horrified him by his spiritual audacity . 
` Everything in the world is lawful according to him , and nothing must be forbidden in the future - that is what he always taught me . ' 
I believe that idiot was driven out of his mind by this theory , though , of course , the epileptic attacks from which he suffered , and this terrible catastrophe , have helped to unhinge his faculties . 
But he dropped one very interesting observation , which would have done credit to a more intelligent observer , and that is , indeed , why I 've mentioned it : ` If there is one of the sons that is like Fyodor Pavlovitch in character , it is Ivan Fyodorovitch . ' 
`` With that remark I conclude my sketch of his character , feeling it indelicate to continue further . 
Oh , I do n't want to draw any further conclusions and croak like a raven over the young man 's future . 
We 've seen to-day in this court that there are still good impulses in his young heart , that family feeling has not been destroyed in him by lack of faith and cynicism , which have come to him rather by inheritance than by the exercise of independent thought . 
`` Then the third son . 
Oh , he is a devout and modest youth , who does not share his elder brother 's gloomy and destructive theory of life . 
He has sought to cling to the ` ideas of the people , ' or to what goes by that name in some circles of our intellectual classes . 
He clung to the monastery , and was within an ace of becoming a monk . 
He seems to me to have betrayed unconsciously , and so early , that timid despair which leads so many in our unhappy society , who dread cynicism and its corrupting influences , and mistakenly attribute all the mischief to European enlightenment , to return to their ` native soil , ' as they say , to the bosom , so to speak , of their mother earth , like frightened children , yearning to fall asleep on the withered bosom of their decrepit mother , and to sleep there for ever , only to escape the horrors that terrify them . 
`` For my part I wish the excellent and gifted young man every success ; I trust that youthful idealism and impulse towards the ideas of the people may never degenerate , as often happens , on the moral side into gloomy mysticism , and on the political into blind chauvinism - two elements which are even a greater menace to Russia than the premature decay , due to misunderstanding and gratuitous adoption of European ideas , from which his elder brother is suffering . '' 
