I found in him no trace of the timidity on which the prosecutor so insisted . 
There was no simplicity about him , either . 
I found in him , on the contrary , an extreme mistrustfulness concealed under a mask of naivete , and an intelligence of considerable range . 
The prosecutor was too simple in taking him for weak-minded . 
He made a very definite impression on me : I left him with the conviction that he was a distinctly spiteful creature , excessively ambitious , vindictive , and intensely envious . 
I made some inquiries : he resented his parentage , was ashamed of it , and would clench his teeth when he remembered that he was the son of ` stinking Lizaveta . ' 
He was disrespectful to the servant Grigory and his wife , who had cared for him in his childhood . 
He cursed and jeered at Russia . 
He dreamed of going to France and becoming a Frenchman . 
He used often to say that he had n't the means to do so . 
I fancy he loved no one but himself and had a strangely high opinion of himself . 
His conception of culture was limited to good clothes , clean shirt-fronts and polished boots . 
Believing himself to be the illegitimate son of Fyodor Pavlovitch -LRB- there is evidence of this -RRB- , he might well have resented his position , compared with that of his master 's legitimate sons . 
They had everything , he nothing . 
They had all the rights , they had the inheritance , while he was only the cook . 
He told me himself that he had helped Fyodor Pavlovitch to put the notes in the envelope . 
The destination of that sum - a sum which would have made his career - must have been hateful to him . 
Moreover , he saw three thousand roubles in new rainbow-coloured notes . 
-LRB- I asked him about that on purpose . -RRB- 
Oh , beware of showing an ambitious and envious man a large sum of money at once ! 
And it was the first time he had seen so much money in the hands of one man . 
The sight of the rainbow-coloured notes may have made a morbid impression on his imagination , but with no immediate results . 
`` The talented prosecutor , with extraordinary subtlety , sketched for us all the arguments for and against the hypothesis of Smerdyakov 's guilt , and asked us in particular what motive he had in feigning a fit . 
But he may not have been feigning at all , the fit may have happened quite naturally , but it may have passed off quite naturally , and the sick man may have recovered , not completely perhaps , but still regaining consciousness , as happens with epileptics . 
`` The prosecutor asks at what moment could Smerdyakov have committed the murder . 
But it is very easy to point out that moment . 
He might have waked up from deep sleep -LRB- for he was only asleep - an epileptic fit is always followed by a deep sleep -RRB- at that moment when the old Grigory shouted at the top of his voice ` Parricide ! ' 
That shout in the dark and stillness may have waked Smerdyakov whose sleep may have been less sound at the moment : he might naturally have waked up an hour before . 
`` Getting out of bed , he goes almost unconsciously and with no definite motive towards the sound to see what 's the matter . 
His head is still clouded with his attack , his faculties are half asleep ; but , once in the garden , he walks to the lighted windows and he hears terrible news from his master , who would be , of course , glad to see him . 
His mind sets to work at once . 
He hears all the details from his frightened master , and gradually in his disordered brain there shapes itself an idea - terrible , but seductive and irresistibly logical . 
To kill the old man , take the three thousand , and throw all the blame on to his young master . 
A terrible lust of money , of booty , might seize upon him as he realised his security from detection . 
Oh ! 
these sudden and irresistible impulses come so often when there is a favourable opportunity , and especially with murderers who have had no idea of committing a murder beforehand . 
And Smerdyakov may have gone in and carried out his plan . 
With what weapon ? 
Why , with any stone picked up in the garden . 
But what for , with what object ? 
Why , the three thousand which means a career for him . 
Oh , I am not contradicting myself - the money may have existed . 
And perhaps Smerdyakov alone knew where to find it , where his master kept it . 
And the covering of the money - the torn envelope on the floor ? 
`` Just now , when the prosecutor was explaining his subtle theory that only an inexperienced thief like Karamazov would have left the envelope on the floor , and not one like Smerdyakov , who would have avoided leaving a piece of evidence against himself , I thought as I listened that I was hearing something very familiar , and , would you believe it , I have heard that very argument , that very conjecture , of how Karamazov would have behaved , precisely two days before , from Smerdyakov himself . 
What 's more , it struck me at the time . 
I fancied that there was an artificial simplicity about him ; that he was in a hurry to suggest this idea to me that I might fancy it was my own . 
He insinuated it , as it were . 
Did he not insinuate the same idea at the inquiry and suggest it to the talented prosecutor ? 
`` I shall be asked , ` What about the old woman , Grigory 's wife ? 
She heard the sick man moaning close by , all night . ' 
Yes , she heard it , but that evidence is extremely unreliable . 
I knew a lady who complained bitterly that she had been kept awake all night by a dog in the yard . 
Yet the poor beast , it appeared , had only yelped once or twice in the night . 
And that 's natural . 
If anyone is asleep and hears a groan he wakes up , annoyed at being waked , but instantly falls asleep again . 
Two hours later , again a groan , he wakes up and falls asleep again ; and the same thing again two hours later - three times altogether in the night . 
Next morning the sleeper wakes up and complains that someone has been groaning all night and keeping him awake . 
And it is bound to seem so to him : the intervals of two hours of sleep he does not remember , he only remembers the moments of waking , so he feels he has been waked up all night . 
`` But why , why , asks the prosecutor , did not Smerdyakov confess in his last letter ? 
Why did his conscience prompt him to one step and not to both ? 
But , excuse me , conscience implies penitence , and the suicide may not have felt penitence , but only despair . 
Despair and penitence are two very different things . 
Despair may be vindictive and irreconcilable , and the suicide , laying his hands on himself , may well have felt redoubled hatred for those whom he had envied all his life . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , beware of a miscarriage of justice ! 
What is there unlikely in all I have put before you just now ? 
Find the error in my reasoning ; find the impossibility , the absurdity . 
And if there is but a shade of possibility , but a shade of probability in my propositions , do not condemn him . 
And is there only a shade ? 
I swear by all that is sacred , I fully believe in the explanation of the murder I have just put forward . 
What troubles me and makes me indignant is that of all the mass of facts heaped up by the prosecution against the prisoner , there is not a single one certain and irrefutable . 
And yet the unhappy man is to be ruined by the accumulation of these facts . 
Yes , the accumulated effect is awful : the blood , the blood dripping from his fingers , the bloodstained shirt , the dark night resounding with the shout ` Parricide ! ' 
and the old man falling with a broken head . 
And then the mass of phrases , statements , gestures , shouts ! 
Oh ! 
this has so much influence , it can so bias the mind ; but , gentlemen of the jury , can it bias your minds ? 
Remember , you have been given absolute power to bind and to loose , but the greater the power , the more terrible its responsibility . 
`` I do not draw back one iota from what I have said just now , but suppose for one moment I agreed with the prosecution that my luckless client had stained his hands with his father 's blood . 
This is only hypothesis , I repeat ; I never for one instant doubt of his innocence . 
But , so be it , I assume that my client is guilty of parricide . 
Even so , hear what I have to say . 
I have it in my heart to say something more to you , for I feel that there must be a great conflict in your hearts and minds ... . 
Forgive my referring to your hearts and minds , gentlemen of the jury , but I want to be truthful and sincere to the end . 
Let us all be sincere ! '' 
At this point the speech was interrupted by rather loud applause . 
The last words , indeed , were pronounced with a note of such sincerity that everyone felt that he really might have something to say , and that what he was about to say would be of the greatest consequence . 
But the President , hearing the applause , in a loud voice threatened to clear the court if such an incident were repeated . 
Every sound was hushed and Fetyukovitch began in a voice full of feeling quite unlike the tone he had used hitherto . 
A Corrupter of Thought `` IT 'S not only the accumulation of facts that threatens my client with ruin , gentlemen of the jury , '' he began , `` what is really damning for my client is one fact - the dead body of his father . 
Had it been an ordinary case of murder you would have rejected the charge in view of the triviality , the incompleteness , and the fantastic character of the evidence , if you examine each part of it separately ; or , at least , you would have hesitated to ruin a man 's life simply from the prejudice against him which he has , alas ! 
only too well deserved . 
But it 's not an ordinary case of murder , it 's a case of parricide . 
That impresses men 's minds , and to such a degree that the very triviality and incompleteness of the evidence becomes less trivial and less incomplete even to an unprejudiced mind . 
How can such a prisoner be acquitted ? 
What if he committed the murder and gets off unpunished ? 
That is what everyone , almost involuntarily , instinctively , feels at heart . 
`` Yes , it 's a fearful thing to shed a father 's blood - the father who has begotten me , loved me , not spared his life for me , grieved over my illnesses from childhood up , troubled all his life for my happiness , and has lived in my joys , in my successes . 
To murder such a father - that 's inconceivable . 
Gentlemen of the jury , what is a father - a real father ? 
