`` And hast thou considered my servant Job ? '' 
God asked of him . 
And God boasted to the devil , pointing to His great and holy servant . 
And the devil laughed at God 's words . 
`` Give him over to me and Thou wilt see that Thy servant will murmur against Thee and curse Thy name . '' 
And God gave up the just man He loved so , to the devil . 
And the devil smote his children and his cattle and scattered his wealth , all of a sudden like a thunderbolt from heaven . 
And Job rent his mantle and fell down upon the ground and cried aloud , `` Naked came I out of my mother 's womb , and naked shall I return into the earth ; the Lord gave and the Lord has taken away . 
Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and ever . '' 
Fathers and teachers , forgive my tears now , for all my childhood rises up again before me , and I breathe now as I breathed then , with the breast of a little child of eight , and I feel as I did then , awe and wonder and gladness . 
The camels at that time caught my imagination , and Satan , who talked like that with God , and God who gave His servant up to destruction , and His servant crying out : `` Blessed be Thy name although Thou dost punish me , '' and then the soft and sweet singing in the church : `` Let my prayer rise up before Thee , '' and again incense from the priest 's censer and the kneeling and the prayer . 
Ever since then - only yesterday I took it up - I 've never been able to read that sacred tale without tears . 
And how much that is great , mysterious and unfathomable there is in it ! 
Afterwards I heard the words of mockery and blame , proud words , `` How could God give up the most loved of His saints for the diversion of the devil , take from him his children , smite him with sore boils so that he cleansed the corruption from his sores with a potsherd - and for no object except to boast to the devil ` See what My saint can suffer for My sake . ' 
`` But the greatness of it lies just in the fact that it is a mystery - that the passing earthly show and the eternal verity are brought together in it . 
In the face of the earthly truth , the eternal truth is accomplished . 
The Creator , just as on the first days of creation He ended each day with praise : `` That is good that I have created , '' looks upon Job and again praises His creation . 
And Job , praising the Lord , serves not only Him but all His creation for generations and generations , and for ever and ever , since for that he was ordained . 
Good heavens , what a book it is , and what lessons there are in it ! 
What a book the Bible is , what a miracle , what strength is given with it to man ! 
It is like a mould cast of the world and man and human nature , everything is there , and a law for everything for all the ages . 
And what mysteries are solved and revealed ! 
God raises Job again , gives him wealth again . 
Many years pass by , and he has other children and loves them . 
But how could he love those new ones when those first children are no more , when he has lost them ? 
Remembering them , how could he be fully happy with those new ones , however dear the new ones might be ? 
But he could , he could . 
It 's the great mystery of human life that old grief passes gradually into quiet , tender joy . 
The mild serenity of age takes the place of the riotous blood of youth . 
I bless the rising sun each day , and , as before , my heart sings to meet it , but now I love even more its setting , its long slanting rays and the soft , tender , gentle memories that come with them , the dear images from the whole of my long , happy life - and over all the Divine Truth , softening , reconciling , forgiving ! 
My life is ending , I know that well , but every day that is left me I feel how earthly life is in touch with a new infinite , unknown , but approaching life , the nearness of which sets my soul quivering with rapture , my mind glowing and my heart weeping with joy . 
Friends and teachers , I have heard more than once , and of late one may hear it more often , that the priests , and above all the village priests , are complaining on all sides of their miserable income and their humiliating lot . 
They plainly state , even in print - I 've read it myself - that they are unable to teach the Scriptures to the people because of the smallness of their means , and if Lutherans and heretics come and lead the flock astray , they let them lead them astray because they have so little to live upon . 
May the Lord increase the sustenance that is so precious to them , for their complaint is just , too . 
But of a truth I say , if anyone is to blame in the matter , half the fault is ours . 
For he may be short of time , he may say truly that he is overwhelmed all the while with work and services , but still it 's not all the time , even he has an hour a week to remember God . 
And he does not work the whole year round . 
Let him gather round him once a week , some hour in the evening , if only the children at first - the fathers will hear of it and they too will begin to come . 
There 's no need to build halls for this , let him take them into his own cottage . 
They wo n't spoil his cottage , they would only be there one hour . 
Let him open that book and begin reading it without grand words or superciliousness , without condescension to them , but gently and kindly , being glad that he is reading to them and that they are listening with attention , loving the words himself , only stopping from time to time to explain words that are not understood by the peasants . 
Do n't be anxious , they will understand everything , the orthodox heart will understand all ! 
Let him read them about Abraham and Sarah , about Isaac and Rebecca , of how Jacob went to Laban and wrestled with the Lord in his dream and said , `` This place is holy '' - and he will impress the devout mind of the peasant . 
Let him read , especially to the children , how the brothers sold Joseph , the tender boy , the dreamer and prophet , into bondage , and told their father that a wild beast had devoured him , and showed him his blood-stained clothes . 
Let him read them how the brothers afterwards journeyed into Egypt for corn , and Joseph , already a great ruler , unrecognised by them , tormented them , accused them , kept his brother Benjamin , and all through love : `` I love you , and loving you I torment you . '' 
For he remembered all his life how they had sold him to the merchants in the burning desert by the well , and how , wringing his hands , he had wept and besought his brothers not to sell him as a slave in a strange land . 
And how , seeing them again after many years , he loved them beyond measure , but he harassed and tormented them in love . 
He left them at last not able to bear the suffering of his heart , flung himself on his bed and wept . 
Then , wiping his tears away , he went out to them joyful and told them , `` Brothers , I am your brother Joseph '' Let him read them further how happy old Jacob was on learning that his darling boy was still alive , and how he went to Egypt leaving his own country , and died in a foreign land , bequeathing his great prophecy that had lain mysteriously hidden in his meek and timid heart all his life , that from his offspring , from Judah , will come the great hope of the world , the Messiah and Saviour . 
Fathers and teachers , forgive me and do n't be angry , that like a little child I 've been babbling of what you know long ago , and can teach me a hundred times more skilfully . 
I only speak from rapture , and forgive my tears , for I love the Bible . 
Let him too weep , the priest of God , and be sure that the hearts of his listeners will throb in response . 
Only a little tiny seed is needed - drop it into the heart of the peasant and it wo n't die , it will live in his soul all his life , it will be hidden in the midst of his darkness and sin , like a bright spot , like a great reminder . 
And there 's no need of much teaching or explanation , he will understand it all simply . 
Do you suppose that the peasants do n't understand ? 
Try reading them the touching story of the fair Esther and the haughty Vashti ; or the miraculous story of Jonah in the whale . 
Do n't forget either the parables of Our Lord , choose especially from the Gospel of St. Luke -LRB- that is what I did -RRB- , and then from the Acts of the Apostles the conversion of St. Paul -LRB- that you must n't leave out on any account -RRB- , and from the Lives of the Saints , for instance , the life of Alexey , the man of God and , greatest of all , the happy martyr and the seer of God , Mary of Egypt - and you will penetrate their hearts with these simple tales . 
Give one hour a week to it in spite of your poverty , only one little hour . 
And you will see for yourselves that our people is gracious and grateful , and will repay you a hundred foId . 
Mindful of the kindness of their priest and the moving words they have heard from him , they will of their own accord help him in his fields and in his house and will treat him with more respect than before - so that it will even increase his worldly well-being too . 
The thing is so simple that sometimes one is even afraid to put it into words , for fear of being laughed at , and yet how true it is ! 
One who does not believe in God will not believe in God 's people . 
He who believes in God 's people will see His Holiness too , even though he had not believed in it till then . 
Only the people and their future spiritual power will convert our atheists , who have torn themselves away from their native soil . 
And what is the use of Christ 's words , unless we set an example ? 
The people is lost without the Word of God , for its soul is athirst for the Word and for all that is good . 
In my youth , long ago , nearly forty years ago , I travelled all over Russia with Father Anfim , collecting funds for our monastery , and we stayed one night on the bank of a great navigable river with some fishermen . 
A good looking peasant lad , about eighteen , joined us ; he had to hurry back next morning to pull a merchant 's barge along the bank . 
I noticed him looking straight before him with clear and tender eyes . 
It was a bright , warm , still , July night , a cool mist rose from the broad river , we could hear the plash of a fish , the birds were still , all was hushed and beautiful , everything praying to God . 
Only we two were not sleeping , the lad and I , and we talked of the beauty of this world of God 's and of the great mystery of it . 
Every blade of grass , every insect , ant , and golden bee , all so marvellously know their path , though they have not intelligence , they bear witness to the mystery of God and continually accomplish it themselves . 
I saw the dear lad 's heart was moved . 
He told me that he loved the forest and the forest birds . 
He was a bird-catcher , knew the note of each of them , could call each bird . 
`` I know nothing better than to be in the forest , '' said he , `` though all things are good . '' 
`` Truly , '' I answered him , `` all things are good and fair , because all is truth . 
Look , '' said I , `` at the horse , that great beast that is so near to man ; or the lowly , pensive ox , which feeds him and works for him ; look at their faces , what meekness , what devotion to man , who often beats them mercilessly . 
What gentleness , what confidence and what beauty ! 
It 's touching to know that there 's no sin in them , for all , all except man , is sinless , and Christ has been with them before us . '' 
`` Why , '' asked the boy , `` is Christ with them too ? '' 
`` It can not but be so , '' said I , `` since the Word is for all . 
All creation and all creatures , every leaf is striving to the Word , singing glory to God , weeping to Christ , unconsciously accomplishing this by the mystery of their sinless life . 
Yonder , '' said I , `` in the forest wanders the dreadful bear , fierce and menacing , and yet innocent in it . '' 
And I told him how once a bear came to a great saint who had taken refuge in a tiny cell in the wood . 
And the great saint pitied him , went up to him without fear and gave him a piece of bread . 
`` Go along , '' said he , `` Christ be with you , '' and the savage beast walked away meekly and obediently , doing no harm . 
And the lad was delighted that the bear had walked away without hurting the saint , and that Christ was with him too . 
`` Ah , '' said he , `` how good that is , how good and beautiful is all God 's work ! '' 
He sat musing softly and sweetly . 
I saw he understood . 
And he slept beside me a light and sinless sleep . 
May God bless youth ! 
And I prayed for him as I went to sleep . 
Lord , send peace and light to Thy people ! 
-LRB- c -RRB- Recollections of Father Zossima 's Youth before he became a Monk . 
The Duel I SPENT a long time , almost eight years , in the military cadet school at Petersburg , and in the novelty of my surroundings there , many of my childish impressions grew dimmer , though I forgot nothing . 
I picked up so many new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a cruel , absurd , almost savage creature . 
A surface polish of courtesy and society manners I did acquire together with the French language . 
But we all , myself included , looked upon the soldiers in our service as cattle . 
