`` Meanwhile , I spent my time in drink and riot , till the lieutenant-colonel put me under arrest for three days . 
Just at that time father sent me six thousand roubles in return for my sending him a deed giving up all claims upon him - settling our accounts , so to speak , and saying that I would n't expect anything more . 
I did n't understand a word of it at the time . 
Until I came here , Alyosha , till the last few days , indeed , perhaps even now , I have n't been able to make head or tail of my money affairs with father . 
But never mind that , we 'll talk of it later . 
`` Just as I received the money , I got a letter from a friend telling me something that interested me immensely . 
The authorities , I learnt , were dissatisfied with our lieutenant-colonel . 
He was suspected of irregularities ; in fact , his enemies were preparing a surprise for him . 
And then the commander of the division arrived , and kicked up the devil of a shindy . 
Shortly afterwards he was ordered to retire . 
I wo n't tell you how it all happened . 
He had enemies certainly . 
Suddenly there was a marked coolness in the town towards him and all his family . 
His friends all turned their backs on him . 
Then I took my first step . 
I met Agafya Ivanovna , with whom I 'd always kept up a friendship , and said , ` Do you know there 's a deficit of 4500 roubles of government money in your father 's accounts ? ' '' 
` What do you mean ? 
What makes you say so ? 
The general was here not long ago , and everything was all right . ' '' 
` Then it was , but now it is n't . ' 
`` She was terribly scared . '' 
` Do n't frighten me ! ' 
she said . 
` Who told you so ? ' '' 
` Do n't be uneasy , ' I said , ' I wo n't tell anyone . 
You know I 'm as silent as the tomb . 
I only wanted , in view of `` possibilities , '' to add , that when they demand that 4500 roubles from your father , and he ca n't produce it , he 'll be tried , and made to serve as a common soldier in his old age , unless you like to send me your young lady secretly . 
I 've just had money paid me . 
I 'll give her four thousand , if you like , and keep the secret religiously . ' '' 
` Ah , you scoundrel ! ' 
- that 's what she said . 
` You wicked scoundrel ! 
How dare you ! ' 
`` She went away furiously indignant , while I shouted after her once more that the secret should be kept sacred . 
Those two simple creatures , Agafya and her aunt , I may as well say at once , behaved like perfect angels all through this business . 
They genuinely adored their ` Katya , ' thought her far above them , and waited on her , hand and foot . 
But Agafya told her of our conversation . 
I found that out afterwards . 
She did n't keep it back , and of course that was all I wanted . 
`` Suddenly the new major arrived to take command of the battalion . 
The old lieutenant-colonel was taken ill at once , could n't leave his room for two days , and did n't hand over the government money . 
Dr. Kravchenko declared that he really was ill . 
But I knew for a fact , and had known for a long time , that for the last four years the money had never been in his hands except when the Commander made his visits of inspection . 
He used to lend it to a trustworthy person , a merchant of our town called Trifonov , an old widower , with a big beard and gold-rimmed spectacles . 
He used to go to the fair , do a profitable business with the money , and return the whole sum to the colonel , bringing with it a present from the fair , as well as interest on the loan . 
But this time -LRB- I heard all about it quite by chance from Trifonov 's son and heir , a drivelling youth and one of the most vicious in the world -RRB- - this time , I say , Trifonov brought nothing back from the fair . 
The lieutenant-colonel flew to him . 
` I 've never received any money from you , and could n't possibly have received any . ' 
That was all the answer he got . 
So now our lieutenant-colonel is confined to the house , with a towel round his head , while they 're all three busy putting ice on it . 
All at once an orderly arrives on the scene with the book and the order to ` hand over the battalion money immediately , within two hours . ' 
He signed the book -LRB- I saw the signature in the book afterwards -RRB- , stood up , saying he would put on his uniform , ran to his bedroom , loaded his double-barrelled gun with a service bullet , took the boot off his right foot , fixed the gun against his chest , and began feeling for the trigger with his foot . 
But Agafya , remembering what I had told her , had her suspicions . 
She stole up and peeped into the room just in time . 
She rushed in , flung herself upon him from behind , threw her arms round him , and the gun went off , hit the ceiling , but hurt no one . 
The others ran in , took away the gun , and held him by the arms . 
I heard all about this afterwards . 
I was at home , it was getting dusk , and I was just preparing to go out . 
I had dressed , brushed my hair , scented my handkerchief , and taken up my cap , when suddenly the door opened , and facing me in the room stood Katerina Ivanovna . 
`` It 's strange how things happen sometimes . 
No one had seen her in the street , so that no one knew of it in the town . 
I lodged with two decrepit old ladies , who looked after me . 
They were most obliging old things , ready to do anything for me , and at my request were as silent afterwards as two cast-iron posts . 
Of course I grasped the position at once . 
She walked in and looked straight at me , her dark eyes determined , even defiant , but on her lips and round mouth I saw uncertainty . '' 
` My sister told me , ' she began , ` that you would give me 4500 roubles if I came to you for it - myself . 
I have come ... give me the money ! ' 
`` She could n't keep it up . 
She was breathless , frightened , her voice failed her , and the corners of her mouth and the lines round it quivered . 
Alyosha , are you listening , or are you asleep ? '' 
`` Mitya , I know you will tell the whole truth , said Alyosha in agitation . 
`` I am telling it . 
If I tell the whole truth just as it happened I sha n't spare myself . 
My first idea was a - Karamazov one . 
Once I was bitten by a centipede , brother , and laid up a fortnight with fever from it . 
Well , I felt a centipede biting at my heart then - a noxious insect , you understand ? 
I looked her up and down . 
You 've seen her ? 
She 's a beauty . 
But she was beautiful in another way then . 
At that moment she was beautiful because she was noble , and I was a scoundrel ; she in all the grandeur of her generosity and sacrifice for her father , and I - a bug ! 
And , scoundrel as I was , she was altogether at my mercy , body and soul . 
She was hemmed in . 
I tell you frankly , that thought , that venomous thought , so possessed my heart that it almost swooned with suspense . 
It seemed as if there could be no resisting it ; as though I should act like a bug , like a venomous spider , without a spark of pity . 
I could scarcely breathe . 
Understand , I should have gone next day to ask for her hand , so that it might end honourably , so to speak , and that nobody would or could know . 
For though I 'm a man of base desires , I 'm honest . 
And at that very second some voice seemed to whisper in my ear , ` But when you come to-morrow to make your proposal , that girl wo n't even see you ; she 'll order her coachman to kick you out of the yard . 
`` Publish it through all the town , '' she would say , `` I 'm not afraid of you . '' ' 
I looked at the young lady , my voice had not deceived me . 
That is how it would be , not a doubt of it . 
I could see from her face now that I should be turned out of the house . 
My spite was roused . 
I longed to play her the nastiest swinish cad 's trick : to look at her with a sneer , and on the spot where she stood before me to stun her with a tone of voice that only a shopman could use . '' 
` Four thousand ! 
What do you mean ? 
I was joking . 
You 've been counting your chickens too easily , madam . 
Two hundred , if you like , with all my heart . 
