She had n't much brains in her youth , and now at forty she has lost what she had . 
` But she 's awfully sentimental , ' he says ; ` that 's how I shall get hold of her . 
When I marry her , I shall take her to Petersburg and there I shall start a newspaper . ' 
And his mouth was simply watering , the beast , not for the widow , but for the hundred and fifty thousand . 
And he made me believe it . 
He came to see me every day . 
` She is coming round , ' he declared . 
He was beaming with delight . 
And then , all of a sudden , he was turned out of the house . 
Perhotin 's carrying everything before him , bravo ! 
I could kiss the silly old noodle for turning him out of the house . 
And he had written this doggerel . 
` It 's the first time I 've soiled my hands with writing poetry , ' he said . 
` It 's to win her heart , so it 's in a good cause . 
When I get hold of the silly woman 's fortune , I can be of great social utility . ' 
They have this social justification for every nasty thing they do ! 
` Anyway it 's better than your Pushkin 's poetry , ' he said , ` for I 've managed to advocate enlightenment even in that . ' 
I understand what he means about Pushkin , I quite see that , if he really was a man of talent and only wrote about women 's feet . 
But was n't Rakitin stuck up about his doggerel ! 
The vanity of these fellows ! 
` On the convalescence of the swollen foot of the object of my affections ' - he thought of that for a title . 
He 's a waggish fellow . 
A captivating little foot , Though swollen and red and tender ! 
The doctors come and plasters put , But still they can not mend her . 
Yet , 't is not for her foot I dread - A theme for Pushkin 's muse more fit - It 's not her foot , it is her head : I tremble for her loss of wit ! 
For as her foot swells , strange to say , Her intellect is on the wane - Oh , for some remedy I pray That may restore both foot and brain ! 
He is a pig , a regular pig , but he 's very arch , the rascal ! 
And he really has put in a progressive idea . 
And was n't he angry when she kicked him out ! 
He was gnashing his teeth ! '' 
`` He 's taken his revenge already , '' said Alyosha . 
`` He 's written a paragraph about Madame Hohlakov . '' 
And Alyosha told him briefly about the paragraph in Gossip . 
`` That 's his doing , that 's his doing ! '' 
Mitya assented , frowning . 
`` That 's him ! 
These paragraphs ... I know ... the insulting things that have been written about Grushenka , for instance ... . 
And about Katya , too ... . 
H 'm ! 
He walked across the room with a harassed air . 
`` Brother , I can not stay long , '' Alyosha said , after a pause . 
`` To-morrow will be a great and awful day for you , the judgment of God will be accomplished ... I am amazed at you , you walk about here , talking of I do n't know what ... '' `` No , do n't be amazed at me , '' Mitya broke in warmly . 
`` Am I to talk of that stinking dog ? 
Of the murderer ? 
We 've talked enough of him . 
I do n't want to say more of the stinking son of Stinking Lizaveta ! 
God will kill him , you will see . 
Hush ! '' 
He went up to Alyosha excitedly and kissed him . 
His eyes glowed . 
`` Rakitin would n't understand it , '' he began in a sort of exaltation ; `` but you , you 'll understand it all . 
That 's why I was thirsting for you . 
You see , there 's so much I 've been wanting to tell you for ever so long , here , within these peeling walls , but I have n't said a word about what matters most ; the moment never seems to have come . 
Now I can wait no longer . 
I must pour out my heart to you . 
Brother , these last two months I 've found in myself a new man . 
A new man has risen up in me . 
He was hidden in me , but would never have come to the surface , if it had n't been for this blow from heaven . 
I am afraid ! 
And what do I care if I spend twenty years in the mines , breaking ore with a hammer ? 
I am not a bit afraid of that - it 's something else I am afraid of now : that that new man may leave me . 
Even there , in the mines , underground , I may find a human heart in another convict and murderer by my side , and I may make friends with him , for even there one may live and love and suffer . 
One may thaw and revive a frozen heart in that convict , one may wait upon him for years , and at last bring up from the dark depths a lofty soul , a feeling , suffering creature ; one may bring forth an angel , create a hero ! 
There are so many of them , hundreds of them , and we are all to blame for them . 
Why was it I dreamed of that ` babe ' at such a moment ? 
` Why is the babe so poor ? ' 
That was a sign to me at that moment . 
It 's for the babe I 'm going . 
Because we are all responsible for all . 
For all the ` babes , ' for there are big children as well as little children All are ` babes . ' 
I go for all , because someone must go for all . 
I did n't kill father , but I 've got to go . 
I accept it . 
It 's all come to me here , here , within these peeling walls . 
There are numbers of them there , hundreds of them underground , with hammers in their hands . 
Oh , yes , we shall be in chains and there will be no freedom , but then , in our great sorrow , we shall rise again to joy , without which man can not live nor God exist , for God gives joy : it 's His privilege - a grand one . 
Ah , man should be dissolved in prayer ! 
What should I be underground there without God ? 
Rakitin 's laughing ! 
If they drive God from the earth , we shall shelter Him underground . 
One can not exist in prison without God ; it 's even more impossible than out of prison . 
And then we men underground will sing from the bowels of the earth a glorious hymn to God , with Whom is joy . 
Hail to God and His joy ! 
I love Him ! '' 
Mitya was almost gasping for breath as he uttered his wild speech . 
He turned pale , his lips quivered , and tears rolled down his cheeks . 
`` Yes , life is full , there is life even underground , '' he began again . 
`` You would n't believe , Alexey , how I want to live now , what a thirst for existence and consciousness has sprung up in me within these peeling walls . 
Rakitin does n't understand that ; all he cares about is building a house and letting flats . 
But I 've been longing for you . 
And what is suffering ? 
I am not afraid of it , even if it were beyond reckoning . 
I am not afraid of it now . 
I was afraid of it before . 
Do you know , perhaps I wo n't answer at the trial at all ... . 
And I seem to have such strength in me now , that I think I could stand anything , any suffering , only to be able to say and to repeat to myself every moment , ' I exist . ' 
In thousands of agonies - I exist . 
I 'm tormented on the rack - but I exist ! 
Though I sit alone on a pillar - I exist ! 
I see the sun , and if I do n't see the sun , I know it 's there . 
