Do you think I always lie and play the fool like this ? 
Believe me , I have been acting like this all the time on purpose to try you . 
I have been testing you all the time to see whether I could get on with you . 
Is there room for my humility beside your pride ? 
I am ready to give you a testimonial that one can get on with you ! 
But now , I 'll be quiet ; I will keep quiet all the time . 
I 'll sit in a chair and hold my tongue . 
Now it is for you to speak , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
You are the principal person left now - for ten minutes . '' 
Peasant Women Who Have Faith NEAR the wooden portico below , built on to the outer wall of the precinct , there was a crowd of about twenty peasant women . 
They had been told that the elder was at last coming out , and they had gathered together in anticipation . 
Two ladies , Madame Hohlakov and her daughter , had also come out into the portico to wait for the elder , but in a separate part of it set aside for women of rank . 
Madame Hohlakov was a wealthy lady , still young and attractive , and always dressed with taste . 
She was rather pale , and had lively black eyes . 
She was not more than thirty-three , and had been five years a widow . 
Her daughter , a girl of fourteen , was partially paralysed . 
The poor child had not been able to walk for the last six months , and was wheeled about in a long reclining chair . 
She had a charming little face , rather thin from illness , but full of gaiety . 
There was a gleam of mischief in her big dark eyes with their long lashes . 
Her mother had been intending to take her abroad ever since the spring , but they had been detained all the summer by business connected with their estate . 
They had been staying a week in our town , where they had come more for purposes of business than devotion , but had visited Father Zossima once already , three days before . 
Though they knew that the elder scarcely saw anyone , they had now suddenly turned up again , and urgently entreated `` the happiness of looking once again on the great healer . '' 
The mother was sitting on a chair by the side of her daughter 's invalid carriage , and two paces from her stood an old monk , not one of our monastery , but a visitor from an obscure religious house in the far north . 
He too sought the elder 's blessing . 
But Father Zossima , on entering the portico , went first straight to the peasants who were crowded at the foot of the three steps that led up into the portico . 
Father Zossima stood on the top step , put on his stole , and began blessing the women who thronged about him . 
One crazy woman was led up to him . 
As soon as she caught sight of the elder she began shrieking and writhing as though in the pains of childbirth . 
Laying the stole on her forehead , he read a short prayer over her , and she was at once soothed and quieted . 
I do not know how it may be now , but in my childhood I often happened to see and hear these `` possessed '' women in the villages and monasteries . 
They used to be brought to mass ; they would squeal and bark like a dog so that they were heard all over the church . 
But when the sacrament was carried in and they were led up to it , at once the `` possession '' ceased , and the sick women were always soothed for a time . 
I was greatly impressed and amazed at this as a child ; but then I heard from country neighbours and from my town teachers that the whole illness was simulated to avoid work , and that it could always be cured by suitable severity ; various anecdotes were told to confirm this . 
But later on I learnt with astonishment from medical specialists that there is no pretence about it , that it is a terrible illness to which women are subject , especially prevalent among us in Russia , and that it is due to the hard lot of the peasant women . 
It is a disease , I was told , arising from exhausting toil too soon after hard , abnormal and unassisted labour in childbirth , and from the hopeless misery , from beatings , and so on , which some women were not able to endure like others . 
The strange and instant healing of the frantic and struggling woman as soon as she was led up to the holy sacrament , which had been explained to me as due to malingering and the trickery of the `` clericals , '' arose probably in the most natural manner . 
Both the women who supported her and the invalid herself fully believed as a truth beyond question that the evil spirit in possession of her could not hold if the sick woman were brought to the sacrament and made to bow down before it . 
And so , with a nervous and psychically deranged woman , a sort of convulsion of the whole organism always took place , and was bound to take place , at the moment of bowing down to the sacrament , aroused by the expectation of the miracle of healing and the implicit belief that it would come to pass ; and it did come to pass , though only for a moment . 
It was exactly the same now as soon as the elder touched the sick woman with the stole . 
Many of the women in the crowd were moved to tears of ecstasy by the effect of the moment : some strove to kiss the hem of his garment , others cried out in sing-song voices . 
He blessed them all and talked with some of them . 
The `` possessed '' woman he knew already . 
She came from a village only six versts from the monastery , and had been brought to him before . 
`` But here is one from afar . '' 
He pointed to a woman by no means old but very thin and wasted , with a face not merely sunburnt but almost blackened by exposure . 
She was kneeling and gazing with a fixed stare at the elder ; there was something almost frenzied in her eyes . 
`` From afar off , Father , from afar off ! 
From two hundred miles from here . 
From afar off , Father , from afar off ! '' 
the woman began in a sing-song voice as though she were chanting a dirge , swaying her head from side to side with her cheek resting in her hand . 
There is silent and long-suffering sorrow to be met with among the peasantry . 
It withdraws into itself and is still . 
But there is a grief that breaks out , and from that minute it bursts into tears and finds vent in wailing . 
This is particularly common with women . 
But it is no lighter a grief than the silent . 
Lamentations comfort only by lacerating the heart still more . 
Such grief does not desire consolation . 
It feeds on the sense of its hopelessness . 
Lamentations spring only from the constant craving to re-open the wound . 
`` You are of the tradesman class ? '' 
said Father Zossima , looking curiously at her . 
`` Townfolk we are , Father , townfolk . 
Yet we are peasants though we live in the town . 
I have come to see you , O Father ! 
We heard of you , Father , we heard of you . 
I have buried my little son , and I have come on a pilgrimage . 
I have been in three monasteries , but they told me , ` Go , Nastasya , go to them ' - that is to you . 
I have come ; I was yesterday at the service , and to-day I have come to you . '' 
`` What are you weeping for ? '' 
`` It 's my little son I 'm grieving for , Father . 
he was three years old - three years all but three months . 
For my little boy , Father , I 'm in anguish , for my little boy . 
He was the last one left . 
We had four , my Nikita and I , and now we 've no children , our dear ones have all gone I buried the first three without grieving overmuch , and now I have buried the last I ca n't forget him . 
He seems always standing before me . 
He never leaves me . 
He has withered my heart . 
I look at his little clothes , his little shirt , his little boots , and I wail . 
I lay out all that is left of him , all his little things . 
I look at them and wail . 
I say to Nikita , my husband , ` let me go on a pilgrimage , master . ' 
He is a driver . 
We 're not poor people , Father , not poor ; he drives our own horse . 
It 's all our own , the horse and the carriage . 
And what good is it all to us now ? 
My Nikita has begun drinking while I am away . 
He 's sure to . 
It used to be so before . 
As soon as I turn my back he gives way to it . 
But now I do n't think about him . 
It 's three months since I left home . 
I 've forgotten him . 
I 've forgotten everything . 
I do n't want to remember . 
And what would our life be now together ? 
I 've done with him , I 've done . 
I 've done with them all . 
I do n't care to look upon my house and my goods . 
I do n't care to see anything at all ! '' 
`` Listen , mother , '' said the elder . 
