He was not running to carry out a programme , to carry out what he had written , that is , not for an act of premeditated robbery , but he ran suddenly , spontaneously , in a jealous fury . 
Yes ! 
I shall be told , but when he got there and murdered him he seized the money , too . 
But did he murder him after all ? 
The charge of robbery I repudiate with indignation . 
A man can not be accused of robbery , if it 's impossible to state accurately what he has stolen ; that 's an axiom . 
But did he murder him without robbery , did he murder him at all ? 
Is that proved ? 
Is n't that , too , a romance ? '' 
And There Was No Murder Either `` ALLOW me , gentlemen of the jury , to remind you that a man 's life is at stake and that you must be careful . 
We have heard the prosecutor himself admit that until to-day he hesitated to accuse the prisoner of a full and conscious premeditation of the crime ; he hesitated till he saw that fatal drunken letter which was produced in court to-day . 
` All was done as written . ' 
But , I repeat again , he was running to her , to seek her , solely to find out where she was . 
That 's a fact that ca n't be disputed . 
Had she been at home , he would not have run away , but would have remained at her side , and so would not have done what he promised in the letter . 
He ran unexpectedly and accidentally , and by that time very likely he did not even remember his drunken letter . 
` He snatched up the pestle , ' they say , and you will remember how a whole edifice of psychology was built on that pestle - why he was bound to look at that pestle as a weapon , to snatch it up , and so on , and so on . 
A very commonplace idea occurs to me at this point : What if that pestle had not been in sight , had not been lying on the shelf from which it was snatched by the prisoner , but had been put away in a cupboard ? 
It would not have caught the prisoner 's eye , and he would have run away without a weapon , with empty hands , and then he would certainly not have killed anyone . 
How then can I look upon the pestle as a proof of premeditation ? 
`` Yes , but he talked in the taverns of murdering his father , and two days before , on the evening when he wrote his drunken letter , he was quiet and only quarrelled with a shopman in the tavern , because a Karamazov could not help quarrelling , forsooth ! 
But my answer to that is , that , if he was planning such a murder in accordance with his letter , he certainly would not have quarrelled even with a shopman , and probably would not have gone into the tavern at all , because a person plotting such a crime seeks quiet and retirement , seeks to efface himself , to avoid being seen and heard , and that not from calculation , but from instinct . 
Gentlemen of the jury , the psychological method is a two-edged weapon , and we , too , can use it . 
As for all this shouting in taverns throughout the month , do n't we often hear children , or drunkards coming out of taverns shout , ` I 'll kill you ' ? 
but they do n't murder anyone . 
And that fatal letter - is n't that simply drunken irritability , too ? 
Is n't that simply the shout of the brawler outside the tavern , ` I 'll kill you ! 
I 'll kill the lot of you ! ' 
Why not , why could it not be that ? 
What reason have we to call that letter ` fatal ' rather than absurd ? 
Because his father has been found murdered , because a witness saw the prisoner running out of the garden with a weapon in his hand , and was knocked down by him : therefore , we are told , everything was done as he had planned in writing , and the letter was not ` absurd , ' but ` fatal . ' 
`` Now , thank God ! 
we 've come to the real point : ` since he was in the garden , he must have murdered him . ' 
In those few words : ` since he was , then he must ' lies the whole case for the prosecution . 
He was there , so he must have . 
And what if there is no must about it , even if he was there ? 
Oh , I admit that the chain of evidence - the coincidences - are really suggestive . 
But examine all these facts separately , regardless of their connection . 
Why , for instance , does the prosecution refuse to admit the truth of the prisoner 's statement that he ran away from his father 's window ? 
Remember the sarcasms in which the prosecutor indulged at the expense of the respectful and ` pious ' sentiments which suddenly came over the murderer . 
But what if there were something of the sort , a feeling of religious awe , if not of filial respect ? 
` My mother must have been praying for me at that moment , ' were the prisoner 's words at the preliminary inquiry , and so he ran away as soon as he convinced himself that Madame Svyetlov was not in his father 's house . 
` But he could not convince himself by looking through the window , ' the prosecutor objects . 
But why could n't he ? 
Why ? 
The window opened at the signals given by the prisoner . 
Some word might have been uttered by Fyodor Pavlovitch , some exclamation which showed the prisoner that she was not there . 
Why should we assume everything as we imagine it , as we make up our minds to imagine it ? 
A thousand things may happen in reality which elude the subtlest imagination . '' 
` Yes , but Grigory saw the door open and so the prisoner certainly was in the house , therefore he killed him . ' 
Now about that door , gentlemen of the jury ... . 
Observe that we have only the statement of one witness as to that door , and he was at the time in such a condition , that - but supposing the door was open ; supposing the prisoner has lied in denying it , from an instinct of self-defence , natural in his position ; supposing he did go into the house - well , what then ? 
How does it follow that because he was there he committed the murder ? 
He might have dashed in , run through the rooms ; might have pushed his father away ; might have struck him ; but as soon as he had made sure Madame Svyetlov was not there , he may have run away rejoicing that she was not there and that he had not killed his father . 
And it was perhaps just because he had escaped from the temptation to kill his father , because he had a clear conscience and was rejoicing at not having killed him , that he was capable of a pure feeling , the feeling of pity and compassion , and leapt off the fence a minute later to the assistance of Grigory after he had , in his excitement , knocked him down . 
`` With terrible eloquence the prosecutor has described to us the dreadful state of the prisoner 's mind at Mokroe when love again lay before him calling him to new life , while love was impossible for him because he had his father 's bloodstained corpse behind him and beyond that corpse - retribution . 
And yet the prosecutor allowed him love , which he explained , according to his method , talking about this drunken condition , about a criminal being taken to execution , about it being still far off , and so on and so on . 
But again I ask , Mr. Prosecutor , have you not invented a new personality ? 
Is the prisoner so coarse and heartless as to be able to think at that moment of love and of dodges to escape punishment , if his hands were really stained with his father 's blood ? 
No , no , no ! 
As soon as it was made plain to him that she loved him and called him to her side , promising him new happiness , oh ! 
then , I protest he must have felt the impulse to suicide doubled , trebled , and must have killed himself , if he had his father 's murder on his conscience . 
Oh , no ! 
he would not have forgotten where his pistols lay ! 
I know the prisoner : the savage , stony heartlessness ascribed to him by the prosecutor is inconsistent with his character . 
He would have killed himself , that 's certain . 
He did not kill himself just because ` his mother 's prayers had saved him , ' and he was innocent of his father 's blood . 
He was troubled , he was grieving that night at Mokroe only about old Grigory and praying to God that the old man would recover , that his blow had not been fatal , and that he would not have to suffer for it . 
Why not accept such an interpretation of the facts ? 
What trustworthy proof have we that the prisoner is lying ? 
`` But we shall be told at once again , ` There is his father 's corpse ! 
If he ran away without murdering him , who did murder him ? ' 
Here , I repeat , you have the whole logic of the prosecution . 
Who murdered him , if not he ? 
There 's no one to put in his place . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , is that really so ? 
Is it positively , actually true that there is no one else at all ? 
We 've heard the prosecutor count on his fingers all the persons who were in that house that night . 
They were five in number ; three of them , I agree , could not have been responsible - the murdered man himself , old Grigory , and his wife . 
There are left then the prisoner and Smerdyakov , and the prosecutor dramatically exclaims that the prisoner pointed to Smerdyakov because he had no one else to fix on , that had there been a sixth person , even a phantom of a sixth person , he would have abandoned the charge against Smerdyakov at once in shame and have accused that other . 
But , gentlemen of the jury , why may I not draw the very opposite conclusion ? 
There are two persons - the prisoner and Smerdyakov . 
Why can I not say that you accuse my client , simply because you have no one else to accuse ? 
And you have no one else only because you have determined to exclude Smerdyakov from all suspicion . 
`` It 's true , indeed , Smerdyakov is accused only by the prisoner , his two brothers , and Madame Svyetlov . 
But there are others who accuse him : there are vague rumours of a question , of a suspicion , an obscure report , a feeling of expectation . 
Finally , we have the evidence of a combination of facts very suggestive , though , I admit , inconclusive . 
In the first place we have precisely on the day of the catastrophe that fit , for the genuineness of which the prosecutor , for some reason , has felt obliged to make a careful defence . 
Then Smerdyakov 's sudden suicide on the eve of the trial . 
Then the equally startling evidence given in court to-day by the elder of the prisoner 's brothers , who had believed in his guilt , but has to-day produced a bundle of notes and proclaimed Smerdyakov as the murderer . 
Oh , I fully share the court 's and the prosecutor 's conviction that Ivan Karamazov is suffering from brain fever , that his statement may really be a desperate effort , planned in delirium , to save his brother by throwing the guilt on the dead man . 
But again Smerdyakov 's name is pronounced , again there is a suggestion of mystery . 
There is something unexplained , incomplete . 
And perhaps it may one day be explained . 
But we wo n't go into that now . 
Of that later . 
`` The court has resolved to go on with the trial , but , meantime , I might make a few remarks about the character-sketch of Smerdyakov drawn with subtlety and talent by the prosecutor . 
But while I admire his talent I can not agree with him . 
I have visited Smerdyakov , I have seen him and talked to him , and he made a very different impression on me . 
He was weak in health , it is true ; but in character , in spirit , he was by no means the weak man the prosecutor has made him out to be . 
