Our court is the best hall in the town - spacious , lofty , and good for sound . 
On the right of the judges , who were on a raised platform , a table and two rows of chairs had been put ready for the jury . 
On the left was the place for the prisoner and the counsel for the defence . 
In the middle of the court , near the judges , was a table with the `` material proofs . '' 
On it lay Fyodor Pavlovitch 's white silk dressing-gown , stained with blood ; the fatal brass pestle with which the supposed murder had been committed ; Mitya 's shirt , with a blood-stained sleeve ; his coat , stained with blood in patches over the pocket in which he had put his handkerchief ; the handkerchief itself , stiff with blood and by now quite yellow ; the pistol loaded by Mitya at Perhotin 's with a view to suicide , and taken from him on the sly at Mokroe by Trifon Borrissovitch ; the envelope in which the three thousand roubles had been put ready for Grushenka , the narrow pink ribbon with which it had been tied , and many other articles I do n't remember . 
In the body of the hall , at some distance , came the seats for the public . 
But in front of the balustrade a few chairs had been placed for witnesses who remained in the court after giving their evidence . 
At ten o'clock the three judges arrived - the President , one honorary justice of the peace , and one other . 
The prosecutor , of course , entered immediately after . 
The President was a short , stout , thick-set man of fifty , with a dyspeptic complexion , dark hair turning grey and cut short , and a red ribbon , of what Order I do n't remember . 
The prosecutor struck me and the others , too , as looking particularly pale , almost green . 
His face seemed to have grown suddenly thinner , perhaps in a single night , for I had seen him looking as usual only two days before . 
The President began with asking the court whether all the jury were present . 
But I see I ca n't go on like this , partly because some things I did not hear , others I did not notice , and others I have forgotten , but most of all because , as I have said before , I have literally no time or space to mention everything that was said and done . 
I only know that neither side objected to very many of the jurymen . 
I remember the twelve jurymen - four were petty officials of the town , two were merchants , and six peasants and artisans of the town . 
I remember , long before the trial , questions were continually asked with some surprise , especially by ladies : `` Can such a delicate , complex and psychological case be submitted for decision to petty officials and even peasants ? '' 
and `` What can an official , still more a peasant , understand in such an affair ? '' 
All the four officials in the jury were , in fact , men of no consequence and of low rank . 
Except one who was rather younger , they were grey-headed men , little known in society , who had vegetated on a pitiful salary , and who probably had elderly , unpresentable wives and crowds of children , perhaps even without shoes and stockings . 
At most , they spent their leisure over cards and , of course , had never read a single book . 
The two merchants looked respectable , but were strangely silent and stolid . 
One of them was close-shaven , and was dressed in European style ; the other had a small , grey beard , and wore a red ribbon with some sort of a medal upon it on his neck . 
There is no need to speak of the artisans and the peasants . 
The artisans of Skotoprigonyevsk are almost peasants , and even work on the land . 
Two of them also wore European dress , and , perhaps for that reason , were dirtier and more uninviting-looking than the others . 
So that one might well wonder , as I did as soon as I had looked at them , `` what men like that could possibly make of such a case ? '' 
Yet their faces made a strangely imposing , almost menacing , impression ; they were stern and frowning . 
At last the President opened the case of the murder of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov . 
I do n't quite remember how he described him . 
The court usher was told to bring in the prisoner , and Mitya made his appearance . 
There was a hush through the court . 
One could have heard a fly . 
I do n't know how it was with others , but Mitya made a most unfavourable impression on me . 
He looked an awful dandy in a brand-new frock-coat . 
I heard afterwards that he had ordered it in Moscow expressly for the occasion from his own tailor , who had his measure . 
He wore immaculate black kid gloves and exquisite linen . 
He walked in with his yard-long strides , looking stiffly straight in front of him , and sat down in his place with a most unperturbed air . 
At the same moment the counsel for defence , the celebrated Fetyukovitch , entered , and a sort of subdued hum passed through the court . 
He was a tall , spare man , with long thin legs , with extremely long , thin , pale fingers , clean-shaven face , demurely brushed , rather short hair , and thin lips that were at times curved into something between a sneer and a smile . 
He looked about forty . 
His face would have been pleasant , if it had not been for his eyes , which , in themselves small and inexpressive , were set remarkably close together , with only the thin , long nose as a dividing line between them . 
In fact , there was something strikingly birdlike about his face . 
He was in evening dress and white tie . 
I remember the President 's first questions to Mitya , about his name , his calling , and so on . 
Mitya answered sharply , and his voice was so unexpectedly loud that it made the President start and look at the prisoner with surprise . 
Then followed a list of persons who were to take part in the proceedings - that is , of the witnesses and experts . 
It was a long list . 
Four of the witnesses were not present - Miusov , who had given evidence at the preliminary inquiry , but was now in Paris ; Madame Hohlakov and Maximov , who were absent through illness ; and Smerdyakov , through his sudden death , of which an official statement from the police was presented . 
The news of Smerdyakov 's death produced a sudden stir and whisper in the court . 
Many of the audience , of course , had not heard of the sudden suicide . 
What struck people most was Mitya 's sudden outburst . 
As soon as the statement of Smerdyakov 's death was made , he cried out aloud from his place : `` He was a dog and died like a dog ! '' 
I remember how his counsel rushed to him , and how the President addressed him , threatening to take stern measures , if such an irregularity were repeated . 
Mitya nodded and in a subdued voice repeated several times abruptly to his counsel , with no show of regret : `` I wo n't again , I wo n't . 
It escaped me . 
I wo n't do it again . '' 
And , of course , this brief episode did him no good with the jury or the public . 
His character was displayed , and it spoke for itself . 
It was under the influence of this incident that the opening statement was read . 
It was rather short , but circumstantial . 
It only stated the chief reasons why he had been arrested , why he must be tried , and so on . 
Yet it made a great impression on me . 
The clerk read it loudly and distinctly . 
The whole tragedy was suddenly unfolded before us , concentrated , in bold relief , in a fatal and pitiless light . 
I remember how , immediately after it had been read , the President asked Mitya in a loud impressive voice : `` Prisoner , do you plead guilty ? '' 
Mitya suddenly rose from his seat . 
`` I plead guilty to drunkenness and dissipation , '' he exclaimed , again in a startling , almost frenzied , voice , `` to idleness and debauchery . 
I meant to become an honest man for good , just at the moment when I was struck down by fate . 
But I am not guilty of the death of that old man , my enemy and my father . 
No , no , I am not guilty of robbing him ! 
I could not be . 
Dmitri Karamazov is a scoundrel , but not a thief . '' 
He sat down again , visibly trembling all over . 
The President again briefly , but impressively , admonished him to answer only what was asked , and not to go off into irrelevant exclamations . 
Then he ordered the case to proceed . 
All the witnesses were led up to take the oath . 
Then I saw them all together . 
The brothers of the prisoner were , however , allowed to give evidence without taking the oath . 
After an exhortation from the priest and the President , the witnesses were led away and were made to sit as far as possible apart from one another . 
Then they began calling them up one by one . 
Dangerous Witnesses I DO NOT know whether the witnesses for the defence and for the prosecution were separated into groups by the President , and whether it was arranged to call them in a certain order . 
But no doubt it was so . 
I only know that the witnesses for the prosecution were called first . 
I repeat I do n't intend to describe all the questions step by step . 
Besides , my account would be to some extent superfluous , because in the speeches for the prosecution and for the defence the whole course of the evidence was brought together and set in a strong and significant light , and I took down parts of those two remarkable speeches in full , and will quote them in due course , together with one extraordinary and quite unexpected episode , which occurred before the final speeches , and undoubtedly influenced the sinister and fatal outcome of the trial . 
I will only observe that from the first moments of the trial one peculiar characteristic of the case was conspicuous and observed by all , that is , the overwhelming strength of the prosecution as compared with the arguments the defence had to rely upon . 
Everyone realised it from the first moment that the facts began to group themselves round a single point , and the whole horrible and bloody crime was gradually revealed . 
Everyone , perhaps , felt from the first that the case was beyond dispute , that there was no doubt about it , that there could be really no discussion , and that the defence was only a matter of form , and that the prisoner was guilty , obviously and conclusively guilty . 
I imagine that even the ladies , who were so impatiently longing for the acquittal of the interesting prisoner , were at the same time , without exception , convinced of his guilt . 
What 's more , I believe they would have been mortified if his guilt had not been so firmly established , as that would have lessened the effect of the closing scene of the criminal 's acquittal . 
That he would be acquitted , all the ladies , strange to say , were firmly persuaded up to the very last moment . 
`` He is guilty , but he will be acquitted , from motives of humanity , in accordance with the new ideas , the new sentiments that had come into fashion , '' and so on , and so on . 
And that was why they had crowded into the court so impatiently . 
The men were more interested in the contest between the prosecutor and the famous Fetyukovitch . 
All were wondering and asking themselves what could even a talent like Fetyukovitch 's make of such a desperate case ; and so they followed his achievements , step by step , with concentrated attention . 
But Fetyukovitch remained an enigma to all up to the very end , up to his speech . 
Persons of experience suspected that he had some design , that he was working towards some object , but it was almost impossible to guess what it was . 
His confidence and self-reliance were unmistakable , however . 
Everyone noticed with pleasure , moreover , that he , after so short a stay , not more than three days , perhaps , among us , had so wonderfully succeeded in mastering the case and `` had studied it to a nicety . '' 
