She was just then expecting the `` message , '' and was much relieved that Mitya had not been to see her that day or the day before . 
She hoped that `` please God he wo n't come till I 'm gone away , '' and he suddenly burst in on her . 
The rest we know already . 
To get him off her hands she suggested at once that he should walk with her to Samsonov 's , where she said she absolutely must go `` to settle his accounts , '' and when Mitya accompanied her at once , she said good-bye to him at the gate , making him promise to come at twelve o'clock to take her home again . 
Mitya , too , was delighted at this arrangement . 
If she was sitting at Samsonov 's she could not be going to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , `` if only she 's not lying , '' he added at once . 
But he thought she was not lying from what he saw . 
He was that sort of jealous man who , in the absence of the beloved woman , at once invents all sorts of awful fancies of what may be happening to her , and how she may be betraying him , but , when shaken , heartbroken , convinced of her faithlessness , he runs back to her , at the first glance at her face , her gay , laughing , affectionate face , he revives at once , lays aside all suspicion and with joyful shame abuses himself for his jealousy . 
After leaving Grushenka at the gate he rushed home . 
Oh , he had so much still to do that day ! 
But a load had been lifted from his heart , anyway . 
`` Now I must only make haste and find out from Smerdyakov whether anything happened there last night , whether , by any chance , she went to Fyodor Pavlovitch ; ough ! '' 
floated through his mind . 
Before he had time to reach his lodging , jealousy had surged up again in his restless heart . 
Jealousy ! 
`` Othello was not jealous , he was trustful , '' observed Pushkin . 
And that remark alone is enough to show the deep insight of our great poet . 
Othello 's soul was shattered and his whole outlook clouded simply because his ideal was destroyed . 
But Othello did not begin hiding , spying , peeping . 
He was trustful , on the contrary . 
He had to be led up , pushed on , excited with great difficulty before he could entertain the idea of deceit . 
The truly jealous man is not like that . 
It is impossible to picture to oneself the shame and moral degradation to which the jealous man can descend without a qualm of conscience . 
And yet it 's not as though the jealous were all vulgar and base souls . 
On the contrary , a man of lofty feelings , whose love is pure and full of self-sacrifice , may yet hide under tables , bribe the vilest people , and be familiar with the lowest ignominy of spying and eavesdropping . 
Othello was incapable of making up his mind to faithlessness - not incapable of forgiving it , but of making up his mind to it - though his soul was as innocent and free from malice as a babe 's . 
It is not so with the really jealous man . 
It is hard to imagine what some jealous men can make up their mind to and overlook , and what they can forgive ! 
The jealous are the readiest of all to forgive , and all women know it . 
The jealous man can forgive extraordinarily quickly -LRB- though , of course , after a violent scene -RRB- , and he is able to forgive infidelity almost conclusively proved , the very kisses and embraces he has seen , if only he can somehow be convinced that it has all been `` for the last time , '' and that his rival will vanish from that day forward , will depart to the ends of the earth , or that he himself will carry her away somewhere , where that dreaded rival will not get near her . 
Of course the reconciliation is only for an hour . 
For , even if the rival did disappear next day , he would invent another one and would be jealous of him . 
And one might wonder what there was in a love that had to be so watched over , what a love could be worth that needed such strenuous guarding . 
But that the jealous will never understand . 
And yet among them are men of noble hearts . 
It is remarkable , too , that those very men of noble hearts , standing hidden in some cupboard , listening and spying , never feel the stings of conscience at that moment , anyway , though they understand clearly enough with their `` noble hearts '' the shameful depths to which they have voluntarily sunk . 
At the sight of Grushenka , Mitya 's jealousy vanished , and , for an instant he became trustful and generous , and positively despised himself for his evil feelings . 
But it only proved that , in his love for the woman , there was an element of something far higher than he himself imagined , that it was not only a sensual passion , not only the `` curve of her body , '' of which he had talked to Alyosha . 
But , as soon as Grushenka had gone , Mitya began to suspect her of all the low cunning of faithlessness , and he felt no sting of conscience at it . 
And so jealousy surged up in him again . 
He had , in any case , to make haste . 
The first thing to be done was to get hold of at least a small , temporary loan of money . 
The nine roubles had almost all gone on his expedition . 
And , as we all know , one ca n't take a step without money . 
But he had thought over in the cart where he could get a loan . 
He had a brace of fine duelling pistols in a case , which he had not pawned till then because he prized them above all his possessions . 
In the Metropolis tavern he had some time since made acquaintance with a young official and had learnt that this very opulent bachelor was passionately fond of weapons . 
He used to buy pistols , revolvers , daggers , hang them on his wall and show them to acquaintances . 
He prided himself on them , and was quite a specialist on the mechanism of the revolver . 
Mitya , without stopping to think , went straight to him , and offered to pawn his pistols to him for ten roubles . 
The official , delighted , began trying to persuade him to sell them outright . 
But Mitya would not consent , so the young man gave him ten roubles , protesting that nothing would induce him to take interest . 
They parted friends . 
Mitya was in haste ; he rushed towards Fyodor Pavlovitch 's by the back way , to his arbour , to get hold of Smerdyakov as soon as possible . 
In this way the fact was established that three or four hours before a certain event , of which I shall speak later on , Mitya had not a farthing , and pawned for ten roubles a possession he valued , though , three hours later , he was in possession of thousands ... . 
But I am anticipating . 
From Marya Kondratyevna -LRB- the woman living near Fyodor Pavlovitch 's -RRB- he learned the very disturbing fact of Smerdyakov 's illness . 
He heard the story of his fall in the cellar , his fit , the doctor 's visit , Fyodor Pavlovitch 's anxiety ; he heard with interest , too , that his brother Ivan had set off that morning for Moscow . 
`` Then he must have driven through Volovya before me , '' thought Dmitri , but he was terribly distressed about Smerdyakov . 
`` What will happen now ? 
Who 'll keep watch for me ? 
Who 'll bring me word ? '' 
he thought . 
He began greedily questioning the women whether they had seen anything the evening before . 
They quite understood what he was trying to find out , and completely reassured him . 
No one had been there . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch had been there that night ; everything had been perfectly as usual . 
Mitya grew thoughtful . 
He would certainly have to keep watch to-day , but where ? 
Here or at Samsonov 's gate ? 
He decided that he must be on the lookout both here and there , and meanwhile ... meanwhile ... The difficulty was that he had to carry out the new plan that he had made on the journey back . 
He was sure of its success , but he must not delay acting upon it . 
Mitya resolved to sacrifice an hour to it : `` In an hour I shall know everything , I shall settle everything , and then , then , then , first of all to Samsonov 's . 
I 'll inquire whether Grushenka 's there and instantly be back here again , stay till eleven , and then to Samsonov 's again to bring her home . '' 
This was what he decided . 
He flew home , washed , combed his hair , brushed his clothes , dressed , and went to Madame Hohlakov 's . 
Alas ! 
he had built his hopes on her . 
He had resolved to borrow three thousand from that lady . 
And what was more , he felt suddenly convinced that she would not refuse to lend it to him . 
It may be wondered why , if he felt so certain , he had not gone to her at first , one of his own sort , so to speak , instead of to Samsonov , a man he did not know , who was not of his own class , and to whom he hardly knew how to speak . 
But the fact was that he had never known Madame Hohlakov well , and had seen nothing of her for the last month , and that he knew she could not endure him . 
She had detested him from the first because he was engaged to Katerina Ivanovna , while she had , for some reason , suddenly conceived the desire that Katerina Ivanovna should throw him over , and marry the `` charming , chivalrously refined Ivan , who had such excellent manners . '' 
Mitya 's manners she detested . 
Mitya positively laughed at her , and had once said about her that she was just as lively and at her ease as she was uncultivated . 
But that morning in the cart a brilliant idea had struck him : `` If she is so anxious I should not marry Katerina Ivanovna '' -LRB- and he knew she was positively hysterical upon the subject -RRB- `` why should she refuse me now that three thousand , just to enable me to leave Katya and get away from her for ever . 
These spoilt fine ladies , if they set their hearts on anything , will spare no expense to satisfy their caprice . 
Besides , she 's so rich , '' Mitya argued . 
As for his `` plan '' it was just the same as before ; it consisted of the offer of his rights to Tchermashnya - but not with a commercial object , as it had been with Samsonov , not trying to allure the lady with the possibility of making a profit of six or seven thousand - but simply as a security for the debt . 
As he worked out this new idea , Mitya was enchanted with it , but so it always was with him in all his undertakings , in all his sudden decisions . 
He gave himself up to every new idea with passionate enthusiasm . 
Yet , when he mounted the steps of Madame Hohlakov 's house he felt a shiver of fear run down his spine . 
At that moment he saw fully , as a mathematical certainty , that this was his last hope , that if this broke down , nothing else was left him in the world but to `` rob and murder someone for the three thousand . '' 
It was half-past seven when he rang at the bell . 
At first fortune seemed to smile upon him . 
As soon as he was announced he was received with extraordinary rapidity . 
`` As though she were waiting for me , '' thought Mitya , and as soon as he had been led to the drawing-room , the lady of the house herself ran in , and declared at once that she was expecting him . 
`` I was expecting you ! 
I was expecting you ! 
Though I 'd no reason to suppose you would come to see me , as you will admit yourself . 
