Father Ferapont had succeeded in getting himself installed in this same solitary cell seven years previously . 
It was simply a peasant 's hut , though it looked like a chapel , for it contained an extraordinary number of ikons with lamps perpetually burning before them - which men brought to the monastery as offerings to God . 
Father Ferapont had been appointed to look after them and keep the lamps burning . 
It was said -LRB- and indeed it was true -RRB- that he ate only two pounds of bread in three days . 
The beekeeper , who lived close by the apiary , used to bring him the bread every three days , and even to this man who waited upon him , Father Ferapont rarely uttered a word . 
The four pounds of bread , together with the sacrament bread , regularly sent him on Sundays after the late mass by the Father Superior , made up his weekly rations . 
The water in his jug was changed every day . 
He rarely appeared at mass . 
Visitors who came to do him homage saw him sometimes kneeling all day long at prayer without looking round . 
If he addressed them , he was brief , abrupt , strange , and almost always rude . 
On very rare occasions , however , he would talk to visitors , but for the most part he would utter some one strange saying which was a complete riddle , and no entreaties would induce him to pronounce a word in explanation . 
He was not a priest , but a simple monk . 
There was a strange belief , chiefly , however , among the most ignorant , that Father Ferapont had communication with heavenly spirits and would only converse with them , and so was silent with men . 
The monk from Obdorsk , having been directed to the apiary by the beekeeper , who was also a very silent and surly monk , went to the corner where Father Ferapont 's cell stood . 
`` Maybe he will speak as you are a stranger and maybe you 'll get nothing out of him , '' the beekeeper had warned him . 
The monk , as he related afterwards , approached in the utmost apprehension . 
It was rather late in the evening . 
Father Ferapont was sitting at the door of his cell on a low bench . 
A huge old elm was lightly rustling overhead . 
There was an evening freshness in the air . 
The monk from Obdorsk bowed down before the saint and asked his blessing . 
`` Do you want me to bow down to you , monk ? '' 
said Father Ferapont . 
`` Get up ! '' 
The monk got up . 
`` Blessing , be blessed ! 
Sit beside me . 
Where have you come from ? '' 
What most struck the poor monk was the fact that in spite of his strict fasting and great age , Father Ferapont still looked a vigorous old man . 
He was tall , held himself erect , and had a thin , but fresh and healthy face . 
There was no doubt he still had considerable strength . 
He was of athletic build . 
In spite of his great age he was not even quite grey , and still had very thick hair and a full beard , both of which had once been black . 
His eyes were grey , large and luminous , but strikingly prominent . 
He spoke with a broad accent . 
He was dressed in a peasant 's long reddish coat of coarse convict cloth -LRB- as it used to be called -RRB- and had a stout rope round his waist . 
His throat and chest were bare . 
Beneath his coat , his shirt of the coarsest linen showed almost black with dirt , not having been changed for months . 
They said that he wore irons weighing thirty pounds under his coat . 
His stockingless feet were thrust in old slippers almost dropping to pieces . 
`` From the little Obdorsk monastery , from St. Sylvester , '' the monk answered humbly , whilst his keen and inquisitive , but rather frightened little eyes kept watch on the hermit . 
`` I have been at your Sylvester 's . 
I used to stay there . 
Is Sylvester well ? '' 
The monk hesitated . 
`` You are a senseless lot ! 
How do you keep the fasts ? '' 
`` Our dietary is according to the ancient conventual rules . 
During Lent there are no meals provided for Monday , Wednesday , and Friday . 
For Tuesday and Thursday we have white bread , stewed fruit with honey , wild berries , or salt cabbage and whole meal stirabout . 
On Saturday white cabbage soup , noodles with peas , kasha , all with hemp oil . 
On weekdays we have dried fish and kasha with the cabbage soup . 
From Monday till Saturday evening , six whole days in Holy Week , nothing is cooked , and we have only bread and water , and that sparingly ; if possible not taking food every day , just the same as is ordered for first week in Lent . 
On Good Friday nothing is eaten . 
In the same way on the Saturday we have to fast till three o'clock , and then take a little bread and water and drink a single cup of wine . 
On Holy Thursday we drink wine and have something cooked without oil or not cooked at all , inasmuch as the Laodicean council lays down for Holy Thursday : `` It is unseemly by remitting the fast on the Holy Thursday to dishonour the whole of Lent ! '' 
This is how we keep the fast . 
But what is that compared with you , holy Father , '' added the monk , growing more confident , `` for all the year round , even at Easter , you take nothing but bread and water , and what we should eat in two days lasts you full seven . 
It 's truly marvellous - your great abstinence . '' 
`` And mushrooms ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , suddenly . 
`` Mushrooms ? '' 
repeated the surprised monk . 
`` Yes . 
I can give up their bread , not needing it at all , and go away into the forest and live there on the mushrooms or the berries , but they ca n't give up their bread here , wherefore they are in bondage to the devil . 
Nowadays the unclean deny that there is need of such fasting . 
Haughty and unclean is their judgment . '' 
`` Och , true , '' sighed the monk . 
`` And have you seen devils among them ? '' 
asked Ferapont . 
`` Among them ? 
Among whom ? '' 
asked the monk , timidly . 
`` I went to the Father Superior on Trinity Sunday last year , I have n't been since . 
I saw a devil sitting on one man 's chest hiding under his cassock , only his horns poked out ; another had one peeping out of his pocket with such sharp eyes , he was afraid of me ; another settled in the unclean belly of one , another was hanging round a man 's neck , and so he was carrying him about without seeing him . '' 
`` You - can see spirits ? '' 
the monk inquired . 
`` I tell you I can see , I can see through them . 
When I was coming out from the Superior 's I saw one hiding from me behind the door , and a big one , a yard and a half or more high , with a thick long grey tail , and the tip of his tail was in the crack of the door and I was quick and slammed the door , pinching his tail in it . 
He squealed and began to struggle , and I made the sign of the cross over him three times . 
And he died on the spot like a crushed spider . 
He must have rotted there in the corner and be stinking , but they do n't see , they do n't smell it . 
It 's a year since I have been there . 
I reveal it to you , as you are a stranger . '' 
`` Your words are terrible ! 
But , holy and blessed father , '' said the monk , growing bolder and bolder , `` is it true , as they noise abroad even to distant lands about you , that you are in continual communication with the Holy Ghost ? '' 
`` He does fly down at times . '' 
`` How does he fly down ? 
In what form ? '' 
`` As a bird . '' 
`` The Holy Ghost in the form of a dove ? '' 
`` There 's the Holy Ghost and there 's the Holy Spirit . 
The Holy Spirit can appear as other birds - sometimes as a swallow , sometimes a goldfinch and sometimes as a blue-tit . '' 
`` How do you know him from an ordinary tit ? '' 
`` He speaks . '' 
`` How does he speak , in what language ? '' 
`` Human language . '' 
`` And what does he tell you ? '' 
`` Why , to-day he told me that a fool would visit me and would ask me unseemly questions . 
You want to know too much , monk . '' 
