`` Once in olden times a holy saint saw in the Temple a mother like you weeping for her little one , her only one , whom God had taken . 
` Knowest thou not , ' said the saint to her , ` how bold these little ones are before the throne of God ? 
Verily there are none bolder than they in the Kingdom of Heaven . 
`` Thou didst give us life , O Lord , '' they say , `` and scarcely had we looked upon it when Thou didst take it back again . '' 
And so boldly they ask and ask again that God gives them at once the rank of angels . 
Therefore , ' said the saint , ` thou , too , O Mother , rejoice and weep not , for thy little son is with the Lord in the fellowship of the angels . ' 
That 's what the saint said to the weeping mother of old . 
He was a great saint and he could not have spoken falsely . 
Therefore you too , mother , know that your little one is surely before the throne of God , is rejoicing and happy , and praying to God for you , and therefore weep , but rejoice . '' 
The woman listened to him , looking down with her cheek in her hand . 
She sighed deeply . 
`` My Nikita tried to comfort me with the same words as you . 
` Foolish one , ' he said , ` why weep ? 
Our son is no doubt singing with the angels before God . ' 
He says that to me , but he weeps himself . 
I see that he cries like me . ' 
I know , Nikita , ' said I. ` Where could he be if not with the Lord God ? 
Only , here with us now he is not as he used to sit beside us before . ' 
And if only I could look upon him one little time , if only I could peep at him one little time , without going up to him , without speaking , if I could be hidden in a corner and only see him for one little minute , hear him playing in the yard , calling in his little voice , ` Mammy , where are you ? ' 
If only I could hear him pattering with his little feet about the room just once , only once ; for so often , so often I remember how he used to run to me and shout and laugh , if only I could hear his little feet I should know him ! 
But he 's gone , Father , he 's gone , and I shall never hear him again . 
Here 's his little sash , but him I shall never see or hear now . '' 
She drew out of her bosom her boy 's little embroidered sash , and as soon as she looked at it she began shaking with sobs , hiding her eyes with her fingers through which the tears flowed in a sudden stream . 
`` It is Rachel of old , '' said the elder , `` weeping for her children , and will not be comforted because they are not . 
Such is the lot set on earth for you mothers . 
Be not comforted . 
Consolation is not what you need . 
Weep and be not consoled , but weep . 
Only every time that you weep be sure to remember that your little son is one of the angels of God , that he looks down from there at you and sees you , and rejoices at your tears , and points at them to the Lord God ; and a long while yet will you keep that great mother 's grief . 
But it will turn in the end into quiet joy , and your bitter tears will be only tears of tender sorrow that purifies the heart and delivers it from sin . 
And I shall pray for the peace of your child 's soul . 
What was his name ? '' 
`` Alexey , Father . '' 
`` A sweet name . 
After Alexey , the man of God ? '' 
`` Yes , Father . '' 
`` What a saint he was ! 
I will remember him , mother , and your grief in my prayers , and I will pray for your husband 's health . 
It is a sin for you to leave him . 
Your little one will see from heaven that you have forsaken his father , and will weep over you . 
Why do you trouble his happiness ? 
He is living , for the soul lives for ever , and though he is not in the house he is near you , unseen . 
How can he go into the house when you say that the house is hateful to you ? 
To whom is he to go if he find you not together , his father and mother ? 
He comes to you in dreams now , and you grieve . 
But then he will send you gentle dreams . 
Go to your husband , mother ; go this very day . '' 
`` I will go , Father , at your word . 
I will go . 
You 've gone straight to my heart . 
My Nikita , my Nikita , you are waiting for me , '' the woman began in a sing-song voice ; but the elder had already turned away to a very old woman , dressed like a dweller in the town , not like a pilgrim . 
Her eyes showed that she had come with an object , and in order to say something . 
She said she was the widow of a non-commissioned officer , and lived close by in the town . 
Her son Vasenka was in the commissariat service , and had gone to Irkutsk in Siberia . 
He had written twice from there , but now a year had passed since he had written . 
She did inquire about him , but she did not know the proper place to inquire . 
`` Only the other day Stepanida Ilyinishna - she 's a rich merchant 's wife - said to me , ` You go , Prohorovna , and put your son 's name down for prayer in the church , and pray for the peace of his soul as though he were dead . 
His soul will be troubled , ' she said , ` and he will write you a letter . ' 
And Stepanida Ilyinishna told me it was a certain thing which had been many times tried . 
Only I am in doubt ... . 
Oh , you light of ours ! 
is it true or false , and would it be right ? '' 
`` Do n't think of it . 
It 's shameful to ask the question . 
How is it possible to pray for the peace of a living soul ? 
And his own mother too ! 
It 's a great sin , akin to sorcery . 
Only for your ignorance it is forgiven you . 
Better pray to the Queen of Heaven , our swift defence and help , for his good health , and that she may forgive you for your error . 
And another thing I will tell you , Prohorovna . 
Either he will soon come back to you , your son , or he will be sure to send a letter . 
Go , and henceforward be in peace . 
Your son is alive , I tell you . '' 
`` Dear Father , God reward you , our benefactor , who prays for all of us and for our sins ! '' 
But the elder had already noticed in the crowd two glowing eyes fixed upon him . 
An exhausted , consumptive-looking , though young peasant woman was gazing at him in silence . 
Her eyes besought him , but she seemed afraid to approach . 
`` What is it , my child ? '' 
`` Absolve my soul , Father , '' she articulated softly , and slowly sank on her knees and bowed down at his feet . 
`` I have sinned , Father . 
I am afraid of my sin . '' 
The elder sat down on the lower step . 
The woman crept closer to him , still on her knees . 
`` I am a widow these three years , '' she began in a half-whisper , with a sort of shudder . 
`` I had a hard life with my husband . 
He was an old man . 
He used to beat me cruelly . 
He lay ill ; I thought looking at him , if he were to get well , if he were to get up again , what then ? 
And then the thought came to me - '' `` Stay ! '' 
said the elder , and he put his ear close to her lips . 
The woman went on in a low whisper , so that it was almost impossible to catch anything . 
She had soon done . 
`` Three years ago ? '' 
asked the elder . 
`` Three years . 
At first I did n't think about it , but now I 've begun to be ill , and the thought never leaves me . '' 
`` Have you come from far ? '' 
`` Over three hundred miles away . '' 
`` Have you told it in confession ? '' 
`` I have confessed it . 
