And again she cried bitterly . 
`` This I can tell you for certain , Grushenka , '' Alyosha said , getting up . 
`` First , that he loves you , loves you more than anyone in the world , and you only , believe me . 
I know . 
I do know . 
The second thing is that I do n't want to worm his secret out of him , but if he 'll tell me of himself to-day , I shall tell him straight out that I have promised to tell you . 
Then I 'll come to you to-day and tell you . 
Only ... I fancy ... Katerina Ivanovna has nothing to do with it , and that the secret is about something else . 
That 's certain . 
It is n't likely it 's about Katerina Ivanovna , it seems to me . 
Good-bye for now . '' 
Alyosha shook hands with her . 
Grushenka was still crying . 
He saw that she put little faith in his consolation , but she was better for having had her sorrow out , for having spoken of it . 
He was sorry to leave her in such a state of mind , but he was in haste . 
He had a great many things to do still . 
The Injured Foot THE first of these things was at the house of Madame Hohlakov , and he hurried there to get it over as quickly as possible and not be too late for Mitya . 
Madame Hohlakov had been slightly ailing for the last three weeks : her foot had for some reason swollen up , and though she was not in bed , she lay all day half-reclining on the couch in her boudoir , in a fascinating but decorous deshabille . 
Alyosha had once noted with innocent amusement that , in spite of her illness , Madame Hohlakov had begun to be rather dressy - topknots , ribbons , loose wrappers had made their appearance , and he had an inkling of the reason , though he dismissed such ideas from his mind as frivolous . 
During the last two months the young official , Perhotin , had become a regular visitor at the house . 
Alyosha had not called for four days and he was in haste to go straight to Lise , as it was with her he had to speak , for Lise had sent a maid to him the previous day specially asking him to come to her `` about something very important , '' a request which , for certain reasons , had interest for Alyosha . 
But while the maid went to take his name in to Lise , Madame Hohlakov heard of his arrival from someone , and immediately sent to beg him to come to her `` just for one minute . '' 
Alyosha reflected that it was better to accede to the mamma 's request , or else she would be sending down to Lise 's room every minute that he was there . 
Madame Hohlakov was lying on a couch . 
She was particularly smartly dressed and was evidently in a state of extreme nervous excitement . 
She greeted Alyosha with cries of rapture . 
`` It 's ages , ages , perfect ages since I 've seen you ! 
It 's a whole week - only think of it ! 
Ah , but you were here only four days ago , on Wednesday . 
You have come to see Lise . 
I 'm sure you meant to slip into her room on tiptoe , without my hearing you . 
My dear , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , if you only knew how worried I am about her ! 
But of that later , though that 's the most important thing , of that later . 
Dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , I trust you implicitly with my Lise . 
Since the death of Father Zossima - God rest his soul ! '' 
-LRB- she crossed herself -RRB- - `` I look upon you as a monk , though you look charming in your new suit . 
Where did you find such a tailor in these parts ? 
No , no , that 's not the chief thing - of that later . 
Forgive me for sometimes calling you Alyosha ; an old woman like me may take liberties , '' she smiled coquettishly ; `` but that will do later , too . 
The important thing is that I should n't forget what is important . 
Please remind me of it yourself . 
As soon as my tongue runs away with me , you just say ` the important thing ? ' 
Ach ! 
how do I know now what is of most importance ? 
Ever since Lise took back her promise - her childish promise , Alexey Fyodorovitch - to marry you , you 've realised , of course , that it was only the playful fancy of a sick child who had been so long confined to her chair - thank God , she can walk now ! 
... that-new doctor Katya sent for from Moscow for your unhappy brother , who will to-morrow - but why speak of to-morrow ? 
I am ready to die at the very thought of to-morrow . 
Ready to die of curiosity ... . 
That doctor was with us yesterday and saw Lise ... . 
I paid him fifty roubles for the visit . 
But that 's not the point , that 's not the point again . 
You see , I 'm mixing everything up . 
I am in such a hurry . 
Why am I in a hurry ? 
I do n't understand . 
It 's awful how I seem growing unable to understand anything . 
Everything seems mixed up in a sort of tangle . 
I am afraid you are so bored you will jump up and run away , and that will be all I shall see of you . 
Goodness ! 
Why are we sitting here and no coffee ? 
Yulia , Glafira , coffee ! '' 
Alyosha made haste to thank her , and said that he had only just had coffee . 
`` Where ? '' 
`` At Agrfena Alexandrovna 's . '' 
`` At ... at that woman 's ? 
Ah , it 's she has brought ruin on everyone . 
I know nothing about it though . 
They say she has become a saint , though it 's rather late in the day . 
She had better have done it before . 
What use is it now ? 
Hush , hush , Alexey Fyodorovitch , for I have so much to say to you that I am afraid I shall tell you nothing . 
This awful trial ... I shall certainly go , I am making arrangements . 
I shall be carried there in my chair ; besides I can sit up . 
I shall have people with me . 
And , you know , I am a witness . 
How shall I speak , how shall I speak ? 
I do n't know what I shall say . 
One has to take an oath , has n't one ? '' 
`` Yes ; but I do n't think you will be able to go . '' 
`` I can sit up . 
Ah , you put me out ! 
Ah ! 
this trial , this savage act , and then they are all going to Siberia , some are getting married , and all this so quickly , so quickly , everything 's changing , and at last - nothing . 
All grow old and have death to look forward to . 
Well , so be it ! 
I am weary . 
This Katya , cette charmante personne , has disappointed all my hopes . 
Now she is going to follow one of your brothers to Siberia , and your other brother is going to follow her , and will live in the nearest town , and they will all torment one another . 
It drives me out of my mind . 
Worst of all - the publicity . 
The story has been told a million times over in all the papers in Moscow and Petersburg . 
Ah ! 
yes , would you believe it , there 's a paragraph that I was ' a dear friend ' of your brother 's - , I ca n't repeat the horrid word . 
just fancy , just fancy ! '' 
`` Impossible ! 
Where was the paragraph ? 
What did it say ? '' 
`` I 'll show you directly . 
I got the paper and read it yesterday . 
Here , in the Petersburg paper Gossip . 
