Do you know , Alyosha - do n't laugh I made a poem about a year ago . 
If you can waste another ten minutes on me , I 'll tell it to you . '' 
`` You wrote a poem ? '' 
`` Oh , no , I did n't write it , '' laughed Ivan , and I 've never written two lines of poetry in my life . 
But I made up this poem in prose and I remembered it . 
I was carried away when I made it up . 
You will be my first reader - that is listener . 
Why should an author forego even one listener ? '' 
smiled Ivan . 
`` Shall I tell it to you ? '' 
`` I am all attention . '' 
said Alyosha . 
`` My poem is called The Grand Inquisitor ; it 's a ridiculous thing , but I want to tell it to you . 
The Grand Inquisitor `` EVEN this must have a preface - that is , a literary preface , '' laughed Ivan , `` and I am a poor hand at making one . 
You see , my action takes place in the sixteenth century , and at that time , as you probably learnt at school , it was customary in poetry to bring down heavenly powers on earth . 
Not to speak of Dante , in France , clerks , as well as the monks in the monasteries , used to give regular performances in which the Madonna , the saints , the angels , Christ , and God Himself were brought on the stage . 
In those days it was done in all simplicity . 
In Victor Hugo 's Notre Dame de Paris an edifying and gratuitous spectacle was provided for the people in the Hotel de Ville of Paris in the reign of Louis XI in honour of the birth of the dauphin . 
It was called Le bon jugement de la tres sainte et gracieuse Vierge Marie , and she appears herself on the stage and pronounces her bon jugement . 
Similar plays , chiefly from the Old Testament , were occasionally performed in Moscow too , up to the times of Peter the Great . 
But besides plays there were all sorts of legends and ballads scattered about the world , in which the saints and angels and all the powers of Heaven took part when required . 
In our monasteries the monks busied themselves in translating , copying , and even composing such poems - and even under the Tatars . 
There is , for instance , one such poem -LRB- of course , from the Greek -RRB- , The Wanderings of Our Lady through Hell , with descriptions as bold as Dante 's . 
Our Lady visits hell , and the Archangel Michael leads her through the torments . 
She sees the sinners and their punishment . 
There she sees among others one noteworthy set of sinners in a burning lake ; some of them sink to the bottom of the lake so that they ca n't swim out , and ` these God forgets ' - an expression of extraordinary depth and force . 
And so Our Lady , shocked and weeping , falls before the throne of God and begs for mercy for all in hell - for all she has seen there , indiscriminately . 
Her conversation with God is immensely interesting . 
She beseeches Him , she will not desist , and when God points to the hands and feet of her Son , nailed to the Cross , and asks , ` How can I forgive His tormentors ? ' 
she bids all the saints , all the martyrs , all the angels and archangels to fall down with her and pray for mercy on all without distinction . 
It ends by her winning from God a respite of suffering every year from Good Friday till Trinity Day , and the sinners at once raise a cry of thankfulness from hell , chanting , ` Thou art just , O Lord , in this judgment . ' 
Well , my poem would have been of that kind if it had appeared at that time . 
He comes on the scene in my poem , but He says nothing , only appears and passes on . 
Fifteen centuries have passed since He promised to come in His glory , fifteen centuries since His prophet wrote , ` Behold , I come quickly ' ; ` Of that day and that hour knoweth no man , neither the Son , but the Father , ' as He Himself predicted on earth . 
But humanity awaits him with the same faith and with the same love . 
Oh , with greater faith , for it is fifteen centuries since man has ceased to see signs from heaven . 
No signs from heaven come to-day To add to what the heart doth say . 
There was nothing left but faith in what the heart doth say . 
It is true there were many miracles in those days . 
There were saints who performed miraculous cures ; some holy people , according to their biographies , were visited by the Queen of Heaven herself . 
But the devil did not slumber , and doubts were already arising among men of the truth of these miracles . 
And just then there appeared in the north of Germany a terrible new heresy . ' 
A huge star like to a torch ' -LRB- that is , to a church -RRB- ` fell on the sources of the waters and they became bitter . ' 
These heretics began blasphemously denying miracles . 
But those who remained faithful were all the more ardent in their faith . 
The tears of humanity rose up to Him as before , awaited His coming , loved Him , hoped for Him , yearned to suffer and die for Him as before . 
And so many ages mankind had prayed with faith and fervour , ' O Lord our God , hasten Thy coming ' ; so many ages called upon Him , that in His infinite mercy He deigned to come down to His servants . 
Before that day He had come down , He had visited some holy men , martyrs , and hermits , as is written in their lives . 
Among us , Tyutchev , with absolute faith in the truth of his words , bore witness that Bearing the Cross , in slavish dress , Weary and worn , the Heavenly King Our mother , Russia , came to bless , And through our land went wandering . 
And that certainly was so , I assure you . 
`` And behold , He deigned to appear for a moment to the people , to the tortured , suffering people , sunk in iniquity , but loving Him like children . 
My story is laid in Spain , in Seville , in the most terrible time of the Inquisition , when fires were lighted every day to the glory of God , and ` in the splendid auto da fe the wicked heretics were burnt . ' 
Oh , of course , this was not the coming in which He will appear , according to His promise , at the end of time in all His heavenly glory , and which will be sudden ` as lightning flashing from east to west . ' 
No , He visited His children only for a moment , and there where the flames were crackling round the heretics . 
In His infinite mercy He came once more among men in that human shape in which He walked among men for thirty-three years fifteen centuries ago . 
He came down to the ` hot pavements ' of the southern town in which on the day before almost a hundred heretics had , ad majorem gloriam Dei , been burnt by the cardinal , the Grand Inquisitor , in a magnificent auto da fe , in the presence of the king , the court , the knights , the cardinals , the most charming ladies of the court , and the whole population of Seville . 
`` He came softly , unobserved , and yet , strange to say , everyone recognised Him . 
That might be one of the best passages in the poem . 
I mean , why they recognised Him . 
The people are irresistibly drawn to Him , they surround Him , they flock about Him , follow Him . 
He moves silently in their midst with a gentle smile of infinite compassion . 
The sun of love burns in His heart , and power shine from His eyes , and their radiance , shed on the people , stirs their hearts with responsive love . 
He holds out His hands to them , blesses them , and a healing virtue comes from contact with Him , even with His garments . 
An old man in the crowd , blind from childhood , cries out , ' O Lord , heal me and I shall see Thee ! ' 
and , as it were , scales fall from his eyes and the blind man sees Him . 
The crowd weeps and kisses the earth under His feet . 
Children throw flowers before Him , sing , and cry hosannah . 
` It is He - it is He ! ' 
repeat . 
` It must be He , it can be no one but Him ! ' 
He stops at the steps of the Seville cathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a little open white coffin . 
In it lies a child of seven , the only daughter of a prominent citizen . 
The dead child lies hidden in flowers . 
` He will raise your child , ' the crowd shouts to the weeping mother . 
The priest , coming to meet the coffin , looks perplexed , and frowns , but the mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet with a wail . 
` If it is Thou , raise my child ! ' 
she cries , holding out her hands to Him . 
The procession halts , the coffin is laid on the steps at His feet . 
He looks with compassion , and His lips once more softly pronounce , ` Maiden , arise ! ' 
and the maiden arises . 
The little girl sits up in the coffin and looks round , smiling with wide-open wondering eyes , holding a bunch of white roses they had put in her hand . 
`` There are cries , sobs , confusion among the people , and at that moment the cardinal himself , the Grand Inquisitor , passes by the cathedral . 
He is an old man , almost ninety , tall and erect , with a withered face and sunken eyes , in which there is still a gleam of light . 
He is not dressed in his gorgeous cardinal 's robes , as he was the day before , when he was burning the enemies of the Roman Church - at this moment he is wearing his coarse , old , monk 's cassock . 
At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistants and slaves and the ` holy guard . ' 
He stops at the sight of the crowd and watches it from a distance . 
He sees everything ; he sees them set the coffin down at His feet , sees the child rise up , and his face darkens . 
He knits his thick grey brows and his eyes gleam with a sinister fire . 
He holds out his finger and bids the guards take Him . 
And such is his power , so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience to him , that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards , and in the midst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead him away . 
The crowd instantly bows down to the earth , like one man , before the old Inquisitor . 
He blesses the people in silence and passes on ' The guards lead their prisoner to the close , gloomy vaulted prison - in the ancient palace of the Holy , inquisition and shut him in it . 
The day passes and is followed by the dark , burning , ` breathless ' night of Seville . 
The air is ` fragrant with laurel and lemon . ' 
In the pitch darkness the iron door of the prison is suddenly opened and the Grand Inquisitor himself comes in with a light in his hand . 
He is alone ; the door is closed at once behind him . 
He stands in the doorway and for a minute or two gazes into His face . 
At last he goes up slowly , sets the light on the table and speaks . '' 
` Is it Thou ? 
Thou ? ' 
