It was the first room from the entrance with a buffet along the wall . 
Waiters were continually darting to and fro in it . 
The only customer in the room was an old retired military man drinking tea in a corner . 
But there was the usual bustle going on in the other rooms of the tavern ; there were shouts for the waiters , the sound of popping corks , the click of billiard balls , the drone of the organ . 
Alyosha knew that Ivan did not usually visit this tavern and disliked taverns in general . 
So he must have come here , he reflected , simply to meet Dmitri by arrangement . 
Yet Dmitri was not there . 
`` Shall I order you fish , soup , or anything . 
You do n't live on tea alone , I suppose , '' cried Ivan , apparently delighted at having got hold of Alyosha . 
He had finished dinner and was drinking tea . 
`` Let me have soup , and tea afterwards , I am hungry , '' said Alyosha gaily . 
`` And cherry jam ? 
They have it here . 
You remember how you used to love cherry jam when you were little ? '' 
`` You remember that ? 
Let me have jam too , I like it still . '' 
Ivan rang for the waiter and ordered soup , jam , and tea . 
`` I remember everything , Alyosha , I remember you till you were eleven , I was nearly fifteen . 
There 's such a difference between fifteen and eleven that brothers are never companions at those ages . 
I do n't know whether I was fond of you even . 
When I went away to Moscow for the first few years I never thought of you at all . 
Then , when you came to Moscow yourself , we only met once somewhere , I believe . 
And now I 've been here more than three months , and so far we have scarcely said a word to each other . 
To-morrow I am going away , and I was just thinking as I sat here how I could see you to say good-bye and just then you passed . '' 
`` Were you very anxious to see me , then ? '' 
`` Very . 
I want to get to know you once for all , and I want you to know me . 
And then to say good-bye . 
I believe it 's always best to get to know people just before leaving them . 
I 've noticed how you 've been looking at me these three months . 
There has been a continual look of expectation in your eyes , and I ca n't endure that . 
That 's how it is I 've kept away from you . 
But in the end I have learned to respect you . 
The little man stands firm , I thought . 
Though I am laughing , I am serious . 
You do stand firm , do n't you ? 
I like people who are firm like that whatever it is they stand by , even if they are such little fellows as you . 
Your expectant eyes ceased to annoy me , I grew fond of them in the end , those expectant eyes . 
You seem to love me for some reason , Alyosha ? '' 
`` I do love you , Ivan . 
Dmitri says of you - Ivan is a tomb ! 
I say of you , Ivan is a riddle . 
You are a riddle to me even now . 
But I understand something in you , and I did not understand it till this morning . '' 
`` What 's that ? '' 
laughed Ivan . 
`` You wo n't be angry ? '' 
Alyosha laughed too . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` That you are just as young as other young men of three and twenty , that you are just a young and fresh and nice boy , green in fact ! 
Now , have I insulted you dreadfully ? '' 
`` On the contrary , I am struck by a coincidence , '' cried Ivan , warmly and good-humouredly . 
`` Would you believe it that ever since that scene with her , I have thought of nothing else but my youthful greenness , and just as though you guessed that , you begin about it . 
Do you know I 've been sitting here thinking to myself : that if I did n't believe in life , if I lost faith in the woman I love , lost faith in the order of things , were convinced , in fact , that everything is a disorderly , damnable , and perhaps devil-ridden chaos , if I were struck by every horror of man 's disillusionment - still I should want to live and , having once tasted of the cup , I would not turn away from it till I had drained it ! 
At thirty , though , I shall be sure to leave the cup , even if I 've not emptied it , and turn away - where I do n't know . 
But till I am thirty , I know that my youth will triumph over everything - every disillusionment , every disgust with life . 
I 've asked myself many times whether there is in the world any despair that would overcome this frantic and perhaps unseemly thirst for life in me , and I 've come to the conclusion that there is n't , that is till I am thirty , and then I shall lose it of myself , I fancy . 
Some drivelling consumptive moralists - and poets especially - often call that thirst for life base . 
It 's a feature of the Karamazovs , it 's true , that thirst for life regardless of everything ; you have it no doubt too , but why is it base ? 
The centripetal force on our planet is still fearfully strong , Alyosha . 
I have a longing for life , and I go on living in spite of logic . 
Though I may not believe in the order of the universe , yet I love the sticky little leaves as they open in spring . 
I love the blue sky , I love some people , whom one loves you know sometimes without knowing why . 
I love some great deeds done by men , though I 've long ceased perhaps to have faith in them , yet from old habit one 's heart prizes them . 
Here they have brought the soup for you , eat it , it will do you good . 
It 's first-rate soup , they know how to make it here . 
I want to travel in Europe , Alyosha , I shall set off from here . 
And yet I know that I am only going to a graveyard , but it 's a most precious graveyard , that 's what it is ! 
Precious are the dead that lie there , every stone over them speaks of such burning life in the past , of such passionate faith in their work , their truth , their struggle and their science , that I know I shall fall on the ground and kiss those stones and weep over them ; though I 'm convinced in my heart that it 's long been nothing but a graveyard . 
And I shall not weep from despair , but simply because I shall be happy in my tears , I shall steep my soul in emotion . 
I love the sticky leaves in spring , the blue sky - that 's all it is . 
It 's not a matter of intellect or logic , it 's loving with one 's inside , with one 's stomach . 
One loves the first strength of one 's youth . 
Do you understand anything of my tirade , Alyosha ? '' 
Ivan laughed suddenly . 
`` I understand too well , Ivan . 
One longs to love with one 's inside , with one 's stomach . 
You said that so well and I am awfully glad that you have such a longing for life , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` I think everyone should love life above everything in the world . '' 
`` Love life more than the meaning of it ? '' 
`` Certainly , love it , regardless of logic as you say , it must be regardless of logic , and it 's only then one will understand the meaning of it . 
I have thought so a long time . 
Half your work is done , Ivan , you love life , now you 've only to try to do the second half and you are saved . '' 
`` You are trying to save me , but perhaps I am not lost ! 
And what does your second half mean ? '' 
`` Why , one has to raise up your dead , who perhaps have not died after all . 
Come , let me have tea . 
I am so glad of our talk , Ivan . '' 
`` I see you are feeling inspired . 
I am awfully fond of such professions de foi * from such - novices . 
You are a steadfast person , Alexey . 
Is it true that you mean to leave the monastery ? '' 
* Professions of faith . 
`` Yes , my elder sends me out into the world . '' 
`` We shall see each other then in the world . 
We shall meet before I am thirty , when I shall begin to turn aside from the cup . 
Father does n't want to turn aside from his cup till he is seventy , he dreams of hanging on to eighty in fact , so he says . 
He means it only too seriously , though he is a buffoon . 
He stands on a firm rock , too , he stands on his sensuality though after we are thirty , indeed , there may be nothing else to stand on ... . 
But to hang on to seventy is nasty , better only to thirty ; one might retain ' a shadow of nobility ' by deceiving oneself . 
