He must be killed ! 
Katya despises me . 
I 've seen that for a month past . 
Even Lise will begin to despise me ! 
` You are going in order to be praised . ' 
That 's a brutal lie ! 
And you despise me too , Alyosha . 
Now I am going to hate you again ! 
And I hate the monster , too ! 
I hate the monster ! 
I do n't want to save the monster . 
Let him rot in Siberia ! 
He 's begun singing a hymn ! 
Oh , to-morrow I 'll go , stand before them , and spit in their faces ! '' 
He jumped up in a frenzy , flung off the towel , and fell to pacing up and down the room again . 
Alyosha recalled what he had just said . 
`` I seem to be sleeping awake ... I walk , I speak , I see , but I am asleep . '' 
It seemed to be just like that now . 
Alyosha did not leave him . 
The thought passed through his mind to run for a doctor , but he was afraid to leave his brother alone : there was no one to whom he could leave him . 
By degrees Ivan lost consciousness completely at last . 
He still went on talking , talking incessantly , but quite incoherently , and even articulated his words with difficulty . 
Suddenly he staggered violently ; but Alyosha was in time to support him . 
Ivan let him lead him to his bed . 
Alyosha undressed him somehow and put him to bed . 
He sat watching over him for another two hours . 
The sick man slept soundly , without stirring , breathing softly and evenly . 
Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on the sofa , without undressing . 
As he fell asleep he prayed for Mitya and Ivan . 
He began to understand Ivan 's illness . 
`` The anguish of a proud determination . 
An earnest conscience ! '' 
God , in Whom he disbelieved , and His truth were gaining mastery over his heart , which still refused to submit . 
`` Yes , '' the thought floated through Alyosha 's head as it lay on the pillow , `` yes , if Smerdyakov is dead , no one will believe Ivan 's evidence ; but he will go and give it . '' 
Alyosha smiled softly . 
`` God will conquer ! '' 
he thought . 
`` He will either rise up in the light of truth , or ... he 'll perish in hate , revenging on himself and on everyone his having served the cause he does not believe in , '' Alyosha added bitterly , and again he prayed for Ivan . 
A Judicial Error The Fatal Day AT ten o'clock in the morning of the day following the events I have described , the trial of Dmitri Karamazov began in our district court . 
I hasten to emphasise the fact that I am far from esteeming myself capable of reporting all that took place at the trial in full detail , or even in the actual order of events . 
I imagine that to mention everything with full explanation would fill a volume , even a very large one . 
And so I trust I may not be reproached , for confining myself to what struck me . 
I may have selected as of most interest what was of secondary importance , and may have omitted the most prominent and essential details . 
But I see I shall do better not to apologise . 
I will do my best and the reader will see for himself that I have done all I can . 
And , to begin with , before entering the court , I will mention what surprised me most on that day . 
Indeed , as it appeared later , everyone was surprised at it , too . 
We all knew that the affair had aroused great interest , that everyone was burning with impatience for the trial to begin , that it had been a subject of talk , conjecture , exclamation and surmise for the last two months in local society . 
Everyone knew , too , that the case had become known throughout Russia , but yet we had not imagined that it had aroused such burning , such intense , interest in everyone , not only among ourselves , but all over Russia . 
This became evident at the trial this day . 
Visitors had arrived not only from the chief town of our province , but from several other Russian towns , as well as from Moscow and Petersburg . 
Among them were lawyers , ladies , and even several distinguished personages . 
Every ticket of admission had been snatched up . 
A special place behind the table at which the three judges sat was set apart for the most distinguished and important of the men visitors ; a row of arm-chairs had been placed there - something exceptional , which had never been allowed before . 
A large proportion not less than half of the public - were ladies . 
There was such a large number of lawyers from all parts that they did not know where to seat them , for every ticket had long since been eagerly sought for and distributed . 
I saw at the end of the room , behind the platform , a special partition hurriedly put up , behind which all these lawyers were admitted , and they thought themselves lucky to have standing room there , for all chairs had been removed for the sake of space , and the crowd behind the partition stood throughout the case closely packed , shoulder to shoulder . 
Some of the ladies , especially those who came from a distance , made their appearance in the gallery very smartly dressed , but the majority of the ladies were oblivious even of dress . 
Their faces betrayed hysterical , intense , almost morbid , curiosity . 
A peculiar fact - established afterwards by many observations - was that almost all the ladies , or , at least the vast majority of them , were on Mitya 's side and in favour of his being acquitted . 
This was perhaps chiefly owing to his reputation as a conqueror of female hearts . 
It was known that two women rivals were to appear in the case . 
One of them - Katerina Ivanovna - was an object of general interest . 
All sorts of extraordinary tales were told about her , amazing anecdotes of her passion for Mitya , in spite of his crime . 
Her pride and `` aristocratic connections '' were particularly insisted upon -LRB- she had called upon scarcely anyone in the town -RRB- . 
People said she intended to petition the Government for leave to accompany the criminal to Siberia and to be married to him somewhere in the mines . 
The appearance of Grushenka in court was awaited with no less impatience . 
The public was looking forward with anxious curiosity to the meeting of the two rivals - the proud aristocratic girl and `` the hetaira . '' 
But Grushenka was a more familiar figure to the ladies of the district than Katerina Ivanovna . 
They had already seen `` the woman who had ruined Fyodor Pavlovitch and his unhappy son , '' and all , almost without exception , wondered how father and son could be so in love with `` such a very common , ordinary Russian girl , who was not even pretty . '' 
In brief , there was a great deal of talk . 
I know for a fact that there were several serious family quarrels on Mitya 's account in our town . 
Many ladies quarrelled violently with their husbands over differences of opinion about the dreadful case , and it was that the husbands of these ladies , far from being favourably disposed to the prisoner , should enter the court bitterly prejudiced against him . 
In fact , one may say pretty certainly that the masculine , as distinguished from the feminine , part of the audience was biased against the prisoner . 
There were numbers of severe , frowning , even vindictive faces . 
Mitya , indeed , had managed to offend many people during his stay in the town . 
Some of the visitors were , of course , in excellent spirits and quite unconcerned as to the fate of Mitya personally . 
But all were interested in the trial , and the majority of the men were certainly hoping for the conviction of the criminal , except perhaps the lawyers , who were more interested in the legal than in the moral aspect of the case . 
Everybody was excited at the presence of the celebrated lawyer , Fetyukovitch . 
His talent was well known , and this was not the first time he had defended notorious criminal cases in the provinces . 
And if he defended them , such cases became celebrated and long remembered all over Russia . 
There were stories , too , about our prosecutor and about the President of the Court . 
It was said that Ippolit Kirillovitch was in a tremor at meeting Fetyukovitch , and that they had been enemies from the beginning of their careers in Petersburg , that though our sensitive prosecutor , who always considered that he had been aggrieved by someone in Petersburg because his talents had not been properly appreciated , was keenly excited over the Karamazov case , and was even dreaming of rebuilding his flagging fortunes by means of it , Fetyukovitch , they said , was his one anxiety . 
But these rumours were not quite just . 
Our prosecutor was not one of those men who lose heart in face of danger . 
On the contrary , his self-confidence increased with the increase of danger . 
It must be noted that our prosecutor was in general too hasty and morbidly impressionable . 
He would put his whole soul into some case and work at it as though his whole fate and his whole fortune depended on its result . 
This was the subject of some ridicule in the legal world , for just by this characteristic our prosecutor had gained a wider notoriety than could have been expected from his modest position . 
People laughed particularly at his passion for psychology . 
In my opinion , they were wrong , and our prosecutor was , I believe , a character of greater depth than was generally supposed . 
But with his delicate health he had failed to make his mark at the outset of his career and had never made up for it later . 
As for the President of our Court , I can only say that he was a humane and cultured man , who had a practical knowledge of his work and progressive views . 
He was rather ambitious , but did not concern himself greatly about his future career . 
The great aim of his life was to be a man of advanced ideas . 
He was , too , a man of connections and property . 
He felt , as we learnt afterwards , rather strongly about the Karamazov case , but from a social , not from a personal standpoint . 
He was interested in it as a social phenomenon , in its classification and its character as a product of our social conditions , as typical of the national character , and so on , and so on . 
His attitude to the personal aspect of the case , to its tragic significance and the persons involved in it , including the prisoner , was rather indifferent and abstract , as was perhaps fitting , indeed . 
The court was packed and overflowing long before the judges made their appearance . 
