Then he suddenly remembered how he had tried to join their hands , and he felt fearfully ashamed again . 
`` Though I acted quite sincerely , I must be more sensible in the future , '' he concluded suddenly , and did not even smile at his conclusion . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's commission took him to Lake Street , and his brother Dmitri lived close by , in a turning out of Lake Street . 
Alyosha decided to go to him in any case before going to the captain , though he had a presentiment that he would not find his brother . 
He suspected that he would intentionally keep out of his way now , but he must find him anyhow . 
Time was passing : the thought of his dying elder had not left Alyosha for one minute from the time he set off from the monastery . 
There was one point which interested him particularly about Katerina Ivanovna 's commission ; when she had mentioned the captain 's son , the little schoolboy who had run beside his father crying , the idea had at once struck Alyosha that this must be the schoolboy who had bitten his finger when he , Alyosha , asked him what he had done to hurt him . 
Now Alyosha felt practically certain of this , though he could not have said why . 
Thinking of another subject was a relief , and he resolved to think no more about the `` mischief '' he had done , and not to torture himself with remorse , but to do what he had to do , let come what would . 
At that thought he was completely comforted . 
Turning to the street where Dmitri lodged , he felt hungry , and taking out of his pocket the roll he had brought from his father 's , he ate it . 
It made him feel stronger . 
Dmitri was not at home . 
The people of the house , an old cabinet-maker , his son , and his old wife , looked with positive suspicion at Alyosha . 
`` He has n't slept here for the last three nights . 
Maybe he has gone away , '' the old man said in answer to Alyosha 's persistent inquiries . 
Alyosha saw that he was answering in accordance with instructions . 
When he asked whether he were not at Grushenka 's or in hiding at Foma 's -LRB- Alyosha spoke so freely on purpose -RRB- , all three looked at him in alarm . 
`` They are fond of him , they are doing their best for him , '' thought Alyosha . 
`` That 's good . '' 
At last he found the house in Lake Street . 
It was a decrepit little house , sunk on one side , with three windows looking into the street , and with a muddy yard , in the middle of which stood a solitary cow . 
He crossed the yard and found the door opening into the passage . 
On the left of the passage lived the old woman of the house with her old daughter . 
Both seemed to be deaf . 
In answer to his repeated inquiry for the captain , one of them at last understood that he was asking for their lodgers , and pointed to a door across the passage . 
The captain 's lodging turned out to be a simple cottage room . 
Alyosha had his hand on the iron latch to open the door , when he was struck by the strange hush within . 
Yet he knew from Katerina Ivanovna 's words that the man had a family . 
`` Either they are all asleep or perhaps they have heard me coming and are waiting for me to open the door . 
I 'd better knock first , '' and he knocked . 
An answer came , but not at once , after an interval of perhaps ten seconds . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
shouted someone in a loud and very angry voice . 
Then Alyosha opened the door and crossed the threshold . 
He found himself in a regular peasant 's room . 
Though it was large , it was cumbered up with domestic belongings of all sorts , and there were several people in it . 
On the left was a large Russian stove . 
From the stove to the window on the left was a string running across the room , and on it there were rags hanging . 
There was a bedstead against the wall on each side , right and left , covered with knitted quilts . 
On the one on the left was a pyramid of four print-covered pillows , each smaller than the one beneath . 
On the other there was only one very small pillow . 
The opposite corner was screened off by a curtain or a sheet hung on a string . 
Behind this curtain could be seen a bed made up on a bench and a chair . 
The rough square table of plain wood had been moved into the middle window . 
The three windows , which consisted each of four tiny greenish mildewy panes , gave little light , and were close shut , so that the room was not very light and rather stuffy . 
On the table was a frying pan with the remains of some fried eggs , a half-eaten piece of bread , and a small bottle with a few drops of vodka . 
A woman of genteel appearance , wearing a cotton gown , was sitting on a chair by the bed on the left . 
Her face was thin and yellow , and her sunken cheeks betrayed at the first glance that she was ill . 
But what struck Alyosha most was the expression in the poor woman 's eyes - a look of surprised inquiry and yet of haughty pride . 
And while he was talking to her husband , her big brown eyes moved from one speaker to the other with the same haughty and questioning expression . 
Beside her at the window stood a young girl , rather plain , with scanty reddish hair , poorly but very neatly dressed . 
She looked disdainfully at Alyosha as he came in . 
Beside the other bed was sitting another female figure . 
She was a very sad sight , a young girl of about twenty , but hunchback and crippled `` with withered legs , '' as Alyosha was told afterwards . 
Her crutches stood in the corner close by . 
The strikingly beautiful and gentle eyes of this poor girl looked with mild serenity at Alyosha . 
A man of forty-five was sitting at the table , finishing the fried eggs . 
He was spare , small , and weakly built . 
He had reddish hair and a scanty light-coloured beard , very much like a wisp of tow -LRB- this comparison and the phrase `` a wisp of tow '' flashed at once into Alyosha 's mind for some reason , he remembered it afterwards -RRB- . 
It was obviously this gentleman who had shouted to him , as there was no other man in the room . 
But when Alyosha went in , he leapt up from the bench on which he was sitting , and , hastily wiping his mouth with a ragged napkin , darted up to Alyosha . 
`` It 's a monk come to beg for the monastery . 
A nice place to come to ! '' 
the girl standing in the left corner said aloud . 
The man spun round instantly towards her and answered her in an excited and breaking voice : `` No , Varvara , you are wrong . 
Allow me to ask , '' he turned again to Alyosha , `` what has brought you to our retreat ? '' 
Alyosha looked attentively at him . 
It was the first time he had seen him . 
There was something angular , flurried and irritable about him . 
Though he had obviously just been drinking , he was not drunk . 
There was extraordinary impudence in his expression , and yet , strange to say , at the same time there was fear . 
He looked like a man who had long been kept in subjection and had submitted to it , and now had suddenly turned and was trying to assert himself . 
Or , better still , like a man who wants dreadfully to hit you but is horribly afraid you will hit him . 
In his words and in the intonation of his shrill voice there was a sort of crazy humour , at times spiteful and at times cringing , and continually shifting from one tone to another . 
The question about `` our retreat '' he had asked , as it were , quivering all over , rolling his eyes , and skipping up so close to Alyosha that he instinctively drew back a step . 
He was dressed in a very shabby dark cotton coat , patched and spotted . 
He wore checked trousers of an extremely light colour , long out of fashion , and of very thin material . 
They were so crumpled and so short that he looked as though he had grown out of them like a boy . 
`` I am Alexey Karamazov , '' Alyosha began in reply . 
`` I quite understand that , sir , '' the gentleman snapped out at once to assure him that he knew who he was already . 
`` I am Captain Snegiryov , sir , but I am still desirous to know precisely what has led you - '' `` Oh , I 've come for nothing special . 
I wanted to have a word with you - if only you allow me . '' 
`` In that case , here is a chair , sir ; kindly be seated . 
That 's what they used to say in the old comedies , ` kindly be seated , ' '' and with a rapid gesture he seized an empty chair -LRB- it was a rough wooden chair , not upholstered -RRB- and set it for him almost in the middle of the room ; then , taking another similar chair for himself , he sat down facing Alyosha , so close to him that their knees almost touched . 
`` Nikolay Ilyitch Snegiryov , sir , formerly a captain in the Russian infantry , put to shame for his vices , but still a captain . 
Though I might not be one now for the way I talk ; for the last half of my life I 've learnt to say ` sir . ' 
It 's a word you use when you 've come down in the world . '' 
`` That 's very true , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But is it used involuntarily or on purpose ? '' 
`` As God 's above , it 's involuntary , and I use n't to use it ! 
I did n't use the word ` sir ' all my life , but as soon as I sank into low water I began to say ` sir . ' 
It 's the work of a higher power . 
I see you are interested in contemporary questions , but how can I have excited your curiosity , living as I do in surroundings impossible for the exercise of hospitality ? '' 
`` I 've come - about that business . '' 
`` About what business ? '' 
the captain interrupted impatiently . 
`` About your meeting with my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Alyosha blurted out awkwardly . 
`` What meeting , sir ? 
You do n't mean that meeting ? 
