`` How does he love you ? 
How has he shown it , that you make such a fuss about it ? '' 
Grushenka was standing in the middle of the room ; she spoke with heat and there were hysterical notes in her voice . 
`` Hush , Rakitin , you know nothing about us ! 
And do n't dare to speak to me like that again . 
How dare you be so familiar ! 
Sit in that corner and be quiet , as though you were my footman ! 
And now , Alyosha , I 'll tell you the whole truth , that you may see what a wretch I am ! 
I am not talking to Rakitin , but to you . 
I wanted to ruin you , Alyosha , that 's the holy truth ; I quite meant to . 
I wanted to so much , that I bribed Rakitin to bring you . 
And why did I want to do such a thing ? 
You knew nothing about it , Alyosha , you turned away from me ; if you passed me , you dropped your eyes . 
And I 've looked at you a hundred times before to-day ; I began asking everyone about you . 
Your face haunted my heart . 
` He despises me , ' I thought ; ` he wo n't even look at me . ' 
And I felt it so much at last that I wondered at myself for being so frightened of a boy . 
I 'll get him in my clutches and laugh at him . 
I was full of spite and anger . 
Would you believe it , nobody here dares talk or think of coming to Agrafena Alexandrovna with any evil purpose . 
Old Kuzma is the only man I have anything to do with here ; I was bound and sold to him ; Satan brought us together , but there has been no one else . 
But looking at you , I thought , I 'll get him in my clutches and laugh at him . 
You see what a spiteful cur I am , and you called me your sister ! 
And now that man who wronged me has come ; I sit here waiting for a message from him . 
And do you know what that man has been to me ? 
Five years ago , when Kuzma brought me here , I used to shut myself up , that no one might have sight or sound of me . 
I was a silly slip of a girl ; I used to sit here sobbing ; I used to lie awake all night , thinking : ` Where is he now , the man who wronged me ? 
He is laughing at me with another woman , most likely . 
If only I could see him , if I could meet him again , I 'd pay him out , I 'd pay him out ! ' 
At night I used to lie sobbing into my pillow in the dark , and I used to brood over it ; I used to tear my heart on purpose and gloat over my anger . 
` I 'll pay him out , I 'll pay him out ! 
That 's what I used to cry out in the dark . 
And when I suddenly thought that I should really do nothing to him , and that he was laughing at me then , or perhaps had utterly forgotten me , I would fling myself on the floor , melt into helpless tears , and lie there shaking till dawn . 
In the morning I would get up more spiteful than a dog , ready to tear the whole world to pieces . 
And then what do you think ? 
I began saving money , I became hardhearted , grew stout - grew wiser , would you say ? 
No , no one in the whole world sees it , no one knows it , but when night comes on , I sometimes lie as I did five years ago , when I was a silly girl , clenching my teeth and crying all night , thinking , ` I 'll pay him out , I 'll pay him out ! ' 
Do you hear ? 
Well then , now you understand me . 
A month ago a letter came to me - he was coming , he was a widower , he wanted to see me . 
It took my breath away ; then I suddenly thought : ` If he comes and whistles to call me , I shall creep back to him like a beaten dog . ' 
I could n't believe myself . 
Am I so abject ? 
Shall I run to him or not ? 
And I 've been in such a rage with myself all this month that I am worse than I was five years ago . 
Do you see now , Alyosha , what a violent , vindictive creature I am ? 
I have shown you the whole truth ! 
I played with Mitya to keep me from running to that other . 
Hush , Rakitin , it 's not for you to judge me , I am not speaking to you . 
Before you came in , I was lying here waiting , brooding , deciding my whole future life , and you can never know what was in my heart . 
Yes , Alyosha , tell your young lady not to be angry with me for what happened the day before yesterday ... . 
Nobody in the whole world knows what I am going through now , and no one ever can know ... . 
For perhaps I shall take a knife with me to-day , I ca n't make up my mind ... '' And at this `` tragic '' phrase Grushenka broke down , hid her face in her hands , flung herself on the sofa pillows , and sobbed like a little child . 
Alyosha got up and went to Rakitin . 
`` Misha , '' he said , `` do n't be angry . 
She wounded you , but do n't be angry . 
You heard what she said just now ? 
You must n't ask too much of human endurance , one must be merciful . '' 
Alyosha said this at the instinctive prompting of his heart . 
He felt obliged to speak and he turned to Rakitin . 
If Rakitin had not been there , he would have spoken to the air . 
But Rakitin looked at him ironically and Alyosha stopped short . 
`` You were so primed up with your elder 's reading last night that now you have to let it off on me , Alexey , man of God ! '' 
said Rakitin , with a smile of hatred . 
`` Do n't laugh , Rakitin , do n't smile , do n't talk of the dead - he was better than anyone in the world ! '' 
cried Alyosha , with tears in his voice . 
`` I did n't speak to you as a judge but as the lowest of the judged . 
What am I beside her ? 
I came here seeking my ruin , and said to myself , ` What does it matter ? ' 
in my cowardliness , but she , after five years in torment , as soon as anyone says a word from the heart to her - it makes her forget everything , forgive everything , in her tears ! 
The man who has wronged her has come back , he sends for her and she forgives him everything , and hastens joyfully to meet him and she wo n't take a knife with her . 
She wo n't ! 
No , I am not like that . 
I do n't know whether you are , Misha , but I am not like that . 
It 's a lesson to me ... . 
She is more loving than we ... . 
Have you heard her speak before of what she has just told us ? 
No , you have n't ; if you had , you 'd have understood her long ago ... and the person insulted the day before yesterday must forgive her , too ! 
She will , when she knows ... and she shall know ... . 
This soul is not yet at peace with itself , one must be tender with ... there may be a treasure in that soul ... '' Alyosha stopped , because he caught his breath . 
In spite of his ill-humour Rakitin looked at him with astonishment . 
He had never expected such a tirade from the gentle Alyosha . 
`` She 's found someone to plead her cause ! 
Why , are you in love with her ? 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , our monk 's really in love with you , you 've made a conquest ! '' 
he cried , with a coarse laugh . 
Grushenka lifted her head from the pillow and looked at Alyosha with a tender smile shining on her tear-stained face . 
`` Let him alone , Alyosha , my cherub ; you see what he is , he is not a person for you to speak to . 
Mihail Osipovitch , '' she turned to Rakitin , `` I meant to beg your pardon for being rude to you , but now I do n't want to . 
Alyosha , come to me , sit down here . '' 
She beckoned to him with a happy smile . 
`` That 's right , sit here . 
Tell me , '' she took him by the hand and peeped into his face , smiling , `` tell me , do I love that man or not ? 
The man who wronged me , do I love him or not ? 
Before you came , I lay here in the dark , asking my heart whether I loved him . 
Decide for me , Alyosha , the time has come , it shall be as you say . 
Am I to forgive him or not ? '' 
`` But you have forgiven him already , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Yes , I really have forgiven him , '' Grushenka murmured thoughtfully . 
`` What an abject heart ! 
