He sat without moving , and unconsciously dozed off and fell asleep as he sat . 
He seemed to have slept for two hours or more . 
He was waked up by his head aching so unbearably that he could have screamed . 
There was a hammering in his temples , and the top of his head ached . 
It was a long time before he could wake up fully and understand what had happened to him . 
At last he realised that the room was full of charcoal fumes from the stove , and that he might die of suffocation . 
And the drunken peasant still lay snoring . 
The candle guttered and was about to go out . 
Mitya cried out , and ran staggering across the passage into the forester 's room . 
The forester waked up at once , but hearing that the other room was full of fumes , to Mitya 's surprise and annoyance , accepted the fact with strange unconcern , though he did go to see to it . 
`` But he 's dead , he 's dead ! 
and ... what am I to do then ? '' 
cried Mitya frantically . 
They threw open the doors , opened a window and the chimney . 
Mitya brought a pail of water from the passage . 
First he wetted his own head , then , finding a rag of some sort , dipped it into the water , and put it on Lyagavy 's head . 
The forester still treated the matter contemptuously , and when he opened the window said grumpily : `` It 'll be all right , now . '' 
He went back to sleep , leaving Mitya a lighted lantern . 
Mitya fussed about the drunken peasant for half an hour , wetting his head , and gravely resolved not to sleep all night . 
But he was so worn out that when he sat down for a moment to take breath , he closed his eyes , unconsciously stretched himself full length on the bench and slept like the dead . 
It was dreadfully late when he waked . 
It was somewhere about nine o'clock . 
The sun was shining brightly in the two little windows of the hut . 
The curly-headed peasant was sitting on the bench and had his coat on . 
He had another samovar and another bottle in front of him . 
Yesterday 's bottle had already been finished , and the new one was more than half empty . 
Mitya jumped up and saw at once that the cursed peasant was drunk again , hopelessly and incurably . 
He stared at him for a moment with wide opened eyes . 
The peasant was silently and slyly watching him , with insulting composure , and even a sort of contemptuous condescension , so Mitya fancied . 
He rushed up to him . 
`` Excuse me , you see ... I. . . 
you 've most likely heard from the forester here in the hut . 
I 'm Lieutenant Dmitri Karamazov , the son of the old Karamazov whose copse you are buying . '' 
`` That 's a lie ! '' 
said the peasant , calmly and confidently . 
`` A lie ? 
You know Fyodor Pavlovitch ? '' 
`` I do n't know any of your Fyodor Pavlovitches , '' said the peasant , speaking thickly . 
`` You 're bargaining with him for the copse , for the copse . 
Do wake up , and collect yourself . 
Father Pavel of Ilyinskoe brought me here . 
You wrote to Samsonov , and he has sent me to you , '' Mitya gasped breathlessly . 
`` You 're lying ! '' 
Lyagavy blurted out again . 
Mitya 's legs went cold . 
`` For mercy 's sake ! 
It is n't a joke ! 
You 're drunk , perhaps . 
Yet you can speak and understand ... or else ... I understand nothing ! '' 
`` You 're a painter ! '' 
`` For mercy 's sake ! 
I 'm Karamazov , Dmitri Karamazov . 
I have an offer to make you , an advantageous offer ... very advantageous offer , concerning the copse ! '' 
The peasant stroked his beard importantly . 
`` No , you 've contracted for the job and turned out a scamp . 
You 're a scoundrel ! '' 
`` I assure you you 're mistaken , '' cried Mitya , wringing his hands in despair . 
The peasant still stroked his beard , and suddenly screwed up his eyes cunningly . 
`` No , you show me this : you tell me the law that allows roguery . 
D'you hear ? 
You 're a scoundrel ! 
Do you understand that ? '' 
Mitya stepped back gloomily , and suddenly `` something seemed to hit him on the head , '' as he said afterwards . 
In an instant a light seemed to dawn in his mind , `` a light was kindled and I grasped it all . '' 
He stood , stupefied , wondering how he , after all a man of intelligence , could have yielded to such folly , have been led into such an adventure , and have kept it up for almost twenty-four hours , fussing round this Lyagavy , wetting his head . 
`` Why , the man 's drunk , dead drunk , and he 'll go on drinking now for a week ; what 's the use of waiting here ? 
And what if Samsonov sent me here on purpose ? 
What if she - ? 
Oh God , what have I done ? '' 
The peasant sat watching him and grinning . 
Another time Mitya might have killed the fool in a fury , but now he felt as weak as a child . 
He went quietly to the bench , took up his overcoat , put it on without a word , and went out of the hut . 
He did not find the forester in the next room ; there was no one there . 
He took fifty copecks in small change out of his pocket and put them on the table for his night 's lodging , the candle , and the trouble he had given . 
Coming out of the hut he saw nothing but forest all round . 
He walked at hazard , not knowing which way to turn out of the hut , to the right or to the left . 
Hurrying there the evening before with the priest , he had not noticed the road . 
He had no revengeful feeling for anybody , even for Samsonov , in his heart . 
He strode along a narrow forest path , aimless , dazed , without heeding where he was going . 
A child could have knocked him down , so weak was he in body and soul . 
He got out of the forest somehow , however , and a vista of fields , bare after the harvest , stretched as far as the eye could see . 
`` What despair ! 
What death all round ! '' 
he repeated , striding on and on . 
He was saved by meeting an old merchant who was being driven across country in a hired trap . 
When he overtook him , Mitya asked the way and it turned out that the old merchant , too , was going to Volovya . 
After some discussion Mitya got into the trap . 
Three hours later they arrived . 
At Volovya , Mitya at once ordered posting-horses to drive to the town , and suddenly realised that he was appallingly hungry . 
While the horses were being harnessed , an omelette was prepared for him . 
He ate it all in an instant , ate a huge hunk of bread , ate a sausage , and swallowed three glasses of vodka . 
After eating , his spirits and his heart grew lighter . 
He flew towards the town , urged on the driver , and suddenly made a new and `` unalterable '' plan to procure that `` accursed money '' before evening . 
`` And to think , only to think that a man 's life should be ruined for the sake of that paltry three thousand ! '' 
he cried , contemptuously . 
`` I 'll settle it to-day . '' 
And if it had not been for the thought of Grushenka and of what might have happened to her , which never left him , he would perhaps have become quite cheerful again ... . 
But the thought of her was stabbing him to the heart every moment , like a sharp knife . 
At last they arrived , and Mitya at once ran to Grushenka . 
Gold Mines THIS was the visit of Mitya of which Grushenka had spoken to Rakitin with such horror . 
