And , indeed , it 's a struggle of three in this business , for it 's fate - that 's a fearful thing , Kuzma Kuzmitch ! 
A tragedy , Kuzma Kuzmitch , a tragedy ! 
And as you 've dropped out long ago , it 's a tug-of-war between two . 
I 'm expressing it awkwardly , perhaps , but I 'm not a literary man . 
You see , I 'm on the one side , and that monster on the other . 
So you must choose . 
It 's either I or the monster . 
It all lies in your hands - . 
the fate of three lives , and the happiness of two ... . 
Excuse me , I 'm making a mess of it , but you understand ... I see from your venerable eyes that you understand ... and if you do n't understand , I 'm done for ... so you see ! '' 
Mitya broke off his clumsy speech with that , `` so you see ! '' 
and jumping up from his seat , awaited the answer to his foolish proposal . 
At the last phrase he had suddenly become hopelessly aware that it had all fallen flat , above all , that he had been talking utter nonsense . 
`` How strange it is ! 
On the way here it seemed all right , and now it 's nothing but nonsense . '' 
The idea suddenly dawned on his despairing mind . 
All the while he had been talking , the old man sat motionless , watching him with an icy expression in his eyes . 
After keeping him for a moment in suspense , Kuzma Kuzmitch pronounced at last in the most positive and chilling tone : `` Excuse me , we do n't undertake such business . '' 
Mitya suddenly felt his legs growing weak under him . 
`` What am I to do now , Kuzma Kuzmitch ? '' 
he muttered , with a pale smile . 
`` I suppose it 's all up with me - what do you think ? '' 
`` Excuse me ... '' Mitya remained standing , staring motionless . 
He suddenly noticed a movement in the old man 's face . 
He started . 
`` You see , sir , business of that sort 's not in our line , '' said the old man slowly . 
`` There 's the court , and the lawyers - it 's a perfect misery . 
But if you like , there is a man here you might apply to . '' 
`` Good heavens ! 
Who is it ? 
You 're my salvation , Kuzma Kuzmitch , '' faltered Mitya . 
`` He does n't live here , and he 's not here just now . 
He is a peasant , he does business in timber . 
His name is Lyagavy . 
He 's been haggling with Fyodor Pavlovitch for the last year , over your copse at Tchermashnya . 
They ca n't agree on the price , maybe you 've heard ? 
Now he 's come back again and is staying with the priest at Ilyinskoe , about twelve versts from the Volovya station . 
He wrote to me , too , about the business of the copse , asking my advice . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch means to go and see him himself . 
So if you were to be beforehand with Fyodor Pavlovitch and to make Lyagavy the offer you 've made me , he might possibly - '' `` A brilliant idea ! '' 
Mitya interrupted ecstatically . 
`` He 's the very man , it would just suit him . 
He 's haggling with him for it , being asked too much , and here he would have all the documents entitling him to the property itself . 
Ha ha ha ! '' 
And Mitya suddenly went off into his short , wooden laugh , startling Samsonov . 
`` How can I thank you , Kuzma Kuzmitch ? '' 
cried Mitya effusively . 
`` Do n't mention it , '' said Samsonov , inclining his head . 
`` But you do n't know , you 've saved me . 
Oh , it was a true presentiment brought me to you ... . 
So now to this priest ! 
`` No need of thanks . '' 
`` I 'll make haste and fly there . 
I 'm afraid I 've overtaxed your strength . 
I shall never forget it . 
It 's a Russian says that , Kuzma Kuzmitch , a R-r-russian ! '' 
`` To be sure ! '' 
Mitya seized his hand to press it , but there was a malignant gleam in the old man 's eye . 
Mitya drew back his hand , but at once blamed himself for his mistrustfulness . 
`` It 's because he 's tired , '' he thought . 
`` For her sake ! 
For her sake , Kuzma Kuzmitch ! 
You understand that it 's for her , '' he cried , his voice ringing through the room . 
He bowed , turned sharply round , and with the same long stride walked to the door without looking back . 
He was trembling with delight . 
`` Everything was on the verge of ruin and my guardian angel saved me , '' was the thought in his mind . 
And if such a business man as Samsonov -LRB- a most worthy old man , and what dignity ! -RRB- 
had suggested this course , then ... then success was assured . 
He would fly off immediately . 
`` I will be back before night , I shall be back at night and the thing is done . 
Could the old man have been laughing at me ? '' 
exclaimed Mitya , as he strode towards his lodging . 
He could , of course , imagine nothing but that the advice was practical `` from such a business man '' with an understanding of the business , with an understanding of this Lyagavy -LRB- curious surname ! -RRB- . 
Or - the old man was laughing at him . 
Alas ! 
The second alternative was the correct one . 
Long afterwards , when the catastrophe had happened , old Samsonov himself confessed , laughing , that he had made a fool of the `` captain . '' 
He was a cold , spiteful and sarcastic man , liable to violent antipathies . 
Whether it was the `` captain 's '' excited face , or the foolish conviction of the `` rake and spendthrift , '' that he , Samsonov , could be taken in by such a cock-and-bull story as his scheme , or his jealousy of Grushenka , in whose name this `` scapegrace '' had rushed in on him with such a tale to get money which worked on the old man , I ca n't tell . 
But at the instant when Mitya stood before him , feeling his legs grow weak under him , and frantically exclaiming that he was ruined , at that moment the old man looked at him with intense spite , and resolved to make a laughing-stock of him . 
When Mitya had gone , Kuzma Kuzmitch , white with rage , turned to his son and bade him see to it that that beggar be never seen again , and never admitted even into the yard , or else he 'd - He did not utter his threat . 
But even his son , who often saw him enraged , trembled with fear . 
For a whole hour afterwards , the old man was shaking with anger , and by evening he was worse , and sent for the doctor . 
Lyagavy SO he must drive at full speed , and he had not the money for horses . 
He had forty copecks , and that was all , all that was left after so many years of prosperity ! 
But he had at home an old silver watch which had long ceased to go . 
He snatched it up and carried it to a Jewish watch maker who had a shop in the market-place . 
The Jew gave him six roubles for it . 
`` And I did n't expect that cried Mitya , ecstatically . 
-LRB- He was still in a state of ecstasy . -RRB- 
He seized his six roubles and ran home . 
At home he borrowed three roubles from the people of the house , who loved him so much that they were pleased to give it him , though it was all they had . 
Mitya in his excitement told them on the spot that his fate would be decided that day , and he described , in desperate haste , the whole scheme he had put before Samsonov , the latter 's decision , his own hopes for the future , and so on . 
These people had been told many of their lodger 's secrets before , and so looked upon him as a gentleman who was not at all proud , and almost one of themselves . 
Having thus collected nine roubles Mitya sent for posting-horses to take him to the Volovya station . 
This was how the fact came to be remembered and established that `` at midday , on the day before the event , Mitya had not a farthing , and that he had sold his watch to get money and had borrowed three roubles from his landlord , all in the presence of witnesses . '' 
I note this fact , later on it will be apparent why I do so . 
Though he was radiant with the joyful anticipation that he would at last solve all his difficulties , yet , as he drew near Volovya station , he trembled at the thought of what Grushenka might be doing in his absence . 
What if she made up her mind to-day to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch ? 
This was why he had gone off without telling her and why he left orders with his landlady not to let out where he had gone , if anyone came to inquire for him . 
