`` Nothing will induce her to abandon him . '' 
`` There you see how dearly these fine young ladies love a rake and a scoundrel . 
They are poor creatures I tell you , those pale young ladies , very different from - Ah , if I had his youth and the looks I had then -LRB- for I was better-looking than he at eight and twenty -RRB- I 'd have been a conquering hero just as he is . 
He is a low cad ! 
But he sha n't have Grushenka , anyway , he sha n't ! 
I 'll crush him ! '' 
His anger had returned with the last words . 
`` You can go . 
There 's nothing for you to do here to-day , '' he snapped harshly . 
Alyosha went up to say good-bye to him , and kissed him on the shoulder . 
`` What 's that for ? '' 
The old man was a little surprised . 
`` We shall see each other again , or do you think we sha n't ? '' 
`` Not at all , I did n't mean anything . '' 
`` Nor did I , I did not mean anything , '' said the old man , looking at him . 
`` Listen , listen , '' he shouted after him , `` make haste and come again and I 'll have a fish soup for you , a fine one , not like to-day . 
Be sure to come ! 
Come to-morrow , do you hear , to-morrow ! '' 
And as soon as Alyosha had gone out of the door , he went to the cupboard again and poured out another half-glass . 
`` I wo n't have more ! '' 
he muttered , clearing his throat , and again he locked the cupboard and put the key in his pocket . 
Then he went into his bedroom , lay down on the bed , exhausted , and in one minute he was asleep . 
A Meeting with the Schoolboys `` THANK goodness he did not ask me about Grushenka , '' thought Alyosha , as he left his father 's house and turned towards Madame Hohlakov 's , `` or I might have had to tell him of my meeting with Grushenka yesterday . '' 
Alyosha felt painfully that since yesterday both combatants had renewed their energies , and that their hearts had grown hard again . 
`` Father is spiteful and angry , he 's made some plan and will stick to it . 
And what of Dmitri ? 
He too will be harder than yesterday , he too must be spiteful and angry , and he too , no doubt , has made some plan . 
Oh , I must succeed in finding him to-day , whatever happens . '' 
But Alyosha had not long to meditate . 
An incident occurred on the road , which , though apparently of little consequence , made a great impression on him . 
just after he had crossed the square and turned the corner coming out into Mihailovsky Street , which is divided by a small ditch from the High Street -LRB- our whole town is intersected by ditches -RRB- , he saw a group of schoolboys between the ages of nine and twelve , at the bridge . 
They were going home from school , some with their bags on their shoulders , others with leather satchels slung across them , some in short jackets , others in little overcoats . 
Some even had those high boots with creases round the ankles , such as little boys spoilt by rich fathers love to wear . 
The whole group was talking eagerly about something , apparently holding a council . 
Alyosha had never from his Moscow days been able to pass children without taking notice of them , and although he was particularly fond of children of three or thereabout , he liked schoolboys of ten and eleven too . 
And so , anxious as he was to-day , he wanted at once to turn aside to talk to them . 
He looked into their excited rosy faces , and noticed at once that all the boys had stones in their hands . 
Behind the ditch some thirty paces away , there was another schoolboy standing by a fence . 
He too had a satchel at his side . 
He was about ten years old , pale , delicate-looking and with sparkling black eyes . 
He kept an attentive and anxious watch on the other six , obviously his schoolfellows with whom he had just come out of school , but with whom he had evidently had a feud . 
Alyosha went up and , addressing a fair , curly-headed , rosy boy in a black jacket , observed : `` When I used to wear a satchel like yours , I always used to carry it on my left side , so as to have my right hand free , but you 've got yours on your right side . 
So it will be awkward for you to get at it . '' 
Alyosha had no art or premeditation in beginning with this practical remark . 
But it is the only way for a grown-up person to get at once into confidential relations with a child , or still more with a group of children . 
One must begin in a serious , businesslike way so as to be on a perfectly equal footing . 
Alyosha understood it by instinct . 
`` But he is left-handed , '' another , a fine healthy-looking boy of eleven , answered promptly . 
All the others stared at Alyosha . 
`` He even throws stones with his left hand , '' observed a third . 
At that instant a stone flew into the group , but only just grazed the left-handed boy , though it was well and vigorously thrown by the boy standing on the other side of the ditch . 
`` Give it him , hit him back , Smurov , '' they all shouted . 
But Smurov , the left-handed boy , needed no telling , and at once revenged himself ; he threw a stone , but it missed the boy and hit the ground . 
The boy on the other side of the ditch , the pocket of whose coat was visibly bulging with stones , flung another stone at the group ; this time it flew straight at Alyosha and hit him painfully on the shoulder . 
`` He aimed it at you , he meant it for you . 
You are Karamazov , Karamazov ! '' 
the boys shouted laughing , `` Come , all throw at him at once ! '' 
and six stones flew at the boy . 
One struck the boy on the head and he fell down , but at once leapt up and began ferociously returning their fire . 
Both sides threw stones incessantly . 
Many of the group had their pockets full too . 
`` What are you about ! 
Are n't you ashamed ? 
Six against one ! 
Why , you 'll kill him , '' cried Alyosha . 
He ran forward and met the flying stones to screen the solitary boy . 
Three or four ceased throwing for a minute . 
`` He began first ! '' 
cried a boy in a red shirt in an angry childish voice . 
`` He is a beast , he stabbed Krassotkin in class the other day with a penknife . 
It bled . 
Krassotkin would n't tell tales , but he must be thrashed . '' 
`` But what for ? 
I suppose you tease him . '' 
`` There , he sent a stone in your back again , he knows you , '' cried the children . 
`` It 's you he is throwing at now , not us . 
Come , all of you , at him again , do n't miss , Smurov ! '' 
and again a fire of stones , and a very vicious one , began . 
The boy on the other side of the ditch was hit in the chest ; he screamed , began to cry and ran away uphill towards Mihailovsky Street . 
They all shouted : `` Aha , he is funking , he is running away . 
Wisp of tow ! '' 
`` You do n't know what a beast he is , Karamazov , killing is too good for him , '' said the boy in the jacket , with flashing eyes . 
He seemed to be the eldest . 
`` What 's wrong with him ? '' 
asked Alyosha , `` Is he a tell-tale or what ? '' 
The boys looked at one another as though derisively . 
`` Are you going that way , to Mihailovsky ? '' 
the same boy went on . 
`` Catch him up ... . 
You see he 's stopped again , he is waiting and looking at you . '' 
`` He is looking at you , '' the other boys chimed in . 
`` You ask him , does he like a dishevelled wisp of tow . 
Do you hear , ask him that ! '' 
There was a general burst of laughter . 
Alyosha looked at them , and they at him . 
`` Do n't go near him , he 'll hurt you , '' cried Smurov in a warning voice . 
`` I sha n't ask him about the wisp of tow , for I expect you tease him with that question somehow . 
But I 'll find out from him why you hate him so . '' 
`` Find out then , find out , '' cried the boys laughing . 
Alyosha crossed the bridge and walked uphill by the fence , straight towards the boy . 
