`` You 'd better look out , '' the boys called after him ; `` he wo n't be afraid of you . 
He will stab you in a minute , on the sly , as he did Krassotkin . '' 
The boy waited for him without budging . 
Coming up to him , Alyosha saw facing him a child of about nine years old . 
He was an undersized weakly boy with a thin pale face , with large dark eyes that gazed at him vindictively . 
He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat , which he had monstrously outgrown . 
His bare arms stuck out beyond his sleeves . 
There was a large patch on the right knee of his trousers , and in his right boot just at the toe there was a big hole in the leather , carefully blackened with ink . 
Both the pockets of his greatcoat were weighed down with stones . 
Alyosha stopped two steps in front of him , looking inquiringly at him , The boy , seeing at once from Alyosha 's eyes that he would n't beat him , became less defiant , and addressed him first . 
`` I am alone , and there are six of them . 
I 'll beat them all , alone ! '' 
he said suddenly , with flashing eyes . 
`` I think one of the stones must have hurt you badly , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` But I hit Smurov on the head ! '' 
cried the boy . 
`` They told me that you know me , and that you threw a stone at me on purpose , '' said Alyosha . 
The boy looked darkly at him . 
`` I do n't know you . 
Do you know me ? '' 
Alyosha continued . 
`` Let me alone ! '' 
the boy cried irritably ; but he did not move , as though he were expecting something , and again there was a vindictive light in his eyes . 
`` Very well , I am going , '' said Alyosha ; `` only I do n't know you and I do n't tease you . 
They told me how they tease you , but I do n't want to tease you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` Monk in silk trousers ! '' 
cried the boy , following Alyosha with the same vindictive and defiant expression , and he threw himself into an attitude of defence , feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him ; but Alyosha turned , looked at him , and walked away . 
He had not gone three steps before the biggest stone the boy had in his pocket hit him a painful blow in the back . 
`` So you 'll hit a man from behind ! 
They tell the truth , then , when they say that you attack on the sly , '' said Alyosha , turning round again . 
This time the boy threw a stone savagely right into Alyosha 's face ; but Alyosha just had time to guard himself , and the stone struck him on the elbow . 
`` Are n't you ashamed ? 
What have I done to you ? '' 
he cried . 
The boy waited in silent defiance , certain that now Alyosha would attack him . 
Seeing that even now he would not , his rage was like a little wild beast 's ; he flew at Alyosha himself , and before Alyosha had time to move , the spiteful child had seized his left hand with both of his and bit his middle finger . 
He fixed his teeth in it and it was ten seconds before he let go . 
Alyosha cried out with pain and pulled his finger away with all his might . 
The child let go at last and retreated to his former distance . 
Alyosha 's finger had been badly bitten to the bone , close to the nail ; it began to bleed . 
Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightly round his injured hand . 
He was a full minute bandaging it . 
The boy stood waiting all the time . 
At last Alyosha raised his gentle eyes and looked at him . 
`` Very well , '' he said , `` You see how badly you 've bitten me . 
That 's enough , is n't it ? 
Now tell me , what have I done to you ? '' 
The boy stared in amazement . 
`` Though I do n't know you and it 's the first time I 've seen you , '' Alyosha went on with the same serenity , `` yet I must have done something to you - you would n't have hurt me like this for nothing . 
So what have I done ? 
How have I wronged you , tell me ? '' 
Instead of answering , the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and ran away . 
Alyosha walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street , and for a long time he saw the child running in the distance as fast as ever , not turning his head and no doubt still keeping up his tearful wail . 
He made up his mind to find him out as soon as he had time , and to solve this mystery . 
just now he had not the time . 
At the Hohlakovs ' ALYOSHA soon reached Madame Hohlakov 's house , a handsome stone house of two stories , one of the finest in our town . 
Though Madame Hohlakov spent most of her time in another province where she had an estate , or in Moscow , where she had a house of her own , yet she had a house in our town too , inherited from her forefathers . 
The estate in our district was the largest of her three estates , yet she had been very little in our province before this time . 
She ran out to Alyosha in the hall . 
`` Did you get my letter about the new miracle ? '' 
She spoke rapidly and nervously . 
`` Yes '' `` Did you show it to everyone ? 
He restored the son to his mother ! '' 
`` He is dying to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` I have heard , I know , oh , how I long to talk to you , to you or someone , about all this . 
No , to you , to you ! 
And how sorry I am I ca n't see him ! 
The whole town is in excitement , they are all suspense . 
But now - do you know Katerina Ivanovna is here now ? '' 
`` Ah , that 's lucky , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` Then I shall see her here . 
She told me yesterday to be sure to come and see her to-day . '' 
`` I know , I know all . 
I 've heard exactly what happened yesterday - and the atrocious behaviour of that - creature . 
C'est tragique , and if I 'd been in her place I do n't know what I should have done . 
And your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , what do you think of him ? 
- my goodness ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I am forgetting , only fancy ; your brother is in there with her , not that dreadful brother who was so shocking yesterday , but the other , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he is sitting with her talking ; they are having a serious conversation . 
If you could only imagine what 's passing between them now - it 's awful , I tell you it 's lacerating , it 's like some incredible tale of horror . 
They are ruining their lives for no reason anyone can see . 
They both recognise it and revel in it . 
I 've been watching for you ! 
I 've been thirsting for you ! 
It 's too much for me . 
that 's the worst of it . 
I 'll tell you all about it presently , but now I must speak of something else , the most important thing - I had quite forgotten what 's most important . 
Tell me , why has Lise been in hysterics ? 
As soon as she heard you were here , she began to be hysterical ! '' 
`` Maman , it 's you who are hysterical now , not I , '' Lise 's voice carolled through a tiny crack of the door at the side . 
Her voice sounded as though she wanted to laugh , but was doing her utmost to control it . 
Alyosha at once noticed the crack , and no doubt Lise was peeping through it , but that he could not see . 
`` And no wonder , Lise , no wonder ... your caprices will make me hysterical too . 
But she is so ill , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she has been so ill all night , feverish and moaning ! 
I could hardly wait for the morning and for Herzenstube to come . 
He says that he can make nothing of it , that we must wait . 
Herzenstube always comes and says that he can make nothing of it . 
As soon as you approached the house , she screamed , fell into hysterics , and insisted on being wheeled back into this room here . '' 
`` Mamma , I did n't know he had come . 
It was n't on his account I wanted to be wheeled into this room . '' 
