`` Terrible are your words , most holy and blessed Father , '' the monk shook his head . 
But there was a doubtful look in his frightened little eyes . 
`` Do you see this tree ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , after a pause . 
`` I do , blessed Father . '' 
`` You think it 's an elm , but for me it has another shape . '' 
`` What sort of shape ? '' 
inquired the monk , after a pause of vain expectation . 
`` It happens at night . 
You see those two branches ? 
In the night it is Christ holding out His arms to me and seeking me with those arms , I see it clearly and tremble . 
It 's terrible , terrible ! '' 
`` What is there terrible if it 's Christ Himself ? '' 
`` Why , He 'll snatch me up and carry me away . '' 
`` Alive ? '' 
`` In the spirit and glory of Elijah , have n't you heard ? 
He will take me in His arms and bear me away . '' 
Though the monk returned to the cell he was sharing with one of the brothers , in considerable perplexity of mind , he still cherished at heart a greater reverence for Father Ferapont than for Father Zossima . 
He was strongly in favour of fasting , and it was not strange that one who kept so rigid a fast as Father Ferapont should `` see marvels . '' 
His words seemed certainly queer , but God only could tell what was hidden in those words , and were not worse words and acts commonly seen in those who have sacrificed their intellects for the glory of God ? 
The pinching of the devil 's tail he was ready and eager to believe , and not only in the figurative sense . 
Besides he had , before visiting the monastery , a strong prejudice against the institution of `` elders , '' which he only knew of by hearsay and believed to be a pernicious innovation . 
Before he had been long at the monastery , he had detected the secret murmurings of some shallow brothers who disliked the institution . 
He was , besides , a meddlesome , inquisitive man , who poked his nose into everything . 
This was why the news of the fresh `` miracle '' performed by Father Zossima reduced him to extreme perplexity . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards how their inquisitive guest from Obdorsk had been continually flitting to and fro from one group to another , listening and asking questions among the monks that were crowding within and without the elder 's cell . 
But he did not pay much attention to him at the time , and only recollected it afterwards . 
He had no thought to spare for it indeed , for when Father Zossima , feeling tired again , had gone back to bed , he thought of Alyosha as he was closing his eyes , and sent for him . 
Alyosha ran at once . 
There was no one else in the cell but Father Paissy , Father Iosif , and the novice Porfiry . 
The elder , opening his weary eyes and looking intently at Alyosha , asked him suddenly : `` Are your people expecting you , my son ? '' 
Alyosha hesitated . 
`` Have n't they need of you ? 
Did n't you promise someone yesterday to see them to-day ? '' 
`` I did promise - to my father - my brothers - others too . '' 
`` You see , you must go . 
Do n't grieve . 
Be sure I shall not die without your being by to hear my last word . 
To you I will say that word , my son , it will be my last gift to you . 
To you , dear son , because you love me . 
But now go to keep your promise . '' 
Alyosha immediately obeyed , though it was hard to go . 
But the promise that he should hear his last word on earth , that it should be the last gift to him , Alyosha , sent a thrill of rapture through his soul . 
He made haste that he might finish what he had to do in the town and return quickly . 
Father Paissy , too , uttered some words of exhortation which moved and surprised him greatly . 
He spoke as they left the cell together . 
`` Remember , young man , unceasingly , '' Father Paissy began , without preface , `` that the science of this world , which has become a great power , has , especially in the last century , analysed everything divine handed down to us in the holy books . 
After this cruel analysis the learned of this world have nothing left of all that was sacred of old . 
But they have only analysed the parts and overlooked the whole , and indeed their blindness is marvellous . 
Yet the whole still stands steadfast before their eyes , and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it . 
Has it not lasted nineteen centuries , is it not still a living , a moving power in the individual soul and in the masses of people ? 
It is still as strong and living even in the souls of atheists , who have destroyed everything ! 
For even those who have renounced Christianity and attack it , in their inmost being still follow the Christian ideal , for hitherto neither their subtlety nor the ardour of their hearts has been able to create a higher ideal of man and of virtue than the ideal given by Christ of old . 
When it has been attempted , the result has been only grotesque . 
Remember this especially , young man , since you are being sent into the world by your departing elder . 
Maybe , remembering this great day , you will not forget my words , uttered from the heart for your guidance , seeing you are young , and the temptations of the world are great and beyond your strength to endure . 
Well , now go , my orphan . '' 
With these words Father Paissy blessed him . 
As Alyosha left the monastery and thought them over , he suddenly realised that he had met a new and unexpected friend , a warmly loving teacher , in this austere monk who had hitherto treated him sternly . 
It was as though Father Zossima had bequeathed him to him at his death , and `` perhaps that 's just what had passed between them , '' Alyosha thought suddenly . 
The philosophic reflections he had just heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth of Father Paissy 's heart . 
He was in haste to arm the boy 's mind for conflict with temptation and to guard the young soul left in his charge with the strongest defence he could imagine . 
At His Father 's FIRST of all , Alyosha went to his father . 
On the way he remembered that his father had insisted the day before that he should come without his brother Ivan seeing him . 
`` Why so ? '' 
Alyosha wondered suddenly . 
`` Even if my father has something to say to me alone , why should I go in unseen ? 
Most likely in his excitement yesterday he meant to say something different , '' he decided . 
Yet he was very glad when Marfa Ignatyevna , who opened the garden gate to him -LRB- Grigory , it appeared , was ill in bed in the lodge -RRB- , told him in answer to his question that Ivan Fyodorovitch had gone out two hours ago . 
`` And my father ? '' 
`` He is up , taking his coffee , '' Marfa answered somewhat drily . 
Alyosha went in . 
The old man was sitting alone at the table wearing slippers and a little old overcoat . 
He was amusing himself by looking through some accounts , rather inattentively however . 
He was quite alone in the house , for Smerdyakov too had gone out marketing . 
Though he had got up early and was trying to put a bold face on it , he looked tired and weak . 
His forehead , upon which huge purple bruises had come out during the night , was bandaged with a red handkerchief ; his nose too was swollen terribly in the night , and some smaller bruises covered it in patches , giving his whole face a peculiarly spiteful and irritable look . 
The old man was aware of this , and turned a hostile glance on Alyosha as he came in . 
`` The coffee is cold , '' he cried harshly ; `` I wo n't offer you any . 
I 've ordered nothing but a Lenten fish soup to-day , and I do n't invite anyone to share it . 
Why have you come ? '' 
`` To find out how you are , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Yes . 
Besides , I told you to come yesterday . 
It 's all of no consequence . 
You need not have troubled . 
But I knew you 'd come poking in directly . '' 
He said this with almost hostile feeling . 
At the same time he got up and looked anxiously in the looking-glass -LRB- perhaps for the fortieth time that morning -RRB- at his nose . 
He began , too , binding his red handkerchief more becomingly on his forehead . 
`` Red 's better . 
It 's just like the hospital in a white one , '' he observed sententiously . 
`` Well , how are things over there ? 
How is your elder ? '' 
`` He is very bad ; he may die to-day , '' answered Alyosha . 
But his father had not listened , and had forgotten his own question at once . 
`` Ivan 's gone out , '' he said suddenly . 
`` He is doing his utmost to carry off Mitya 's betrothed . 
That 's what he is staying here for , '' he added maliciously , and , twisting his mouth , looked at Alyosha . 
`` Surely he did not tell you so ? '' 
