The kind , silent man used often on our wanderings to spend the farthings given us on sweets and cakes for the children . 
He could not pass by a child without emotion . 
That 's the nature of the man . 
At some thoughts one stands perplexed , especially at the sight of men 's sin , and wonders whether one should use force or humble love . 
Always decide to use humble love . 
If you resolve on that once for all , you may subdue the whole world . 
Loving humility is marvellously strong , the strongest of all things , and there is nothing else like it . 
Every day and every hour , every minute , walk round yourself and watch yourself , and see that your image is a seemly one . 
You pass by a little child , you pass by , spiteful , with ugly words , with wrathful heart ; you may not have noticed the child , but he has seen you , and your image , unseemly and ignoble , may remain in his defenceless heart . 
You do n't know it , but you may have sown an evil seed in him and it may grow , and all because you were not careful before the child , because you did not foster in yourself a careful , actively benevolent love . 
Brothers , love is a teacher ; but one must know how to acquire it , for it is hard to acquire , it is dearly bought , it is won slowly by long labour . 
For we must love not only occasionally , for a moment , but for ever . 
Everyone can love occasionally , even the wicked can . 
My brother asked the birds to forgive him ; that sounds senseless , but it is right ; for all is like an ocean , all is flowing and blending ; a touch in one place sets up movement at the other end of the earth . 
It may be senseless to beg forgiveness of the birds , but birds would be happier at your side - a little happier , anyway - and children and all animals , if you were nobler than you are now . 
It 's all like an ocean , I tell you . 
Then you would pray to the birds too , consumed by an all-embracing love , in a sort of transport , and pray that they too will forgive you your sin . 
Treasure this ecstasy , however senseless it may seem to men . 
My friends , pray to God for gladness . 
Be glad as children , as the birds of heaven . 
And let not the sin of men confound you in your doings . 
Fear not that it will wear away your work and hinder its being accomplished . 
Do not say , `` Sin is mighty , wickedness is mighty , evil environment is mighty , and we are lonely and helpless , and evil environment is wearing us away and hindering our good work from being done . '' 
Fly from that dejection , children ! 
There is only one means of salvation , then take yourself and make yourself responsible for all men 's sins , that is the truth , you know , friends , for as soon as you sincerely make yourself responsible for everything and for all men , you will see at once that it is really so , and that you are to blame for everyone and for all things . 
But throwing your own indolence and impotence on others you will end by sharing the pride of Satan and murmuring against God . 
Of the pride of Satan what I think is this : it is hard for us on earth to comprehend it , and therefore it is so easy to fall into error and to share it , even imagining that we are doing something grand and fine . 
Indeed , many of the strongest feelings and movements of our nature we can not comprehend on earth . 
Let not that be a stumbling-block , and think not that it may serve as a justification to you for anything . 
For the Eternal judge asks of you what you can comprehend and not what you can not . 
You will know that yourself hereafter , for you will behold all things truly then and will not dispute them . 
On earth , indeed , we are , as it were , astray , and if it were not for the precious image of Christ before us , we should be undone and altogether lost , as was the human race before the flood . 
Much on earth is hidden from us , but to make up for that we have been given a precious mystic sense of our living bond with the other world , with the higher heavenly world , and the roots of our thoughts and feelings are not here but in other worlds . 
That is why the philosophers say that we can not apprehend the reality of things on earth . 
God took seeds from different worlds and sowed them on this earth , and His garden grew up and everything came up that could come up , but what grows lives and is alive only through the feeling of its contact with other mysterious worlds . 
If that feeling grows weak or is destroyed in you , the heavenly growth will die away in you . 
Then you will be indifferent to life and even grow to hate it . 
That 's what I think . 
-LRB- h -RRB- Can a Man judge his Fellow Creatures ? 
Faith to the End . 
Remember particularly that you can not be a judge of anyone . 
For no one can judge a criminal until he recognises that he is just such a criminal as the man standing before him , and that he perhaps is more than all men to blame for that crime . 
When he understands that , he will be able to be a judge . 
Though that sounds absurd , it is true . 
If I had been righteous myself , perhaps there would have been no criminal standing before me . 
If you can take upon yourself the crime of the criminal your heart is judging , take it at once , suffer for him yourself , and let him go without reproach . 
And even if the law itself makes you his judge , act in the same spirit so far as possible , for he will go away and condemn himself more bitterly than you have done . 
If , after your kiss , he goes away untouched , mocking at you , do not let that be a stumbling-block to you . 
It shows his time has not yet come , but it will come in due course . 
And if it come not , no Matter ; if not he , then another in his place will understand and suffer , and judge and condemn himself , and the truth will be fulfilled . 
Believe that , believe it without doubt ; for in that lies all the hope and faith of the saints . 
Work without ceasing . 
If you remember in the night as you go to sleep , `` I have not done what I ought to have done , '' rise up at once and do it . 
If the people around you are spiteful and callous and will not hear you , fall down before them and beg their forgiveness ; for in truth you are to blame for their not wanting to hear you . 
And if you can not speak to them in their bitterness , serve them in silence and in humility , never losing hope . 
If all men abandon you and even drive you away by force , then when you are left alone fall on the earth and kiss it , water it with your tears and it will bring forth fruit even though no one has seen or heard you in your solitude . 
Believe to the end , even if all men went astray and you were left the only one faithful ; bring your offering even then and praise God in your loneliness . 
And if two of you are gathered together - then there is a whole world , a world of living love . 
Embrace each other tenderly and praise God , for if only in you two His truth has been fulfilled . 
If you sin yourself and grieve even unto death for your sins or for your sudden sin , then rejoice for others , rejoice for the righteous man , rejoice that if you have sinned , he is righteous and has not sinned . 
If the evil-doing of men moves you to indignation and overwhelming distress , even to a desire for vengeance on the evil-doers , shun above all things that feeling . 
Go at once and seek suffering for yourself , as though you were yourself guilty of that wrong . 
Accept that suffering and bear it and your heart will find comfort , and you will understand that you too are guilty , for you might have been a light to the evil-doers , even as the one man sinless , and you were not a light to them . 
If you had been a light , you would have lightened the path for others too , and the evil-doer might perhaps have been saved by your light from his sin . 
And even though your light was shining , yet you see men were not saved by it , hold firm and doubt not the power of the heavenly light . 
Believe that if they were not saved , they will be saved hereafter . 
And if they are not saved hereafter , then their sons will be saved , for your light will not die even when you are dead . 
The righteous man departs , but his light remains . 
Men are always saved after the death of the deliverer . 
Men reject their prophets and slay them , but they love their martyrs and honour those whom they have slain . 
You are working for the whole , are acting for the future . 
Seek no reward , for great is your reward on this earth : the spiritual joy which is only vouchsafed to the righteous man . 
Fear not the great nor the mighty , but be wise and ever serene . 
Know the measure , know the times , study that . 
When you are left alone , pray . 
Love to throw yourself on the earth and kiss it . 
Kiss the earth and love it with an unceasing , consuming love . 
Love all men , love everything . 
Seek that rapture and ecstasy . 
Water the earth with the tears of your joy and love those tears . 
Do n't be ashamed of that ecstasy , prize it , for it is a gift of God and a great one ; it is not given to many but only to the elect . 
-LRB- i -RRB- Of Hell and Hell Fire , a Mystic Reflection . 
Fathers and teachers , I ponder , `` What is hell ? '' 
I maintain that it is the suffering of being unable to love . 
Once in infinite existence , immeasurable in time and space , a spiritual creature was given on his coming to earth the power of saying , `` I am and I love . '' 
Once , only once , there was given him a moment of active lifting love , and for that was earthly life given him , and with it times and seasons . 
And that happy creature rejected the priceless gift , prized it and loved it not , scorned it and remained callous . 
Such a one , having left the earth , sees Abraham 's bosom and talks with Abraham as we are told in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus , and beholds heaven and can go up to the Lord . 
But that is just his torment , to rise up to the Lord without ever having loved , to be brought close to those who have loved when he has despised their love . 
For he sees clearly and says to himself , `` Now I have understanding , and though I now thirst to love , there will be nothing great , no sacrifice in my love , for my earthly life is over , and Abraham will not come even with a drop of living water -LRB- that is the gift of earthly active life -RRB- to cool the fiery thirst of spiritual love which burns in me now , though I despised it on earth ; there is no more life for me and will be no more time ! 
Even though I would gladly give my life for others , it can never be , for that life is passed which can be sacrificed for love , and now there is a gulf fixed between that life and this existence . '' 
They talk of hell fire in the material sense . 
I do n't go into that mystery and I shun it . 
But I think if there were fire in material sense , they would be glad of it , for I imagine that in material agony , their still greater spiritual agony would be forgotten for a moment . 
Moreover , that spiritual agony can not be taken from them , for that suffering is not external but within them . 
And if it could be taken from them , I think it would be bitterer still for the unhappy creatures . 
For even if the righteous in Paradise forgave them , beholding their torments , and called them up to heaven in their infinite love , they would only multiply their torments , for they would arouse in them still more keenly a flaming thirst for responsive , active and grateful love which is now impossible . 
In the timidity of my heart I imagine , however , that the very recognition of this impossibility would serve at last to console them . 
For accepting the love of the righteous together with the impossibility of repaying it , by this submissiveness and the effect of this humility , they will attain at last , as it were , to a certain semblance of that active love which they scorned in life , to something like its outward expression ... I am sorry , friends and brothers , that I can not express this clearly . 
But woe to those who have slain themselves on earth , woe to the suicides ! 
