He was suddenly seized with the desire to see the monastery and the holy man . 
As his lawsuit with the monastery still dragged on , he made it the pretext for seeing the Superior , in order to attempt to settle it amicably . 
A visitor coming with such laudable intentions might be received with more attention and consideration than if he came from simple curiosity . 
Influences from within the monastery were brought to bear on the elder , who of late had scarcely left his cell , and had been forced by illness to deny even his ordinary visitors . 
In the end he consented to see them , and the day was fixed . 
`` Who has made me a judge over them ? '' 
was all he said , smilingly , to Alyosha . 
Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit . 
Of all the wrangling , quarrelsome party , Dmitri was the only one who could regard the interview seriously . 
All the others would come from frivolous motives , perhaps insulting to the elder . 
Alyosha was well aware of that . 
Ivan and Miusov would come from curiosity , perhaps of the coarsest kind , while his father might be contemplating some piece of buffoonery . 
Though he said nothing , Alyosha thoroughly understood his father . 
The boy , I repeat , was far from being so simple as everyone thought him . 
He awaited the day with a heavy heart . 
No doubt he was always pondering in his mind how the family discord could be ended . 
But his chief anxiety concerned the elder . 
He trembled for him , for his glory , and dreaded any affront to him , especially the refined , courteous irony of Miusov and the supercilious half-utterances of the highly educated Ivan . 
He even wanted to venture on warning the elder , telling him something about them , but , on second thoughts , said nothing . 
He only sent word the day before , through a friend , to his brother Dmitri , that he loved him and expected him to keep his promise . 
Dmitri wondered , for he could not remember what he had promised , but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to let himself be provoked `` by vileness , '' but that , although he had a deep respect for the elder and for his brother Ivan , he was convinced that the meeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce . 
`` Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking in respect to the sainted man whom you reverence so highly , '' he wrote in conclusion . 
Alyosha was not greatly cheered by the letter . 
An Unfortunate Gathering They Arrive at the Monastery IT was a warm , bright day the end of August . 
The interview with the elder had been fixed for half-past eleven , immediately after late mass . 
Our visitors did not take part in the service , but arrived just as it was over . 
First an elegant open carriage , drawn by two valuable horses , drove up with Miusov and a distant relative of his , a young man of twenty , called Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov . 
This young man was preparing to enter the university . 
Miusov with whom he was staying for the time , was trying to persuade him to go abroad to the university of Zurich or Jena . 
The young man was still undecided . 
He was thoughtful and absent-minded . 
He was nice-looking , strongly built , and rather tall . 
There was a strange fixity in his gaze at times . 
Like all very absent-minded people he would sometimes stare at a person without seeing him . 
He was silent and rather awkward , but sometimes , when he was alone with anyone , he became talkative and effusive , and would laugh at anything or nothing . 
But his animation vanished as quickly as it appeared . 
He was always well and even elaborately dressed ; he had already some independent fortune and expectations of much more . 
He was a friend of Alyosha 's . 
In an ancient , jolting , but roomy , hired carriage , with a pair of old pinkish-grey horses , a long way behind Miusov 's carriage , came Fyodor Pavlovitch , with his son Ivan . 
Dmitri was late , though he had been informed of the time the evening before . 
The visitors left their carriage at the hotel , outside the precincts , and went to the gates of the monastery on foot . 
Except Fyodor Pavlovitch , more of the party had ever seen the monastery , and Miusov had probably not even been to church for thirty years . 
He looked about him with curiosity , together with assumed ease . 
But , except the church and the domestic buildings , though these too were ordinary enough , he found nothing of interest in the interior of the monastery . 
The last of the worshippers were coming out of the church bareheaded and crossing themselves . 
Among the humbler people were a few of higher rank - two or three ladies and a very old general . 
They were all staying at the hotel . 
Our visitors were at once surrounded by beggars , but none of them gave them anything , except young Kalganov , who took a ten-copeck piece out of his purse , and , nervous and embarrassed - God knows why ! 
- hurriedly gave it to an old woman , saying : `` Divide it equally . '' 
None of his companions made any remark upon it , so that he had no reason to be embarrassed ; but , perceiving this , he was even more overcome . 
It was strange that their arrival did not seem expected , and that they were not received with special honour , though one of them had recently made a donation of a thousand roubles , while another was a very wealthy and highly cultured landowner , upon whom all in the monastery were in a sense dependent , as a decision of the lawsuit might at any moment put their fishing rights in his hands . 
Yet no official personage met them . 
Miusov looked absent-mindedly at the tombstones round the church , and was on the point of saying that the dead buried here must have paid a pretty penny for the right of lying in this `` holy place , '' but refrained . 
His liberal irony was rapidly changing almost into anger . 
`` Who the devil is there to ask in this imbecile place ? 
We must find out , for time is passing , '' he observed suddenly , as though speaking to himself . 
All at once there came up a bald-headed , elderly man with ingratiating little eyes , wearing a full , summer overcoat . 
Lifting his hat , he introduced himself with a honeyed lisp as Maximov , a landowner of Tula . 
He at once entered into our visitors ' difficulty . 
`` Father Zossima lives in the hermitage , apart , four hundred paces from the monastery , the other side of the copse . '' 
`` I know it 's the other side of the copse , '' observed Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` but we do n't remember the way . 
It is a long time since we 've been here . '' 
`` This way , by this gate , and straight across the copse ... the copse . 
Come with me , wo n't you ? 
I 'll show you . 
I have to go ... . 
I am going myself . 
This way , this way . '' 
They came out of the gate and turned towards the copse . 
Maximov , a man of sixty , ran rather than walked , turning sideways to stare at them all , with an incredible degree of nervous curiosity . 
His eyes looked starting out of his head . 
`` You see , we have come to the elder upon business of our own , '' observed Miusov severely . 
`` That personage has granted us an audience , so to speak , and so , though we thank you for showing us the way , we can not ask you to accompany us . '' 
`` I 've been there . 
I 've been already ; un chevalier parfait , '' and Maximov snapped his fingers in the air . 
`` Who is a chevalier ? '' 
asked Miusov . 
`` The elder , the splendid elder , the elder ! 
The honour and glory of the monastery , Zossima . 
Such an elder ! '' 
But his incoherent talk was cut short by a very pale , wan-looking monk of medium height wearing a monk 's cap , who overtook them . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch and Miusov stopped . 
The monk , with an extremely courteous , profound bow , announced : `` The Father Superior invites all of you gentlemen to dine with him after your visit to the hermitage . 
At one o'clock , not later . 
And you also , '' he added , addressing Maximov . 
`` That I certainly will , without fail , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , hugely delighted at the invitation . 
`` And , believe me , we 've all given our word to behave properly here ... . 
And you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , will you go , too ? '' 
`` Yes , of course . 
What have I come for but to study all the customs here ? 
The only obstacle to me is your company ... '' `` Yes , Dmitri Fyodorovitch is non-existent as yet . '' 
`` It would be a capital thing if he did n't turn up . 
Do you suppose I like all this business , and in your company , too ? 
So we will come to dinner . 
Thank the Father Superior , '' he said to the monk . 
`` No , it is my duty now to conduct you to the elder , '' answered the monk . 
`` If so I 'll go straight to the Father Superior - to the Father Superior , '' babbled Maximov . 
`` The Father Superior is engaged just now . 
But as you please - '' the monk hesitated . 
`` Impertinent old man ! '' 
