Both Together ALYOSHA left his father 's house feeling even more exhausted and dejected in spirit than when he had entered it . 
His mind too seemed shattered and unhinged , while he felt that he was afraid to put together the disjointed fragments and form a general idea from all the agonising and conflicting experiences of the day . 
He felt something bordering upon despair , which he had never known till then . 
Towering like a mountain above all the rest stood the fatal , insoluble question : How would things end between his father and his brother Dmitri with this terrible woman ? 
Now he had himself been a witness of it , he had been present and seen them face to face . 
Yet only his brother Dmitri could be made unhappy , terribly , completely unhappy : there was trouble awaiting him . 
It appeared too that there were other people concerned , far more so than Alyosha could have supposed before . 
There was something positively mysterious in it , too . 
Ivan had made a step towards him , which was what Alyosha had been long desiring . 
Yet now he felt for some reason that he was frightened at it . 
And these women ? 
Strange to say , that morning he had set out for Katerina Ivanovna 's in the greatest embarrassment ; now he felt nothing of the kind . 
On the contrary , he was hastening there as though expecting to find guidance from her . 
Yet to give her this message was obviously more difficult than before . 
The matter of the three thousand was decided irrevocably , and Dmitri , feeling himself dishonoured and losing his last hope , might sink to any depth . 
He had , moreover , told him to describe to Katerina Ivanovna the scene which had just taken place with his father . 
It was by now seven o'clock , and it was getting dark as Alyosha entered the very spacious and convenient house in the High Street occupied by Katerina Ivanovna . 
Alyosha knew that she lived with two aunts . 
One of them , a woman of little education , was that aunt of her half-sister Agafya Ivanovna who had looked after her in her father 's house when she came from boarding-school . 
The other aunt was a Moscow lady of style and consequence , though in straitened circumstances . 
It was said that they both gave way in everything to Katerina Ivanovna , and that she only kept them with her as chaperons . 
Katerina Ivanovna herself gave way to no one but her benefactress , the general 's widow , who had been kept by illness in Moscow , and to whom she was obliged to write twice a week a full account of all her doings . 
When Alyosha entered the hall and asked the maid who opened the door to him to take his name up , it was evident that they were already aware of his arrival . 
Possibly he had been noticed from the window . 
At least , Alyosha heard a noise , caught the sound of flying footsteps and rustling skirts . 
Two or three women , perhaps , had run out of the room . 
Alyosha thought it strange that his arrival should cause such excitement . 
He was conducted , however , to the drawing-room at once . 
It was a large room , elegantly and amply furnished , not at all in provincial style . 
There were many sofas , lounges , settees , big and little tables . 
There were pictures on the walls , vases and lamps on the tables , masses of flowers , and even an aquarium in the window . 
It was twilight and rather dark . 
Alyosha made out a silk mantle thrown down on the sofa , where people had evidently just been sitting ; and on a table in front of the sofa were two unfinished cups of chocolate , cakes , a glass saucer with blue raisins , and another with sweetmeats . 
Alyosha saw that he had interrupted visitors , and frowned . 
But at that instant the portiere was raised , and with rapid , hurrying footsteps Katerina Ivanovna came in , holding out both hands to Alyosha with a radiant smile of delight . 
At the same instant a servant brought in two lighted candles and set them on the table . 
`` Thank God ! 
At last you have come too ! 
I 've been simply praying for you all day ! 
Sit down . '' 
Alyosha had been struck by Katerina Ivanovna 's beauty when , three weeks before , Dmitri had first brought him , at Katerina Ivanovna 's special request , to be introduced to her . 
There had been no conversation between them at that interview , however . 
Supposing Alyosha to be very shy , Katerina Ivanovna had talked all the time to Dmitri to spare him . 
Alyosha had been silent , but he had seen a great deal very clearly . 
He was struck by the imperiousness , proud ease , and self-confidence of the haughty girl . 
And all that was certain , Alyosha felt that he was not exaggerating it . 
He thought her great glowing black eyes were very fine , especially with her pale , even rather sallow , longish face . 
But in those eyes and in the lines of her exquisite lips there was something with which his brother might well be passionately in love , but which perhaps could not be loved for long . 
He expressed this thought almost plainly to Dmitri when , after the visit , his brother besought and insisted that he should not conceal his impressions on seeing his betrothed . 
`` You 'll be happy with her , but perhaps not tranquilly happy . '' 
`` Quite so , brother . 
Such people remain always the same . 
They do n't yield to fate . 
So you think I sha n't love her for ever . '' 
`` No ; perhaps you will love her for ever . 
But perhaps you wo n't always be happy with her . '' 
Alyosha had given his opinion at the time , blushing , and angry with himself for having yielded to his brother 's entreaties and put such `` foolish '' ideas into words . 
For his opinion had struck him as awfully foolish immediately after he had uttered it . 
He felt ashamed too of having given so confident an opinion about a woman . 
It was with the more amazement that he felt now , at the first glance at Katerina Ivanovna as she ran in to him , that he had perhaps been utterly mistaken . 
This time her face was beaming with spontaneous good-natured kindliness , and direct warm-hearted sincerity . 
The `` pride and haughtiness , '' which had struck Alyosha so much before , was only betrayed now in a frank , generous energy and a sort of bright , strong faith in herself . 
Alyosha realised at the first glance , at the first word , that all the tragedy of her position in relation to the man she loved so dearly was no secret to her ; that she perhaps already knew everything , positively everything . 
And yet , in spite of that , there was such brightness in her face , such faith in the future . 
Alyosha felt at once that he had gravely wronged her in his thoughts . 
He was conquered and captivated immediately . 
Besides all this , he noticed at her first words that she was in great excitement , an excitement perhaps quite exceptional and almost approaching ecstasy . 
`` I was so eager to see you , because I can learn from you the whole truth - from you and no one else . '' 
`` I have come , '' muttered Alyosha confusedly , `` I - he sent me . '' 
`` Ah , he sent you I foresaw that . 
Now I know everything - everything ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , her eyes flashing . 
`` Wait a moment , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I 'll tell you why I 've been so longing to see you . 
You see , I know perhaps far more than you do yourself , and there 's no need for you to tell me anything . 
I 'll tell you what I want from you . 
I want to know your own last impression of him . 
I want you to tell me most directly , plainly , coarsely even -LRB- oh , as coarsely as you like ! -RRB- 
, what you thought of him just now and of his position after your meeting with him to-day . 
That will perhaps be better than if I had a personal explanation with him , as he does not want to come to me . 
Do you understand what I want from you ? 
Now , tell me simply , tell me every word of the message he sent you with -LRB- I knew he would send you -RRB- . '' 
`` He told me to give you his compliments and to say that he would never come again but to give you his compliments . '' 
`` His compliments ? 
Was that what he said his own expression ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Accidentally perhaps he made a mistake in the word , perhaps he did not use the right word ? '' 
`` No ; he told me precisely to repeat that word . 
He begged me two or three times not to forget to say so . '' 
Katerina Ivanovna flushed hotly . 
`` Help me now , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
Now I really need your help . 
I 'll tell you what I think , and you must simply say whether it 's right or not . 
Listen ! 
If he had sent me his compliments in passing , without insisting on your repeating the words , without emphasising them , that would be the end of everything ! 
But if he particularly insisted on those words , if he particularly told you not to forget to repeat them to me , then perhaps he was in excitement , beside himself . 
He had made his decision and was frightened at it . 
He was n't walking away from me with a resolute step , but leaping headlong . 
The emphasis on that phrase may have been simply bravado . '' 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
cried Alyosha warmly . 
