I have naturally a kind and merry heart . ' 
I also write vaudevilles of all sorts . ' 
You seem to take me for Hlestakov grown old , but my fate is a far more serious one . 
Before time was , by some decree which I could never make out , I was predestined ` to deny ' and yet I am genuinely good-hearted and not at all inclined to negation . 
` No , you must go and deny , without denial there 's no criticism and what would a journal be without a column of criticism ? ' 
Without criticism it would be nothing but one ` hosannah . ' 
But nothing but hosannah is not enough for life , the hosannah must be tried in the crucible of doubt and so on , in the same style . 
But I do n't meddle in that , I did n't create it , I am not answerable for it . 
Well , they 've chosen their scapegoat , they 've made me write the column of criticism and so life was made possible . 
We understand that comedy ; I , for instance , simply ask for annihilation . 
No , live , I am told , for there 'd be nothing without you . 
If everything in the universe were sensible , nothing would happen . 
There would be no events without you , and there must be events . 
So against the grain I serve to produce events and do what 's irrational because I am commanded to . 
For all their indisputable intelligence , men take this farce as something serious , and that is their tragedy . 
They suffer , of course ... but then they live , they live a real life , not a fantastic one , for suffering is life . 
Without suffering what would be the pleasure of it ? 
It would be transformed into an endless church service ; it would be holy , but tedious . 
But what about me ? 
I suffer , but still , I do n't live . 
I am x in an indeterminate equation . 
I am a sort of phantom in life who has lost all beginning and end , and who has even forgotten his own name . 
You are laughing - no , you are not laughing , you are angry again . 
You are for ever angry , all you care about is intelligence , but I repeat again that I would give away all this superstellar life , all the ranks and honours , simply to be transformed into the soul of a merchant 's wife weighing eighteen stone and set candles at God 's shrine . '' 
`` Then even you do n't believe in God ? '' 
said Ivan , with a smile of hatred . 
`` What can I say ? 
- that is , if you are in earnest - '' `` Is there a God or not ? '' 
Ivan cried with the same savage intensity . 
`` Ah , then you are in earnest ! 
My dear fellow , upon my word I do n't know . 
There ! 
I 've said it now ! '' 
`` You do n't know , but you see God ? 
No , you are not someone apart , you are myself , you are I and nothing more ! 
You are rubbish , you are my fancy ! '' 
`` Well , if you like , I have the same philosophy as you , that would be true . 
Je pense , donc je suis , * I know that for a fact ; all the rest , all these worlds , God and even Satan - all that is not proved , to my mind . 
Does all that exist of itself , or is it only an emanation of myself , a logical development of my ego which alone has existed for ever : but I make haste to stop , for I believe you will be jumping up to beat me directly . '' 
* I think , therefore I am . 
`` You 'd better tell me some anecdote ! '' 
said Ivan miserably . 
`` There is an anecdote precisely on our subject , or rather a legend , not an anecdote . 
You reproach me with unbelief ; you see , you say , yet you do n't believe . 
But , my dear fellow , I am not the only one like that . 
We are all in a muddle over there now and all through your science . 
Once there used to be atoms , five senses , four elements , and then everything hung together somehow . 
There were atoms in the ancient world even , but since we 've learned that you 've discovered the chemical molecule and protoplasm and the devil knows what , we had to lower our crest . 
There 's a regular muddle , and , above all , superstition , scandal ; there 's as much scandal among us as among you , you know ; a little more in fact , and spying , indeed , for we have our secret police department where private information is received . 
Well , this wild legend belongs to our middle ages - not yours , but ours - and no one believes it even among us , except the old ladies of eighteen stone , not your old ladies I mean , but ours . 
We 've everything you have , I am revealing one of our secrets out of friendship for you ; though it 's forbidden . 
This legend is about Paradise . 
There was , they say , here on earth a thinker and philosopher . 
He rejected everything , ` laws , conscience , faith , ' and , above all , the future life . 
He died ; he expected to go straight to darkness and death and he found a future life before him . 
He was astounded and indignant . 
` This is against my principles ! ' 
he said . 
And he was punished for that ... that is , you must excuse me , I am just repeating what I heard myself , it 's only a legend ... he was sentenced to walk a quadrillion kilometres in the dark -LRB- we 've adopted the metric system , you know -RRB- : and when he has finished that quadrillion , the gates of heaven would be opened to him and he 'll be forgiven - '' `` And what tortures have you in the other world besides the quadrillion kilometres ? '' 
asked Ivan , with a strange eagerness . 
`` What tortures ? 
Ah , do n't ask . 
In old days we had all sorts , but now they have taken chiefly to moral punishments - ` the stings of conscience ' and all that nonsense . 
We got that , too , from you , from the softening of your manners . 
And who 's the better for it ? 
Only those who have got no conscience , for how can they be tortured by conscience when they have none ? 
But decent people who have conscience and a sense of honour suffer for it . 
Reforms , when the ground has not been prepared for them , especially if they are institutions copied from abroad , do nothing but mischief ! 
The ancient fire was better . 
Well , this man , who was condemned to the quadrillion kilometres , stood still , looked round and lay down across the road . ' 
I wo n't go , I refuse on principle ! ' 
Take the soul of an enlightened Russian atheist and mix it with the soul of the prophet Jonah , who sulked for three days and nights in the belly of the whale , and you get the character of that thinker who lay across the road . '' 
`` What did he lie on there ? '' 
`` Well , I suppose there was something to lie on . 
You are not laughing ? '' 
`` Bravo ! '' 
cried Ivan , still with the same strange eagerness . 
Now he was listening with an unexpected curiosity . 
`` Well , is he lying there now ? '' 
`` That 's the point , that he is n't . 
He lay there almost a thousand years and then he got up and went on . '' 
`` What an ass ! '' 
cried Ivan , laughing nervously and still seeming to be pondering something intently . 
`` Does it make any difference whether he lies there for ever or walks the quadrillion kilometres ? 
It would take a billion years to walk it ? '' 
`` Much more than that . 
I have n't got a pencil and paper or I could work it out . 
But he got there long ago , and that 's where the story begins . '' 
`` What , he got there ? 
But how did he get the billion years to do it ? '' 
`` Why , you keep thinking of our present earth ! 
But our present earth may have been repeated a billion times . 
Why , it 's become extinct , been frozen ; cracked , broken to bits , disintegrated into its elements , again ` the water above the firmament , ' then again a comet , again a sun , again from the sun it becomes earth - and the same sequence may have been repeated endlessly and exactly the same to every detail , most unseemly and insufferably tedious - '' `` Well , well , what happened when he arrived ? '' 
`` Why , the moment the gates of Paradise were open and he walked in ; before he had been there two seconds , by his watch -LRB- though to my thinking his watch must have long dissolved into its elements on the way -RRB- , he cried out that those two seconds were worth walking not a quadrillion kilometres but a quadrillion of quadrillions , raised to the quadrillionth power ! 
In fact , he sang ` hosannah ' and overdid it so , that some persons there of lofty ideas would n't shake hands with him at first - he 'd become too rapidly reactionary , they said . 
The Russian temperament . 
I repeat , it 's a legend . 
I give it for what it 's worth , so that 's the sort of ideas we have on such subjects even now . '' 
`` I 've caught you ! '' 
Ivan cried , with an almost childish delight , as though he had succeeded in remembering something at last . 
