`` Do n't trouble ; it is cold , but I do n't often catch cold . 
Let us go in , though , and , by the way , what is your name ? 
I know you are called Kolya , but what else ? '' 
`` Nikolay - Nikolay Ivanovitch Krassotkin , or , as they say in official documents , ` Krassotkin son . ' '' 
Kolya laughed for some reason , but added suddenly , `` Of course I hate my name Nikolay . '' 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` It 's so trivial , so ordinary . '' 
`` You are thirteen ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` No , fourteen - that is , I shall be fourteen very soon , in a fortnight . 
I 'll confess one weakness of mine , Karamazov , just to you , since it 's our first meeting , so that you may understand my character at once . 
I hate being asked my age , more than that ... and in fact ... there 's a libellous story going about me , that last week I played robbers with the preparatory boys . 
It 's a fact that I did play with them , but it 's a perfect libel to say I did it for my own amusement . 
I have reasons for believing that you 've heard the story ; but I was n't playing for my own amusement , it was for the sake of the children , because they could n't think of anything to do by themselves . 
But they 've always got some silly tale . 
This is an awful town for gossip , I can tell you . '' 
`` But what if you had been playing for your own amusement , what 's the harm ? '' 
`` Come , I say , for my own amusement ! 
You do n't play horses , do you ? '' 
`` But you must look at it like this , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Grown-up people go to the theatre and there the adventures of all sorts of heroes are represented - sometimes there are robbers and battles , too - and is n't that just the same thing , in a different form , of course ? 
And young people 's games of soldiers or robbers in their playtime are also art in its first stage . 
You know , they spring from the growing artistic instincts of the young . 
And sometimes these games are much better than performances in the theatre ; the only difference is that people go there to look at the actors , while in these games the young people are the actors themselves . 
But that 's only natural . '' 
`` You think so ? 
Is that your idea ? '' 
Kolya looked at him intently . 
`` Oh , you know , that 's rather an interesting view . 
When I go home , I 'll think it over . 
I 'll admit I thought I might learn something from you . 
I 've come to learn of you , Karamazov , '' Kolya concluded , in a voice full of spontaneous feeling . 
`` And I of you , '' said Alyosha , smiling and pressing his hand . 
Kolya was much pleased with Alyosha . 
What struck him most was that he treated him exactly like an equal and that he talked to him just as if he were `` quite grown up . '' 
`` I 'll show you something directly , Karamazov ; it 's a theatrical performance , too , '' he said , laughing nervously . 
`` That 's why I 've come . '' 
`` Let us go first to the people of the house , on the left . 
All the boys leave their coats in there , because the room is small and hot . '' 
`` Oh , I 'm only coming in for a minute . 
I 'll keep on my overcoat . 
Perezvon will stay here in the passage and be dead . 
Ici , Perezvon , lie down and be dead ! 
You see how he 's dead . 
I 'll go in first and explore , then I 'll whistle to him when I think fit , and you 'll see , he 'll dash in like mad . 
Only Smurov must not forget to open the door at the moment . 
I 'll arrange it all and you 'll see something . '' 
By Ilusha 's Bedside THE room inhabited by the family of the retired captain Snegiryov is already familiar to the reader . 
It was close and crowded at that moment with a number of visitors . 
Several boys were sitting with Ilusha , and though all of them , like Smurov , were prepared to deny that it was Alyosha who had brought them and reconciled them with Ilusha , it was really the fact . 
All the art he had used had been to take them , one by one , to Ilusha , without `` sheepish sentimentality , '' appearing to do so casually and without design . 
It was a great consolation to Ilusha in his suffering . 
He was greatly touched by seeing the almost tender affection and sympathy shown him by these boys , who had been his enemies . 
Krassotkin was the only one missing and his absence was a heavy load on Ilusha 's heart . 
Perhaps the bitterest of all his bitter memories was his stabbing Krassotkin , who had been his one friend and protector . 
Clever little Smurov , who was the first to make it up with Ilusha , thought it was so . 
But when Smurov hinted to Krassotkin that Alyosha wanted to come and see him about something , the latter cut him short , bidding Smurov tell `` Karamazov '' at once that he knew best what to do , that he wanted no one 's advice , and that , if he went to see Ilusha , he would choose his own time for he had `` his own reasons . '' 
That was a fortnight before this Sunday . 
That was why Alyosha had not been to see him , as he had meant to . 
But though he waited he sent Smurov to him twice again . 
Both times Krassotkin met him with a curt , impatient refusal , sending Alyosha a message not to bother him any more , that if he came himself , he , Krassotkin , would not go to Ilusha at all . 
Up to the very last day , Smurov did not know that Kolya meant to go to Ilusha that morning , and only the evening before , as he parted from Smurov , Kolya abruptly told him to wait at home for him next morning , for he would go with him to the Snegiryovs , but warned him on no account to say he was coming , as he wanted to drop in casually . 
Smurov obeyed . 
Smurov 's fancy that Kolya would bring back the lost dog was based on the words Kolya had dropped that `` they must be asses not to find the dog , if it was alive . '' 
When Smurov , waiting for an opportunity , timidly hinted at his guess about the dog , Krassotkin flew into a violent rage . 
`` I 'm not such an ass as to go hunting about the town for other people 's dogs when I 've got a dog of my own ! 
And how can you imagine a dog could be alive after swallowing a pin ? 
Sheepish sentimentality , thats what it is ! 
For the last fortnight Ilusha had not left his little bed under the ikons in the corner . 
He had not been to school since the day he met Alyosha and bit his finger . 
He was taken ill the same day , though for a month afterwards he was sometimes able to get up and walk about the room and passage . 
But latterly he had become so weak that he could not move without help from his father . 
His father was terribly concerned about him . 
He even gave up drinking and was almost crazy with terror that his boy would die . 
And often , especially after leading him round the room on his arm and putting him back to bed , he would run to a dark corner in the passage and , leaning his head against the wall , he would break into paroxysms of violent weeping , stifling his sobs that they might not be heard by Ilusha . 
Returning to the room , he would usually begin doing something to amuse and comfort his precious boy : he would tell him stories , funny anecdotes , or would mimic comic people he had happened to meet , even imitate the howls and cries of animals . 
But Ilusha could not bear to see his father fooling and playing the buffoon . 
Though the boy tried not to show how he disliked it , he saw with an aching heart that his father was an object of contempt , and he was continually haunted by the memory of the `` wisp of tow '' and that `` terrible day . '' 
Nina , Ilusha 's gentle , crippled sister , did not like her father 's buffoonery either -LRB- Varvara had been gone for some time past to Petersburg to study at the university -RRB- . 
But the half-imbecile mother was greatly diverted and laughed heartily when her husband began capering about or performing something . 
It was the only way she could be amused ; all the rest of the time she was grumbling and complaining that now everyone had forgotten her , that no one treated her with respect , that she was slighted , and so on . 
But during the last few days she had completely changed . 
She began looking constantly at Ilusha 's bed in the corner and seemed lost in thought . 
She was more silent , quieter , and , if she cried , she cried quietly so as not to be heard . 
The captain noticed the change in her with mournful perplexity . 
The boys ' visits at first only angered her , but later on their merry shouts and stories began to divert her , and at last she liked them so much that , if the boys had given up coming , she would have felt dreary without them . 
When the children told some story or played a game , she laughed and clapped her hands . 
She called some of them to her and kissed them . 
She was particularly fond of Smurov . 
As for the captain , the presence in his room of the children , who came to cheer up Ilusha , filled his heart from the first with ecstatic joy . 
He even hoped that Ilusha would now get over his depression and that that would hasten his recovery . 
In spite of his alarm about Ilusha , he had not , till lately , felt one minute 's doubt of his boy 's ultimate recovery . 
He met his little visitors with homage , waited upon them hand and foot ; he was ready to be their horse and even began letting them ride on his back , but Ilusha did not like the game and it was given up . 
He began buying little things for them , gingerbread and nuts , gave them tea and cut them sandwiches . 
It must be noted that all this time he had plenty of money . 
He had taken the two hundred roubles from Katerina Ivanovna just as Alyosha had predicted he would . 
And afterwards Katerina Ivanovna , learning more about their circumstances and Ilusha 's illness , visited them herself , made the acquaintance of the family , and succeeded in fascinating the half-imbecile mother . 
Since then she had been lavish in helping them , and the captain , terror-stricken at the thought that his boy might be dying , forgot his pride and humbly accepted her assistance . 
All this time Doctor Herzenstube , who was called in by Katerina Ivanovna , came punctually every other day , but little was gained by his visits and he dosed the invalid mercilessly . 
But on that Sunday morning a new doctor was expected , who had come from Moscow , where he had a great reputation . 
