If she 'd been here she 'd have scratched them out in court . 
She is at home with toothache . 
He he he ! '' 
`` He he he ! '' 
In a third group : `` I dare say they will acquit Mitenka , after all . '' 
`` I should not be surprised if he turns the Metropolis upside down to-morrow . 
He will be drinking for ten days ! '' 
`` Oh , the devil ! '' 
`` The devil 's bound to have a hand in it . 
Where should he be if not here ? '' 
`` Well , gentlemen , I admit it was eloquent . 
But still it 's not the thing to break your father 's head with a pestle ! 
Or what are we coming to ? '' 
`` The chariot ! 
Do you remember the chariot ? '' 
`` Yes ; he turned a cart into a chariot ! '' 
`` And to-morrow he will turn a chariot into a cart , just to suit his purpose . '' 
`` What cunning chaps there are nowadays ! 
Is there any justice to be had in Russia ? '' 
But the bell rang . 
The jury deliberated for exactly an hour , neither more nor less . 
A profound silence reigned in the court as soon as the public had taken their seats . 
I remember how the jurymen walked into the court . 
At last ! 
I wo n't repeat the questions in order , and , indeed , I have forgotten them . 
I remember only the answer to the President 's first and chief question : `` Did the prisoner commit the murder for the sake of robbery and with premeditation ? '' 
-LRB- I do n't remember the exact words . -RRB- 
There was a complete hush . 
The foreman of the jury , the youngest of the clerks , pronounced , in a clear , loud voice , amidst the deathlike stillness of the court : `` Yes , guilty ! '' 
And the same answer was repeated to every question : `` Yes , guilty ! '' 
and without the slightest extenuating comment . 
This no one had expected ; almost everyone had reckoned upon a recommendation to mercy , at least . 
The death-like silence in the court was not broken - all seemed petrified : those who desired his conviction as well as those who had been eager for his acquittal . 
But that was only for the first instant , and it was followed by a fearful hubbub . 
Many of the men in the audience were pleased . 
Some were rubbing their hands with no attempt to conceal their joy . 
Those who disagreed with the verdict seemed crushed , shrugged their shoulders , whispered , but still seemed unable to realise this . 
But how shall I describe the state the ladies were in ? 
I thought they would create a riot . 
At first they could scarcely believe their ears . 
Then suddenly the whole court rang with exclamations : `` What 's the meaning of it ? 
What next ? '' 
They leapt up from their places . 
They seemed to fancy that it might be at once reconsidered and reversed . 
At that instant Mitya suddenly stood up and cried in a heart-rending voice , stretching his hands out before him : `` I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am not guilty of my father 's blood ! 
Katya , I forgive you ! 
Brothers , friends , have pity on the other woman ! '' 
He could not go on , and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heard all over the court in a strange , unnatural voice unlike his own . 
From the farthest corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing shriek - it was Grushenka . 
She had succeeded in begging admittance to the court again before the beginning of the lawyers ' speeches . 
Mitya was taken away . 
The passing of the sentence was deferred till next day . 
The whole court was in a hubbub but I did not wait to hear . 
I only remember a few exclamations I heard on the steps as I went out . 
`` He 'll have a twenty years ' trip to the mines ! '' 
`` Not less . '' 
`` Well , our peasants have stood firm . '' 
`` And have done for our Mitya . '' 
EPILOGUE Plans for Mitya 's Escape VERY early , at nine o'clock in the morning , five days after the trial , Alyosha went to Katerina Ivanovna 's to talk over a matter of great importance to both of them , and to give her a message . 
She sat and talked to him in the very room in which she had once received Grushenka . 
In the next room Ivan Fyodorovitch lay unconscious in a high fever . 
Katerina Ivanovna had immediately after the scene at the trial ordered the sick and unconscious man to be carried to her house , disregarding the inevitable gossip and general disapproval of the public . 
One of two relations who lived with her had departed to Moscow immediately after the scene in court , the other remained . 
But if both had gone away , Katerina Ivanovna would have adhered to her resolution , and would have gone on nursing the sick man and sitting by him day and night . 
Varvinsky and Herzenstube were attending him . 
The famous doctor had gone back to Moscow , refusing to give an opinion as to the probable end of the illness . 
Though the doctors encouraged Katerina Ivanovna and Alyosha , it was evident that they could not yet give them positive hopes of recovery . 
Alyosha came to see his sick brother twice a day . 
But this time he had specially urgent business , and he foresaw how difficult it would be to approach the subject , yet he was in great haste . 
He had another engagement that could not be put off for that same morning , and there was need of haste . 
They had been talking for a quarter of an hour . 
Katerina Ivanovna was pale and terribly fatigued , yet at the same time in a state of hysterical excitement . 
She had a presentiment of the reason why Alyosha had come to her . 
`` Do n't worry about his decision , '' she said , with confident emphasis to Alyosha . 
`` One way or another he is bound to come to it . 
He must escape . 
That unhappy man , that hero of honour and principle - not he , not Dmitri Fyodorovitch , but the man lying the other side of that door , who has sacrificed himself for his brother , '' Katya added , with flashing eyes - `` told me the whole plan of escape long ago . 
You know he has already entered into negotiations ... . 
I 've told you something already ... . 
You see , it will probably come off at the third etape from here , when the party of prisoners is being taken to Siberia . 
Oh , it 's a long way off yet . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch has already visited the superintendent of the third etape . 
But we do n't know yet who will be in charge of the party , and it 's impossible to find that out so long beforehand . 
To-morrow , perhaps , I will show you in detail the whole plan which Ivan Fyodorovitch left me on the eve of the trial in case of need ... . 
That was when - do you remember ? 
- you found us quarrelling . 
He had just gone downstairs , but seeing you I made him come back ; do you remember ? 
Do you know what we were quarrelling about then ? '' 
`` No , I do n't , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Of course he did not tell you . 
It was about that plan of escape . 
He had told me the main idea three days before , and we began quarrelling about it at once and quarrelled for three days . 
We quarrelled because , when he told me that if Dmitri Fyodorovitch were convicted he would escape abroad with that creature , I felt furious at once - I ca n't tell you why , I do n't know myself why ... . 
Oh , of course , I was furious then about that creature , and that she , too , should go abroad with Dmitri ! '' 
Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly , her lips quivering with anger . 
`` As soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch saw that I was furious about that woman , he instantly imagined I was jealous of Dmitri and that I still loved Dmitri . 
That is how our first quarrel began . 
I would not give an explanation , I could not ask forgiveness . 
I could not bear to think that such a man could suspect me of still loving that ... and when I myself had told him long before that I did not love Dmitri , that I loved no one but him ! 
It was only resentment against that creature that made me angry with him . 
