`` It 's easy enough to thrust them upon one . 
And who wrote them ? 
Can they have been written by men ? '' 
`` The Holy Spirit wrote them , '' said I. `` It 's easy for you to prate , '' he smiled again , this time almost with hatred . 
I took the book again , opened it in another place and showed him the Epistle to the Hebrews , chapter 10 , verse 31 . 
He read : `` It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God . '' 
He read it and simply flung down the book . 
He was trembling all over . 
`` An awful text , '' he said . 
`` There 's no denying you 've picked out fitting ones . '' 
He rose from the chair . 
`` Well ! '' 
he said , `` good-bye , perhaps I sha n't come again ... we shall meet in heaven . 
So I have been for fourteen years ` in the hands of the living God , ' that 's how one must think of those fourteen years . 
To-morrow I will beseech those hands to let me go . '' 
I wanted to take him in my arms and kiss him , but I did not dare - his face was contorted add sombre . 
He went away . 
`` Good God , '' I thought , `` what has he gone to face ! '' 
I fell on my knees before the ikon and wept for him before the Holy Mother of God , our swift defender and helper . 
I was half an hour praying in tears , and it was late , about midnight . 
Suddenly I saw the door open and he came in again . 
I was surprised . 
Where have you been ? '' 
I asked him . 
`` I think , '' he said , `` I 've forgotten something ... my handkerchief , I think ... . 
Well , even if I 've not forgotten anything , let me stay a little . '' 
He sat down . 
I stood over him . 
`` You sit down , too , '' said he . 
I sat down . 
We sat still for two minutes ; he looked intently at me and suddenly smiled . 
I remembered that - then he got up , embraced me warmly and kissed me . 
`` Remember , '' he said , `` how I came to you a second time . 
Do you hear , remember it ! '' 
And he went out . 
`` To-morrow , '' I thought . 
And so it was . 
I did not know that evening that the next day was his birthday . 
I had not been out for the last few days , so I had no chance of hearing it from anyone . 
On that day he always had a great gathering , everyone in the town went to it . 
It was the same this time . 
After dinner he walked into the middle of the room , with a paper in his hand - a formal declaration to the chief of his department who was present . 
This declaration he read aloud to the whole assembly . 
It contained a full account of the crime , in every detail . 
`` I cut myself off from men as a monster . 
God has visited me , '' he said in conclusion . 
`` I want to suffer for my sin ! '' 
Then he brought out and laid on the table all the things he had been keeping for fourteen years , that he thought would prove his crime , the jewels belonging to the murdered woman which he had stolen to divert suspicion , a cross and a locket taken from her neck with a portrait of her betrothed in the locket , her notebook and two letters ; one from her betrothed , telling her that he would soon be with her , and her unfinished answer left on the table to be sent off next day . 
He carried off these two letters - what for ? 
Why had he kept them for fourteen years afterwards instead of destroying them as evidence against him ? 
And this is what happened : everyone was amazed and horrified , everyone refused to believe it and thought that he was deranged , though all listened with intense curiosity . 
A few days later it was fully decided and agreed in every house that the unhappy man was mad . 
The legal authorities could not refuse to take the case up , but they too dropped it . 
Though the trinkets and letters made them ponder , they decided that even if they did turn out to be authentic , no charge could be based on those alone . 
Besides , she might have given him those things as a friend , or asked him to take care of them for her . 
I heard afterwards , however , that the genuineness of the things was proved by the friends and relations of the murdered woman , and that there was no doubt about them . 
Yet nothing was destined to come of it , after all . 
Five days later , all had heard that he was ill and that his life was in danger . 
The nature of his illness I ca n't explain ; they said it was an affection of the heart . 
But it became known that the doctors had been induced by his wife to investigate his mental condition also , and had come to the conclusion that it was a case of insanity . 
I betrayed nothing , though people ran to question me . 
But when I wanted to visit him , I was for a long while forbidden to do so , above all by his wife . 
`` It 's you who have caused his illness , '' she said to me ; `` he was always gloomy , but for the last year people noticed that he was peculiarly excited and did strange things , and now you have been the ruin of him . 
Your preaching has brought him to this ; for the last month he was always with you . '' 
Indeed , not only his wife but the whole town were down upon me and blamed me . 
`` It 's all your doing , '' they said . 
I was silent and indeed rejoiced at heart , for I saw plainly God 's mercy to the man who had turned against himself and punished himself . 
I could not believe in his insanity . 
They let me see him at last . 
he insisted upon saying good-bye to me . 
I went in to him and saw at once , that not only his days , but his hours were numbered . 
He was weak , yellow , his hands trembled , he gasped for breath , but his face was full of tender and happy feeling . 
`` It is done ! '' 
he said . 
`` I 've long been yearning to see you . 
Why did n't you come ? '' 
I did not tell him that they would not let me see him . 
`` God has had pity on me and is calling me to Himself . 
I know I am dying , but I feel joy and peace for the first time after so many years . 
There was heaven in my heart from the moment I had done what I had to do . 
Now I dare to love my children and to kiss them . 
Neither my wife nor the judges , nor anyone has believed it . 
My children will never believe it either . 
I see in that God 's mercy to them . 
I shall die , and my name will be without a stain for them . 
And now I feel God near , my heart rejoices as in Heaven ... I have done my duty . '' 
He could not speak , he gasped for breath , he pressed my hand warmly , looking fervently at me . 
We did not talk for long , his wife kept peeping in at us . 
But he had time to whisper to me : `` Do you remember how I came back to you that second time , at midnight ? 
I told you to remember it . 
You know what I came back for ? 
I came to kill you ! '' 
I started . 
`` I went out from you then into the darkness , I wandered about the streets , struggling with myself . 
And suddenly I hated you so that I could hardly bear it . 
Now , I thought , he is all that binds me , and he is my judge . 
I ca n't refuse to face my punishment to-morrow , for he knows all . 
It was not that I was afraid you would betray me -LRB- I never even thought of that -RRB- , but I thought , ` How can I look him in the face if I do n't confess ? ' 
And if you had been at the other end of the earth , but alive , it would have been all the same , the thought was unendurable that you were alive knowing everything and condemning me . 
I hated you as though you were the cause , as though you were to blame for everything . 
