We peep into the Gospel only on the eve of making speeches , in order to dazzle the audience by our acquaintance with what is , anyway , a rather original composition , which may be of use to produce a certain effect - all to serve the purpose ! 
But what Christ commands us is something very different : He bids us beware of doing this , because the wicked world does this , but we ought to forgive and to turn the other cheek , and not to measure to our persecutors as they measure to us . 
This is what our God has taught us and not that to forbid children to murder their fathers is a prejudice . 
And we will not from the tribune of truth and good sense correct the Gospel of our Lord , Whom the counsel for the defence deigns to call only ` the crucified lover of humanity , ' in opposition to all orthodox Russia , which calls to Him , ` For Thou art our God ! ' '' 
At this the President intervened and checked the over-zealous speaker , begging him not to exaggerate , not to overstep the bounds , and so on , as presidents always do in such cases . 
The audience , too , was uneasy . 
The public was restless : there were even exclamations of indignation . 
Fetyukovitch did not so much as reply ; he only mounted the tribune to lay his hand on his heart and , with an offended voice , utter a few words full of dignity . 
He only touched again , lightly and ironically , on `` romancing '' and `` psychology , '' and in an appropriate place quoted , `` Jupiter , you are angry , therefore you are wrong , '' which provoked a burst of approving laughter in the audience , for Ippolit Kirillovitch was by no means like Jupiter . 
Then , a propos of the accusation that he was teaching the young generation to murder their fathers , Fetyukovitch observed , with great dignity , that he would not even answer . 
As for the prosecutor 's charge of uttering unorthodox opinions , Fetyukovitch hinted that it was a personal insinuation and that he had expected in this court to be secure from accusations `` damaging to my reputation as a citizen and a loyal subject . '' 
But at these words the President pulled him up , too , and Fetyukovitch concluded his speech with a bow , amid a hum of approbation in the court . 
And Ippolit Kirillovitch was , in the opinion of our ladies , `` crushed for good . '' 
Then the prisoner was allowed to speak . 
Mitya stood up , but said very little . 
He was fearfully exhausted , physically and mentally . 
The look of strength and independence with which he had entered in the morning had almost disappeared . 
He seemed as though he had passed through an experience that day , which had taught him for the rest of his life something very important he had not understood till then . 
His voice was weak , he did not shout as before . 
In his words there was a new note of humility , defeat and submission . 
`` What am I to say , gentlemen of the jury ? 
The hour of judgment has come for me , I feel the hand of God upon me ! 
The end has come to an erring man ! 
But , before God , I repeat to you , I am innocent of my father 's blood ! 
For the last time I repeat , it was n't I killed him ! 
I was erring , but I loved what is good . 
Every instant I strove to reform , but I lived like a wild beast . 
I thank the prosecutor , he told me many things about myself that I did not know ; but it 's not true that I killed my father , the prosecutor is mistaken . 
I thank my counsel , too . 
I cried listening to him ; but it 's not true that I killed my father , and he need n't have supposed it . 
And do n't believe the doctors . 
I am perfectly sane , only my heart is heavy . 
If you spare me , if you let me go , I will pray for you . 
I will be a better man . 
I give you my word before God I will ! 
And if you will condemn me , I 'll break my sword over my head myself and kiss the pieces . 
But spare me , do not rob me of my God ! 
I know myself , I shall rebel ! 
My heart is heavy , gentlemen ... spare me ! '' 
He almost fell back in his place : his voice broke : he could hardly articulate the last phrase . 
Then the judges proceeded to put the questions and began to ask both sides to formulate their conclusions . 
But I will not describe the details . 
At last the jury rose to retire for consultation . 
The President was very tired , and so his last charge to the jury was rather feeble . 
`` Be impartial , do n't be influenced by the eloquence of the defence , but yet weigh the arguments . 
Remember that there is a great responsibility laid upon you , '' and so on and so on . 
The jury withdrew and the court adjourned . 
People could get up , move about , exchange their accumulated impressions , refresh themselves at the buffet . 
It was very late , almost one o'clock in the night , but nobody went away : the strain was so great that no one could think of repose . 
All waited with sinking hearts ; though that is , perhaps , too much to say , for the ladies were only in a state of hysterical impatience and their hearts were untroubled . 
An acquittal , they thought , was inevitable . 
They all prepared themselves for a dramatic moment of general enthusiasm . 
I must own there were many among the men , too , who were convinced that an acquittal was inevitable . 
Some were pleased , others frowned , while some were simply dejected , not wanting him to be acquitted . 
Fetyukovitch himself was confident of his success . 
He was surrounded by people congratulating him and fawning upon him . 
`` There are , '' he said to one group , as I was told afterwards , `` there are invisible threads binding the counsel for the defence with the jury . 
One feels during one 's speech if they are being formed . 
I was aware of them . 
They exist . 
Our cause is won . 
Set your mind at rest . '' 
`` What will our peasants say now ? '' 
said one stout , cross-looking , pock-marked gentleman , a landowner of the neighbourhood , approaching a group of gentlemen engaged in conversation . 
`` But they are not all peasants . 
There are four government clerks among them . '' 
`` Yes , there are clerks , '' said a member of the district council , joining the group . 
`` And do you know that Nazaryev , the merchant with the medal , a juryman ? '' 
`` What of him ? '' 
`` He is a man with brains . '' 
`` But he never speaks . '' 
`` He is no great talker , but so much the better . 
There 's no need for the Petersburg man to teach him : he could teach all Petersburg himself . 
He 's the father of twelve children . 
Think of that ! '' 
`` Upon my word , you do n't suppose they wo n't acquit him ? '' 
one of our young officials exclaimed in another group . 
`` They 'll acquit him for certain , '' said a resolute voice . 
`` It would be shameful , disgraceful , not to acquit him cried the official . 
`` Suppose he did murder him - there are fathers and fathers ! 
And , besides , he was in such a frenzy ... . 
He really may have done nothing but swing the pestle in the air , and so knocked the old man down . 
But it was a pity they dragged the valet in . 
That was simply an absurd theory ! 
If I 'd been in Fetyukovitch 's place , I should simply have said straight out : ` He murdered him ; but he is not guilty , hang it all ! ' 
`` That 's what he did , only without saying , ` Hang it all ! ' '' 
`` No , Mihail Semyonovitch , he almost said that , too , '' put in a third voice . 
`` Why , gentlemen , in Lent an actress was acquitted in our town who had cut the throat of her lover 's lawful wife . '' 
`` Oh , but she did not finish cutting it . '' 
`` That makes no difference . 
She began cutting it . '' 
`` What did you think of what he said about children ? 
Splendid , was n't it ? '' 
`` Splended ! '' 
`` And about mysticism , too ! '' 
`` Oh , drop mysticism , do ! '' 
cried someone else ; `` think of Ippolit and his fate from this day forth . 
His wife will scratch his eyes out to-morrow for Mitya 's sake . '' 
`` Is she here ? '' 
`` What an idea ! 
