In the distance the cathedral clock struck half-past eleven . 
The boys made haste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov 's lodging , a considerable distance , quickly and almost in silence . 
Twenty paces from the house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask Karamazov to come out to him . 
`` One must sniff round a bit first , '' he observed to Smurov . 
`` Why ask him to come out ? '' 
Smurov protested . 
`` You go in ; they will be awfully glad to see you . 
What 's the sense of making friends in the frost out here ? '' 
`` I know why I want to see him out here in the frost , '' Kolya cut him short in the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with `` small boys , '' and Smurov ran to do his bidding . 
The Lost Dog KOLYA leaned against the fence with an air of dignity , waiting for Alyosha to appear . 
Yes , he had long wanted to meet him . 
He had heard a great deal about him from the boys , but hitherto he had always maintained an appearance of disdainful indifference when he was mentioned , and he had even `` criticised '' what he heard about Alyosha . 
But secretely he had a great longing to make his acquaintance ; there was something sympathetic and attractive in all he was told about Alyosha . 
So the present moment was important : to begin with , he had to show himself at his best , to show his independence . 
`` Or he 'll think of me as thirteen and take me for a boy , like the rest of them . 
And what are these boys to him ? 
I shall ask him when I get to know him . 
It 's a pity I am so short , though . 
Tuzikov is younger than I am , yet he is half a head taller . 
But I have a clever face . 
I am not good-looking . 
I know I 'm hideous , but I 've a clever face . 
I must n't talk too freely ; if I fall into his arms all at once , he may think - Tfoo ! 
how horrible if he should think - ! '' 
Such were the thoughts that excited Kolya while he was doing his utmost to assume the most independent air . 
What distressed him most was his being so short ; he did not mind so much his `` hideous '' face , as being so short . 
On the wall in a corner at home he had the year before made a pencil-mark to show his height , and every two months since he anxiously measured himself against it to see how much he had gained . 
But alas ! 
he grew very slowly , and this sometimes reduced him almost to despair . 
His face was in reality by no means `` hideous '' ; on the contrary , it was rather attractive , with a fair , pale skin , freckled . 
His small , lively grey eyes had a fearless look , and often glowed with feeling . 
He had rather high cheekbones ; small , very red , but not very thick , lips ; his nose was small and unmistakably turned up . 
`` I 've a regular pug nose , a regular pug nose , '' Kolya used to mutter to himself when he looked in the looking-glass , and he always left it with indignation . 
`` But perhaps I have n't got a clever face ? '' 
he sometimes thought , doubtful even of that . 
But it must not be supposed that his mind was preoccupied with his face and his height . 
On the contrary , however bitter the moments before the looking-glass were to him , he quickly forgot them , and forgot them for a long time , `` abandoning himself entirely to ideas and to real life , '' as he formulated it to himself . 
Alyosha came out quickly and hastened up to Kolya . 
Before he reached him , Kolya could see that he looked delighted . 
`` Can he be so glad to see me ? '' 
Kolya wondered , feeling pleased . 
We may note here , in passing , that Alyosha 's appearance had undergone a complete change since we saw him last . 
He had abandoned his cassock and was wearing now a wellcut coat , a soft , round hat , and his hair had been cropped short . 
All this was very becoming to him , and he looked quite handsome . 
His charming face always had a good-humoured expression ; but there was a gentleness and serenity in his good-humour . 
To Kolya 's surprise , Alyosha came out to him just as he was , without an overcoat . 
He had evidently come in haste . 
He held out his hand to Kolya at once . 
`` Here you are at last ! 
How anxious we 've been to see you ! '' 
`` There were reasons which you shall know directly . 
Anyway , I am glad to make your acquaintance . 
I 've long been hoping for an opportunity , and have heard a great deal about you , '' Kolya muttered , a little breathless . 
`` We should have met anyway . 
I 've heard a great deal about you , too ; but you 've been a long time coming here . '' 
`` Tell me , how are things going ? '' 
`` Ilusha is very ill . 
He is certainly dying . '' 
`` How awful ! 
You must admit that medicine is a fraud , Karamazov , '' cried Kolya warmly . 
`` Ilusha has mentioned you often , very often , even in his sleep , in delirium , you know . 
One can see that you used to be very , very dear to him ... before the incident ... with the knife ... . 
Then there 's another reason ... . 
Tell me , is that your dog ? '' 
`` Yes Perezvon . '' 
`` Not Zhutchka ? '' 
Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity . 
`` Is she lost for ever ? '' 
`` I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka . 
I 've heard all about it . '' 
Kolya smiled mysteriously . 
`` Listen , Karamazov , I 'll tell you all about it . 
That 's what I came for ; that 's what I asked you to come out here for , to explain the whole episode to you before we go in , '' he began with animation . 
`` You see , Karamazov , Ilusha came into the preparatory class last spring . 
Well , you know what our preparatory class is - a lot of small boys . 
They began teasing Ilusha at once . 
I am two classes higher up , and , of course , I only look on at them from a distance . 
I saw the boy was weak and small , but he would n't give in to them ; he fought with them . 
I saw he was proud , and his eyes were full of fire . 
I like children like that . 
And they teased him all the more . 
The worst of it was he was horribly dressed at the time , his breeches were too small for him , and there were holes in his boots . 
They worried him about it ; they jeered at him . 
That I ca n't stand . 
I stood up for him at once , and gave it to them hot . 
I beat them , but they adore me , do you know , Karamazov ? '' 
Kolya boasted impulsively ; `` but I am always fond of children . 
I 've two chickens in my hands at home now - that 's what detained me to-day . 
So they left off beating Ilusha and I took him under my protection . 
I saw the boy was proud . 
I tell you that , the boy was proud ; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me : he did my slightest bidding , obeyed me as though I were God , tried to copy me . 
In the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once ' and I 'd go about with him . 
On Sundays , too . 
They always laugh when an older boy makes friends with a younger one like that ; but that 's a prejudice . 
If it 's my fancy , that 's enough . 
I am teaching him , developing him . 
Why should n't I develop him if I like him ? 
Here you , Karamazov , have taken up with all these nestlings . 
I see you want to influence the younger generation - to develop them , to be of use to them , and I assure you this trait in your character , which I knew by hearsay , attracted me more than anything . 
Let us get to the point , though . 
