I noticed that there was a sort of softness and sentimentality coming over the boy , and you know I have a positive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality , and I have had it from a baby . 
There were contradictions in him , too : he was proud , but he was slavishly devoted to me , and yet all at once his eyes would flash and he 'd refuse to agree with me ; he 'd argue , fly into a rage . 
I used sometimes to propound certain ideas ; I could see that it was not so much that he disagreed with the ideas , but that he was simply rebelling against me , because I was cool in responding to his endearments . 
And so , in order to train him properly , the tenderer he was , the colder I became . 
I did it on purpose : that was my idea . 
My object was to form his character , to lick him into shape , to make a man of him ... and besides ... no doubt , you understand me at a word . 
Suddenly I noticed for three days in succession he was downcast and dejected , not because of my coldness , but for something else , something more important . 
I wondered what the tragedy was . 
I have pumped him and found out that he had somehow got to know Smerdyakov , who was footman to your late father - it was before his death , of course - and he taught the little fool a silly trick - that is , a brutal , nasty trick . 
He told him to take a piece of bread , to stick a pin in it , and throw it to one of those hungry dogs who snap up anything without biting it , and then to watch and see what would happen . 
So they prepared a piece of bread like that and threw it to Zhutchka , that shaggy dog there 's been such a fuss about . 
The people of the house it belonged to never fed it at all , though it barked all day . 
-LRB- Do you like that stupid barking , Karamazov ? 
I ca n't stand it . -RRB- 
So it rushed at the bread , swallowed it , and began to squeal ; it turned round and round and ran away , squealing as it ran out of sight . 
That was Ilusha 's own account of it . 
He confessed it to me , and cried bitterly . 
He hugged me , shaking all over . 
He kept on repeating ` He ran away squealing ' : the sight of that haunted him . 
He was tormented by remorse , I could see that . 
I took it seriously . 
I determined to give him a lesson for other things as well . 
So I must confess I was n't quite straightforward , and pretended to be more indignant perhaps than I was . 
` You 've done a nasty thing , ' I said , ` you are a scoundrel . 
I wo n't tell of it , of course , but I shall have nothing more to do with you for a time . 
I 'll think it over and let you know through Smurov ' - that 's the boy who 's just come with me ; he 's always ready to do anything for me - ` whether I will have anything to do with you in the future or whether I give you up for good as a scoundrel . ' 
He was tremendously upset . 
I must own I felt I 'd gone too far as I spoke , but there was no help for it . 
I did what I thought best at the time . 
A day or two after , I sent Smurov to tell him that I would not speak to him again . 
That 's what we call it when two schoolfellows refuse to have anything more to do with one another . 
Secretly I only meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then , if I saw signs of repentance , to hold out my hand to him again . 
That was my intention . 
But what do you think happened ? 
He heard Smurov 's message , his eyes flashed . 
` Tell Krassotkin for me , ' he cried , ` that I will throw bread with pins to all the dogs - all - all of them ! ' 
` So he 's going in for a little temper . 
We must smoke it out of him . ' 
And I began to treat him with contempt ; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled sarcastically . 
And just then that affair with his father happened . 
You remember ? 
You must realise that he was fearfully worked up by what had happened already . 
The boys , seeing I 'd given him up , set on him and taunted him , shouting , ` Wisp of tow , wisp of tow ! ' 
And he had soon regular skirmishes with them , which I am very sorry for . 
They seem to have given him one very bad beating . 
One day he flew at them all as they were coming out of school . 
I stood a few yards off , looking on . 
And , I swear , I do n't remember that I laughed ; it was quite the other way , I felt awfully sorry for him ; in another minute I would have run up to take his part . 
But he suddenly met my eyes . 
I do n't know what he fancied ; but he pulled out a penknife , rushed at me , and struck at my thigh , here in my right leg . 
I did n't move . 
I do n't mind owning I am plucky sometimes , Karamazov . 
I simply looked at him contemptuously , as though to say , ` This is how you repay all my kindness ! 
Do it again if you like , I 'm at your service . ' 
But he did n't stab me again ; he broke down ; he was frightened at what he had done ; he threw away the knife , burst out crying , and ran away . 
I did not sneak on him , of course , and I made them all keep quiet , so it should n't come to the ears of the masters . 
I did n't even tell my mother till it had healed up . 
And the wound was a mere scratch . 
And then I heard that the same day he 'd been throwing stones and had bitten your finger - but you understand now what a state he was in ! 
Well , it ca n't be helped : it was stupid of me not to come and forgive him - that is , to make it up with him - when he was taken ill . 
I am sorry for it now . 
But I had a special reason . 
So now I 've told you all about it ... but I 'm afraid it was stupid of me . '' 
`` Oh , what a pity , '' exclaimed Alyosha , with feeling , `` that I did n't know before what terms you were on with him , or I 'd have come to you long ago to beg you to go to him with me . 
Would you believe it , when he was feverish he talked about you in delirium . 
I did n't know how much you were to him ! 
And you 've really not succeeded in finding that dog ? 
His father and the boys have been hunting all over the town for it . 
Would you believe it , since he 's been ill , I 've three times heard him repeat with tears , ` It 's because I killed Zhutchka , father , that I am ill now . 
God is punishing me for it . ' 
He ca n't get that idea out of his head . 
And if the dog were found and proved to be alive , one might almost fancy the joy would cure him . 
We have all rested our hopes on you . '' 
`` Tell me , what made you hope that I should be the one to find him ? '' 
Kolya asked , with great curiosity . 
`` Why did you reckon on me rather than anyone else ? '' 
`` There was a report that you were looking for the dog , and that you would bring it when you 'd found it . 
Smurov said something of the sort . 
We 've all been trying to persuade Ilusha that the dog is alive , that it 's been seen . 
The boys brought him a live hare : he just looked at it , with a faint smile , and asked them to set it free in the fields . 
And so we did . 
His father has just this moment come back , bringing him a mastiff pup , hoping to comfort him with that ; but I think it only makes it worse . '' 
`` Tell me , Karamazov , what sort of man is the father ? 
I know him , but what do you make of him - a mountebank , a buffoon ? '' 
`` Oh no ; there are people of deep feeling who have been somehow crushed . 
Buffoonery in them is a form of resentful irony against those to whom they dare n't speak the truth , from having been for years humiliated and intimidated by them . 
Believe me , Krassotkin , that sort of buffoonery is sometimes tragic in the extreme . 
His whole life now is centred in Ilusha , and if Ilusha dies , he will either go mad with grief or kill himself . 
I feel almost certain of that when I look at him now . '' 
`` I understand you , Karamazov . 
I see you understand human nature , '' Kolya added , with feeling . 
`` And as soon as I saw you with a dog , I thought it was Zhutchka you were bringing . '' 
`` Wait a bit , Karamazov , perhaps we shall find it yet ; but this is Perezvon . 
I 'll let him go in now and perhaps it will amuse Ilusha more than the mastiff pup . 
Wait a bit , Karamazov , you will know something in a minute . 
But , I say , I am keeping you here ! '' 
Kolya cried suddenly . 
`` You 've no overcoat on in this bitter cold . 
You see what an egoist I am . 
Oh , we are all egoists , Karamazov ! '' 
