`` Yes , she sent for me , and I am just going to her . '' 
Alyosha got up resolutely . 
`` Oh , my dear , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , perhaps that 's what 's most important , '' Madame Hohlakov cried , suddenly bursting into tears . 
`` God knows I trust Lise to you with all my heart , and it 's no matter her sending for you on the sly , without telling her mother . 
But forgive me , I ca n't trust my daughter so easily to your brother Ivan Fyodorovitch , though I still consider him the most chivalrous young man . 
But only fancy , he 's been to see Lise and I knew nothing about it ! '' 
`` How ? 
What ? 
When ? '' 
Alyosha was exceedingly surprised . 
He had not sat down again and listened standing . 
`` I will tell you ; that 's perhaps why I asked you to come , for I do n't know now why I did ask you to come . 
Well , Ivan Fyodorovitch has been to see me twice , since he came back from Moscow . 
First time he came as a friend to call on me , and the second time Katya was here and he came because he heard she was here . 
I did n't , of course , expect him to come often , knowing what a lot he has to do as it is , vous comprenez , cette affaire et la mort terrible de votre papa . 
-LRB- You know , this affair and your father 's terrible death . -RRB- 
But I suddenly heard he 'd been here again , not to see me but to see Lise . 
That 's six days ago now . 
He came , stayed five minutes , and went away . 
And I did n't hear of it till three days afterwards , from Glafira , so it was a great shock to me . 
I sent for Lise directly . 
She laughed . 
` He thought you were asleep , ' she said , ` and came in to me to ask after your health . ' 
Of course , that 's how it happened . 
But Lise , Lise , mercy on us , how she distresses me ! 
Would you believe it , one night , four days ago , just after you saw her last time , and had gone away , she suddenly had a fit , screaming , shrieking , hysterics ! 
Why is it I never have hysterics ? 
Then , next day another fit , and the same thing on the third , and yesterday too , and then yesterday that aberration . 
She suddenly screamed out , ' I hate Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
I insist on your never letting him come to the house again . ' 
I was struck dumb at these amazing words , and answered , ` On what grounds could I refuse to see such an excellent young man , a young man of such learning too , and so unfortunate ? ' 
- for all this business is a misfortune , is n't it ? ' 
She suddenly burst out laughing at my words , and so rudely , you know . 
Well , I was pleased ; I thought I had amused her and the fits would pass off , especially as I wanted to refuse to see Ivan Fyodorovitch anyway on account of his strange visits without my knowledge , and meant to ask him for an explanation . 
But early this morning Lise waked up and flew into a passion with Yulia and , would you believe it , slapped her in the face . 
That 's monstrous ; I am always polite to my servants . 
And an hour later she was hugging Yulia 's feet and kissing them . 
She sent a message to me that she was n't coming to me at all , and would never come and see me again , and when I dragged myself down to her , she rushed to kiss me , crying , and as she kissed me , she pushed me out of the room without saying a word , so I could n't find out what was the matter . 
Now , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , I rest all my hopes on you , and , of course , my whole life is in your hands . 
I simply beg you to go to Lise and find out everything from her , as you alone can , and come back and tell me - me , her mother , for you understand it will be the death of me , simply the death of me , if this goes on , or else I shall run away . 
I can stand no more . 
I have patience ; but I may lose patience , and then ... then something awful will happen . 
Ah , dear me ! 
At last , Pyotr Ilyitch ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , beaming all over as she saw Perhotin enter the room . 
`` You are late , you are late ! 
Well , sit down , speak , put us out of suspense . 
What does the counsel say . 
Where are you off to , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` To Lise . '' 
`` Oh , yes . 
You wo n't forget , you wo n't forget what I asked you ? 
It 's a question of life and death ! 
`` Of course , I wo n't forget , if I can ... but I am so late , '' muttered Alyosha , beating a hasty retreat . 
`` No , be sure , be sure to come in ; do n't say ` If you can . ' 
I shall die if you do n't , '' Madame Hohlakov called after him , but Alyosha had already left the room . 
A Little Demon GOING in to Lise , he found her half reclining in the invalid-chair , in which she had been wheeled when she was unable to walk . 
She did not move to meet him , but her sharp , keen eyes were simply riveted on his face . 
There was a feverish look in her eyes , her face was pale and yellow . 
Alyosha was amazed at the change that had taken place in her in three days . 
She was positively thinner . 
She did not hold out her hand to him . 
He touched the thin , long fingers which lay motionless on her dress , then he sat down facing her , without a word . 
`` I know you are in a hurry to get to the prison , '' Lise said curtly , `` and mamma 's kept you there for hours ; she 's just been telling you about me and Yulia . '' 
`` How do you know ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` I 've been listening . 
Why do you stare at me ? 
I want to listen and I do listen , there 's no harm in that . 
I do n't apologise . '' 
`` You are upset about something ? '' 
`` On the contrary , I am very happy . 
I 've only just been reflecting for the thirtieth time what a good thing it is I refused you and shall not be your wife . 
You are not fit to be a husband . 
If I were to marry you and give you a note to take to the man I loved after you , you 'd take it and be sure to give it to him and bring an answer back , too . 
If you were forty , you would still go on taking my love-letters for me . '' 
She suddenly laughed . 
`` There is something spiteful and yet open-hearted about you , '' Alyosha smiled to her . 
`` The open-heartedness consists in my not being ashamed of myself with you . 
What 's more , I do n't want to feel ashamed with you , just with you . 
Alyosha , why is it I do n't respect you ? 
I am very fond of you , but I do n't respect you . 
If I respected you , I should n't talk to you without shame , should I ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` But do you believe that I am not ashamed with you ? '' 
`` No , I do n't believe it . '' 
Lise laughed nervously again ; she spoke rapidly . 
`` I sent your brother , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , some sweets in prison . 
Alyosha , you know , you are quite pretty ! 
I shall love you awfully for having so quickly allowed me not to love you . '' 
`` Why did you send for me to-day , Lise ? '' 
`` I wanted to tell you of a longing I have . 
I should like some one to torture me , marry me and then torture me , deceive me and go away . 
I do n't want to be happy . '' 
`` You are in love with disorder ? '' 
`` Yes , I want disorder . 
I keep wanting to set fire to the house . 
I keep imagining how I 'll creep up and set fire to the house on the sly ; it must be on the sly . 
They 'll try to put it out , but it 'll go on burning . 
And I shall know and say nothing . 
