How 's that ? 
Why , when you were here a month ago you spent three thousand , not fifteen hundred , everybody knows that . '' 
`` Who knows it ? 
Who counted the money ? 
Did I let anyone count it ? '' 
`` Why , you told everyone yourself that you 'd spent exactly three thousand . '' 
`` It 's true , I did . 
I told the whole town so , and the whole town said so . 
And here , at Mokroe , too , everyone reckoned it was three thousand . 
Yet I did n't spend three thousand , but fifteen hundred . 
And the other fifteen hundred I sewed into a little bag . 
That 's how it was , gentlemen . 
That 's where I got that money yesterday ... '' `` This is almost miraculous , '' murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
`` Allow me to inquire , '' observed the prosecutor at last , `` have you informed anyone whatever of this circumstance before ; I mean that you had fifteen hundred left about you a month ago ? '' 
`` I told no one . '' 
`` That 's strange . 
Do you mean absolutely no one ? '' 
`` Absolutely no one . 
No one and nobody . '' 
`` What was your reason for this reticence ? 
What was your motive for making such a secret of it ? 
To be more precise : You have told us at last your secret , in your words , so ` disgraceful , ' though in reality - that is , of course , comparatively speaking - this action , that is , the appropriation of three thousand roubles belonging to someone else , and , of course , only for a time is , in my view at least , only an act of the greatest recklessness and not so disgraceful , when one takes into consideration your character ... . 
Even admitting that it was an action in the highest degree discreditable , still , discreditable is not ` disgraceful . ' 
... Many people have already guessed , during this last month , about the three thousand of Katerina Ivanovna 's that you have spent , and I heard the legend myself , apart from your confession ... . 
Mihail Makarovitch , for instance , had heard it , too , so that indeed , it was scarcely a legend , but the gossip of the whole town . 
There are indications , too , if I am not mistaken , that you confessed this yourself to someone , I mean that the money was Katerina Ivanovna 's , and so , it 's extremely surprising to me that hitherto , that is , up to the present moment , you have made such an extraordinary secret of the fifteen hundred you say you put by , apparently connecting a feeling of positive horror with that secret ... . 
It 's not easy to believe that it could cost you such distress to confess such a secret ... . 
You cried out , just now , that Siberia would be better than confessing it ... '' The prosecutor ceased speaking . 
He was provoked . 
He did not conceal his vexation , which was almost anger , and gave vent to all his accumulated spleen , disconnectedly and incoherently , without choosing words . 
`` It 's not the fifteen hundred that 's the disgrace , but that I put it apart from the rest of the three thousand , '' said Mitya firmly . 
`` Why ? '' 
smiled the prosecutor irritably . 
`` What is there disgraceful , to your thinking , in your having set aside half of the three thousand you had discreditably , if you prefer , ` disgracefully , ' appropriated ? 
Your taking the three thousand is more important than what you did with it . 
And by the way , why did you do that - why did you set apart that half , for what purpose , for what object did you do it ? 
Can you explain that to us ? '' 
`` Oh , gentlemen , the purpose is the whole point ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I put it aside because I was vile , that is , because I was calculating , and to be calculating in such a case is vile ... and that vileness has been going on a whole month . '' 
`` It 's incomprehensible . '' 
`` I wonder at you . 
But I 'll make it clearer . 
Perhaps it really is incomprehensible . 
You see , attend to what I say . 
I appropriate three thousand entrusted to my honour ; I spend it on a spree , say I spend it all , and next morning I go to her and say , ` Katya , I 've done wrong , I 've squandered your three thousand ' ; well , is that right ? 
No , it 's not right - it 's dishonest and cowardly ; I 'm a beast , with no more self-control than a beast , that 's so , is n't it ? 
But still I 'm not a thief ? 
Not a downright thief , you 'll admit ! 
I squandered it , but I did n't steal it . 
Now a second , rather more favourable alternative : follow me carefully , or I may get confused again - my head 's going round - and so , for the second alternative : I spend here only fifteen hundred out of the three thousand , that is , only half . 
Next day I go and take that half to her : ` Katya , take this fifteen hundred from me , I 'm a low beast , and an untrustworthy scoundrel , for I 've wasted half the money , and I shall waste this , too , so keep me from temptation ! ' 
Well , what of that alternative ? 
I should be a beast and a scoundrel , and whatever you like ; but not a thief , not altogether a thief , or I should not have brought back what was left , but have kept that , too . 
She would see at once that since I brought back half , I should pay back what I 'd spent , that I should never give up trying to , that I should work to get it and pay it back . 
So in that case I should be a scoundrel , but not a thief , you may say what you like , not a thief ! '' 
`` I admit that there is a certain distinction , '' said the prosecutor , with a cold smile . 
`` But it 's strange that you see such a vital difference . '' 
`` Yes , I see a vital difference . 
Every man may be a scoundrel , and perhaps every man is a scoundrel , but not everyone can be a thief ; it takes an arch-scoundrel to be that . 
Oh , of course , I do n't know how to make these fine distinctions ... but a thief is lower than a scoundrel , that 's my conviction . 
Listen , I carry the money about me a whole month ; I may make up my mind to give it back to-morrow , and I 'm a scoundrel no longer ; but I can not make up my mind , you see , though I 'm making up my mind every day , and every day spurring myself on to do it , and yet for a whole month I ca n't bring myself to it , you see . 
Is that right to your thinking , is that right ? '' 
`` Certainly , that 's not right ; that I can quite understand , and that I do n't dispute , '' answered the prosecutor with reserve . 
`` And let us give up all discussion of these subtleties and distinctions , and , if you will be so kind , get back to the point . 
And the point is , that you have still not told us , although we 've asked you , why , in the first place , you halved the money , squandering one half and hiding the other ? 
For what purpose exactly did you hide it , what did you mean to do with that fifteen hundred ? 
I insist upon that question , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` Yes , of course ! '' 
cried Mitya , striking himself on the forehead ; `` forgive me , I 'm worrying you , and am not explaining the chief point , or you 'd understand in a minute , for it 's just the motive of it that 's the disgrace ! 
You see , it was all to do with the old man , my dead father . 
He was always pestering Agrafena and I was jealous ; I thought then that she was hesitating between me and him . 
So I kept thinking everyday , suppose she were to make up her mind all of a sudden , suppose she were to leave off tormenting me , and were suddenly to say to me , ' I love you , not him ; take me to the other end of the world . ' 
And I 'd only forty copecks ; how could I take her away , what could I do ? 
Why , I 'd be lost . 
You see , I did n't know her then , I did n't understand her , I thought she wanted money , and that she would n't forgive my poverty . 
And so I fiendishly counted out the half of that three thousand , sewed it up , calculating on it , sewed it up before I was drunk , and after I had sewn it up , I went off to get drunk on the rest . 
Yes , that was base . 
Do you understand now ? '' 
Both the lawyers laughed aloud . 
`` I should have called it sensible and moral on your part not to have squandered it all , '' chuckled Nikolay Parfenovitch , `` for after all what does it amount to ? '' 
`` Why , that I stole it , that 's what it amounts to ! 
Oh , God , you horrify me by not understanding ! 
Every day that I had that fifteen hundred sewn up round my neck , every day and every hour I said to myself , ` You 're a thief ! 
you 're a thief ! ' 
Yes , that 's why I 've been so savage all this month , that 's why I fought in the tavern , that 's why I attacked my father , it was because I felt I was a thief . 
I could n't make up my mind ; I did n't dare even to tell Alyosha , my brother , about that fifteen hundred : I felt I was such a scoundrel and such a pickpocket . 
But , do you know , while I carried it I said to myself at the same time every hour : ` No , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , you may yet not be a thief . ' 
Why ? 
Because I might go next day and pay back that fifteen hundred to Katya . 
And only yesterday I made up my mind to tear my amulet off my neck , on my way from Fenya 's to Perhotin . 
I had n't been able till that moment to bring myself to it . 
And it was only when I tore it off that I became a downright thief , a thief and a dishonest man for the rest of my life . 
Why ? 
Because , with that I destroyed , too , my dream of going to Katya and saying , ` I 'm a scoundrel , but not a thief ! 
Do you understand now ? 
Do you understand ? '' 
`` What was it made you decide to do it yesterday ? '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch interrupted . 
`` Why ? 
