Was she furious ? '' 
`` No , not that ... . 
There was nothing like that , Mitya . 
There - I found them both there . '' 
`` Both ? 
Whom ? '' 
`` Grushenka at Katerina Ivanovna 's . '' 
Dmitri was struck dumb . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You 're raving ! 
Grushenka with her ? '' 
Alyosha described all that had happened from the moment he went in to Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
He was ten minutes telling his story . 
ca n't be said to have told it fluently and consecutively , but he seemed to make it clear , not omitting any word or action of significance , and vividly describing , often in one word , his own sensations . 
Dmitri listened in silence , gazing at him with a terrible fixed stare , but it was clear to Alyosha that he understood it all , and had grasped every point . 
But as the story went on , his face became not merely gloomy , but menacing . 
He scowled , he clenched his teeth , and his fixed stare became still more rigid , more concentrated , more terrible , when suddenly , with incredible rapidity , his wrathful , savage face changed , his tightly compressed lips parted , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch broke into uncontrolled , spontaneous laughter . 
He literally shook with laughter . 
For a long time he could not speak . 
`` So she would n't kiss her hand ! 
So she did n't kiss it ; so she ran away ! '' 
he kept exclaiming with hysterical delight ; insolent delight it might had been called , if it had not been so spontaneous . 
`` So the other one called her tigress ! 
And a tigress she is ! 
So she ought to be flogged on a scaffold ? 
Yes , yes , so she ought . 
That 's just what I think ; she ought to have been long ago . 
It 's like this , brother , let her be punished , but I must get better first . 
I understand the queen of impudence . 
That 's her all over ! 
You saw her all over in that hand-kissing , the she-devil ! 
She 's magnificent in her own line ! 
So she ran home ? 
I 'll go - ah - I 'll run to her ! 
Alyosha , do n't blame me , I agree that hanging is too good for her . '' 
`` But Katerina Ivanovna ! '' 
exclaimed Alyosha sorrowfully . 
`` I see her , too ! 
I see right through her , as I 've never done before ! 
It 's a regular discovery of the four continents of the world , that is , of the five ! 
What a thing to do ! 
That 's just like Katya , who was not afraid to face a coarse , unmannerly officer and risk a deadly insult on a generous impulse to save her father ! 
But the pride , the recklessness , the defiance of fate , the unbounded defiance ! 
You say that aunt tried to stop her ? 
That aunt , you know , is overbearing , herself . 
She 's the sister of the general 's widow in Moscow , and even more stuck-up than she . 
But her husband was caught stealing government money . 
He lost everything , his estate and all , and the proud wife had to lower her colours , and has n't raised them since . 
So she tried to prevent Katya , but she would n't listen to her ! 
She thinks she can overcome everything , that everything will give way to her . 
She thought she could bewitch Grushenka if she liked , and she believed it herself : she plays a part to herself , and whose fault is it ? 
Do you think she kissed Grushenka 's hand first , on purpose , with a motive ? 
No , she really was fascinated by Grushenka , that 's to say , not by Grushenka , but by her own dream , her own delusion - because it was her dream , her delusion ! 
Alyosha , darling , how did you escape from them , those women ? 
Did you pick up your cassock and run ? 
Ha ha ha ! '' 
`` Brother , you do n't seem to have noticed how you 've insulted Katerina Ivanovna by telling Grushenka about that day . 
And she flung it in her face just now that she had gone to gentlemen in secret to sell her beauty ! 
Brother , what could be worse than that insult ? '' 
What worried Alyosha more than anything was that , incredible as it seemed , his brother appeared pleased at Katerina Ivanovna 's humiliation . 
`` Bah ! '' 
Dmitri frowned fiercely , and struck his forehead with his hand . 
He only now realised it , though Alyosha had just told him of the insult , and Katerina Ivanovna 's cry : `` Your brother is a scoundrel '' `` Yes , perhaps , I really did tell Grushenka about that ` fatal day , ' as Katya calls it . 
Yes , I did tell her , I remember ! 
It was that time at Mokroe . 
I was drunk , the Gypsies were singing ... But I was sobbing . 
I was sobbing then , kneeling and praying to Katya 's image , and Grushenka understood it . 
She understood it all then . 
I remember , she cried herself ... . 
Damn it all ! 
But it 's bound to be so now ... . 
Then she cried , but now ` the dagger in the heart ' ! 
That 's how women are . '' 
He looked down and sank into thought . 
`` Yes , I am a scoundrel , a thorough scoundrel '' he said suddenly , in a gloomy voice . 
`` It does n't matter whether I cried or not , I 'm a scoundrel ! 
Tell her I accept the name , if that 's any comfort . 
Come , that 's enough . 
Good-bye . 
It 's no use talking ! 
It 's not amusing . 
You go your way and I mine . 
And I do n't want to see you again except as a last resource . 
Good-bye , Alexey ! '' 
He warmly pressed Alyosha 's hand , and still looking down , without raising his head , as though tearing himself away , turned rapidly towards the town . 
Alyosha looked after him , unable to believe he would go away so abruptly . 
`` Stay , Alexey , one more confession to you alone '' cried Dmitri , suddenly turning back . 
`` Look at me . 
Look at me well . 
You see here , here - there 's terrible disgrace in store for me . '' 
-LRB- As he said `` here , '' Dmitri struck his chest with his fist with a strange air , as though the dishonour lay precisely on his chest , in some spot , in a pocket , perhaps , or hanging round his neck . -RRB- 
`` You know me now , a scoundrel , an avowed scoundrel , but let me tell you that I 've never done anything before and never shall again , anything that can compare in baseness with the dishonour which I bear now at this very minute on my breast , here , here , which will come to pass , though I 'm perfectly free to stop it . 
I can stop it or carry it through , note that . 
Well , let me tell you , I shall carry it through . 
I sha n't stop it . 
I told you everything just now , but I did n't tell you this , because even I had not brass enough for it . 
I can still pull up ; if I do , I can give back the full half of my lost honour to-morrow . 
But I sha n't pull up . 
I shall carry out my base plan , and you can bear witness that I told so beforehand . 
