`` In active love ? 
There 's another question and such a question ! 
You see , I so love humanity that - would you believe it ? 
- I often dream of forsaking all that I have , leaving Lise , and becoming a sister of mercy . 
I close my eyes and think and dream , and at that moment I feel full of strength to overcome all obstacles . 
No wounds , no festering sores could at that moment frighten me . 
I would bind them up and wash them with my own hands . 
I would nurse the afflicted . 
I would be ready to kiss such wounds . '' 
`` It is much , and well that your mind is full of such dreams and not others . 
Some time , unawares , you may do a good deed in reality . '' 
`` Yes . 
But could I endure such a life for long ? '' 
the lady went on fervently , almost frantically . 
`` That 's the chief question - that 's my most agonising question . 
I shut my eyes and ask myself , ` Would you persevere long on that path ? 
And if the patient whose wounds you are washing did not meet you with gratitude , but worried you with his whims , without valuing or remarking your charitable services , began abusing you and rudely commanding you , and complaining to the superior authorities of you -LRB- which often happens when people are in great suffering -RRB- - what then ? 
Would you persevere in your love , or not ? ' 
And do you know , I came with horror to the conclusion that , if anything could dissipate my love to humanity , it would be ingratitude . 
In short , I am a hired servant , I expect my payment at once - that is , praise , and the repayment of love with love . 
Otherwise I am incapable of loving anyone . ' '' 
She was in a very paroxysm of self-castigation , and , concluding , she looked with defiant resolution at the elder . 
`` It 's just the same story as a doctor once told me , '' observed the elder . 
`` He was a man getting on in years , and undoubtedly clever . 
He spoke as frankly as you , though in jest , in bitter jest . ' 
I love humanity , ' he said , ` but I wonder at myself . 
The more I love humanity in general , the less I love man in particular . 
In my dreams , ' he said , ' I have often come to making enthusiastic schemes for the service of humanity , and perhaps I might actually have faced crucifixion if it had been suddenly necessary ; and yet I am incapable of living in the same room with anyone for two days together , as I know by experience . 
As soon as anyone is near me , his personality disturbs my self-complacency and restricts my freedom . 
In twenty-four hours I begin to hate the best of men : one because he 's too long over his dinner ; another because he has a cold and keeps on blowing his nose . 
I become hostile to people the moment they come close to me . 
But it has always happened that the more I detest men individually the more ardent becomes my love for humanity . ' 
`` But what 's to be done ? 
What can one do in such a case ? 
Must one despair ? '' 
`` No . 
It is enough that you are distressed at it . 
Do what you can , and it will be reckoned unto you . 
Much is done already in you since you can so deeply and sincerely know yourself . 
If you have been talking to me so sincerely , simply to gain approbation for your frankness , as you did from me just now , then , of course , you will not attain to anything in the achievement of real love ; it will all get no further than dreams , and your whole life will slip away like a phantom . 
In that case you will naturally cease to think of the future life too , and will of yourself grow calmer after a fashion in the end . '' 
`` You have crushed me ! 
Only now , as you speak , I understand that I was really only seeking your approbation for my sincerity when I told you I could not endure ingratitude . 
You have revealed me to myself . 
You have seen through me and explained me to myself `` Are you speaking the truth ? 
Well , now , after such a confession , I believe that you are sincere and good at heart . 
If you do not attain happiness , always remember that you are on the right road , and try not to leave it . 
Above all , avoid falsehood , every kind of falsehood , especially falseness to yourself . 
Watch over your own deceitfulness and look into it every hour , every minute . 
Avoid being scornful , both to others and to yourself . 
What seems to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of your observing it in yourself . 
Avoid fear , too , though fear is only the consequence of every sort of falsehood . 
Never be frightened at your own faint-heartedness in attaining love . 
Do n't be frightened overmuch even at your evil actions . 
I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling to you , for love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams . 
Love in dreams is greedy for immediate action , rapidly performed and in the sight of all . 
Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal does not last long but is soon over , with all looking on and applauding as though on the stage . 
But active love is labour and fortitude , and for some people too , perhaps , a complete science . 
But I predict that just when you see with horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting farther from your goal instead of nearer to it - at that very moment I predict that you will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord who has been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you . 
Forgive me for not being able to stay longer with you . 
They are waiting for me . 
Good-bye . '' 
The lady was weeping . 
`` Lise , Lise ! 
Bless her - bless her ! '' 
she cried , starting up suddenly . 
`` She does not deserve to be loved . 
I have seen her naughtiness all along , '' the elder said jestingly . 
`` Why have you been laughing at Alexey ? '' 
Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time . 
She had noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her , and she found this extremely amusing . 
She waited intently to catch his eye . 
Alyosha , unable to endure her persistent stare , was irresistibly and suddenly drawn to glance at her , and at once she smiled triumphantly in his face . 
Alyosha was even more disconcerted and vexed . 
At last he turned away from her altogether and hid behind the elder 's back . 
After a few minutes , drawn by the same irresistible force , he turned again to see whether he was being looked at or not , and found Lise almost hanging out of her chair to peep sideways at him , eagerly waiting for him to look . 
Catching his eye , she laughed so that the elder could not help saying , `` Why do you make fun of him like that , naughty girl ? '' 
Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed . 
Her eyes flashed and her face became quite serious . 
She began speaking quickly and nervously in a warm and resentful voice : `` Why has he forgotten everything , then ? 
He used to carry me about when I was little . 
We used to play together . 
He used to come to teach me to read , do you know . 
Two years ago , when he went away , he said that he would never forget me , that we were friends for ever , for ever , for ever ! 
And now he 's afraid of me all at once . 
Am I going to eat him ? 
Why does n't he want to come near me ? 
Why does n't he talk ? 
Why wo n't he come and see us ? 
It 's not that you wo n't let him . 
We know that he goes everywhere . 
It 's not good manners for me to invite him . 
He ought to have thought of it first , if he has n't forgotten me . 
No , now he 's saving his soul ! 
Why have you put that long gown on him ? 
If he runs he 'll fall . '' 
And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible , prolonged , nervous , inaudible laughter . 
The elder listened to her with a smile , and blessed her tenderly . 
As she kissed his hand she suddenly pressed it to her eyes and began crying . 
`` Do n't be angry with me . 
