Why are people poor ? 
Why is the babe poor ? 
Why is the steppe barren ? 
Why do n't they hug each other and kiss ? 
Why do n't they sing songs of joy ? 
Why are they so dark from black misery ? 
Why do n't they feed the babe ? '' 
And he felt that , though his questions were unreasonable and senseless , yet he wanted to ask just that , and he had to ask it just in that way . 
And he felt that a passion of pity , such as he had never known before , was rising in his heart , that he wanted to cry , that he wanted to do something for them all , so that the babe should weep no more , so that the dark-faced , dried-up mother should not weep , that no one should shed tears again from that moment , and he wanted to do it at once , at once , regardless of all obstacles , with all the recklessness of the Karamazovs . 
`` And I 'm coming with you . 
I wo n't leave you now for the rest of my life , I 'm coming with you '' , he heard close beside him Grushenka 's tender voice , thrilling with emotion . 
And his heart glowed , and he struggled forward towards the light , and he longed to live , to live , to go on and on , towards the new , beckoning light , and to hasten , hasten , now , at once ! 
`` What ! 
Where ? '' 
he exclaimed opening his eyes , and sitting up on the chest , as though he had revived from a swoon , smiling brightly . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch was standing over him , suggesting that he should hear the protocol read aloud and sign it . 
Mitya guessed that he had been asleep an hour or more , but he did not hear Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
He was suddenly struck by the fact that there was a pillow under his head , which had n't been there when he had leant back , exhausted , on the chest . 
`` Who put that pillow under my head ? 
Who was so kind ? '' 
he cried , with a sort of ecstatic gratitude , and tears in his voice , as though some great kindness had been shown him . 
He never found out who this kind man was ; perhaps one of the peasant witnesses , or Nikolay Parfenovitch 's little secretary , had compassionately thought to put a pillow under his head ; but his whole soul was quivering with tears . 
He went to the table and said that he would sign whatever they liked . 
`` I 've had a good dream , gentlemen , '' he said in a strange voice , with a new light , as of joy , in his face . 
They Carry Mitya Away WHEN the protocol had been signed , Nikolay Parfenovitch turned solemnly to the prisoner and read him the `` Committal , '' setting forth , that in such a year , on such a day , in such a place , the investigating lawyer of such-and-such a district court , having examined so-and-so -LRB- to wit , Mitya -RRB- accused of this and of that -LRB- all the charges were carefully written out -RRB- and having considered that the accused , not pleading guilty to the charges made against him , had brought forward nothing in his defence , while the witnesses , so-and-so , and so-and-so , and the circumstances such-and-such testify against him , acting in accordance with such-and-such articles of the Statute Book , and so on , has ruled , that , in order to preclude so-and-so -LRB- Mitya -RRB- from all means of evading pursuit and judgment , he be detained in such-and-such a prison , which he hereby notifies to the accused and communicates a copy of this same `` Committal '' to the deputy prosecutor , and so on , and so on . 
In brief , Mitya was informed that he was , from that moment , a prisoner , and that he would be driven at once to the town , and there shut up in a very unpleasant place . 
Mitya listened attentively , and only shrugged his shoulders . 
`` Well , gentlemen , I do n't blame you . 
I 'm ready ... . 
I understand that there 's nothing else for you to do . '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch informed him gently that he would be escorted at once by the rural police officer , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , who happened to be on the spot ... `` Stay , '' Mitya interrupted , suddenly , and impelled by uncontrollable feeling he pronounced , addressing all in the room : `` Gentlemen , we 're all cruel , we 're all monsters , we all make men weep , and mothers , and babes at the breast , but of all , let it be settled here , now , of all I am the lowest reptile ! 
I 've sworn to amend , and every day I 've done the same filthy things . 
I understand now that such men as I need a blow , a blow of destiny to catch them as with a noose , and bind them by a force from without . 
Never , never should I have risen of myself ! 
But the thunderbolt has fallen . 
I accept the torture of accusation , and my public shame ; I want to suffer and by suffering I shall be purified . 
Perhaps I shall be purified , gentlemen ? 
But listen , for the last time , I am not guilty of my father 's blood . 
I accept my punishment , not because I killed him , but because I meant to kill him , and perhaps I really might have killed him . 
Still I mean to fight it out with you . 
I warn you of that . 
I 'll fight it out with you to the end , and then God will decide . 
Good-bye , gentlemen , do n't be vexed with me for having shouted at you during the examination . 
Oh , I was still such a fool then ... . 
In another minute I shall be a prisoner , but now , for the last time , as a free man , Dmitri Karamazov offers you his hand . 
Saying good-bye to you , I say it to all men . '' 
His voice quivered and he stretched out his hand , but Nikolay Parfenovitch , who happened to stand nearest to him , with a sudden , almost nervous movement , hid his hands behind his back . 
Mitya instantly noticed this , and started . 
He let his outstretched hand fall at once . 
`` The preliminary inquiry is not yet over , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch faltered , somewhat embarrassed . 
`` We will continue it in the town , and I , for my part , of course , am ready to wish you all success ... in your defence ... . 
As a matter of fact , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , I 've always been disposed to regard you as , so to speak , more unfortunate than guilty . 
All of us here , if I may make bold to speak for all , we are all ready to recognise that you are , at bottom , a young man of honour , but , alas , one who has been carried away by certain passions to a somewhat excessive degree ... '' Nikolay Parfenovitch 's little figure was positively majestic by the time he had finished speaking . 
It struck Mitya that in another minute this `` boy '' would take his arm , lead him to another corner , and renew their conversation about `` girls . '' 
But many quite irrelevant and inappropriate thoughts sometimes occur even to a prisoner when he is being led out to execution . 
`` Gentlemen , you are good , you are humane , may I see her to say ` good-bye ' for the last time ? '' 
asked Mitya . 
`` Certainly , but considering ... in fact , now it 's impossible except in the presence of - '' `` Oh , well , if it must be so , it must ! '' 
Grushenka was brought in , but the farewell was brief , and of few words , and did not at all satisfy Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
Grushenka made a deep bow to Mitya . 
`` I have told you I am yours , and I will be yours . 
I will follow you for ever , wherever they may send you . 
Farewell ; you are guiltless , though you 've been your own undoing . '' 
Her lips quivered , tears flowed from her eyes . 
`` Forgive me , Grusha , for my love , for ruining you , too , with my love . '' 
Mitya would have said something more , but he broke off and went out . 
He was at once surrounded by men who kept a constant watch on him . 
At the bottom of the steps to which he had driven up with such a dash the day before with Andrey 's three horses , two carts stood in readiness . 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , a sturdy , thick-set man with a wrinkled face , was annoyed about something , some sudden irregularity . 
He was shouting angrily . 
He asked Mitya to get into the cart with somewhat excessive surliness . 
`` When I stood him drinks in the tavern , the man had quite a different face , '' thought Mitya , as he got in . 
At the gates there was a crowd of people , peasants , women , and drivers . 
Trifon Borissovitch came down the steps too . 
All stared at Mitya . 
`` Forgive me at parting , good people ! '' 
Mitya shouted suddenly from the cart . 
`` Forgive us too ! '' 
he heard two or three voices . 
`` Good-bye to you , too , Trifon Borissovitch ! '' 
But Trifon Borissovitch did not even turn round . 
He was , perhaps , too busy . 
He , too , was shouting and fussing about something . 
It appeared that everything was not yet ready in the second cart , in which two constables were to accompany Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
The peasant who had been ordered to drive the second cart was pulling on his smock , stoutly maintaining that it was not his turn to go , but Akim 's . 
But Akim was not to be seen . 
They ran to look for him . 
The peasant persisted and besought them to wait . 
`` You see what our peasants are , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
They 've no shame ! '' 
exclaimed Trifon Borissovitch . 
`` Akim gave you twenty-five copecks the day before yesterday . 
You 've drunk it all and now you cry out . 
I 'm simply surprised at your good-nature , with our low peasants , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , that 's all I can say . '' 
`` But what do we want a second cart for ? '' 
Mitya put in . 
`` Let 's start with the one , Mavriky Mavrikyevitch . 
I wo n't be unruly , I wo n't run away from you , old fellow . 
What do we want an escort for ? '' 
`` I 'll trouble you , sir , to learn how to speak to me if you 've never been taught . 
