The monks , who had gathered for this probably last conversation with Father Zossima , had all been his devoted friends for many years . 
There were four of them : Father Iosif and Father Paissy , Father Mihail the warden of the hermitage , a man not very old and far from being learned . 
He was of humble origin , of strong will and steadfast faith , of austere appearance , but of deep tenderness , though he obviously concealed it as though he were almost ashamed of it . 
The fourth , Father Anfim , was a very old and humble little monk of the poorest peasant class . 
He was almost illiterate , and very quiet , scarcely speaking to anyone . 
He was the humblest of the humble , and looked as though he had been frightened by something great and awful beyond the scope of his intelligence . 
Father Zossima had a great affection for this timorous man , and always treated him with marked respect , though perhaps there was no one he had known to whom he had said less , in spite of the fact that he had spent years wandering about holy Russia with him . 
That was very long ago , forty years before , when Father Zossima first began his life as a monk in a poor and little monastery at Kostroma , and when , shortly after , he had accompanied Father Anfim on his pilgrimage to collect alms for their poor monastery . 
The whole party were in the bedroom which , as we mentioned before , was very small , so that there was scarcely room for the four of them -LRB- in addition to Porfiry , the novice , who stood -RRB- to sit round Father Zossima on chairs brought from the sitting room . 
It was already beginning to get dark , the room was lighted up by the lamps and the candles before the ikons . 
Seeing Alyosha standing embarrassed in the doorway , Father Zossima smiled at him joyfully and held out his hand . 
`` Welcome , my quiet one , welcome , my dear , here you are too . 
I knew you would come . '' 
Alyosha went up to him , bowed down before him to the ground and wept . 
Something surged up from his heart , his soul was quivering , he wanted to sob . 
`` Come , do n't weep over me yet , '' Father Zossima smiled , laying his right hand on his head . 
`` You see I am sitting up talking ; maybe I shall live another twenty years yet , as that dear good woman from Vishegorye , with her little Lizaveta in her arms , wished me yesterday . 
God bless the mother and the little girl Lizaveta , '' he crossed himself . 
`` Porfiry , did you take her offering where I told you ? '' 
He meant the sixty copecks brought him the day before by the good-humoured woman to be given `` to someone poorer than me . '' 
Such offerings , always of money gained by personal toil , are made by way of penance voluntarily undertaken . 
The elder had sent Porfiry the evening before to a widow , whose house had been burnt down lately , and who after the fire had gone with her children begging alms . 
Porfiry hastened to reply that he had given the money , as he had been instructed , `` from an unknown benefactress . '' 
`` Get up , my dear boy , '' the elder went on to Alyosha . 
`` Let me look at you . 
Have you been home and seen your brother ? '' 
It seemed strange to Alyosha that he asked so confidently and precisely , about one of his brothers only - but which one ? 
Then perhaps he had sent him out both yesterday and to-day for the sake of that brother . 
`` I have seen one of my brothers , '' answered Alyosha . 
`` I mean the elder one , to whom I bowed down . '' 
`` I only saw him yesterday and could not find him to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Make haste to find him , go again to-morrow and make haste , leave everything and make haste . 
Perhaps you may still have time to prevent something terrible . 
I bowed down yesterday to the great suffering in store for him . '' 
He was suddenly silent and seemed to be pondering . 
The words were strange . 
Father Iosif , who had witnessed the scene yesterday , exchanged glances with Father Paissy . 
Alyosha could not resist asking : `` Father and teacher , '' he began with extreme emotion , `` your words are too obscure ... . 
What is this suffering in store for him ? '' 
`` Do n't inquire . 
I seemed to see something terrible yesterday ... as though his whole future were expressed in his eyes . 
A look came into his eyes - so that I was instantly horror-stricken at what that man is preparing for himself . 
Once or twice in my life I 've seen such a look in a man 's face ... reflecting as it were his future fate , and that fate , alas , came to pass . 
I sent you to him , Alexey , for I thought your brotherly face would help him . 
But everything and all our fates are from the Lord . 
` Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die , it abideth alone ; but if it die , it bringeth forth much fruit . ' 
Remember that . 
You , Alexey , I 've many times silently blessed for your face , know that , '' added the elder with a gentle smile . 
`` This is what I think of you , you will go forth from these walls , but will live like a monk in the world . 
You will have many enemies , but even your foes will love you . 
Life will bring you many misfortunes , but you will find your happiness in them , and will bless life and will make others bless it - which is what matters most . 
Well , that is your character . 
Fathers and teachers , '' he addressed his friends with a tender smile , `` I have never till to-day told even him why the face of this youth is so dear to me . 
Now I will tell you . 
His face has been as it were a remembrance and a prophecy for me . 
At the dawn of my life when I was a child I had an elder brother who died before my eyes at seventeen . 
And later on in the course of my life I gradually became convinced that that brother had been for a guidance and a sign from on high for me . 
For had he not come into my life , I should never perhaps , so I fancy at least , have become a monk and entered on this precious path . 
He appeared first to me in my childhood , and here , at the end of my pilgrimage , he seems to have come to me over again . 
It is marvellous , fathers and teachers , that Alexey , who has some , though not a great , resemblance in face , seems to me so like him spiritually , that many times I have taken him for that young man , my brother , mysteriously come back to me at the end of my pilgrimage , as a reminder and an inspiration . 
So that I positively wondered at so strange a dream in myself . 
Do you hear this , Porfiry ? '' 
he turned to the novice who waited on him . 
`` Many times I 've seen in your face as it were a look of mortification that I love Alexey more than you . 
Now you know why that was so , but I love you too , know that , and many times I grieved at your mortification . 
I should like to tell you , dear friends , of that youth , my brother , for there has been no presence in my life more precious , more significant and touching . 
My heart is full of tenderness , and I look at my whole life at this moment as though living through it again . '' 
Here I must observe that this last conversation of Father Zossima with the friends who visited him on the last day of his life has been partly preserved in writing . 
Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov wrote it down from memory , some time after his elder 's death . 
But whether this was only the conversation that took place then , or whether he added to it his notes of parts of former conversations with his teacher , I can not determine . 
In his account , Father Zossima 's talk goes on without interruption , as though he told his life to his friends in the form of a story , though there is no doubt , from other accounts of it , that the conversation that evening was general . 
Though the guests did not interrupt Father Zossima much , yet they too talked , perhaps even told something themselves . 
Besides , Father Zossima could not have carried on an uninterrupted narrative , for he was sometimes gasping for breath , his voice failed him , and he even lay down to rest on his bed , though he did not fall asleep and his visitors did not leave their seats . 
Once or twice the conversation was interrupted by Father Paissy 's reading the Gospel . 
It is worthy of note , too , that no one of them supposed that he would die that night , for on that evening of his life after his deep sleep in the day he seemed suddenly to have found new strength , which kept him up through this long conversation . 
It was like a last effort of love which gave him marvellous energy ; only for a little time , however , for his life was cut short immediately . . 
But of that later . 
I will only add now that I have preferred to confine myself to the account given by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
It will be shorter and not so fatiguing , though , of course , as I must repeat , Alyosha took a great deal from previous conversations and added them to it . 
Notes of the Life of the deceased Priest and Monk , the Elder Zossima , taken from his own words by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES -LRB- a -RRB- Father Zossima 's Brother . 
Beloved fathers and teachers , I was born in a distant province in the north , in the town of V. My father was a gentleman by birth , but of no great consequence or position . 
He died when I was only two years old , and I do n't remember him at all . 
He left my mother a small house built of wood , and a fortune , not large , but sufficient to keep her and her children in comfort . 
There were two of us , my elder brother Markel and I . 
He was eight years older than I was , of hasty , irritable temperament , but kind-hearted and never ironical . 
He was remarkably silent , especially at home with me , his mother , and the servants . 
He did well at school , but did not get on with his school-fellows , though he never quarrelled , at least so my mother has told me . 
Six months before his death , when he was seventeen , he made friends with a political exile who had been banished from Moscow to our town for freethinking , and led a solitary existence there . 
He was a good scholar who had gained distinction in philosophy in the university . 
Something made him take a fancy to Markel , and he used to ask him to see him . 
The young man would spend whole evenings with him during that winter , till the exile was summoned to Petersburg to take up his post again at his own request , as he had powerful friends . 
It was the beginning of Lent , and Markel would not fast , he was rude and laughed at it . 
`` That 's all silly twaddle , and there is no God , '' he said , horrifying my mother , the servants , and me too . 
For though I was only nine , I too was aghast at hearing such words . 
We had four servants , all serfs . 
I remember my mother selling one of the four , the cook Afimya , who was lame and elderly , for sixty paper roubles , and hiring a free servant to take her place . 
In the sixth week in Lent , my brother , who was never strong and had a tendency to consumption , was taken ill . 
He was tall but thin and delicate-looking , and of very pleasing countenance . 
I suppose he caught cold , anyway the doctor , who came , soon whispered to my mother that it was galloping consumption , that he would not live through the spring . 
