He had a footing everywhere , and got information about everything . 
He was of an uneasy and envious temper . 
He was well aware of his own considerable abilities , and nervously exaggerated them in his self-conceit . 
He knew he would play a prominent part of some sort , but Alyosha , who was attached to him , was distressed to see that his friend Rakitin was dishonourable , and quite unconscious of being so himself , considering , on the contrary , that because he would not steal money left on the table he was a man of the highest integrity . 
Neither Alyosha nor anyone else could have influenced him in that . 
Rakitin , of course , was a person of too little consequence to be invited to the dinner , to which Father Iosif , Father Paissy , and one other monk were the only inmates of the monastery invited . 
They were already waiting when Miusov , Kalganov , and Ivan arrived . 
The other guest , Maximov , stood a little aside , waiting also . 
The Father Superior stepped into the middle of the room to receive his guests . 
He was a tall , thin , but still vigorous old man , with black hair streaked with grey , and a long , grave , ascetic face . 
He bowed to his guests in silence . 
But this time they approached to receive his blessing . 
Miusov even tried to kiss his hand , but the Father Superior drew it back in time to avoid the salute . 
But Ivan and Kalganov went through the ceremony in the most simple-hearted and complete manner , kissing his hand as peasants do . 
`` We must apologise most humbly , your reverence , '' began Miusov , simpering affably , and speaking in a dignified and respectful tone . 
`` Pardon us for having come alone without the gentleman you invited , Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
He felt obliged to decline the honour of your hospitality , and not without reason . 
In the reverend Father Zossima 's cell he was carried away by the unhappy dissension with his son , and let fall words which were quite out of keeping ... in fact , quite unseemly ... as '' - he glanced at the monks - `` your reverence is , no doubt , already aware . 
And therefore , recognising that he had been to blame , he felt sincere regret and shame , and begged me , and his son Ivan Fyodorovitch , to convey to you his apologies and regrets . 
In brief , he hopes and desires to make amends later . 
He asks your blessing , and begs you to forget what has taken place . '' 
As he uttered the last word of his tirade , Miusov completely recovered his self-complacency , and all traces of his former irritation disappeared . 
He fully and sincerely loved humanity again . 
The Father Superior listened to him with dignity , and , with a slight bend of the head , replied : `` I sincerely deplore his absence . 
Perhaps at our table he might have learnt to like us , and we him . 
Pray be seated , gentlemen . '' 
He stood before the holy image , and began to say grace , aloud . 
All bent their heads reverently , and Maximov clasped his hands before him , with peculiar fervour . 
It was at this moment that Fyodor Pavlovitch played his last prank . 
It must be noted that he really had meant to go home , and really had felt the impossibility of going to dine with the Father Superior as though nothing had happened , after his disgraceful behaviour in the elder 's cell . 
Not that he was so very much ashamed of himself - quite the contrary perhaps . 
But still he felt it would be unseemly to go to dinner . 
Yet his creaking carriage had hardly been brought to the steps of the hotel , and he had hardly got into it , when he suddenly stopped short . 
He remembered his own words at the elder 's : `` I always feel when I meet people that I am lower than all , and that they all take me for a buffoon ; so I say let me play the buffoon , for you are , every one of you , stupider and lower than I. '' He longed to revenge himself on everyone for his own unseemliness . 
He suddenly recalled how he had once in the past been asked , `` Why do you hate so and so , so much ? '' 
And he had answered them , with his shameless impudence , `` I 'll tell you . 
He has done me no harm . 
But I played him a dirty trick , and ever since I have hated him . '' 
Remembering that now , he smiled quietly and malignantly , hesitating for a moment . 
His eyes gleamed , and his lips positively quivered . 
`` Well , since I have begun , I may as well go on , '' he decided . 
His predominant sensation at that moment might be expressed in the following words , `` Well , there is no rehabilitating myself now . 
So let me shame them for all I am worth . 
I will show them I do n't care what they think - that 's all ! '' 
He told the coachman to wait , while with rapid steps he returned to the monastery and straight to the Father Superior 's . 
He had no clear idea what he would do , but he knew that he could not control himself , and that a touch might drive him to the utmost limits of obscenity , but only to obscenity , to nothing criminal , nothing for which he could be legally punished . 
In the last resort , he could always restrain himself , and had marvelled indeed at himself , on that score , sometimes . 
He appeared in the Father Superior 's dining-room , at the moment when the prayer was over , and all were moving to the table . 
Standing in the doorway , he scanned the company , and laughing his prolonged , impudent , malicious chuckle , looked them all boldly in the face . 
`` They thought I had gone , and here I am again , '' he cried to the whole room . 
For one moment everyone stared at him without a word ; and at once everyone felt that something revolting , grotesque , positively scandalous , was about to happen . 
Miusov passed immediately from the most benevolent frame of mind to the most savage . 
All the feelings that had subsided and died down in his heart revived instantly . 
`` No ! 
this I can not endure ! '' 
he cried . 
`` I absolutely can not ! 
and ... I certainly can not ! '' 
The blood rushed to his head . 
He positively stammered ; but he was beyond thinking of style , and he seized his hat . 
`` What is it he can not ? '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` that he absolutely can not and certainly can not ? 
Your reverence , am I to come in or not ? 
Will you receive me as your guest ? '' 
`` You are welcome with all my heart , '' answered the Superior . 
`` Gentlemen ! '' 
he added , `` I venture to beg you most earnestly to lay aside your dissensions , and to be united in love and family harmony - with prayer to the Lord at our humble table . '' 
`` No , no , it is impossible ! '' 
cried Miusov , beside himself . 
`` Well , if it is impossible for Pyotr Alexandrovitch , it is impossible for me , and I wo n't stop . 
That is why I came . 
I will keep with Pyotr Alexandrovitch everywhere now . 
If you will go away , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , I will go away too , if you remain , I will remain . 
You stung him by what you said about family harmony , Father Superior , he does not admit he is my relation . 
That 's right , is n't it , von Sohn ? 
Here 's von Sohn . 
How are you , von Sohn ? '' 
`` Do you mean me ? '' 
muttered Maximov , puzzled . 
`` Of course I mean you , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` Who else ? 
The Father Superior could not be von Sohn . '' 
`` But I am not von Sohn either . 
I am Maximov . '' 
`` No , you are von Sohn . 
Your reverence , do you know who von Sohn was ? 
It was a famous murder case . 
He was killed in a house of harlotry - I believe that is what such places are called among you - he was killed and robbed , and in spite of his venerable age , he was nailed up in a box and sent from Petersburg to Moscow in the luggage van , and while they were nailing him up , the harlots sang songs and played the harp , that is to say , the piano . 
So this is that very von Solin . 
He has risen from the dead , has n't he , von Sohn ? '' 
`` What is happening ? 
What 's this ? '' 
voices were heard in the group of monks . 
`` Let us go , '' cried Miusov , addressing Kalganov . 
`` No , excuse me , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch broke in shrilly , taking another step into the room . 
`` Allow me to finish . 
There in the cell you blamed me for behaving disrespectfully just because I spoke of eating gudgeon , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
Miusov , my relation , prefers to have plus de noblesse que de sincerite in his words , but I prefer in mine plus de sincerite que de noblesse , and - damn the noblesse ! 
That 's right , is n't it , von Sohn ? 
Allow me , Father Superior , though I am a buffoon and play the buffoon , yet I am the soul of honour , and I want to speak my mind . 
