`` That anecdote about the quadrillion years , I made up myself ! 
I was seventeen then , I was at the high school . 
I made up that anecdote and told it to a schoolfellow called Korovkin , it was at Moscow ... . 
The anecdote is so characteristic that I could n't have taken it from anywhere . 
I thought I 'd forgotten it ... but I 've unconsciously recalled it - I recalled it myself - it was not you telling it ! 
Thousands of things are unconsciously remembered like that even when people are being taken to execution ... it 's come back to me in a dream . 
You are that dream ! 
You are a dream , not a living creature ! '' 
`` From the vehemence with which you deny my existence , '' laughed the gentleman , `` I am convinced that you believe in me . '' 
`` Not in the slightest ! 
I have n't a hundredth part of a grain of faith in you ! '' 
`` But you have the thousandth of a grain . 
Homeopathic doses perhaps are the strongest . 
Confess that you have faith even to the ten-thousandth of a grain . '' 
`` Not for one minute , '' cried Ivan furiously . 
`` But I should like to believe in you , '' he added strangely . 
`` Aha ! 
There 's an admission ! 
But I am good-natured . 
I 'll come to your assistance again . 
Listen , it was I caught you , not you me . 
I told you your anecdote you 'd forgotten , on purpose , so as to destroy your faith in me completely . '' 
`` You are lying . 
The object of your visit is to convince me of your existence ! '' 
`` Just so . 
But hesitation , suspense , conflict between belief and disbelief - is sometimes such torture to a conscientious man , such as you are , that it 's better to hang oneself at once . 
Knowing that you are inclined to believe in me , I administered some disbelief by telling you that anecdote . 
I lead you to belief and disbelief by turns , and I have my motive in it . 
It 's the new method . 
As soon as you disbelieve in me completely , you 'll begin assuring me to my face that I am not a dream but a reality . 
I know you . 
Then I shall have attained my object , which is an honourable one . 
I shall sow in you only a tiny grain of faith and it will grow into an oak-tree - and such an oak-tree that , sitting on it , you will long to enter the ranks of ` the hermits in the wilderness and the saintly women , ' for that is what you are secretly longing for . 
You 'll dine on locusts , you 'll wander into the wilderness to save your soul ! '' 
`` Then it 's for the salvation of my soul you are working , is it , you scoundrel ? '' 
`` One must do a good work sometimes . 
How ill-humoured you are ! '' 
`` Fool ! 
did you ever tempt those holy men who ate locusts and prayed seventeen years in the wilderness till they were overgrown with moss ? '' 
`` My dear fellow , I 've done nothing else . 
One forgets the whole world and all the worlds , and sticks to one such saint , because he is a very precious diamond . 
One such soul , you know , is sometimes worth a whole constellation . 
We have our system of reckoning , you know . 
The conquest is priceless ! 
And some of them , on my word , are not inferior to you in culture , though you wo n't believe it . 
They can contemplate such depths of belief and disbelief at the same moment that sometimes it really seems that they are within a hair 's - breadth of being ` turned upside down , ' as the actor Gorbunov says . '' 
`` Well , did you get your nose pulled ? '' 
`` My dear fellow , '' observed the visitor sententiously , `` it 's better to get off with your nose pulled than without a nose at all . 
As an afflicted marquis observed not long ago -LRB- he must have been treated by a specialist -RRB- in confession to his spiritual father - a Jesuit . 
I was present , it was simply charming . 
` Give me back my nose ! ' 
he said , and he beat his breast . 
` My son , ' said the priest evasively , ` all things are accomplished in accordance with the inscrutable decrees of Providence , and what seems a misfortune sometimes leads to extraordinary , though unapparent , benefits . 
If stern destiny has deprived you of your nose , it 's to your advantage that no one can ever pull you by your nose . ' 
` Holy father , that 's no comfort , ' cried the despairing marquis . 
` I 'd be delighted to have my nose pulled every day of my life , if it were only in its proper place . ' 
` My son , ' sighs the priest , ` you ca n't expect every blessing at once . 
This is murmuring against Providence , who even in this has not forgotten you , for if you repine as you repined just now , declaring you 'd be glad to have your nose pulled for the rest of your life , your desire has already been fulfilled indirectly , for when you lost your nose , you were led by the nose . ' 
`` Fool , how stupid ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` My dear friend , I only wanted to amuse you . 
But I swear that 's the genuine Jesuit casuistry and I swear that it all happened word for word as I 've told you . 
It happened lately and gave me a great deal of trouble . 
The unhappy young man shot himself that very night when he got home . 
I was by his side till the very last moment . 
Those Jesuit confessionals are really my most delightful diversion at melancholy moments . 
Here 's another incident that happened only the other day . 
A little blonde Norman girl of twenty - a buxom , unsophisticated beauty that would make your mouth water - comes to an old priest . 
She bends down and whispers her sin into the grating . 
` Why , my daughter , have you fallen again already ? ' 
cries the priest : ' O Sancta Maria , what do I hear ! 
Not the same man this time , how long is this going on ? 
Are n't you ashamed ! ' 
` Ah , mon pere , ' answers the sinner with tears of penitence , ` Ca lui fait tant de plaisir , et a moi si peu de peine ! ' 
* Fancy , such an answer ! 
I drew back . 
It was the cry of nature , better than innocence itself , if you like . 
I absolved her sin on the spot and was turning to go , but I was forced to turn back . 
I heard the priest at the grating making an appointment with her for the evening - though he was an old man hard as flint , he fell in an instant ! 
It was nature , the truth of nature asserted its rights ! 
What , you are turning up your nose again ? 
Angry again ? 
I do n't know how to please you - '' * Ah , my father , this gives him so much pleasure , and me so little pain ! 
`` Leave me alone , you are beating on my brain like a haunting nightmare , '' Ivan moaned miserably , helpless before his apparition . 
`` I am bored with you , agonisingly and insufferably . 
I would give anything to be able to shake you off ! '' 
`` I repeat , moderate your expectations , do n't demand of me ` everything great and noble , ' and you 'll see how well we shall get on , '' said the gentleman impressively . 
`` You are really angry with me for not having appeared to you in a red glow , with thunder and lightning , with scorched wings , but have shown myself in such a modest form . 
You are wounded , in the first place , in your asthetic feelings , and , secondly , in your pride . 
How could such a vulgar devil visit such a great man as you ! 
Yes , there is that romantic strain in you , that was so derided by Byelinsky . 
I ca n't help it , young man , as I got ready to come to you I did think as a joke of appearing in the figure of a retired general who had served in the Caucasus , with a star of the Lion and the Sun on my coat . 
But I was positively afraid of doing it , for you 'd have thrashed me for daring to pin the Lion and the Sun on my coat , instead of , at least , the Polar Star or the Sirius . 
And you keep on saying I am stupid , but , mercy on us ! 
I make no claim to be equal to you in intelligence . 
Mephistopheles declared to Faust that he desired evil , but did only good . 
Well , he can say what he likes , it 's quite the opposite with me . 
I am perhaps the one man in all creation who loves the truth and genuinely desires good . 
I was there when the Word , Who died on the Cross , rose up into heaven bearing on His bosom the soul of the penitent thief . 
I heard the glad shrieks of the cherubim singing and shouting hosannah and the thunderous rapture of the seraphim which shook heaven and all creation , and I swear to you by all that 's sacred , I longed to join the choir and shout hosannah with them all . 
