So there is a little devil sitting in your heart , Alyosha Karamazov ! '' 
`` What I said was absurd , but - '' `` That 's just the point , that ` but ' ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` Let me tell you , novice , that the absurd is only too necessary on earth . 
The world stands on absurdities , and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in it without them . 
We know what we know ! '' 
`` What do you know ? '' 
`` I understand nothing , '' Ivan went on , as though in delirium . 
`` I do n't want to understand anything now . 
I want to stick to the fact . 
I made up my mind long ago not to understand . 
If I try to understand anything , I shall be false to the fact , and I have determined to stick to the fact . '' 
`` Why are you trying me ? '' 
Alyosha cried , with sudden distress . 
`` Will you say what you mean at last ? '' 
`` Of course , I will ; that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
You are dear to me , I do n't want to let you go , and I wo n't give you up to your Zossima . '' 
Ivan for a minute was silent , his face became all at once very sad . 
`` Listen ! 
I took the case of children only to make my case clearer . 
Of the other tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its crust to its centre , I will say nothing . 
I have narrowed my subject on purpose . 
I am a bug , and I recognise in all humility that I can not understand why the world is arranged as it is . 
Men are themselves to blame , I suppose ; they were given paradise , they wanted freedom , and stole fire from heaven , though they knew they would become unhappy , so there is no need to pity them . 
With my pitiful , earthly , Euclidian understanding , all I know is that there is suffering and that there are none guilty ; that cause follows effect , simply and directly ; that everything flows and finds its level - but that 's only Euclidian nonsense , I know that , and I ca n't consent to live by it ! 
What comfort is it to me that there are none guilty and that cause follows effect simply and directly , and that I know it ? 
- I must have justice , or I will destroy myself . 
And not justice in some remote infinite time and space , but here on earth , and that I could see myself . 
I have believed in it . 
I want to see it , and if I am dead by then , let me rise again , for if it all happens without me , it will be too unfair . 
Surely I have n't suffered simply that I , my crimes and my sufferings , may manure the soil of the future harmony for somebody else . 
I want to see with my own eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and embrace his murderer . 
I want to be there when everyone suddenly understands what it has all been for . 
All the religions of the world are built on this longing , and I am a believer . 
But then there are the children , and what am I to do about them ? 
That 's a question I ca n't answer . 
For the hundredth time I repeat , there are numbers of questions , but I 've only taken the children , because in their case what I mean is so unanswerably clear . 
Listen ! 
If all must suffer to pay for the eternal harmony , what have children to do with it , tell me , please ? 
It 's beyond all comprehension why they should suffer , and why they should pay for the harmony . 
Why should they , too , furnish material to enrich the soil for the harmony of the future ? 
I understand solidarity in sin among men . 
I understand solidarity in retribution , too ; but there can be no such solidarity with children . 
And if it is really true that they must share responsibility for all their fathers ' crimes , such a truth is not of this world and is beyond my comprehension . 
Some jester will say , perhaps , that the child would have grown up and have sinned , but you see he did n't grow up , he was torn to pieces by the dogs , at eight years old . 
Oh , Alyosha , I am not blaspheming ! 
I understand , of course , what an upheaval of the universe it will be when everything in heaven and earth blends in one hymn of praise and everything that lives and has lived cries aloud : ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed . ' 
When the mother embraces the fiend who threw her child to the dogs , and all three cry aloud with tears , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
then , of course , the crown of knowledge will be reached and all will be made clear . 
But what pulls me up here is that I ca n't accept that harmony . 
And while I am on earth , I make haste to take my own measures . 
You see , Alyosha , perhaps it really may happen that if I live to that moment , or rise again to see it , I , too , perhaps , may cry aloud with the rest , looking at the mother embracing the child 's torturer , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
but I do n't want to cry aloud then . 
While there is still time , I hasten to protect myself , and so I renounce the higher harmony altogether . 
It 's not worth the tears of that one tortured child who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its stinking outhouse , with its unexpiated tears to ` dear , kind God ' ! 
It 's not worth it , because those tears are unatoned for . 
They must be atoned for , or there can be no harmony . 
But how ? 
How are you going to atone for them ? 
Is it possible ? 
By their being avenged ? 
But what do I care for avenging them ? 
What do I care for a hell for oppressors ? 
What good can hell do , since those children have already been tortured ? 
And what becomes of harmony , if there is hell ? 
I want to forgive . 
I want to embrace . 
I do n't want more suffering . 
And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth , then I protest that the truth is not worth such a price . 
I do n't want the mother to embrace the oppressor who threw her son to the dogs ! 
She dare not forgive him ! 
Let her forgive him for herself , if she will , let her forgive the torturer for the immeasurable suffering of her mother 's heart . 
But the sufferings of her tortured child she has no right to forgive ; she dare not forgive the torturer , even if the child were to forgive him ! 
And if that is so , if they dare not forgive , what becomes of harmony ? 
Is there in the whole world a being who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
I do n't want harmony . 
From love for humanity I do n't want it . 
I would rather be left with the unavenged suffering . 
I would rather remain with my unavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation , even if I were wrong . 
Besides , too high a price is asked for harmony ; it 's beyond our means to pay so much to enter on it . 
And so I hasten to give back my entrance ticket , and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as possible . 
And that I am doing . 
It 's not God that I do n't accept , Alyosha , only I most respectfully return him the ticket . '' 
`` That 's rebellion , '' murmered Alyosha , looking down . 
`` Rebellion ? 
I am sorry you call it that , '' said Ivan earnestly . 
`` One can hardly live in rebellion , and I want to live . 
Tell me yourself , I challenge your answer . 
Imagine that you are creating a fabric of human destiny with the object of making men happy in the end , giving them peace and rest at last , but that it was essential and inevitable to torture to death only one tiny creature - that baby beating its breast with its fist , for instance - and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears , would you consent to be the architect on those conditions ? 
Tell me , and tell the truth . '' 
`` No , I would n't consent , '' said Alyosha softly . 
`` And can you admit the idea that men for whom you are building it would agree to accept their happiness on the foundation of the unexpiated blood of a little victim ? 
And accepting it would remain happy for ever ? '' 
`` No , I ca n't admit it . 
Brother , '' said Alyosha suddenly , with flashing eyes , `` you said just now , is there a being in the whole world who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
But there is a Being and He can forgive everything , all and for all , because He gave His innocent blood for all and everything . 
You have forgotten Him , and on Him is built the edifice , and it is to Him they cry aloud , ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed ! ' 
`` Ah ! 
the One without sin and His blood ! 
No , I have not forgotten Him ; on the contrary I 've been wondering all the time how it was you did not bring Him in before , for usually all arguments on your side put Him in the foreground . 
