Notes for three thousand roubles were brought into the court just now , and we were told that they were the same that lay in the envelope now on the table before us , and that the witness had received them from Smerdyakov the day before . 
But I need not recall the painful scene , though I will make one or two comments , selecting such trivial ones as might not be obvious at first sight to everyone , and so may be overlooked . 
In the first place , Smerdyakov must have given back the money and hanged himself yesterday from remorse . 
And only yesterday he confessed his guilt to Ivan Karamazov , as the latter informs us . 
If it were not so , indeed , why should Ivan Fyodorovitch have kept silence till now ? 
And so , if he has confessed , then why , I ask again , did he not avow the whole truth in the last letter he left behind , knowing that the innocent prisoner had to face this terrible ordeal the next day ? 
`` The money alone is no proof . 
A week ago , quite by chance , the fact came to the knowledge of myself and two other persons in this court that Ivan Fyodorovitch had sent two five per cent coupons of five thousand each - that is , ten thousand in all - to the chief town of the province to be changed . 
I only mention this to point out that anyone may have money , and that it ca n't be proved that these notes are the same as were in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's envelope . 
`` Ivan Karamazov , after receiving yesterday a communication of such importance from the real murderer , did not stir . 
Why did n't he report it at once ? 
Why did he put it all off till morning ? 
I think I have a right to conjecture why . 
His health had been giving way for a week past : he had admitted to a doctor and to his most intimate friends that he was suffering from hallucinations and seeing phantoms of the dead : he was on the eve of the attack of brain fever by which he has been stricken down to-day . 
In this condition he suddenly heard of Smerdyakov 's death , and at once reflected . 
` The man is dead , I can throw the blame on him and save my brother . 
I have money . 
I will take a roll of notes and say that Smerdyakov gave them me before his death . ' 
You will say that was dishonourable : it 's dishonourable to slander even the dead , and even to save a brother . 
True , but what if he slandered him unconsciously ? 
What if , finally unhinged by the sudden news of the valet 's death , he imagined it really was so ? 
You saw the recent scene : you have seen the witness 's condition . 
He was standing up and was speaking , but where was his mind ? 
`` Then followed the document , the prisoner 's letter written two days before the crime , and containing a complete programme of the murder . 
Why , then , are we looking for any other programme ? 
The crime was committed precisely according to this programme , and by no other than the writer of it . 
Yes , gentlemen of the jury , it went off without a hitch ! 
He did not run respectfully and timidly away from his father 's window , though he was firmly convinced that the object of his affections was with him . 
No , that is absurd and unlikely ! 
He went in and murdered him . 
Most likely he killed him in anger , burning with resentment , as soon as he looked on his hated rival . 
But having killed him , probably with one blow of the brass pestle , and having convinced himself , after careful search , that she was not there , he did not , however , forget to put his hand under the pillow and take out the envelope , the torn cover of which lies now on the table before us . 
`` I mention this fact that you may note one , to my thinking , very characteristic circumstance . 
Had he been an experienced murderer and had he committed the murder for the sake of gain only , would he have left the torn envelope on the floor as it was found , beside the corpse ? 
Had it been Smerdyakov , for instance , murdering his master to rob him , he would have simply carried away the envelope with him , without troubling himself to open it over his victim 's corpse , for he would have known for certain that the notes were in the envelope - they had been put in and sealed up in his presence - and had he taken the envelope with him , no one would ever have known of the robbery . 
I ask you , gentlemen , would Smerdyakov have behaved in that way ? 
Would he have left the envelope on the floor ? 
`` No , this was the action of a frantic murderer , a murderer who was not a thief and had never stolen before that day , who snatched the notes from under the pillow , not like a thief stealing them , but as though seizing his own property from the thief who had stolen it . 
For that was the idea which had become almost an insane obsession in Dmitri Karamazov in regard to that money . 
And pouncing upon the envelope , which he had never seen before , he tore it open to make sure whether the money was in it , and ran away with the money in his pocket , even forgetting to consider that he had left an astounding piece of evidence against himself in that torn envelope on the floor . 
All because it was Karamazov , not Smerdyakov , he did n't think , he did n't reflect , and how should he ? 
He ran away ; he heard behind him the servant cry out ; the old man caught him , stopped him and was felled to the ground by the brass pestle . 
`` The prisoner , moved by pity , leapt down to look at him . 
Would you believe it , he tells us that he leapt down out of pity , out of compassion , to see whether he could do anything for him . 
Was that a moment to show compassion ? 
No ; he jumped down simply to make certain whether the only witness of his crime were dead or alive . 
Any other feeling , any other motive would be unnatural . 
Note that he took trouble over Grigory , wiped his head with his handkerchief and , convincing himself he was dead , he ran to the house of his mistress , dazed and covered with blood . 
How was it he never thought that he was covered with blood and would be at once detected ? 
But the prisoner himself assures us that he did not even notice that he was covered with blood . 
That may be believed , that is very possible , that always happens at such moments with criminals . 
On one point they will show diabolical cunning , while another will escape them altogether . 
But he was thinking at that moment of one thing only - where was she ? 
He wanted to find out at once where she was , so he ran to her lodging and learnt an unexpected and astounding piece of news - she had gone off to Mokroe to meet her first lover . '' 
The Galloping Troika . 
The End of the Prosecutor 's Speech IPPOLIT KIRILLOVITCH had chosen the historial method of exposition , beloved by all nervous orators , who find in its limitation a check on their own eager rhetoric . 
At this moment in his speech he went off into a dissertation on Grushenka 's `` first lover , '' and brought forward several interesting thoughts on this theme . 
`` Karamazov , who had been frantically jealous of everyone , collapsed , so to speak , and effaced himself at once before this first lover . 
What makes it all the more strange is that he seems to have hardly thought of this formidable rival . 
But he had looked upon him as a remote danger , and Karamazov always lives in the present . 
Possibly he regarded him as a fiction . 
But his wounded heart grasped instantly that the woman had been concealing this new rival and deceiving him , because he was anything but a fiction to her , because he was the one hope of her life . 
Grasping this instantly , he resigned himself . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , I can not help dwelling on this unexpected trait in the prisoner 's character . 
He suddenly evinces an irresistible desire for justice , a respect for woman and a recognition of her right to love . 
And all this at the very moment when he had stained his hands with his father 's blood for her sake ! 
It is true that the blood he had shed was already crying out for vengeance , for , after having ruined his soul and his life in this world , he was forced to ask himself at that same instant what he was and what he could be now to her , to that being , dearer to him than his own soul , in comparison with that former lover who had returned penitent , with new love , to the woman he had once betrayed , with honourable offers , with the promise of a reformed and happy life . 
And he , luckless man , what could he give her now , what could he offer her ? 
`` Karamazov felt all this , knew that all ways were barred to him by his crime and that he was a criminal under sentence , and not a man with life before him ! 
This thought crushed him . 
And so he instantly flew to one frantic plan , which , to a man of Karamazov 's character , must have appeared the one inevitable way out of his terrible position . 
That way out was suicide . 
He ran for the pistols he had left in pledge with his friend Perhotin and on the way , as he ran , he pulled out of his pocket the money , for the sake of which he had stained his hands with his father 's gore . 
Oh , now he needed money more than ever . 
Karamazov would die , Karamazov would shoot himself and it should be remembered ! 
To be sure , he was a poet and had burnt the candle at both ends all his life . 
` To her , to her ! 
and there , oh , there I will give a feast to the whole world , such as never was before , that will be remembered and talked of long after ! 
In the midst of shouts of wild merriment , reckless gypsy songs and dances I shall raise the glass and drink to the woman I adore and her new-found happiness ! 
And then , on the spot , at her feet , I shall dash out my brains before her and punish myself ! 
She will remember Mitya Karamazov sometimes , she will see how Mitya loved her , she will feel for Mitya ! ' 
`` Here we see in excess a love of effect , a romantic despair and sentimentality , and the wild recklessness of the Karamazovs . 
Yes , but there is something else , gentlemen of the jury , something that cries out in the soul , throbs incessantly in the mind , and poisons the heart unto death - that something is conscience , gentlemen of the jury , its judgment , its terrible torments ! 
The pistol will settle everything , the pistol is the only way out ! 
But beyond - I do n't know whether Karamazov wondered at that moment ` What lies beyond , ' whether Karamazov could , like Hamlet , wonder ` What lies beyond . ' 
No , gentlemen of the jury , they have their Hamlets , but we still have our Karamazovs ! '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch drew a minute picture of Mitya 's preparations , the scene at Perhotin 's , at the shop , with the drivers . 
He quoted numerous words and actions , confirmed by witnesses , and the picture made a terrible impression on the audience . 
The guilt of this harassed and desperate man stood out clear and convincing , when the facts were brought together . 
`` What need had he of precaution ? 
Two or three times he almost confessed , hinted at it , all but spoke out . '' 
-LRB- Then followed the evidence given by witnesses . -RRB- 
`` He even cried out to the peasant who drove him , ` Do you know , you are driving a murderer ! ' 
But it was impossible for him to speak out , he had to get to Mokroe and there to finish his romance . 
But what was awaiting the luckless man ? 
Almost from the first minute at Mokroe he saw that his invincible rival was perhaps by no means so invincible , that the toast to their new-found happiness was not desired and would not be acceptable . 
But you know the facts , gentlemen of the jury , from the preliminary inquiry . 
Karamazov 's triumph over his rival was complete and his soul passed into quite a new phase , perhaps the most terrible phase through which his soul has passed or will pass . 
`` One may say with certainty , gentlemen of the jury , '' the prosecutor continued , `` that outraged nature and the criminal heart bring their own vengeance more completely than any earthly justice . 
What 's more , justice and punishment on earth positively alleviate the punishment of nature and are , indeed , essential to the soul of the criminal at such moments , as its salvation from despair . 
