hid his face in his hands , and rushed out of the room . 
All the guests flocked out after him , in their confusion not saying good-bye , or bowing to their host . 
Only the monks went up to him again for a blessing . 
`` What did it mean , falling at his feet like that ? 
Was it symbolic or what ? '' 
said Fyodor Pavlovitch , suddenly quieted and trying to reopen conversation without venturing to address anybody in particular . 
They were all passing out of the precincts of the hermitage at the moment . 
`` I ca n't answer for a madhouse and for madmen , '' Miusov answered at once ill-humouredly , `` but I will spare myself your company , Fyodor Pavlovitch , and , trust me , for ever . 
Where 's that monk ? '' 
`` That monk , '' that is , the monk who had invited them to dine with the Superior , did not keep them waiting . 
He met them as soon as they came down the steps from the elder 's cell , as though he had been waiting for them all the time . 
`` Reverend Father , kindly do me a favour . 
Convey my deepest respect to the Father Superior , apologise for me , personally , Miusov , to his reverence , telling him that I deeply regret that owing to unforeseen circumstances I am unable to have the honour of being present at his table , greatly I should desire to do so , '' Miusov said irritably to the monk . 
`` And that unforeseen circumstance , of course , is myself , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cut in immediately . 
`` Do you hear , Father ; this gentleman does n't want to remain in my company or else he 'd come at once . 
And you shall go , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , pray go to the Father Superior and good appetite to you . 
I will decline , and not you . 
Home , home , I 'll eat at home , I do n't feel equal to it here , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , my amiable relative . '' 
`` I am not your relative and never have been , you contemptible man ! '' 
`` I said it on purpose to madden you , because you always disclaim the relationship , though you really are a relation in spite of your shuffling . 
I 'll prove it by the church calendar . 
As for you , Ivan , stay if you like . 
I 'll send the horses for you later . 
Propriety requires you to go to the Father Superior , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , to apologise for the disturbance we 've been making ... '' `` Is it true that you are going home ? 
Are n't you lying ? '' 
`` Pyotr Alexandrovitch ! 
How could I dare after what 's happened ! 
Forgive me , gentlemen , I was carried away ! 
And upset besides ! 
And , indeed , I am ashamed . 
Gentlemen , one man has the heart of Alexander of Macedon and another the heart of the little dog Fido . 
Mine is that of the little dog Fido . 
I am ashamed ! 
After such an escapade how can I go to dinner , to gobble up the monastery 's sauces ? 
I am ashamed , I ca n't . 
You must excuse me ! '' 
`` The devil only knows , what if he deceives us ? '' 
thought Miusov , still hesitating , and watching the retreating buffoon with distrustful eyes . 
The latter turned round , and noticing that Miusov was watching him , waved him a kiss . 
`` Well , are you coming to the Superior ? '' 
Miusov asked Ivan abruptly . 
`` Why not ? 
I was especially invited yesterday . '' 
`` Unfortunately I feel myself compelled to go to this confounded dinner , '' said Miusov with the same irritability , regardless of the fact that the monk was listening . 
`` We ought , at least , to apologise for the disturbance , and explain that it was not our doing . 
What do you think ? '' 
`` Yes , we must explain that it was n't our doing . 
Besides , father wo n't be there , '' observed Ivan . 
`` Well , I should hope not ! 
Confound this dinner ! '' 
They all walked on , however . 
The monk listened in silence . 
On the road through the copse he made one observation however - that the Father Superior had been waiting a long time , and that they were more than half an hour late . 
He received no answer . 
Miusov looked with hatred at Ivan . 
`` Here he is , going to the dinner as though nothing had happened , '' he thought . 
`` A brazen face , and the conscience of a Karamazov ! '' 
A Young Man Bent on a Career ALYOSHA helped Father Zossima to his bedroom and seated him on his bed . 
It was a little room furnished with the bare necessities . 
There was a narrow iron bedstead , with a strip of felt for a mattress . 
In the corner , under the ikons , was a reading-desk with a cross and the Gospel lying on it . 
The elder sank exhausted on the bed . 
His eyes glittered and he breathed hard . 
He looked intently at Alyosha , as though considering something . 
`` Go , my dear boy , go . 
Porfiry is enough for me . 
Make haste , you are needed there , go and wait at the Father Superior 's table . '' 
`` Let me stay here , '' Alyosha entreated . 
`` You are more needed there . 
There is no peace there . 
You will wait , and be of service . 
If evil spirits rise up , repeat a prayer . 
And remember , my son '' - the elder liked to call him that - `` this is not the place for you in the future . 
When it is God 's will to call me , leave the monastery . 
Go away for good . '' 
Alyosha started . 
`` What is it ? 
This is not your place for the time . 
I bless you for great service in the world . 
Yours will be a long pilgrimage . 
And you will have to take a wife , too . 
You will have to bear all before you come back . 
There will be much to do . 
But I do n't doubt of you , and so I send you forth . 
Christ is with you . 
Do not abandon Him and He will not abandon you . 
You will see great sorrow , and in that sorrow you will be happy . 
This is my last message to you : in sorrow seek happiness . 
Work , work unceasingly . 
Remember my words , for although I shall talk with you again , not only my days but my hours are numbered . '' 
Alyosha 's face again betrayed strong emotion . 
The corners of his mouth quivered . 
`` What is it again ? '' 
Father Zossima asked , smiling gently . 
`` The worldly may follow the dead with tears , but here we rejoice over the father who is departing . 
We rejoice and pray for him . 
Leave me , I must pray . 
Go , and make haste . 
Be near your brothers . 
And not near one only , but near both . '' 
