replied Rostov . 
Bagration stopped and , before replying , tried to see Rostov 's face in the mist . 
`` Well , go and see , '' he said , after a pause . 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
Rostov spurred his horse , called to Sergeant Fedchenko and two other hussars , told them to follow him , and trotted downhill in the direction from which the shouting came . 
He felt both frightened and pleased to be riding alone with three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous misty distance where no one had been before him . 
Bagration called to him from the hill not to go beyond the stream , but Rostov pretended not to hear him and did not stop but rode on and on , continually mistaking bushes for trees and gullies for men and continually discovering his mistakes . 
Having descended the hill at a trot , he no longer saw either our own or the enemy 's fires , but heard the shouting of the French more loudly and distinctly . 
In the valley he saw before him something like a river , but when he reached it he found it was a road . 
Having come out onto the road he reined in his horse , hesitating whether to ride along it or cross it and ride over the black field up the hillside . 
To keep to the road which gleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would be easier to see people coming along it . 
`` Follow me ! '' 
said he , crossed the road , and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the point where the French pickets had been standing that evening . 
`` Your honor , there he is ! '' 
cried one of the hussars behind him . 
And before Rostov had time to make out what the black thing was that had suddenly appeared in the fog , there was a flash , followed by a report , and a bullet whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintive sound passed out of hearing . 
Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan . 
Rostov turned his horse and galloped back . 
Four more reports followed at intervals , and the bullets passed somewhere in the fog singing in different tones . 
Rostov reined in his horse , whose spirits had risen , like his own , at the firing , and went back at a footpace . 
`` Well , some more ! 
Some more ! '' 
a merry voice was saying in his soul . 
But no more shots came . 
Only when approaching Bagration did Rostov let his horse gallop again , and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general . 
Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and had only lit fires to deceive us . 
`` What does that prove ? '' 
he was saying as Rostov rode up . 
`` They might retreat and leave the pickets . '' 
`` It 's plain that they have not all gone yet , Prince , '' said Bagration . 
`` Wait till tomorrow morning , we 'll find out everything tomorrow . '' 
`` The picket is still on the hill , your excellency , just where it was in the evening , '' reported Rostov , stooping forward with his hand at the salute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his ride and especially by the sound of the bullets . 
`` Very good , very good , '' said Bagration . 
`` Thank you , officer . '' 
`` Your excellency , '' said Rostov , `` may I ask a favor ? '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve . 
May I ask to be attached to the first squadron ? '' 
`` What 's your name ? '' 
`` Count Rostov . '' 
`` Oh , very well , you may stay in attendance on me . '' 
`` Count Ilya Rostov 's son ? '' 
asked Dolgorukov . 
But Rostov did not reply . 
`` Then I may reckon on it , your excellency ? '' 
`` I will give the order . '' 
`` Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the Emperor , '' thought Rostov . 
`` Thank God ! '' 
The fires and shouting in the enemy 's army were occasioned by the fact that while Napoleon 's proclamation was being read to the troops the Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs . 
The soldiers , on seeing him , lit wisps of straw and ran after him , shouting , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
Napoleon 's proclamation was as follows : Soldiers ! 
The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge the Austrian army of Ulm . 
They are the same battalions you broke at Hollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place . 
The position we occupy is a strong one , and while they are marching to go round me on the right they will expose a flank to me . 
Soldiers ! 
I will myself direct your battalions . 
I will keep out of fire if you with your habitual valor carry disorder and confusion into the enemy 's ranks , but should victory be in doubt , even for a moment , you will see your Emperor exposing himself to the first blows of the enemy , for there must be no doubt of victory , especially on this day when what is at stake is the honor of the French infantry , so necessary to the honor of our nation . 
Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded ! 
Let every man be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these hirelings of England , inspired by such hatred of our nation ! 
This victory will conclude our campaign and we can return to winter quarters , where fresh French troops who are being raised in France will join us , and the peace I shall conclude will be worthy of my people , of you , and of myself . 
NAPOLEON At five in the morning it was still quite dark . 
The troops of the center , the reserves , and Bagration 's right flank had not yet moved , but on the left flank the columns of infantry , cavalry , and artillery , which were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French right flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan , were already up and astir . 
The smoke of the campfires , into which they were throwing everything superfluous , made the eyes smart . 
It was cold and dark . 
The officers were hurriedly drinking tea and breakfasting , the soldiers , munching biscuit and beating a tattoo with their feet to warm themselves , gathering round the fires throwing into the flames the remains of sheds , chairs , tables , wheels , tubs , and everything that they did not want or could not carry away with them . 
Austrian column guides were moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds of the advance . 
As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near a commanding officer 's quarters , the regiment began to move : the soldiers ran from the fires , thrust their pipes into their boots , their bags into the carts , got their muskets ready , and formed rank . 
The officers buttoned up their coats , buckled on their swords and pouches , and moved along the ranks shouting . 
The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and packed the wagons and tied on the loads . 
The adjutants and battalion and regimental commanders mounted , crossed themselves , gave final instructions , orders , and commissions to the baggage men who remained behind , and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet resounded . 
The column moved forward without knowing where and unable , from the masses around them , the smoke and the increasing fog , to see either the place they were leaving or that to which they were going . 
A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as much as a sailor is by his ship . 
However far he has walked , whatever strange , unknown , and dangerous places he reaches , just as a sailor is always surrounded by the same decks , masts , and rigging of his ship , so the soldier always has around him the same comrades , the same ranks , the same sergeant major Ivan Mitrich , the same company dog Jack , and the same commanders . 
The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which his ship is sailing , but on the day of battle -- heaven knows how and whence -- a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moral atmosphere of an army , announcing the approach of something decisive and solemn , and awakening in the men an unusual curiosity . 
On the day of battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of their regiment , they listen intently , look about , and eagerly ask concerning what is going on around them . 
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could not see ten paces ahead . 
Bushes looked like gigantic trees and level ground like cliffs and slopes . 
Anywhere , on any side , one might encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off . 
But the columns advanced for a long time , always in the same fog , descending and ascending hills , avoiding gardens and enclosures , going over new and unknown ground , and nowhere encountering the enemy . 
On the contrary , the soldiers became aware that in front , behind , and on all sides , other Russian columns were moving in the same direction . 
Every soldier felt glad to know that to the unknown place where he was going , many more of our men were going too . 
`` There now , the Kurskies have also gone past , '' was being said in the ranks . 
`` It 's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered , lads ! 
Last night I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them . 
A regular Moscow ! '' 
Though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to the men -LRB- the commanders , as we saw at the council of war , were out of humor and dissatisfied with the affair , and so did not exert themselves to cheer the men but merely carried out the orders -RRB- , yet the troops marched gaily , as they always do when going into action , especially to an attack . 
But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fog , the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness of some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks . 
How such a consciousness is communicated is very difficult to define , but it certainly is communicated very surely , and flows rapidly , imperceptibly , and irrepressibly , as water does in a creek . 
Had the Russian army been alone without any allies , it might perhaps have been a long time before this consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction , but as it was , the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the stupid Germans , and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been occasioned by the sausage eaters . 
`` Why have we stopped ? 
Is the way blocked ? 
Or have we already come up against the French ? '' 
`` No , one ca n't hear them . 
They 'd be firing if we had . '' 
`` They were in a hurry enough to start us , and now here we stand in the middle of a field without rhyme or reason . 
It 's all those damned Germans ' muddling ! 
What stupid devils ! '' 
`` Yes , I 'd send them on in front , but no fear , they 're crowding up behind . 
And now here we stand hungry . '' 
`` I say , shall we soon be clear ? 
