Princess Mary lowered her eyes and , tripping over her skirt , came close up to them . 
So many different eyes , old and young , were fixed on her , and there were so many different faces , that she could not distinguish any of them and , feeling that she must speak to them all at once , did not know how to do it . 
But again the sense that she represented her father and her brother gave her courage , and she boldly began her speech . 
`` I am very glad you have come , '' she said without raising her eyes , and feeling her heart beating quickly and violently . 
`` Dronushka tells me that the war has ruined you . 
That is our common misfortune , and I shall grudge nothing to help you . 
I am myself going away because it is dangerous here ... the enemy is near ... because ... I am giving you everything , my friends , and I beg you to take everything , all our grain , so that you may not suffer want ! 
And if you have been told that I am giving you the grain to keep you here -- that is not true . 
On the contrary , I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate near Moscow , and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for nothing . 
You shall be given food and lodging . '' 
The princess stopped . 
Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd . 
`` I am not doing this on my own account , '' she continued , `` I do it in the name of my dead father , who was a good master to you , and of my brother and his son . '' 
Again she paused . 
No one broke the silence . 
`` Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together . 
All that is mine is yours , '' she concluded , scanning the faces before her . 
All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression . 
She could not fathom whether it was curiosity , devotion , gratitude , or apprehension and distrust -- but the expression on all the faces was identical . 
`` We are all very thankful for your bounty , but it wo n't do for us to take the landlord 's grain , '' said a voice at the back of the crowd . 
`` But why not ? '' 
asked the princess . 
No one replied and Princess Mary , looking round at the crowd , found that every eye she met now was immediately dropped . 
`` But why do n't you want to take it ? '' 
she asked again . 
No one answered . 
The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch someone 's eye . 
`` Why do n't you speak ? '' 
she inquired of a very old man who stood just in front of her leaning on his stick . 
`` If you think something more is wanted , tell me ! 
I will do anything , '' said she , catching his eye . 
But as if this angered him , he bent his head quite low and muttered : `` Why should we agree ? 
We do n't want the grain . '' 
`` Why should we give up everything ? 
We do n't agree . 
Do n't agree ... . 
We are sorry for you , but we 're not willing . 
Go away yourself , alone ... '' came from various sides of the crowd . 
And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression , though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude , but of angry resolve . 
`` But you ca n't have understood me , '' said Princess Mary with a sad smile . 
`` Why do n't you want to go ? 
I promise to house and feed you , while here the enemy would ruin you ... '' But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd . 
`` We 're not willing . 
Let them ruin us ! 
We wo n't take your grain . 
We do n't agree . '' 
Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone 's eye , but not a single eye in the crowd was turned to her ; evidently they were all trying to avoid her look . 
She felt strange and awkward . 
`` Oh yes , an artful tale ! 
Follow her into slavery ! 
Pull down your houses and go into bondage ! 
I dare say ! 
` I 'll give you grain , indeed ! ' 
she says , '' voices in the crowd were heard saying . 
With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the house . 
Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her departure next morning , she went to her room and remained alone with her own thoughts . 
For a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window of her room hearing the sound of the peasants ' voices that reached her from the village , but it was not of them she was thinking . 
She felt that she could not understand them however much she might think about them . 
She thought only of one thing , her sorrow , which , after the break caused by cares for the present , seemed already to belong to the past . 
Now she could remember it and weep or pray . 
After sunset the wind had dropped . 
The night was calm and fresh . 
Toward midnight the voices began to subside , a cock crowed , the full moon began to show from behind the lime trees , a fresh white dewy mist began to rise , and stillness reigned over the village and the house . 
Pictures of the near past -- her father 's illness and last moments - rose one after another to her memory . 
With mournful pleasure she now lingered over these images , repelling with horror only the last one , the picture of his death , which she felt she could not contemplate even in imagination at this still and mystic hour of night . 
And these pictures presented themselves to her so clearly and in such detail that they seemed now present , now past , and now future . 
She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and was being dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills , muttering something with his helpless tongue , twitching his gray eyebrows and looking uneasily and timidly at her . 
`` Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died , '' she thought . 
`` He had always thought what he said then . '' 
And she recalled in all its detail the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke , when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained at home against his will . 
She had not slept and had stolen downstairs on tiptoe , and going to the door of the conservatory where he slept that night had listened at the door . 
In a suffering and weary voice he was saying something to Tikhon , speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights and of the Empress . 
Evidently he had wanted to talk . 
`` And why did n't he call me ? 
Why did n't he let me be there instead of Tikhon ? '' 
Princess Mary had thought and thought again now . 
`` Now he will never tell anyone what he had in his soul . 
Never will that moment return for him or for me when he might have said all he longed to say , and not Tikhon but I might have heard and understood him . 
Why did n't I enter the room ? '' 
she thought . 
`` Perhaps he would then have said to me what he said the day he died . 
While talking to Tikhon he asked about me twice . 
He wanted to see me , and I was standing close by , outside the door . 
It was sad and painful for him to talk to Tikhon who did not understand him . 
I remember how he began speaking to him about Lise as if she were alive -- he had forgotten she was dead -- and Tikhon reminded him that she was no more , and he shouted , ` Fool ! ' 
He was greatly depressed . 
From behind the door I heard how he lay down on his bed groaning and loudly exclaimed , ` My God ! ' 
Why did n't I go in then ? 
What could he have done to me ? 
What could I have lost ? 
And perhaps he would then have been comforted and would have said that word to me . '' 
And Princess Mary uttered aloud the caressing word he had said to her on the day of his death . 
`` Dear-est ! '' 
she repeated , and began sobbing , with tears that relieved her soul . 
She now saw his face before her . 
And not the face she had known ever since she could remember and had always seen at a distance , but the timid , feeble face she had seen for the first time quite closely , with all its wrinkles and details , when she stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said . 
`` Dear-est ! '' 
she repeated again . 
`` What was he thinking when he uttered that word ? 
What is he thinking now ? '' 
