Yes , it was like a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack him , and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he knows should annihilate him , but then feels that his arm drops powerless and limp like a rag , and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him in his helplessness . 
The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the French army aroused that horror in Napoleon . 
He sat silently on a campstool below the knoll , with head bowed and elbows on his knees . 
Berthier approached and suggested that they should ride along the line to ascertain the position of affairs . 
`` What ? 
What do you say ? '' 
asked Napoleon . 
`` Yes , tell them to bring me my horse . '' 
He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk . 
Amid the powder smoke , slowly dispersing over the whole space through which Napoleon rode , horses and men were lying in pools of blood , singly or in heaps . 
Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever before seen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area . 
The roar of guns , that had not ceased for ten hours , wearied the ear and gave a peculiar significance to the spectacle , as music does to tableaux vivants . 
Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semenovsk , and through the smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him . 
They were Russians . 
The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and its knoll , and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent forth clouds of smoke . 
It was no longer a battle : it was a continuous slaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or the Russians . 
Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reverie from which Berthier had aroused him . 
He could not stop what was going on before him and around him and was supposed to be directed by him and to depend on him , and from its lack of success this affair , for the first time , seemed to him unnecessary and horrible . 
One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead the Old Guard into action . 
Ney and Berthier , standing near Napoleon , exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general 's senseless offer . 
Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time . 
`` At eight hundred leagues from France , I will not have my Guard destroyed ! '' 
he said , and turning his horse rode back to Shevardino . 
On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning sat Kutuzov , his gray head hanging , his heavy body relaxed . 
He gave no orders , but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested . 
`` Yes , yes , do that , '' he replied to various proposals . 
`` Yes , yes : go , dear boy , and have a look , '' he would say to one or another of those about him ; or , `` No , do n't , we 'd better wait ! '' 
He listened to the reports that were brought him and gave directions when his subordinates demanded that of him ; but when listening to the reports it seemed as if he were not interested in the import of the words spoken , but rather in something else -- in the expression of face and tone of voice of those who were reporting . 
By long years of military experience he knew , and with the wisdom of age understood , that it is impossible for one man to direct hundreds of thousands of others struggling with death , and he knew that the result of a battle is decided not by the orders of a commander in chief , nor the place where the troops are stationed , nor by the number of cannon or of slaughtered men , but by that intangible force called the spirit of the army , and he watched this force and guided it in as far as that was in his power . 
Kutuzov 's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention , and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master the fatigue of his old and feeble body . 
At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fleches captured by the French had been retaken , but that Prince Bagration was wounded . 
Kutuzov groaned and swayed his head . 
`` Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly , '' he said to one of his adjutants , and then turned to the Duke of Wurttemberg who was standing behind him . 
`` Will Your Highness please take command of the first army ? '' 
Soon after the duke 's departure -- before he could possibly have reached Semenovsk -- his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that the duke asked for more troops . 
Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take over the command of the first army , and a request to the duke -- whom he said he could not spare at such an important moment -- to return to him . 
When they brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner , and the staff officers congratulated him , Kutuzov smiled . 
`` Wait a little , gentlemen , '' said he . 
`` The battle is won , and there is nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat . 
Still , it is better to wait before we rejoice . '' 
But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army . 
When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news that the French had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk , Kutuzov , guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin 's looks that the news was bad , rose as if to stretch his legs and , taking Scherbinin 's arm , led him aside . 
`` Go , my dear fellow , '' he said to Ermolov , `` and see whether something ca n't be done . '' 
Kutuzov was in Gorki , near the center of the Russian position . 
The attack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been several times repulsed . 
In the center the French had not got beyond Borodino , and on their left flank Uvarov 's cavalry had put the French to flight . 
Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased . 
On the faces of all who came from the field of battle , and of those who stood around him , Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension . 
He was satisfied with the day 's success -- a success exceeding his expectations , but the old man 's strength was failing him . 
Several times his head dropped low as if it were falling and he dozed off . 
Dinner was brought him . 
Adjutant General Wolzogen , the man who when riding past Prince Andrew had said , `` the war should be extended widely , '' and whom Bagration so detested , rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner . 
Wolzogen had come from Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank . 
The sagacious Barclay de Tolly , seeing crowds of wounded men running back and the disordered rear of the army , weighed all the circumstances , concluded that the battle was lost , and sent his favorite officer to the commander in chief with that news . 
Kutuzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glanced at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids . 
Wolzogen , nonchalantly stretching his legs , approached Kutuzov with a half-contemptuous smile on his lips , scarcely touching the peak of his cap . 
He treated his Serene Highness with a somewhat affected nonchalance intended to show that , as a highly trained military man , he left it to Russians to make an idol of this useless old man , but that he knew whom he was dealing with . 
`` Der alte Herr '' -LRB- as in their own set the Germans called Kutuzov -RRB- `` is making himself very comfortable , '' thought Wolzogen , and looking severely at the dishes in front of Kutuzov he began to report to `` the old gentleman '' the position of affairs on the left flank as Barclay had ordered him to and as he himself had seen and understood it . 
`` All the points of our position are in the enemy 's hands and we can not dislodge them for lack of troops , the men are running away and it is impossible to stop them , '' he reported . 
Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen , as if not understand what was said to him . 
Wolzogen , noticing `` the old gentleman 's '' agitation , said with a smile : `` I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highness what I have seen . 
The troops are in complete disorder ... '' `` You have seen ? 
You have seen ? 
... '' Kutuzov shouted frowning , and rising quickly he went up to Wolzogen . 
`` How ... how dare you ! 
... '' he shouted , choking and making a threatening gesture with his trembling arms : `` How dare you , sir , say that to me ? 
You know nothing about it . 
Tell General Barclay from me that his information is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to me , the commander in chief , than to him . '' 
Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder , but Kutuzov interrupted him . 
`` The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the right flank . 
If you have seen amiss , sir , do not allow yourself to say what you do n't know ! 
Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform him of my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow , '' said Kutuzov sternly . 
All were silent , and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing of the panting old general . 
`` They are repulsed everywhere , for which I thank God and our brave army ! 
The enemy is beaten , and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred soil of Russia , '' said Kutuzov crossing himself , and he suddenly sobbed as his eyes filled with tears . 
Wolzogen , shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips , stepped silently aside , marveling at `` the old gentleman 's '' conceited stupidity . 
`` Ah , here he is , my hero ! '' 
said Kutuzov to a portly , handsome , dark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll . 
This was Raevski , who had spent the whole day at the most important part of the field of Borodino . 
Raevski reported that the troops were firmly holding their ground and that the French no longer ventured to attack . 
After hearing him , Kutuzov said in French : `` Then you do not think , like some others , that we must retreat ? '' 
`` On the contrary , your Highness , in indecisive actions it is always the most stubborn who remain victors , '' replied Raevski , `` and in my opinion ... '' `` Kaysarov ! '' 
Kutuzov called to his adjutant . 
`` Sit down and write out the order of the day for tomorrow . 
And you , '' he continued , addressing another , `` ride along the line and that tomorrow we attack . '' 
While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order of the day , Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished to have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given . 
Kutuzov , without looking at Wolzogen , gave directions for the order to be written out which the former commander in chief , to avoid personal responsibility , very judiciously wished to receive . 
And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains throughout an army one and the same temper , known as `` the spirit of the army , '' and which constitutes the sinew of war , Kutuzov 's words , his order for a battle next day , immediately became known from one end of the army to the other . 
It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached the farthest links of that chain . 
The tales passing from mouth to mouth at different ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutuzov had said , but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said was not the outcome of cunning calculations , but of a feeling that lay in the commander in chief 's soul as in that of every Russian . 
And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy , and hearing from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe , the exhausted , wavering men felt comforted and inspirited . 
Prince Andrew 's regiment was among the reserves which till after one o'clock were stationed inactive behind Semenovsk , under heavy artillery fire . 
Toward two o'clock the regiment , having already lost more than two hundred men , was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gap between Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery , where thousands of men perished that day and on which an intense , concentrated fire from several hundred enemy guns was directed between one and two o'clock . 
Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment here lost another third of its men . 
From in front and especially from the right , in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed , and out of the mysterious domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front , quick hissing cannon balls and slow whistling shells flew unceasingly . 
At times , as if to allow them a respite , a quarter of an hour passed during which the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead , but sometimes several men were torn from the regiment in a minute and the slain were continually being dragged away and the wounded carried off . 
With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not yet killed . 
The regiment stood in columns of battalion , three hundred paces apart , but nevertheless the men were always in one and the same mood . 
All alike were taciturn and morose . 
Talk was rarely heard in the ranks , and it ceased altogether every time the thud of a successful shot and the cry of `` stretchers ! '' 
