The young officer standing in the gateway , as if hesitating whether to enter or not , clicked his tongue . 
`` Ah , how annoying ! '' 
he muttered . 
`` I should have come yesterday ... . 
Ah , what a pity . '' 
Meanwhile , Mavra Kuzminichna was attentively and sympathetically examining the familiar Rostov features of the young man 's face , his tattered coat and trodden-down boots . 
`` What did you want to see the count for ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Oh well ... it ca n't be helped ! '' 
said he in a tone of vexation and placed his hand on the gate as if to leave . 
He again paused in indecision . 
`` You see , '' he suddenly said , `` I am a kinsman of the count 's and he has been very kind to me . 
As you see '' -LRB- he glanced with an amused air and good-natured smile at his coat and boots -RRB- `` my things are worn out and I have no money , so I was going to ask the count ... '' Mavra Kuzminichna did not let him finish . 
`` Just wait a minute , sir . 
One little moment , '' said she . 
And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and , hurrying away on her old legs , went through the back yard to the servants ' quarters . 
While Mavra Kuzminichna was running to her room the officer walked about the yard gazing at his worn-out boots with lowered head and a faint smile on his lips . 
`` What a pity I 've missed Uncle ! 
What a nice old woman ! 
Where has she run off to ? 
And how am I to find the nearest way to overtake my regiment , which must by now be getting near the Rogozhski gate ? '' 
thought he . 
Just then Mavra Kuzminichna appeared from behind the corner of the house with a frightened yet resolute look , carrying a rolled-up check kerchief in her hand . 
While still a few steps from the officer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white twenty-five-ruble assignat and hastily handed it to him . 
`` If his excellency had been at home , as a kinsman he would of course ... but as it is ... '' Mavra Kuzminichna grew abashed and confused . 
The officer did not decline , but took the note quietly and thanked her . 
`` If the count had been at home ... '' Mavra Kuzminichna went on apologetically . 
`` Christ be with you , sir ! 
May God preserve you ! '' 
said she , bowing as she saw him out . 
Swaying his head and smiling as if amused at himself , the officer ran almost at a trot through the deserted streets toward the Yauza bridge to overtake his regiment . 
But Mavra Kuzminichna stood at the closed gate for some time with moist eyes , pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpected flow of motherly tenderness and pity for the unknown young officer . 
From an unfinished house on the Varvarka , the ground floor of which was a dramshop , came drunken shouts and songs . 
On benches round the tables in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands . 
Tipsy and perspiring , with dim eyes and wide-open mouths , they were all laboriously singing some song or other . 
They were singing discordantly , arduously , and with great effort , evidently not because they wished to sing , but because they wanted to show they were drunk and on a spree . 
One , a tall , fair-haired lad in a clean blue coat , was standing over the others . 
His face with its fine straight nose would have been handsome had it not been for his thin , compressed , twitching lips and dull , gloomy , fixed eyes . 
Evidently possessed by some idea , he stood over those who were singing , and solemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white arm with the sleeve turned up to the elbow , trying unnaturally to spread out his dirty fingers . 
The sleeve of his coat kept slipping down and he always carefully rolled it up again with his left hand , as if it were most important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishing should be bare . 
In the midst of the song cries were heard , and fighting and blows in the passage and porch . 
The tall lad waved his arm . 
`` Stop it ! '' 
he exclaimed peremptorily . 
`` There 's a fight , lads ! '' 
And , still rolling up his sleeve , he went out to the porch . 
The factory hands followed him . 
These men , who under the leadership of the tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning , had brought the publican some skins from the factory and for this had had drink served them . 
The blacksmiths from a neighboring smithy , hearing the sounds of revelry in the tavern and supposing it to have been broken into , wished to force their way in too and a fight in the porch had resulted . 
The publican was fighting one of the smiths at the door , and when the workmen came out the smith , wrenching himself free from the tavern keeper , fell face downward on the pavement . 
Another smith tried to enter the doorway , pressing against the publican with his chest . 
The lad with the turned-up sleeve gave the smith a blow in the face and cried wildly : `` They 're fighting us , lads ! '' 
At that moment the first smith got up and , scratching his bruised face to make it bleed , shouted in a tearful voice : `` Police ! 
Murder ! 
... They 've killed a man , lads ! '' 
`` Oh , gracious me , a man beaten to death -- killed ! 
... '' screamed a woman coming out of a gate close by . 
A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith . 
`` Have n't you robbed people enough -- taking their last shirts ? '' 
said a voice addressing the publican . 
`` What have you killed a man for , you thief ? '' 
The tall lad , standing in the porch , turned his bleared eyes from the publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he ought to fight now . 
`` Murderer ! '' 
he shouted suddenly to the publican . 
`` Bind him , lads ! '' 
`` I daresay you would like to bind me ! '' 
shouted the publican , pushing away the men advancing on him , and snatching his cap from his head he flung it on the ground . 
As if this action had some mysterious and menacing significance , the workmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision . 
`` I know the law very well , mates ! 
I 'll take the matter to the captain of police . 
You think I wo n't get to him ? 
Robbery is not permitted to anybody now a days ! '' 
shouted the publican , picking up his cap . 
`` Come along then ! 
Come along then ! '' 
the publican and the tall young fellow repeated one after the other , and they moved up the street together . 
The bloodstained smith went beside them . 
The factory hands and others followed behind , talking and shouting . 
At the corner of the Moroseyka , opposite a large house with closed shutters and bearing a bootmaker 's signboard , stood a score of thin , worn-out , gloomy-faced bootmakers , wearing overalls and long tattered coats . 
`` He should pay folks off properly , '' a thin workingman , with frowning brows and a straggly beard , was saying . 
`` But he 's sucked our blood and now he thinks he 's quit of us . 
He 's been misleading us all the week and now that he 's brought us to this pass he 's made off . '' 
On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceased speaking , and with eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined the moving crowd . 
`` Where are all the folks going ? '' 
`` Why , to the police , of course ! '' 
`` I say , is it true that we have been beaten ? '' 
`` And what did you think ? 
Look what folks are saying . '' 
Questions and answers were heard . 
The publican , taking advantage of the increased crowd , dropped behind and returned to his tavern . 
The tall youth , not noticing the disappearance of his foe , waved his bare arm and went on talking incessantly , attracting general attention to himself . 
It was around him that the people chiefly crowded , expecting answers from him to the questions that occupied all their minds . 
`` He must keep order , keep the law , that 's what the government is there for . 
Am I not right , good Christians ? '' 
said the tall youth , with a scarcely perceptible smile . 
`` He thinks there 's no government ! 
How can one do without government ? 
Or else there would be plenty who 'd rob us . '' 
`` Why talk nonsense ? '' 
rejoined voices in the crowd . 
