`` Now , remember , '' said Count Orlov-Denisov to the sergeant at parting , `` if you have been lying I 'll have you hanged like a dog ; but if it 's true you shall have a hundred gold pieces ! '' 
Without replying , the sergeant , with a resolute air , mounted and rode away with Grekov whose men had quickly assembled . 
They disappeared into the forest , and Count Orlov-Denisov , having seen Grekov off , returned , shivering from the freshness of the early dawn and excited by what he had undertaken on his own responsibility , and began looking at the enemy camp , now just visible in the deceptive light of dawn and the dying campfires . 
Our columns ought to have begun to appear on an open declivity to his right . 
He looked in that direction , but though the columns would have been visible quite far off , they were not to be seen . 
It seemed to the count that things were beginning to stir in the French camp , and his keen-sighted adjutant confirmed this . 
`` Oh , it is really too late , '' said Count Orlov , looking at the camp . 
As often happens when someone we have trusted is no longer before our eyes , it suddenly seemed quite clear and obvious to him that the sergeant was an impostor , that he had lied , and that the whole Russian attack would be ruined by the absence of those two regiments , which he would lead away heaven only knew where . 
How could one capture a commander in chief from among such a mass of troops ! 
`` I am sure that rascal was lying , '' said the count . 
`` They can still be called back , '' said one of his suite , who like Count Orlov felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at the enemy 's camp . 
`` Eh ? 
Really ... what do you think ? 
Should we let them go on or not ? '' 
`` Will you have them fetched back ? '' 
`` Fetch them back , fetch them back ! '' 
said Count Orlov with sudden determination , looking at his watch . 
`` It will be too late . 
It is quite light . '' 
And the adjutant galloped through the forest after Grekov . 
When Grekov returned , Count Orlov-Denisov , excited both by the abandoned attempt and by vainly awaiting the infantry columns that still did not appear , as well as by the proximity of the enemy , resolved to advance . 
All his men felt the same excitement . 
`` Mount ! '' 
he commanded in a whisper . 
The men took their places and crossed themselves ... `` Forward , with God 's aid ! '' 
`` Hurrah-ah-ah ! '' 
reverberated in the forest , and the Cossack companies , trailing their lances and advancing one after another as if poured out of a sack , dashed gaily across the brook toward the camp . 
One desperate , frightened yell from the first French soldier who saw the Cossacks , and all who were in the camp , undressed and only just waking up , ran off in all directions , abandoning cannons , muskets , and horses . 
Had the Cossacks pursued the French , without heeding what was behind and around them , they would have captured Murat and everything there . 
That was what the officers desired . 
But it was impossible to make the Cossacks budge when once they had got booty and prisoners . 
None of them listened to orders . 
Fifteen hundred prisoners and thirty-eight guns were taken on the spot , besides standards and -LRB- what seemed most important to the Cossacks -RRB- horses , saddles , horsecloths , and the like . 
All this had to be dealt with , the prisoners and guns secured , the booty divided -- not without some shouting and even a little themselves -- and it was on this that the Cossacks all busied themselves . 
The French , not being farther pursued , began to recover themselves : they formed into detachments and began firing . 
Orlov-Denisov , still waiting for the other columns to arrive , advanced no further . 
Meantime , according to the dispositions which said that `` the First Column will march '' and so on , the infantry of the belated columns , commanded by Bennigsen and directed by Toll , had started in due order and , as always happens , had got somewhere , but not to their appointed places . 
As always happens the men , starting cheerfully , began to halt ; murmurs were heard , there was a sense of confusion , and finally a backward movement . 
Adjutants and generals galloped about , shouted , grew angry , quarreled , said they had come quite wrong and were late , gave vent to a little abuse , and at last gave it all up and went forward , simply to get somewhere . 
`` We shall get somewhere or other ! '' 
And they did indeed get somewhere , though not to their right places ; a few eventually even got to their right place , but too late to be of any use and only in time to be fired at . 
Toll , who in this battle played the part of Weyrother at Austerlitz , galloped assiduously from place to place , finding everything upside down everywhere . 
Thus he stumbled on Bagovut 's corps in a wood when it was already broad daylight , though the corps should long before have joined Orlov-Denisov . 
Excited and vexed by the failure and supposing that someone must be responsible for it , Toll galloped up to the commander of the corps and began upbraiding him severely , saying that he ought to be shot . 
General Bagovut , a fighting old soldier of placid temperament , being also upset by all the delay , confusion , and cross-purposes , fell into a rage to everybody 's surprise and quite contrary to his usual character and said disagreeable things to Toll . 
`` I prefer not to take lessons from anyone , but I can die with my men as well as anybody , '' he said , and advanced with a single division . 
Coming out onto a field under the enemy 's fire , this brave general went straight ahead , leading his men under fire , without considering in his agitation whether going into action now , with a single division , would be of any use or no . 
Danger , cannon balls , and bullets were just what he needed in his angry mood . 
One of the first bullets killed him , and other bullets killed many of his men . 
And his division remained under fire for some time quite uselessly . 
Meanwhile another column was to have attacked the French from the front , but Kutuzov accompanied that column . 
He well knew that nothing but confusion would come of this battle undertaken against his will , and as far as was in his power held the troops back . 
He did not advance . 
He rode silently on his small gray horse , indolently answering suggestions that they should attack . 
`` The word attack is always on your tongue , but you do n't see that we are unable to execute complicated maneuvers , '' said he to Miloradovich who asked permission to advance . 
`` We could n't take Murat prisoner this morning or get to the place in time , and nothing can be done now ! '' 
he replied to someone else . 
When Kutuzov was informed that at the French rear -- where according to the reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody -- there were now two battalions of Poles , he gave a sidelong glance at Ermolov who was behind him and to whom he had not spoken since the previous day . 
`` You see ! 
They are asking to attack and making plans of all kinds , but as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready , and the enemy , forewarned , takes measures accordingly . '' 
Ermolov screwed up his eyes and smiled faintly on hearing these words . 
He understood that for him the storm had blown over , and that Kutuzov would content himself with that hint . 
`` He 's having a little fun at my expense , '' said Ermolov softly , nudging with his knee Raevski who was at his side . 
Soon after this , Ermolov moved up to Kutuzov and respectfully remarked : `` It is not too late yet , your Highness -- the enemy has not gone away - if you were to order an attack ! 
If not , the Guards will not so much as see a little smoke . '' 
Kutuzov did not reply , but when they reported to him that Murat 's troops were in retreat he ordered an advance , though at every hundred paces he halted for three quarters of an hour . 
The whole battle consisted in what Orlov-Denisov 's Cossacks had done : the rest of the army merely lost some hundreds of men uselessly . 
In consequence of this battle Kutuzov received a diamond decoration , and Bennigsen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles , others also received pleasant recognitions corresponding to their various grades , and following the battle fresh changes were made in the staff . 
`` That 's how everything is done with us , all topsy-turvy ! '' 
said the Russian officers and generals after the Tarutino battle , letting it be understood that some fool there is doing things all wrong but that we ourselves should not have done so , just as people speak today . 
But people who talk like that either do not know what they are talking about or deliberately deceive themselves . 
No battle -- Tarutino , Borodino , or Austerlitz -- takes place as those who planned it anticipated . 
That is an essential condition . 
A countless number of free forces -LRB- for nowhere is man freer than during a battle , where it is a question of life and death -RRB- influence the course taken by the fight , and that course never can be known in advance and never coincides with the direction of any one force . 
If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a given body , the direction of its motion can not coincide with any one of those forces , but will always be a mean -- what in mechanics is represented by the diagonal of a parallelogram of forces . 
If in the descriptions given by historians , especially French ones , we find their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previously formed plans , the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptions are false . 
The battle of Tarutino obviously did not attain the aim Toll had in view -- to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by the dispositions ; nor that which Count Orlov-Denisov may have had in view - to take Murat prisoner ; nor the result of immediately destroying the whole corps , which Bennigsen and others may have had in view ; nor the aim of the officer who wished to go into action to distinguish himself ; nor that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he got , and so on . 
But if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what all the Russians of that day desired -- to drive the French out of Russia and destroy their army -- it is quite clear that the battle of Tarutino , just because of its incongruities , was exactly what was wanted at that stage of the campaign . 
It would be difficult and even impossible to imagine any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this battle . 
With a minimum of effort and insignificant losses , despite the greatest confusion , the most important results of the whole campaign were attained : the transition from retreat to advance , an exposure of the weakness of the French , and the administration of that shock which Napoleon 's army had only awaited to begin its flight . 
Napoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa ; there can be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains in the hands of the French . 
The Russians retreat and abandon their ancient capital . 
Moscow , abounding in provisions , arms , munitions , and incalculable wealth , is in Napoleon 's hands . 
The Russian army , only half the strength of the French , does not make a single attempt to attack for a whole month . 
Napoleon 's position is most brilliant . 
He can either fall on the Russian army with double its strength and destroy it ; negotiate an advantageous peace , or in case of a refusal make a menacing move on Petersburg , or even , in the case of a reverse , return to Smolensk or Vilna ; or remain in Moscow ; in short , no special genius would seem to be required to retain the brilliant position the French held at that time . 
For that , only very simple and easy steps were necessary : not to allow the troops to loot , to prepare winter clothing -- of which there was sufficient in Moscow for the whole army -- and methodically to collect the provisions , of which -LRB- according to the French historians -RRB- there were enough in Moscow to supply the whole army for six months . 
Yet Napoleon , that greatest of all geniuses , who the historians declare had control of the army , took none of these steps . 
He not merely did nothing of the kind , but on the contrary he used his power to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the courses open to him . 
Of all that Napoleon might have done : wintering in Moscow , advancing on Petersburg or on Nizhni-Novgorod , or retiring by a more northerly or more southerly route -LRB- say by the road Kutuzov afterwards took -RRB- , nothing more stupid or disastrous can be imagined than what he actually did . 
He remained in Moscow till October , letting the troops plunder the city ; then , hesitating whether to leave a garrison behind him , he quitted Moscow , approached Kutuzov without joining battle , turned to the right and reached Malo-Yaroslavets , again without attempting to break through and take the road Kutuzov took , but retiring instead to Mozhaysk along the devastated Smolensk road . 
Nothing more stupid than that could have been devised , or more disastrous for the army , as the sequel showed . 
Had Napoleon 's aim been to destroy his army , the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series of actions that would so completely have accomplished that purpose , independently of anything the Russian army might do . 
Napoleon , the man of genius , did this ! 
But to say that he destroyed his army because he wished to , or because he was very stupid , would be as unjust as to say that he had brought his troops to Moscow because he wished to and because he was very clever and a genius . 
In both cases his personal activity , having no more force than the personal activity of any soldier , merely coincided with the laws that guided the event . 
The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon 's faculties as having weakened in Moscow , and do so only because the results did not justify his actions . 
He employed all his ability and strength to do the best he could for himself and his army , as he had done previously and as he did subsequently in 1813 . 
His activity at that time was no less astounding than it was in Egypt , in Italy , in Austria , and in Prussia . 
We do not know for certain in how far his genius was genuine in Egypt -- where forty centuries looked down upon his grandeur -- for his great exploits there are all told us by Frenchmen . 
