The game had begun . 
On returning to Gorki after having seen Prince Andrew , Pierre ordered his groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in the morning , and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a corner Boris had given up to him . 
Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already left the hut . 
The panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom was shaking him . 
`` Your excellency ! 
Your excellency ! 
Your excellency ! '' 
he kept repeating pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without looking at him , having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up . 
`` What ? 
Has it begun ? 
Is it time ? '' 
Pierre asked , waking up . 
`` Hear the firing , '' said the groom , a discharged soldier . 
`` All the gentlemen have gone out , and his Serene Highness himself rode past long ago . '' 
Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch . 
Outside all was bright , fresh , dewy , and cheerful . 
The sun , just bursting forth from behind a cloud that had concealed it , was shining , with rays still half broken by the clouds , over the roofs of the street opposite , on the dew-besprinkled dust of the road , on the walls of the houses , on the windows , the fence , and on Pierre 's horses standing before the hut . 
The roar of guns sounded more distinct outside . 
An adjutant accompanied by a Cossack passed by at a sharp trot . 
`` It 's time , Count ; it 's time ! '' 
cried the adjutant . 
Telling the groom to follow him with the horses , Pierre went down the street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle the day before . 
A crowd of military men was assembled there , members of the staff could be heard conversing in French , and Kutuzov 's gray head in a white cap with a red band was visible , his gray nape sunk between his shoulders . 
He was looking through a field glass down the highroad before him . 
Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him , spellbound by beauty . 
It was the same panorama he had admired from that spot the day before , but now the whole place was full of troops and covered by smoke clouds from the guns , and the slanting rays of the bright sun , rising slightly to the left behind Pierre , cast upon it through the clear morning air penetrating streaks of rosy , golden tinted light and long dark shadows . 
The forest at the farthest extremity of the panorama seemed carved in some precious stone of a yellowish-green color ; its undulating outline was silhouetted against the horizon and was pierced beyond Valuevo by the Smolensk highroad crowded with troops . 
Nearer at hand glittered golden cornfields interspersed with copses . 
There were troops to be seen everywhere , in front and to the right and left . 
All this was vivid , majestic , and unexpected ; but what impressed Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself , of Borodino and the hollows on both sides of the Kolocha . 
Above the Kolocha , in Borodino and on both sides of it , especially to the left where the Voyna flowing between its marshy banks falls into the Kolocha , a mist had spread which seemed to melt , to dissolve , and to become translucent when the brilliant sun appeared and magically colored and outlined everything . 
The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist , and over the whole expanse and through that mist the rays of the morning sun were reflected , flashing back like lightning from the water , from the dew , and from the bayonets of the troops crowded together by the riverbanks and in Borodino . 
A white church could be seen through the mist , and here and there the roofs of huts in Borodino as well as dense masses of soldiers , or green ammunition chests and ordnance . 
And all this moved , or seemed to move , as the smoke and mist spread out over the whole space . 
Just as in the mist-enveloped hollow near Borodino , so along the entire line outside and above it and especially in the woods and fields to the left , in the valleys and on the summits of the high ground , clouds of powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out of nothing , now singly , now several at a time , some translucent , others dense , which , swelling , growing , rolling , and blending , extended over the whole expanse . 
These puffs of smoke and -LRB- strange to say -RRB- the sound of the firing produced the chief beauty of the spectacle . 
`` Puff ! '' 
-- suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging from violet into gray and milky white , and `` boom ! '' 
came the report a second later . 
`` Puff ! 
puff ! '' 
-- and two clouds arose pushing one another and blending together ; and `` boom , boom ! '' 
came the sounds confirming what the eye had seen . 
Pierre glanced round at the first cloud , which he had seen as a round compact ball , and in its place already were balloons of smoke floating to one side , and -- `` puff '' -LRB- with a pause -RRB- -- `` puff , puff ! '' 
three and then four more appeared and then from each , with the same interval -- `` boom -- boom , boom ! '' 
came the fine , firm , precise sounds in reply . 
It seemed as if those smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes stood still while woods , fields , and glittering bayonets ran past them . 
From the left , over fields and bushes , those large balls of smoke were continually appearing followed by their solemn reports , while nearer still , in the hollows and woods , there burst from the muskets small cloudlets that had no time to become balls , but had their little echoes in just the same way . 
`` Trakh-ta-ta-takh ! '' 
came the frequent crackle of musketry , but it was irregular and feeble in comparison with the reports of the cannon . 
Pierre wished to be there with that smoke , those shining bayonets , that movement , and those sounds . 
He turned to look at Kutuzov and his suite , to compare his impressions with those of others . 
They were all looking at the field of battle as he was , and , as it seemed to him , with the same feelings . 
All their faces were now shining with that latent warmth of feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understood after his talk with Prince Andrew . 
`` Go , my dear fellow , go ... and Christ be with you ! '' 
Kutuzov was saying to a general who stood beside him , not taking his eye from the battlefield . 
Having received this order the general passed by Pierre on his way down the knoll . 
`` To the crossing ! '' 
said the general coldly and sternly in reply to one of the staff who asked where he was going . 
`` I 'll go there too , I too ! '' 
thought Pierre , and followed the general . 
The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him . 
Pierre went to his groom who was holding his horses and , asking which was the quietest , clambered onto it , seized it by the mane , and turning out his toes pressed his heels against its sides and , feeling that his spectacles were slipping off but unable to let go of the mane and reins , he galloped after the general , causing the staff officers to smile as they watched him from the knoll . 
Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping turned sharply to the left , and Pierre , losing sight of him , galloped in among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him . 
He tried to pass either in front of them or to the right or left , but there were soldiers everywhere , all with expression and busy with some unseen but evidently important task . 
They all gazed with the same dissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white hat , who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse 's hoofs . 
`` Why ride into the middle of the battalion ? '' 
one of them shouted at him . 
Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket , and Pierre , bending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse , galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space . 
There was a bridge ahead of him , where other soldiers stood firing . 
Pierre rode up to them . 
Without being aware of it he had come to the bridge across the Kolocha between Gorki and Borodino , which the French -LRB- having occupied Borodino -RRB- were attacking in the first phase of the battle . 
Pierre saw that there was a bridge in front of him and that soldiers were doing something on both sides of it and in the meadow , among the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid the smoke of the campfires the day before ; but despite the incessant firing going on there he had no idea that this was the field of battle . 
He did not notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side , or the projectiles that flew over him , did not see the enemy on the other side of the river , and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded , though many fell near him . 
He looked about him with a smile which did not leave his face . 
`` Why 's that fellow in front of the line ? '' 
shouted somebody at him again . 
`` To the left ! 
... Keep to the right ! '' 
the men shouted to him . 
Pierre went to the right , and unexpectedly encountered one of Raevski 's adjutants whom he knew . 
The adjutant looked angrily at him , evidently also intending to shout at him , but on recognizing him he nodded . 
`` How have you got here ? '' 
he said , and galloped on . 
Pierre , feeling out of place there , having nothing to do , and afraid of getting in someone 's way again , galloped after the adjutant . 
`` What 's happening here ? 
May I come with you ? '' 
he asked . 
`` One moment , one moment ! '' 
replied the adjutant , and riding up to a stout colonel who was standing in the meadow , he gave him some message and then addressed Pierre . 
`` Why have you come here , Count ? '' 
he asked with a smile . 
`` Still inquisitive ? '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' assented Pierre . 
But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on . 
`` Here it 's tolerable , '' said he , `` but with Bagration on the left flank they 're getting it frightfully hot . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` Where is that ? '' 
`` Come along with me to our knoll . 
