she said . 
The face of the little princess changed . 
She sighed and said : `` Yes , quite certain . 
Ah ! 
it is very dreadful ... '' Her lip descended . 
She brought her face close to her sister-in-law 's and unexpectedly again began to cry . 
`` She needs rest , '' said Prince Andrew with a frown . 
`` Do n't you , Lise ? 
Take her to your room and I 'll go to Father . 
How is he ? 
Just the same ? '' 
`` Yes , just the same . 
Though I do n't know what your opinion will be , '' answered the princess joyfully . 
`` And are the hours the same ? 
And the walks in the avenues ? 
And the lathe ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which showed that , in spite of all his love and respect for his father , he was aware of his weaknesses . 
`` The hours are the same , and the lathe , and also the mathematics and my geometry lessons , '' said Princess Mary gleefully , as if her lessons in geometry were among the greatest delights of her life . 
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old prince to get up , Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father . 
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his son 's arrival : he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while he dressed for dinner . 
The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned style , wearing an antique coat and powdered hair ; and when Prince Andrew entered his father 's dressing room -LRB- not with the contemptuous look and manner he wore in drawing rooms , but with the animated face with which he talked to Pierre -RRB- , the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered chair , wrapped in a powdering mantle , entrusting his head to Tikhon . 
`` Ah ! 
here 's the warrior ! 
Wants to vanquish Buonaparte ? '' 
said the old man , shaking his powdered head as much as the tail , which Tikhon was holding fast to plait , would allow . 
`` You at least must tackle him properly , or else if he goes on like this he 'll soon have us , too , for his subjects ! 
How are you ? '' 
And he held out his cheek . 
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner . 
-LRB- He used to say that a nap `` after dinner was silver -- before dinner , golden . '' -RRB- 
He cast happy , sidelong glances at his son from under his thick , bushy eyebrows . 
Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the spot indicated to him . 
He made no reply on his father 's favorite topic -- making fun of the military men of the day , and more particularly of Bonaparte . 
`` Yes , Father , I have come come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant , '' said Prince Andrew , following every movement of his father 's face with an eager and respectful look . 
`` How is your health ? '' 
`` Only fools and rakes fall ill , my boy . 
You know me : I am busy from morning till night and abstemious , so of course I am well . '' 
`` Thank God , '' said his son smiling . 
`` God has nothing to do with it ! 
Well , go on , '' he continued , returning to his hobby ; `` tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte by this new science you call ` strategy . ' '' 
Prince Andrew smiled . 
`` Give me time to collect my wits , Father , '' said he , with a smile that showed that his father 's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and honoring him . 
`` Why , I have not yet had time to settle down ! '' 
`` Nonsense , nonsense ! '' 
cried the old man , shaking his pigtail to see whether it was firmly plaited , and grasping his by the hand . 
`` The house for your wife is ready . 
Princess Mary will take her there and show her over , and they 'll talk nineteen to the dozen . 
That 's their woman 's way ! 
I am glad to have her . 
Sit down and talk . 
About Mikhelson 's army I understand -- Tolstoy 's too ... a simultaneous expedition ... . 
But what 's the southern army to do ? 
Prussia is neutral ... I know that . 
What about Austria ? '' 
said he , rising from his chair and pacing up and down the room followed by Tikhon , who ran after him , handing him different articles of clothing . 
`` What of Sweden ? 
How will they cross Pomerania ? '' 
Prince Andrew , seeing that his father insisted , began -- at first reluctantly , but gradually with more and more animation , and from habit changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on - to explain the plan of operation for the coming campaign . 
He explained how an army , ninety thousand strong , was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out of her neutrality and draw her into the war ; how part of that army was to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund ; how two hundred and twenty thousand Austrians , with a hundred thousand Russians , were to operate in Italy and on the Rhine ; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English were to land at Naples , and how a total force of five hundred thousand men was to attack the French from different sides . 
The old prince did not evince the least interest during this explanation , but as if he were not listening to it continued to dress while walking about , and three times unexpectedly interrupted . 
Once he stopped it by shouting : `` The white one , the white one ! '' 
This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted . 
Another time he interrupted , saying : `` And will she soon be confined ? '' 
and shaking his head reproachfully said : `` That 's bad ! 
Go on , go on . '' 
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his description . 
The old man began to sing , in the cracked voice of old age : `` Malbrook s ` en va-t-en guerre . 
Dieu sait quand reviendra . '' 
* * `` Marlborough is going to the wars ; God knows when he 'll return . '' 
His son only smiled . 
`` I do n't say it 's a plan I approve of , '' said the son ; `` I am only telling you what it is . 
Napoleon has also formed his plan by now , not worse than this one . '' 
`` Well , you 've told me nothing new , '' and the old man repeated , meditatively and rapidly : `` Dieu sait quand reviendra . 
Go to the dining room . '' 
At the appointed hour the prince , powdered and shaven , entered the dining room where his daughter-in-law , Princess Mary , and Mademoiselle Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect , who by a strange caprice of his employer 's was admitted to table though the position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly not have caused him to expect that honor . 
The prince , who generally kept very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important government officials to his table , had unexpectedly selected Michael Ivanovich -LRB- who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checked handkerchief -RRB- to illustrate the theory that all men are equals , and had more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivanovich was `` not a whit worse than you or I. '' At dinner the prince usually spoke to the taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else . 
In the dining room , which like all the rooms in the house was exceedingly lofty , the members of the household and the footmen -- one behind each chair -- stood waiting for the prince to enter . 
The head butler , napkin on arm , was scanning the setting of the table , making signs to the footmen , and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door by which the prince was to enter . 
Prince Andrew was looking at a large gilt frame , new to him , containing the genealogical tree of the Princes Bolkonski , opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted portrait -LRB- evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate -RRB- of a ruling prince , in a crown -- an alleged descendant of Rurik and ancestor of the Bolkonskis . 
Prince Andrew , looking again at that genealogical tree , shook his head , laughing as a man laughs who looks at a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing . 
`` How thoroughly like him that is ! '' 
he said to Princess Mary , who had come up to him . 
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise . 
She did not understand what he was laughing at . 
Everything her father did inspired her with reverence and was beyond question . 
`` Everyone has his Achilles ' heel , '' continued Prince Andrew . 
`` Fancy , with his powerful mind , indulging in such nonsense ! '' 
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother 's criticism and was about to reply , when the expected footsteps were heard coming from the study . 
The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was his wont , as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners with the strict formality of his house . 
At that moment the great clock struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing room . 
The prince stood still ; his lively glittering eyes from under their thick , bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on the little princess . 
She felt , as courtiers do when the Tsar enters , the sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around him . 
He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of her neck . 
`` I 'm glad , glad , to see you , '' he said , looking attentively into her eyes , and then quickly went to his place and sat down . 
`` Sit down , sit down ! 
Sit down , Michael Ianovich ! '' 
He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law . 
A footman moved the chair for her . 
`` Ho , ho ! '' 
said the old man , casting his eyes on her rounded figure . 
