They took me and shut me up . 
They hold me captive . 
What , me ? 
Me ? 
My immortal soul ? 
Ha-ha-ha ! 
Ha-ha-ha ! 
... '' and he laughed till tears started to his eyes . 
A man got up and came to see what this queer big fellow was laughing at all by himself . 
Pierre stopped laughing , got up , went farther away from the inquisitive man , and looked around him . 
The huge , endless bivouac that had previously resounded with the crackling of campfires and the voices of many men had grown quiet , the red campfires were growing paler and dying down . 
High up in the light sky hung the full moon . 
Forests and fields beyond the camp , unseen before , were now visible in the distance . 
And farther still , beyond those forests and fields , the bright , oscillating , limitless distance lured one to itself . 
Pierre glanced up at the sky and the twinkling stars in its faraway depths . 
`` And all that is me , all that is within me , and it is all I ! '' 
thought Pierre . 
`` And they caught all that and put it into a shed boarded up with planks ! '' 
He smiled , and went and lay down to sleep beside his companions . 
In the early days of October another envoy came to Kutuzov with a letter from Napoleon proposing peace and falsely dated from Moscow , though Napoleon was already not far from Kutuzov on the old Kaluga road . 
Kutuzov replied to this letter as he had done to the one formerly brought by Lauriston , saying that there could be no question of peace . 
Soon after that a report was received from Dorokhov 's guerrilla detachment operating to the left of Tarutino that troops of Broussier 's division had been seen at Forminsk and that being separated from the rest of the French army they might easily be destroyed . 
The soldiers and officers again demanded action . 
Generals on the staff , excited by the memory of the easy victory at Tarutino , urged Kutuzov to carry out Dorokhov 's suggestion . 
Kutuzov did not consider any offensive necessary . 
The result was a compromise which was inevitable : a small detachment was sent to Forminsk to attack Broussier . 
By a strange coincidence , this task , which turned out to be a most difficult and important one , was entrusted to Dokhturov -- that same modest little Dokhturov whom no one had described to us as drawing up plans of battles , dashing about in front of regiments , showering crosses on batteries , and so on , and who was thought to be and was spoken of as undecided and undiscerning -- but whom we find commanding wherever the position was most difficult all through the Russo-French wars from Austerlitz to the year 1813 . 
At Austerlitz he remained last at the Augezd dam , rallying the regiments , saving what was possible when all were flying and perishing and not a single general was left in the rear guard . 
Ill with fever he went to Smolensk with twenty thousand men to defend the town against Napoleon 's whole army . 
In Smolensk , at the Malakhov Gate , he had hardly dozed off in a paroxysm of fever before he was awakened by the bombardment of the town -- and Smolensk held out all day long . 
At the battle of Borodino , when Bagration was killed and nine tenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of the French artillery fire was directed against it , the man sent there was this same irresolute and undiscerning Dokhturov -- Kutuzov hastening to rectify a mistake he had made by sending someone else there first . 
And the quiet little Dokhturov rode thither , and Borodino became the greatest glory of the Russian army . 
Many heroes have been described to us in verse and prose , but of Dokhturov scarcely a word has been said . 
It was Dokhturov again whom they sent to Forminsk and from there to Malo-Yaroslavets , the place where the last battle with the French was fought and where the obvious disintegration of the French army began ; and we are told of many geniuses and heroes of that period of the campaign , but of Dokhturov nothing or very little is said and that dubiously . 
And this silence about Dokhturov is the clearest testimony to his merit . 
It is natural for a man who does not understand the workings of a machine to imagine that a shaving that has fallen into it by chance and is interfering with its action and tossing about in it is its most important part . 
The man who does not understand the construction of the machine can not conceive that the small connecting cogwheel which revolves quietly is one of the most essential parts of the machine , and not the shaving which merely harms and hinders the working . 
On the tenth of October when Dokhturov had gone halfway to Forminsk and stopped at the village of Aristovo , preparing faithfully to execute the orders he had received , the whole French army having , in its convulsive movement , reached Murat 's position apparently in order to give battle -- suddenly without any reason turned off to the left onto the new Kaluga road and began to enter Forminsk , where only Broussier had been till then . 
At that time Dokhturov had under his command , besides Dorokhov 's detachment , the two small guerrilla detachments of Figner and Seslavin . 
On the evening of October 11 Seslavin came to the Aristovo headquarters with a French guardsman he had captured . 
The prisoner said that the troops that had entered Forminsk that day were the vanguard of the whole army , that Napoleon was there and the whole army had left Moscow four days previously . 
That same evening a house serf who had come from Borovsk said he had seen an immense army entering the town . 
Some Cossacks of Dokhturov 's detachment reported having sighted the French Guards marching along the road to Borovsk . 
From all these reports it was evident that where they had expected to meet a single division there was now the whole French army marching from Moscow in an unexpected direction -- along the Kaluga road . 
Dokhturov was unwilling to undertake any action , as it was not clear to him now what he ought to do . 
He had been ordered to attack Forminsk . 
But only Broussier had been there at that time and now the whole French army was there . 
Ermolov wished to act on his own judgment , but Dokhturov insisted that he must have Kutuzov 's instructions . 
So it was decided to send a dispatch to the staff . 
For this purpose a capable officer , Bolkhovitinov , was chosen , who was to explain the whole affair by word of mouth , besides delivering a written report . 
Toward midnight Bolkhovitinov , having received the dispatch and verbal instructions , galloped off to the General Staff accompanied by a Cossack with spare horses . 
It was a warm , dark , autumn night . 
It had been raining for four days . 
Having changed horses twice and galloped twenty miles in an hour and a half over a sticky , muddy road , Bolkhovitinov reached Litashevka after one o'clock at night . 
Dismounting at a cottage on whose wattle fence hung a signboard , GENERAL STAFF , and throwing down his reins , he entered a dark passage . 
`` The general on duty , quick ! 
It 's very important ! '' 
said he to someone who had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage . 
`` He has been very unwell since the evening and this is the third night he has not slept , '' said the orderly pleadingly in a whisper . 
`` You should wake the captain first . '' 
`` But this is very important , from General Dokhturov , '' said Bolkhovitinov , entering the open door which he had found by feeling in the dark . 
The orderly had gone in before him and began waking somebody . 
`` Your honor , your honor ! 
A courier . '' 
`` What ? 
What 's that ? 
From whom ? '' 
came a sleepy voice . 
`` From Dokhturov and from Alexey Petrovich . 
Napoleon is at Forminsk , '' said Bolkhovitinov , unable to see in the dark who was speaking but guessing by the voice that it was not Konovnitsyn . 
The man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself . 
`` I do n't like waking him , '' he said , fumbling for something . 
`` He is very ill . 
Perhaps this is only a rumor . '' 
`` Here is the dispatch , '' said Bolkhovitinov . 
`` My orders are to give it at once to the general on duty . '' 
`` Wait a moment , I 'll light a candle . 
You damned rascal , where do you always hide it ? '' 
said the voice of the man who was stretching himself , to the orderly . 
-LRB- This was Shcherbinin , Konovnitsyn 's adjutant . -RRB- 
`` I 've found it , I 've found it ! '' 
he added . 
The orderly was striking a light and Shcherbinin was fumbling for something on the candlestick . 
`` Oh , the nasty beasts ! '' 
said he with disgust . 
By the light of the sparks Bolkhovitinov saw Shcherbinin 's youthful face as he held the candle , and the face of another man who was still asleep . 
This was Konovnitsyn . 
When the flame of the sulphur splinters kindled by the tinder burned up , first blue and then red , Shcherbinin lit the tallow candle , from the candlestick of which the cockroaches that had been gnawing it were running away , and looked at the messenger . 
Bolkhovitinov was bespattered all over with mud and had smeared his face by wiping it with his sleeve . 
`` Who gave the report ? '' 
inquired Shcherbinin , taking the envelope . 
`` The news is reliable , '' said Bolkhovitinov . 
`` Prisoners , Cossacks , and the scouts all say the same thing . '' 
`` There 's nothing to be done , we 'll have to wake him , '' said Shcherbinin , rising and going up to the man in the nightcap who lay covered by a greatcoat . 
`` Peter Petrovich ! '' 
said he . 
-LRB- Konovnitsyn did not stir . -RRB- 
`` To the General Staff ! '' 
he said with a smile , knowing that those words would be sure to arouse him . 
And in fact the head in the nightcap was lifted at once . 
