It is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of other reasons , the number depending on the endless diversity of points of view , presented themselves to the men of that day ; but to us , to posterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude and perceive its plain and terrible meaning , these causes seem insufficient . 
To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed and tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander was firm , or because England 's policy was astute or the Duke of Oldenburg wronged . 
We can not grasp what connection such circumstances have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence : why because the Duke was wronged , thousands of men from the other side of Europe killed and ruined the people of Smolensk and Moscow and were killed by them . 
To us , their descendants , who are not historians and are not carried away by the process of research and can therefore regard the event with unclouded common sense , an incalculable number of causes present themselves . 
The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of them we find ; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears to us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificance compared to the magnitude of the events , and by its impotence -- apart from the cooperation of all the other coincident causes -- to occasion the event . 
To us , the wish or objection of this or that French corporal to serve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleon 's refusal to withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the duchy of Oldenburg ; for had he not wished to serve , and had a second , a third , and a thousandth corporal and private also refused , there would have been so many less men in Napoleon 's army and the war could not have occurred . 
Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw beyond the Vistula , and not ordered his troops to advance , there would have been no war ; but had all his sergeants objected to serving a second term then also there could have been no war . 
Nor could there have been a war had there been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg , and had Alexander not felt insulted , and had there not been an autocratic government in Russia , or a Revolution in France and a subsequent dictatorship and Empire , or all the things that produced the French Revolution , and so on . 
Without each of these causes nothing could have happened . 
So all these causes -- myriads of causes -- coincided to bring it about . 
And so there was no one cause for that occurrence , but it had to occur because it had to . 
Millions of men , renouncing their human feelings and reason , had to go from west to east to slay their fellows , just as some centuries previously hordes of men had come from the east to the west , slaying their fellows . 
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander , on whose words the event seemed to hang , were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was drawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription . 
This could not be otherwise , for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander -LRB- on whom the event seemed to depend -RRB- should be carried out , the concurrence of innumerable circumstances was needed without any one of which the event could not have taken place . 
It was necessary that millions of men in whose hands lay the real power - the soldiers who fired , or transported provisions and guns -- should consent to carry out the will of these weak individuals , and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number of diverse and complex causes . 
We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational events -LRB- that is to say , events the reasonableness of which we do not understand -RRB- . 
The more we try to explain such events in history reasonably , the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to us . 
Each man lives for himself , using his freedom to attain his personal aims , and feels with his whole being that he can now do or abstain from doing this or that action ; but as soon as he has done it , that action performed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevocable and belongs to history , in which it has not a free but a predestined significance . 
There are two sides to the life of every man , his individual life , which is the more free the more abstract its interests , and his elemental hive life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him . 
Man lives consciously for himself , but is an unconscious instrument in the attainment of the historic , universal , aims of humanity . 
A deed done is irrevocable , and its result coinciding in time with the actions of millions of other men assumes an historic significance . 
The higher a man stands on the social ladder , the more people he is connected with and the more power he has over others , the more evident is the predestination and inevitability of his every action . 
`` The king 's heart is in the hands of the Lord . '' 
A king is history 's slave . 
History , that is , the unconscious , general , hive life of mankind , uses every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes . 
Though Napoleon at that time , in 1812 , was more convinced than ever that it depended on him , verser -LRB- ou ne pas verser -RRB- le sang de ses peuples * -- as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him - he had never been so much in the grip of inevitable laws , which compelled him , while thinking that he was acting on his own volition , to perform for the hive life -- that is to say , for history - whatever had to be performed . 
* `` To shed -LRB- or not to shed -RRB- the blood of his peoples . '' 
The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men , and by the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and co-ordinated to produce that movement and war : reproaches for the nonobservance of the Continental System , the Duke of Oldenburg 's wrongs , the movement of troops into Prussia -- undertaken -LRB- as it seemed to Napoleon -RRB- only for the purpose of securing an armed peace , the French Emperor 's love and habit of war coinciding with his people 's inclinations , allurement by the grandeur of the preparations , and the expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtaining advantages to compensate for that expenditure , the intoxicating honors he received in Dresden , the diplomatic negotiations which , in the opinion of contemporaries , were carried on with a sincere desire to attain peace , but which only wounded the self-love of both sides , and millions of other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or coincided with it . 
When an apple has ripened and falls , why does it fall ? 
Because of its attraction to the earth , because its stalk withers , because it is dried by the sun , because it grows heavier , because the wind shakes it , or because the boy standing below wants to eat it ? 
Nothing is the cause . 
All this is only the coincidence of conditions in which all vital organic and elemental events occur . 
And the botanist who finds that the apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and so forth is equally right with the child who stands under the tree and says the apple fell because he wanted to eat it and prayed for it . 
Equally right or wrong is he who says that Napoleon went to Moscow because he wanted to , and perished because Alexander desired his destruction , and he who says that an undermined hill weighing a million tons fell because the last navvy struck it for the last time with his mattock . 
In historic events the so-called great men are labels giving names to events , and like labels they have but the smallest connection with the event itself . 
Every act of theirs , which appears to them an act of their own will , is in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of history and predestined from eternity . 
On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden , where he had spent three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes , dukes , kings , and even an emperor . 
Before leaving , Napoleon showed favor to the emperor , kings , and princes who had deserved it , reprimanded the kings and princes with whom he was dissatisfied , presented pearls and diamonds of his own -- that is , which he had taken from other kings - to the Empress of Austria , and having , as his historian tells us , tenderly embraced the Empress Marie Louise -- who regarded him as her husband , though he had left another wife in Paris -- left her grieved by the parting which she seemed hardly able to bear . 
Though the diplomatists still firmly believed in the possibility of peace and worked zealously to that end , and though the Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter to Alexander , calling him Monsieur mon frere , and sincerely assured him that he did not want war and would always love and honor him -- yet he set off to join his army , and at every station gave fresh orders to accelerate the movement of his troops from west to east . 
He went in a traveling coach with six horses , surrounded by pages , aides-de-camp , and an escort , along the road to Posen , Thorn , Danzig , and Konigsberg . 
At each of these towns thousands of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm . 
The army was moving from west to east , and relays of six horses carried him in the same direction . 
On the tenth of June , * coming up with the army , he spent the night in apartments prepared for him on the estate of a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest . 
* Old style . 
Next day , overtaking the army , he went in a carriage to the Niemen , and , changing into a Polish uniform , he drove to the riverbank in order to select a place for the crossing . 
Seeing , on the other side , some Cossacks -LRB- les Cosaques -RRB- and the wide-spreading steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city of Moscow -LRB- Moscou , la ville sainte -RRB- , the capital of a realm such as the Scythia into which Alexander the Great had marched -- Napoleon unexpectedly , and contrary alike to strategic and diplomatic considerations , ordered an advance , and the next day his army began to cross the Niemen . 
Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent , which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen , and looked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out of the Vilkavisski forest and flowing over the three bridges thrown across the river . 
The troops , knowing of the Emperor 's presence , were on the lookout for him , and when they caught sight of a figure in an overcoat and a cocked hat standing apart from his suite in front of his tent on the hill , they threw up their caps and shouted : `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
and one after another poured in a ceaseless stream out of the vast forest that had concealed them and , separating , flowed on and on by the three bridges to the other side . 
`` Now we 'll go into action . 
Oh , when he takes it in hand himself , things get hot ... by heaven ! 
... There he is ! 
... Vive l'Empereur ! 
So these are the steppes of Asia ! 
It 's a nasty country all the same . 
Au revoir , Beauche ; I 'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you ! 
Au revoir . 
Good luck ! 
... Did you see the Emperor ? 
Vive l'Empereur ! 
... preur ! 
-- If they make me Governor of India , Gerard , I 'll make you Minister of Kashmir -- that 's settled . 
Vive l'Empereur ! 
Hurrah ! 
hurrah ! 
hurrah ! 
The Cossacks -- those rascals -- see how they run ! 
Vive l'Empereur ! 
There he is , do you see him ? 
I 've seen him twice , as I see you now . 
The little corporal ... I saw him give the cross to one of the veterans ... . 
Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
came the voices of men , old and young , of most diverse characters and social positions . 
On the faces of all was one common expression of joy at the commencement of the long-expected campaign and of rapture and devotion to the man in the gray coat who was standing on the hill . 
On the thirteenth of June a rather small , thoroughbred Arab horse was brought to Napoleon . 
He mounted it and rode at a gallop to one of the bridges over the Niemen , deafened continually by incessant and rapturous acclamations which he evidently endured only because it was impossible to forbid the soldiers to express their love of him by such shouting , but the shouting which accompanied him everywhere disturbed him and distracted him from the military cares that had occupied him from the time he joined the army . 
He rode across one of the swaying pontoon bridges to the farther side , turned sharply to the left , and galloped in the direction of Kovno , preceded by enraptured , mounted chasseurs of the Guard who , breathless with delight , galloped ahead to clear a path for him through the troops . 
On reaching the broad river Viliya , he stopped near a regiment of Polish Uhlans stationed by the river . 
`` Vivat ! '' 
shouted the Poles , ecstatically , breaking their ranks and pressing against one another to see him . 
Napoleon looked up and down the river , dismounted , and sat down on a log that lay on the bank . 
At a mute sign from him , a telescope was handed him which he rested on the back of a happy page who had run up to him , and he gazed at the opposite bank . 
Then he became absorbed in a map laid out on the logs . 
Without lifting his head he said something , and two of his aides-de-camp galloped off to the Polish Uhlans . 
`` What ? 
What did he say ? '' 
was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlans when one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them . 
The order was to find a ford and to cross the river . 
The colonel of the Polish Uhlans , a handsome old man , flushed and , fumbling in his speech from excitement , asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted to swim the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a ford . 
In evident fear of refusal , like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse , he begged to be allowed to swim across the river before the Emperor 's eyes . 
The aide-de-camp replied that probably the Emperor would not be displeased at this excess of zeal . 
As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this , the old mustached officer , with happy face and sparkling eyes , raised his saber , shouted `` Vivat ! '' 
and , commanding the Uhlans to follow him , spurred his horse and galloped into the river . 
He gave an angry thrust to his horse , which had grown restive under him , and plunged into the water , heading for the deepest part where the current was swift . 
Hundreds of Uhlans galloped in after him . 
It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the middle of the stream , and the Uhlans caught hold of one another as they fell off their horses . 
Some of the horses were drowned and some of the men ; the others tried to swim on , some in the saddle and some clinging to their horses ' manes . 
They tried to make their way forward to the opposite bank and , though there was a ford one third of a mile away , were proud that they were swimming and drowning in this river under the eyes of the man who sat on the log and was not even looking at what they were doing . 
When the aide-de-camp , having returned and choosing an opportune moment , ventured to draw the Emperor 's attention to the devotion of the Poles to his person , the little man in the gray overcoat got up and , having summoned Berthier , began pacing up and down the bank with him , giving him instructions and occasionally glancing disapprovingly at the drowning Uhlans who distracted his attention . 
For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part of the world , from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike , was enough to dumfound people and impel them to insane self-oblivion . 
