All the way Petya had been preparing himself to behave with Denisov as befitted a grownup man and an officer -- without hinting at their previous acquaintance . 
But as soon as Denisov smiled at him Petya brightened up , blushed with pleasure , forgot the official manner he had been rehearsing , and began telling him how he had already been in a battle near Vyazma and how a certain hussar had distinguished himself there . 
`` Well , I am glad to see you , '' Denisov interrupted him , and his face again assumed its anxious expression . 
`` Michael Feoklitych , '' said he to the esaul , `` this is again fwom that German , you know . 
He '' -- he indicated Petya -- `` is serving under him . '' 
And Denisov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was a repetition of the German general 's demand that he should join forces with him for an attack on the transport . 
`` If we do n't take it tomowwow , he 'll snatch it fwom under our noses , '' he added . 
While Denisov was talking to the esaul , Petya -- abashed by Denisov 's cold tone and supposing that it was due to the condition of his trousers -- furtively tried to pull them down under his greatcoat so that no one should notice it , while maintaining as martial an air as possible . 
`` Will there be any orders , your honor ? '' 
he asked Denisov , holding his hand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and general for which he had prepared himself , `` or shall I remain with your honor ? '' 
`` Orders ? '' 
Denisov repeated thoughtfully . 
`` But can you stay till tomowwow ? '' 
`` Oh , please ... May I stay with you ? '' 
cried Petya . 
`` But , just what did the genewal tell you ? 
To weturn at once ? '' 
asked Denisov . 
Petya blushed . 
`` He gave me no instructions . 
I think I could ? '' 
he returned , inquiringly . 
`` Well , all wight , '' said Denisov . 
And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the halting place arranged near the watchman 's hut in the forest , and told the officer on the Kirghiz horse -LRB- who performed the duties of an adjutant -RRB- to go and find out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come that evening . 
Denisov himself intended going with the esaul and Petya to the edge of the forest where it reached out to Shamshevo , to have a look at the part of the French bivouac they were to attack next day . 
`` Well , old fellow , '' said he to the peasant guide , `` lead us to Shamshevo . '' 
Denisov , Petya , and the esaul , accompanied by some Cossacks and the hussar who had the prisoner , rode to the left across a ravine to the edge of the forest . 
The rain had stopped , and only the mist was falling and drops from the trees . 
Denisov , the esaul , and Petya rode silently , following the peasant in the knitted cap who , stepping lightly with outturned toes and moving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves , silently led them to the edge of the forest . 
He ascended an incline , stopped , looked about him , and advanced to where the screen of trees was less dense . 
On reaching a large oak tree that had not yet shed its leaves , he stopped and beckoned mysteriously to them with his hand . 
Denisov and Petya rode up to him . 
From the spot where the peasant was standing they could see the French . 
Immediately beyond the forest , on a downward slope , lay a field of spring rye . 
To the right , beyond a steep ravine , was a small village and a landowner 's house with a broken roof . 
In the village , in the house , in the garden , by the well , by the pond , over all the rising ground , and all along the road uphill from the bridge leading to the village , not more than five hundred yards away , crowds of men could be seen through the shimmering mist . 
Their un-Russian shouting at their horses which were straining uphill with the carts , and their calls to one another , could be clearly heard . 
`` Bwing the prisoner here , '' said Denisov in a low voice , not taking his eyes off the French . 
A Cossack dismounted , lifted the boy down , and took him to Denisov . 
Pointing to the French troops , Denisov asked him what these and those of them were . 
The boy , thrusting his cold hands into his pockets and lifting his eyebrows , looked at Denisov in affright , but in spite of an evident desire to say all he knew gave confused answers , merely assenting to everything Denisov asked him . 
Denisov turned away from him frowning and addressed the esaul , conveying his own conjectures to him . 
Petya , rapidly turning his head , looked now at the drummer boy , now at Denisov , now at the esaul , and now at the French in the village and along the road , trying not to miss anything of importance . 
`` Whether Dolokhov comes or not , we must seize it , eh ? '' 
said Denisov with a merry sparkle in his eyes . 
`` It is a very suitable spot , '' said the esaul . 
`` We 'll send the infantwy down by the swamps , '' Denisov continued . 
`` They 'll cweep up to the garden ; you 'll wide up fwom there with the Cossacks '' -- he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the village -- `` and I with my hussars fwom here . 
And at the signal shot ... '' `` The hollow is impassable -- there 's a swamp there , '' said the esaul . 
`` The horses would sink . 
We must ride round more to the left ... '' While they were talking in undertones the crack of a shot sounded from the low ground by the pond , a puff of white smoke appeared , then another , and the sound of hundreds of seemingly merry French voices shouting together came up from the slope . 
For a moment Denisov and the esaul drew back . 
They were so near that they thought they were the cause of the firing and shouting . 
But the firing and shouting did not relate to them . 
Down below , a man wearing something red was running through the marsh . 
The French were evidently firing and shouting at him . 
`` Why , that 's our Tikhon , '' said the esaul . 
`` So it is ! 
It is ! '' 
`` The wascal ! '' 
said Denisov . 
`` He 'll get away ! '' 
said the esaul , screwing up his eyes . 
The man whom they called Tikhon , having run to the stream , plunged in so that the water splashed in the air , and , having disappeared for an instant , scrambled out on all fours , all black with the wet , and ran on . 
The French who had been pursuing him stopped . 
`` Smart , that ! '' 
said the esaul . 
`` What a beast ! '' 
said Denisov with his former look of vexation . 
`` What has he been doing all this time ? '' 
`` Who is he ? '' 
asked Petya . 
`` He 's our plastun . 
I sent him to capture a ` tongue . ' '' 
`` Oh , yes , '' said Petya , nodding at the first words Denisov uttered as if he understood it all , though he really did not understand anything of it . 
Tikhon Shcherbaty was one of the most indispensable men in their band . 
He was a peasant from Pokrovsk , near the river Gzhat . 
When Denisov had come to Pokrovsk at the beginning of his operations and had as usual summoned the village elder and asked him what he knew about the French , the elder , as though shielding himself , had replied , as all village elders did , that he had neither seen nor heard anything of them . 
But when Denisov explained that his purpose was to kill the French , and asked if no French had strayed that way , the elder replied that some `` more-orderers '' had really been at their village , but that Tikhon Shcherbaty was the only man who dealt with such matters . 
Denisov had Tikhon called and , having praised him for his activity , said a few words in the elder 's presence about loyalty to the Tsar and the country and the hatred of the French that all sons of the fatherland should cherish . 
`` We do n't do the French any harm , '' said Tikhon , evidently frightened by Denisov 's words . 
`` We only fooled about with the lads for fun , you know ! 
We killed a score or so of ` more-orderers , ' but we did no harm else ... '' Next day when Denisov had left Pokrovsk , having quite forgotten about this peasant , it was reported to him that Tikhon had attached himself to their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it . 
Denisov gave orders to let him do so . 
Tikhon , who at first did rough work , laying campfires , fetching water , flaying dead horses , and so on , soon showed a great liking and aptitude for partisan warfare . 
At night he would go out for booty and always brought back French clothing and weapons , and when told to would bring in French captives also . 
Denisov then relieved him from drudgery and began taking him with him when he went out on expeditions and had him enrolled among the Cossacks . 
Tikhon did not like riding , and always went on foot , never lagging behind the cavalry . 
He was armed with a musketoon -LRB- which he carried rather as a joke -RRB- , a pike and an ax , which latter he used as a wolf uses its teeth , with equal case picking fleas out of its fur or crunching thick bones . 
Tikhon with equal accuracy would split logs with blows at arm 's length , or holding the head of the ax would cut thin little pegs or carve spoons . 
In Denisov 's party he held a peculiar and exceptional position . 
When anything particularly difficult or nasty had to be done -- to push a cart out of the mud with one 's shoulders , pull a horse out of a swamp by its tail , skin it , slink in among the French , or walk more than thirty miles in a day -- everybody pointed laughingly at Tikhon . 
`` It wo n't hurt that devil -- he 's as strong as a horse ! '' 
they said of him . 
Once a Frenchman Tikhon was trying to capture fired a pistol at him and shot him in the fleshy part of the back . 
That wound -LRB- which Tikhon treated only with internal and external applications of vodka -RRB- was the subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment - jokes in which Tikhon readily joined . 
`` Hallo , mate ! 
Never again ? 
Gave you a twist ? '' 
the Cossacks would banter him . 
