Why ? 
Why ? 
Who asked you to ? '' 
shouted Natasha , raising herself on the sofa and looking malignantly at Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` But what did you want ? '' 
cried Marya Dmitrievna , growing angry again . 
`` Were you kept under lock and key ? 
Who hindered his coming to the house ? 
Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl ? 
... Well , if he had carried you off ... do you think they would n't have found him ? 
Your father , or brother , or your betrothed ? 
And he 's a scoundrel , a wretch -- that 's a fact ! '' 
`` He is better than any of you ! '' 
exclaimed Natasha getting up . 
`` If you had n't interfered ... Oh , my God ! 
What is it all ? 
What is it ? 
Sonya , why ? 
... Go away ! '' 
And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned . 
Marya Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out : `` Go away ! 
Go away ! 
You all hate and despise me ! '' 
and she threw herself back on the sofa . 
Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time , enjoining on her that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobody would know anything about it if only Natasha herself would undertake to forget it all and not let anyone see that something had happened . 
Natasha did not reply , nor did she sob any longer , but she grew cold and had a shivering fit . 
Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head , covered her with two quilts , and herself brought her some lime-flower water , but Natasha did not respond to her . 
`` Well , let her sleep , '' said Marya Dmitrievna as she went of the room supposing Natasha to be asleep . 
But Natasha was not asleep ; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes she looked straight before her . 
All that night she did not sleep or weep and did not speak to Sonya who got up and went to her several times . 
Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for lunch as he had promised . 
He was in very good spirits ; the affair with the purchaser was going on satisfactorily , and there was nothing to keep him any longer in Moscow , away from the countess whom he missed . 
Marya Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the day before and that they had sent for the doctor , but that she was better now . 
Natasha had not left her room that morning . 
With compressed and parched lips and dry fixed eyes , she sat at the window , uneasily watching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round at anyone who entered the room . 
She was evidently expecting news of him and that he would come or would write to her . 
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound of a man 's footstep , and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent expression . 
She did not even get up to greet him . 
`` What is the matter with you , my angel ? 
Are you ill ? '' 
asked the count . 
After a moment 's silence Natasha answered : `` Yes , ill . '' 
In reply to the count 's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejected and whether anything had happened to her betrothed , she assured him that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry . 
Marya Dmitrievna confirmed Natasha 's assurances that nothing had happened . 
From the pretense of illness , from his daughter 's distress , and by the embarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya Dmitrievna , the count saw clearly that something had gone wrong during his absence , but it was so terrible for him to think that anything disgraceful had happened to his beloved daughter , and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity , that he avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing particularly had happened ; and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition delayed their return to the country . 
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go away somewhere , so as not to be near her . 
Soon after the Rostovs came to Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out his intention . 
He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich 's widow , who had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased husband 's . 
When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya Dmitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of great importance relating to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed . 
Pierre had been avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her was stronger than a married man 's should be for his friend 's fiancee . 
Yet some fate constantly threw them together . 
`` What can have happened ? 
And what can they want with me ? '' 
thought he as he dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna 's . 
`` If only Prince Andrew would hurry up and come and marry her ! '' 
thought he on his way to the house . 
On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him . 
`` Pierre ! 
Been back long ? '' 
someone shouted . 
Pierre raised his head . 
In a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering the dashboard with snow , Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashed past . 
Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of military dandies , the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his head slightly bent . 
His face was fresh and rosy , his white-plumed hat , tilted to one side , disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkled with powdery snow . 
`` Yes , indeed , that 's a true sage , '' thought Pierre . 
`` He sees nothing beyond the pleasure of the moment , nothing troubles him and so he is always cheerful , satisfied , and serene . 
What would n't I give to be like him ! '' 
he thought enviously . 
In Marya Dmitrievna 's anteroom the footman who helped him off with his fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom . 
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at the window , with a thin , pale , and spiteful face . 
She glanced round at him , frowned , and left the room with an expression of cold dignity . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
asked Pierre , entering Marya Dmitrievna 's room . 
`` Fine doings ! '' 
answered Dmitrievna . 
`` For fifty-eight years have I lived in this world and never known anything so disgraceful ! '' 
And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him , Marya Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrew without her parents ' knowledge and that the cause of this was Anatole Kuragin into whose society Pierre 's wife had thrown her and with whom Natasha had tried to elope during her father 's absence , in order to be married secretly . 
Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was told him , scarcely able to believe his own ears . 
That Prince Andrew 's deeply loved affianced wife -- the same Natasha Rostova who used to be so charming -- should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already secretly married -LRB- as Pierre knew -RRB- , and should be so in love with him as to agree to run away with him , was something Pierre could not conceive and could not imagine . 
He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha , whom he had known from a child , with this new conception of her baseness , folly , and cruelty . 
He thought of his wife . 
`` They are all alike ! '' 
he said to himself , reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate enough to be tied to a bad woman . 
But still he pitied Prince Andrew to the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride , and the more he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with disgust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom with such a look of cold dignity . 
He did not know that Natasha 's soul was overflowing with despair , shame , and humiliation , and that it was not her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity and severity . 
`` But how get married ? '' 
said Pierre , in answer to Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` He could not marry -- he is married ! '' 
`` Things get worse from hour to hour ! '' 
ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` A nice youth ! 
What a scoundrel ! 
And she 's expecting him -- expecting him since yesterday . 
She must be told ! 
Then at least she wo n't go on expecting him . '' 
After hearing the details of Anatole 's marriage from Pierre , and giving vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse , Marya Dmitrievna told Pierre why she had sent for him . 
She was afraid that the count or Bolkonski , who might arrive at any moment , if they knew of this affair -LRB- which she hoped to hide from them -RRB- might challenge Anatole to a duel , and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to leave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again . 
Pierre -- only now realizing the danger to the old count , Nicholas , and Prince Andrew -- promised to do as she wished . 
Having briefly and exactly explained her wishes to him , she let him go to the drawing room . 
`` Mind , the count knows nothing . 
