The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev , Prince Andrew spent the evening at Count Kochubey 's . 
He told the count of his interview with Sila Andreevich -LRB- Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that nickname with the same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War 's anteroom -RRB- . 
`` Mon cher , even in this case you ca n't do without Michael Mikhaylovich Speranski . 
He manages everything . 
I 'll speak to him . 
He has promised to come this evening . '' 
`` What has Speranski to do with the army regulations ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew . 
Kochubey shook his head smilingly , as if surprised at Bolkonski 's simplicity . 
`` We were talking to him about you a few days ago , '' Kochubey continued , `` and about your freed plowmen . '' 
`` Oh , is it you , Prince , who have freed your serfs ? '' 
said an old man of Catherine 's day , turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski . 
`` It was a small estate that brought in no profit , '' replied Prince Andrew , trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man uselessly . 
`` Afraid of being late ... '' said the old man , looking at Kochubey . 
`` There 's one thing I do n't understand , '' he continued . 
`` Who will plow the land if they are set free ? 
It is easy to write laws , but difficult to rule ... . 
Just the same as now -- I ask you , Count -- who will be heads of the departments when everybody has to pass examinations ? '' 
`` Those who pass the examinations , I suppose , '' replied Kochubey , crossing his legs and glancing round . 
`` Well , I have Pryanichnikov serving under me , a splendid man , a priceless man , but he 's sixty . 
Is he to go up for examination ? '' 
`` Yes , that 's a difficulty , as education is not at all general , but ... '' Count Kochubey did not finish . 
He rose , took Prince Andrew by the arm , and went to meet a tall , bald , fair man of about forty with a large open forehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness , who was just entering . 
The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with a cross suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast . 
It was Speranski . 
Prince Andrew recognized him at once , and felt a throb within him , as happens at critical moments of life . 
Whether it was from respect , envy , or anticipation , he did not know . 
Speranski 's whole figure was of a peculiar type that made him easily recognizable . 
In the society in which Prince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who together with awkward and clumsy gestures possessed such calmness and self-assurance ; he had never seen so resolute yet gentle an expression as that in those half-closed , rather humid eyes , or so firm a smile that expressed nothing ; nor had he heard such a refined , smooth , soft voice ; above all he had never seen such delicate whiteness of face or hands -- hands which were broad , but very plump , soft , and white . 
Such whiteness and softness Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long in hospital . 
This was Speranski , Secretary of State , reporter to the Emperor and his companion at Erfurt , where he had more than once met and talked with Napoleon . 
Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry to speak . 
He spoke slowly , with assurance that he would be listened to , and he looked only at the person with whom he was conversing . 
Prince Andrew followed Speranski 's every word and movement with particular attention . 
As happens to some people , especially to men who judge those near to them severely , he always on meeting anyone new - especially anyone whom , like Speranski , he knew by reputation - expected to discover in him the perfection of human qualities . 
Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner as he had been detained at the palace . 
He did not say that the Emperor had kept him , and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty . 
When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew , Speranski slowly turned his eyes to Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence . 
`` I am very glad to make your acquaintance . 
I had heard of you , as everyone has , '' he said after a pause . 
Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had given Bolkonski . 
Speranski smiled more markedly . 
`` The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend Monsieur Magnitski , '' he said , fully articulating every word and syllable , `` and if you like I can put you in touch with him . '' 
He paused at the full stop . 
`` I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to co-operate in promoting all that is reasonable . '' 
A circle soon formed round Speranski , and the old man who had talked about his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him . 
Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movement of Speranski 's : this man , not long since an insignificant divinity student , who now , Bolkonski thought , held in his hands -- those plump white hands -- the fate of Russia . 
Prince Andrew was struck by the extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered the old man . 
He appeared to address condescending words to him from an immeasurable height . 
When the old man began to speak too loud , Speranski smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or disadvantage of what pleased the sovereign . 
Having talked for a little while in the general circle , Speranski rose and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of the room . 
It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest himself in Bolkonski . 
`` I had no chance to talk with you , Prince , during the animated conversation in which that venerable gentleman involved me , '' he said with a mildly contemptuous smile , as if intimating by that smile that he and Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of the people with whom he had just been talking . 
This flattered Prince Andrew . 
`` I have known of you for a long time : first from your action with regard to your serfs , a first example , of which it is very desirable that there should be more imitators ; and secondly because you are one of those gentlemen of the chamber who have not considered themselves offended by the new decree concerning the ranks allotted to courtiers , which is causing so much gossip and tittle-tattle . '' 
`` No , '' said Prince Andrew , `` my father did not wish me to take advantage of the privilege . 
I began the service from the lower grade . '' 
`` Your father , a man of the last century , evidently stands above our contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely reestablishes natural justice . '' 
`` I think , however , that these condemnations have some ground , '' returned Prince Andrew , trying to resist Speranski 's influence , of which he began to be conscious . 
He did not like to agree with him in everything and felt a wish to contradict . 
Though he usually spoke easily and well , he felt a difficulty in expressing himself now while talking with Speranski . 
He was too much absorbed in observing the famous man 's personality . 
`` Grounds of personal ambition maybe , '' Speranski put in quietly . 
`` And of state interest to some extent , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
asked Speranski quietly , lowering his eyes . 
`` I am an admirer of Montesquieu , '' replied Prince Andrew , `` and his idea that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me parait incontestable . 
Certains droits et privileges de la noblesse me paraissent etre des moyens de soutenir ce sentiment . '' 
* * `` The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me incontestable . 
Certain rights and privileges for the aristocracy appear to me a means of maintaining that sentiment . '' 
The smile vanished from Speranski 's white face , which was much improved by the change . 
Probably Prince Andrew 's thought interested him . 
`` Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue , '' * he began , pronouncing French with evident difficulty , and speaking even slower than in Russian but quite calmly . 
* `` If you regard the question from that point of view . '' 
Speranski went on to say that honor , l'honeur , can not be upheld by privileges harmful to the service ; that honor , l'honneur , is either a negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a source of emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards , which recognize it . 
His arguments were concise , simple , and clear . 
`` An institution upholding honor , the source of emulation , is one similar to the Legion d'honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon , not harmful but helpful to the success of the service , but not a class or court privilege . '' 
`` I do not dispute that , but it can not be denied that court privileges have attained the same end , '' returned Prince Andrew . 
`` Every courtier considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily . '' 
`` Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege , Prince , '' said Speranski , indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably an argument which was embarrassing for his companion . 
`` If you will do me the honor of calling on me on Wednesday , '' he added , `` I will , after talking with Magnitski , let you know what may interest you , and shall also have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you . '' 
Closing his eyes , he bowed a la francaise , without taking leave , and trying to attract as little attention as possible , he left the room . 
During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt the whole trend of thought he had formed during his life of seclusion quite overshadowed by the trifling cares that engrossed him in that city . 
On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebook four or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours . 
The mechanism of life , the arrangement of the day so as to be in time everywhere , absorbed the greater part of his vital energy . 
He did nothing , did not even think or find time to think , but only talked , and talked successfully , of what he had thought while in the country . 
He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the same remark on the same day in different circles . 
But he was so busy for whole days together that he had no time to notice that he was thinking of nothing . 
As he had done on their first meeting at Kochubey 's , Speranski produced a strong impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday , when he received him tete-a-tate at his own house and talked to him long and confidentially . 
To Bolkonski so many people appeared contemptible and insignificant creatures , and he so longed to find in someone the living ideal of that perfection toward which he strove , that he readily believed that in Speranski he had found this ideal of a perfectly rational and virtuous man . 
Had Speranski sprung from the same class as himself and possessed the same breeding and traditions , Bolkonski would soon have discovered his weak , human , unheroic sides ; but as it was , Speranski 's strange and logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because he did not quite understand him . 
Moreover , Speranski , either because he appreciated the other 's capacity or because he considered it necessary to win him to his side , showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness before Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which goes hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumption that one 's companion is the only man besides oneself capable of understanding the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonableness and profundity of one 's own ideas . 
During their long conversation on Wednesday evening , Speranski more than once remarked : `` We regard everything that is above the common level of rooted custom ... '' or , with a smile : `` But we want the wolves to be fed and the sheep to be safe ... '' or : `` They can not understand this ... '' and all in a way that seemed to say : `` We , you and I , understand what they are and who we are . '' 
This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in Prince Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting . 
He saw in him a remarkable , clear-thinking man of vast intellect who by his energy and persistence had attained power , which he was using solely for the welfare of Russia . 
In Prince Andrew 's eyes Speranski was the man he would himself have wished to be -- one who explained all the facts of life reasonably , considered important only what was rational , and was capable of applying the standard of reason to everything . 
Everything seemed so simple and clear in Speranski 's exposition that Prince Andrew involuntarily agreed with him about everything . 
If he replied and argued , it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and not submit to Speranski 's opinions entirely . 
Everything was right and everything was as it should be : only one thing disconcerted Prince Andrew . 
This was Speranski 's cold , mirrorlike look , which did not allow one to penetrate to his soul , and his delicate white hands , which Prince Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of those who possess power . 
