From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostovs ' as Natasha 's affianced lover . 
No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha 's engagement to Bolkonski was not announced ; Prince Andrew insisted on that . 
He said that as he was responsible for the delay he ought to bear the whole burden of it ; that he had given his word and bound himself forever , but that he did not wish to bind Natasha and gave her perfect freedom . 
If after six months she felt that she did not love him she would have full right to reject him . 
Naturally neither Natasha nor her parents wished to hear of this , but Prince Andrew was firm . 
He came every day to the Rostovs ' , but did not behave to Natasha as an affianced lover : he did not use the familiar thou , but said you to her , and kissed only her hand . 
After their engagement , quite different , intimate , and natural relations sprang up between them . 
It was as if they had not known each other till now . 
Both liked to recall how they had regarded each other when as yet they were nothing to one another ; they felt themselves now quite different beings : then they were artificial , now natural and sincere . 
At first the family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew ; he seemed a man from another world , and for a long time Natasha trained the family to get used to him , proudly assuring them all that he only appeared to be different , but was really just like all of them , and that she was not afraid of him and no one else ought to be . 
After a few days they grew accustomed to him , and without restraint in his presence pursued their usual way of life , in which he took his part . 
He could talk about rural economy with the count , fashions with the countess and Natasha , and about albums and fancywork with Sonya . 
Sometimes the household both among themselves and in his presence expressed their wonder at how it had all happened , and at the evident omens there had been of it : Prince Andrew 's coming to Otradnoe and their coming to Petersburg , and the likeness between Natasha and Prince Andrew which her nurse had noticed on his first visit , and Andrew 's encounter with Nicholas in 1805 , and many other incidents betokening that it had to be . 
In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which always accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple . 
Often when all sitting together everyone kept silent . 
Sometimes the others would get up and go away and the couple , left alone , still remained silent . 
They rarely spoke of their future life . 
Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to speak of it . 
Natasha shared this as she did all his feelings , which she constantly divined . 
Once she began questioning him about his son . 
Prince Andrew blushed , as he often did now -- Natasha particularly liked it in him -- and said that his son would not live with them . 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked Natasha in a frightened tone . 
`` I can not take him away from his grandfather , and besides ... '' `` How I should have loved him ! '' 
said Natasha , immediately guessing his thought ; `` but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding fault with us . '' 
Sometimes the old count would come up , kiss Prince Andrew , and ask his advice about Petya 's education or Nicholas ' service . 
The old countess sighed as she looked at them ; Sonya was always getting frightened lest she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for leaving them alone , even when they did not wish it . 
When Prince Andrew spoke -LRB- he could tell a story very well -RRB- , Natasha listened to him with pride ; when she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed attentively and scrutinizingly at her . 
She asked herself in perplexity : `` What does he look for in me ? 
He is trying to discover something by looking at me ! 
What if what he seeks in me is not there ? '' 
Sometimes she fell into one of the mad , merry moods characteristic of her , and then she particularly loved to hear and see how Prince Andrew laughed . 
He seldom laughed , but when he did he abandoned himself entirely to his laughter , and after such a laugh she always felt nearer to him . 
Natasha would have been completely happy if the thought of the separation awaiting her and drawing near had not terrified her , just as the mere thought of it made him turn pale and cold . 
On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought with him Pierre , who had not been to the Rostovs ' once since the ball . 
Pierre seemed disconcerted and embarrassed . 
He was talking to the countess , and Natasha sat down beside a little chess table with Sonya , thereby inviting Prince Andrew to come too . 
He did so . 
`` You have known Bezukhov a long time ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Do you like him ? '' 
`` Yes , he 's a dear , but very absurd . '' 
And as usual when speaking of Pierre , she began to tell anecdotes of his absent-mindedness , some of which had even been invented about him . 
`` Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret ? 
I have known him from childhood . 
He has a heart of gold . 
I beg you , Natalie , '' Prince Andrew said with sudden seriousness -- `` I am going away and heaven knows what may happen . 
You may cease to ... all right , I know I am not to say that . 
Only this , then : whatever may happen to you when I am not here ... '' `` What can happen ? '' 
`` Whatever trouble may come , '' Prince Andrew continued , `` I beg you , Mademoiselle Sophie , whatever may happen , to turn to him alone for advice and help ! 
He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow , but he has a heart of gold . '' 
Neither her father , nor her mother , nor Sonya , nor Prince Andrew himself could have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act on Natasha . 
Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day , dry-eyed , occupied with most trivial matters as if not understanding what awaited her . 
She did not even cry when , on taking leave , he kissed her hand for the last time . 
`` Do n't go ! '' 
she said in a tone that made him wonder whether he really ought not to stay and which he remembered long afterwards . 
Nor did she cry when he was gone ; but for several days she sat in her room dry-eyed , taking no interest in anything and only saying now and then , `` Oh , why did he go away ? '' 
But a fortnight after his departure , to the surprise of those around her , she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and became her old self again , but with a change in her moral physiognomy , as a child gets up after a long illness with a changed expression of face . 
During that year after his son 's departure , Prince Nicholas Bolkonski 's health and temper became much worse . 
He grew still more irritable , and it was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt of his frequent fits of unprovoked anger . 
He seemed carefully to seek out her tender spots so as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible . 
Princess Mary had two passions and consequently two joys -- her nephew , little Nicholas , and religion -- and these were the favorite subjects of the prince 's attacks and ridicule . 
Whatever was spoken of he would bring round to the superstitiousness of old maids , or the petting and spoiling of children . 
`` You want to make him '' -- little Nicholas -- `` into an old maid like yourself ! 
A pity ! 
Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid , '' he would say . 
Or , turning to Mademoiselle Bourienne , he would ask her in Princess Mary 's presence how she liked our village priests and icons and would joke about them . 
He continually hurt Princess Mary 's feelings and tormented her , but it cost her no effort to forgive him . 
Could he be to blame toward her , or could her father , whom she knew loved her in spite of it all , be unjust ? 
And what is justice ? 
The princess never thought of that proud word `` justice . '' 
All the complex laws of man centered for her in one clear and simple law -- the law of love and self-sacrifice taught us by Him who lovingly suffered for mankind though He Himself was God . 
What had she to do with the justice or injustice of other people ? 
She had to endure and love , and that she did . 
During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay , gentle , and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for a long time past . 
She felt that something had happened to him , but he said nothing to her about his love . 
Before he left he had a long talk with his father about something , and Princess Mary noticed that before his departure they were dissatisfied with one another . 
Soon after Prince Andrew had gone , Princess Mary wrote to her friend Julie Karagina in Petersburg , whom she had dreamed -LRB- as all girls dream -RRB- of marrying to her brother , and who was at that time in mourning for her own brother , killed in Turkey . 
Sorrow , it seems , is our common lot , my dear , tender friend Julie . 
Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as a special providence of God who , loving you , wishes to try you and your excellent mother . 
Oh , my friend ! 
Religion , and religion alone , can -- I will not say comfort us -- but save us from despair . 
Religion alone can explain to us what without its help man can not comprehend : why , for what cause , kind and noble beings able to find happiness in life -- not merely harming no one but necessary to the happiness of others -- are called away to God , while cruel , useless , harmful persons , or such as are a burden to themselves and to others , are left living . 
The first death I saw , and one I shall never forget -- that of my dear sister-in-law -- left that impression on me . 
Just as you ask destiny why your splendid brother had to die , so I asked why that angel Lise , who not only never wronged anyone , but in whose soul there were never any unkind thoughts , had to die . 
And what do you think , dear friend ? 
Five years have passed since then , and already I , with my petty understanding , begin to see clearly why she had to die , and in what way that death was but an expression of the infinite goodness of the Creator , whose every action , though generally incomprehensible to us , is but a manifestation of His infinite love for His creatures . 
Perhaps , I often think , she was too angelically innocent to have the strength to perform all a mother 's duties . 
As a young wife she was irreproachable ; perhaps she could not have been so as a mother . 
As it is , not only has she left us , and particularly Prince Andrew , with the purest regrets and memories , but probably she will there receive a place I dare not hope for myself . 
But not to speak of her alone , that early and terrible death has had the most beneficent influence on me and on my brother in spite of all our grief . 
Then , at the moment of our loss , these thoughts could not occur to me ; I should then have dismissed them with horror , but now they are very clear and certain . 
I write all this to you , dear friend , only to convince you of the Gospel truth which has become for me a principle of life : not a single hair of our heads will fall without His will . 
And His will is governed only by infinite love for us , and so whatever befalls us is for our good . 
You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow . 
In spite of my wish to see you , I do not think so and do not want to do so . 
You will be surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte ! 
The case is this : my father 's health is growing noticeably worse , he can not stand any contradiction and is becoming irritable . 
This irritability is , as you know , chiefly directed to political questions . 
He can not endure the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all the sovereigns of Europe and particularly with our own , the grandson of the Great Catherine ! 
