Each of them expresses his opinion as to how and where to haul it . 
They haul the log away , and it happens that this is done as one of them said . 
He ordered it . 
There we have command and power in their primary form . 
The man who worked most with his hands could not think so much about what he was doing , or reflect on or command what would result from the common activity ; while the man who commanded more would evidently work less with his hands on account of his greater verbal activity . 
When some larger concourse of men direct their activity to a common aim there is a yet sharper division of those who , because their activity is given to directing and commanding , take less less part in the direct work . 
When a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflections which as it seems to him directed his past activity , justify his present activity , and guide him in planning his future actions . 
Just the same is done by a concourse of people , allowing those who do not take a direct part in the activity to devise considerations , justifications , and surmises concerning their collective activity . 
For reasons known or unknown to us the French began to drown and kill one another . 
And corresponding to the event its justification appears in people 's belief that this was necessary for the welfare of France , for liberty , and for equality . 
People ceased to kill one another , and this event was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for a centralization of power , resistance to Europe , and so on . 
Men went from the west to the east killing their fellow men , and the event was accompanied by phrases about the glory of France , the baseness of England , and so on . 
History shows us that these justifications of the events have no common sense and are all contradictory , as in the case of killing a man as the result of recognizing his rights , and the killing of millions in Russia for the humiliation of England . 
But these justifications have a very necessary significance in their own day . 
These justifications release those who produce the events from moral responsibility . 
These temporary aims are like the broom fixed in front of a locomotive to clear the snow from the rails in front : they clear men 's moral responsibilities from their path . 
Without such justification there would be no reply to the simplest question that presents itself when examining each historical event . 
How is it that millions of men commit collective crimes -- make war , commit murder , and so on ? 
With the present complex forms of political and social life in Europe can any event that is not prescribed , decreed , or ordered by monarchs , ministers , parliaments , or newspapers be imagined ? 
Is there any collective action which can not find its justification in political unity , in patriotism , in the balance of power , or in civilization ? 
So that every event that occurs inevitably coincides with some expressed wish and , receiving a justification , presents itself as the result of the will of one man or of several men . 
In whatever direction a ship moves , the flow of the waves it cuts will always be noticeable ahead of it . 
To those on board the ship the movement of those waves will be the only perceptible motion . 
Only by watching closely moment by moment the movement of that flow and comparing it with the movement of the ship do we convince ourselves that every bit of it is occasioned by the forward movement of the ship , and that we were led into error by the fact that we ourselves were imperceptibly moving . 
We see the same if we watch moment by moment the movement of historical characters -LRB- that is , re-establish the inevitable condition of all that occurs -- the continuity of movement in time -RRB- and do not lose sight of the essential connection of historical persons with the masses . 
When the ship moves in one direction there is one and the same wave ahead of it , when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turns frequently . 
But wherever it may turn there always will be the wave anticipating its movement . 
Whatever happens it always appears that just that event was foreseen and decreed . 
Wherever the ship may go , the rush of water which neither directs nor increases its movement foams ahead of it , and at a distance seems to us not merely to move of itself but to govern the ship 's movement also . 
Examining only those expressions of the will of historical persons which , as commands , were related to events , historians have assumed that the events depended on those commands . 
But examining the events themselves and the connection in which the historical persons stood to the people , we have found that they and their orders were dependent on events . 
The incontestable proof of this deduction is that , however many commands were issued , the event does not take place unless there are other causes for it , but as soon as an event occurs -- be it what it may -- then out of all the continually expressed wishes of different people some will always be found which by their meaning and their time of utterance are related as commands to the events . 
Arriving at this conclusion we can reply directly and positively to these two essential questions of history : -LRB- 1 -RRB- What is power ? 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- What force produces the movement of the nations ? 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- Power is the relation of a given person to other individuals , in which the more this person expresses opinions , predictions , and justifications of the collective action that is performed , the less is his participation in that action . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- The movement of nations is caused not by power , nor by intellectual activity , nor even by a combination of the two as historians have supposed , but by the activity of all the people who participate in the events , and who always combine in such a way that those taking the largest direct share in the event take on themselves the least responsibility and vice versa . 
Morally the wielder of power appears to cause the event ; physically it is those who submit to the power . 
But as the moral activity is inconceivable without the physical , the cause of the event is neither in the one nor in the other but in the union of the two . 
Or in other words , the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the phenomena we are examining . 
In the last analysis we reach the circle of infinity -- that final limit to which in every domain of thought man 's reason arrives if it is not playing with the subject . 
Electricity produces heat , heat produces electricity . 
Atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another . 
Speaking of the interaction of heat and electricity and of atoms , we can not say why this occurs , and we say that it is so because it is inconceivable otherwise , because it must be so and that it is a law . 
The same applies to historical events . 
Why war and revolution occur we do not know . 
We only know that to produce the one or the other action , people combine in a certain formation in which they all take part , and we say that this is so because it is unthinkable otherwise , or in other words that it is a law . 
If history dealt only with external phenomena , the establishment of this simple and obvious law would suffice and we should have finished our argument . 
But the law of history relates to man . 
A particle of matter can not tell us that it does not feel the law of attraction or repulsion and that that law is untrue , but man , who is the subject of history , says plainly : I am free and am therefore not subject to the law . 
The presence of the problem of man 's free will , though unexpressed , is felt at every step of history . 
All seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encountered this question . 
All the contradictions and obscurities of history and the false path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack of a solution of that question . 
If the will of every man were free , that is , if each man could act as he pleased , all history would be a series of disconnected incidents . 
If in a thousand years even one man in a million could act freely , that is , as he chose , it is evident that one single free act of that man 's in violation of the laws governing human action would destroy the possibility of the existence of any laws for the whole of humanity . 
If there be a single law governing the actions of men , free will can not exist , for then man 's will is subject to that law . 
In this contradiction lies the problem of free will , which from most ancient times has occupied the best human minds and from most ancient times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance . 
The problem is that regarding man as a subject of observation from whatever point of view -- theological , historical , ethical , or philosophic -- we find a general law of necessity to which he -LRB- like all that exists -RRB- is subject . 
But regarding him from within ourselves as what we are conscious of , we feel ourselves to be free . 
This consciousness is a source of self-cognition quite apart from and independent of reason . 
Through his reason man observes himself , but only through consciousness does he know himself . 
Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason is conceivable . 
To understand , observe , and draw conclusions , man must first of all be conscious of himself as living . 
A man is only conscious of himself as a living being by the fact that he wills , that is , is conscious of his volition . 
But his will -- which forms the essence of his life -- man recognizes -LRB- and can but recognize -RRB- as free . 
If , observing himself , man sees that his will is always directed by one and the same law -LRB- whether he observes the necessity of taking food , using his brain , or anything else -RRB- he can not recognize this never-varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of it . 
Were it not free it could not be limited . 
A man 's will seems to him to be limited just because he is not conscious of it except as free . 
You say : I am not and am not free . 
But I have lifted my hand and let it fall . 
Everyone understands that this illogical reply is an irrefutable demonstration of freedom . 
That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to reason . 
If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent source of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and to experience , but in fact such subjection does not exist and is inconceivable . 
A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he , as an object of observation , is subject to certain laws , and man submits to them and never resists the laws of gravity or impermeability once he has become acquainted with them . 
But the same series of experiments and arguments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he is conscious in himself is impossible , and that his every action depends on his organization , his character , and the motives acting upon him ; yet man never submits to the deductions of these experiments and arguments . 
Having learned from experiment and argument that a stone falls downwards , a man indubitably believes this and always expects the law that he has learned to be fulfilled . 
But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws , he does not and can not believe this . 
However often experiment and reasoning may show a man that under the same conditions and with the same character he will do the same thing as before , yet when under the same conditions and with the same character he approaches for the thousandth time the action that always ends in the same way , he feels as certainly convinced as before the experiment that he can act as he pleases . 
Every man , savage or sage , however incontestably reason and experiment may prove to him that it is impossible to imagine two different courses of action in precisely the same conditions , feels that without this irrational conception -LRB- which constitutes the essence of freedom -RRB- he can not imagine life . 
He feels that however impossible it may be , it is so , for without this conception of freedom not only would he be unable to understand life , but he would be unable to live for a single moment . 
He could not live , because all man 's efforts , all his impulses to life , are only efforts to increase freedom . 
Wealth and poverty , fame and obscurity , power and subordination , strength and weakness , health and disease , culture and ignorance , work and leisure , repletion and hunger , virtue and vice , are only greater or lesser degrees of freedom . 
A man having no freedom can not be conceived of except as deprived of life . 
If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senseless contradiction like the possibility of performing two actions at one and the same instant of time , or of an effect without a cause , that only proves that consciousness is not subject to reason . 
This unshakable , irrefutable consciousness of freedom , uncontrolled by experiment or argument , recognized by all thinkers and felt by everyone without exception , this consciousness without which no conception of man is possible constitutes the other side of the question . 
Man is the creation of an all-powerful , all-good , and all-seeing God . 
What is sin , the conception of which arises from the consciousness of man 's freedom ? 
That is a question for theology . 
The actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressed in statistics . 
What is man 's responsibility to society , the conception of which results from the conception of freedom ? 
That is a question for jurisprudence . 
Man 's actions proceed from his innate character and the motives acting upon him . 
What is conscience and the perception of right and wrong in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom ? 
That is a question for ethics . 
Man in connection with the general life of humanity appears subject to laws which determine that life . 
But the same man apart from that connection appears to free . 
How should the past life of nations and of humanity be regarded -- as the result of the free , or as the result of the constrained , activity of man ? 
That is a question for history . 
Only in our self-confident day of the popularization of knowledge - thanks to that most powerful engine of ignorance , the diffusion of printed matter -- has the question of the freedom of will been put on a level on which the question itself can not exist . 
In our time the majority of so-called advanced people -- that is , the crowd of ignoramuses -- have taken the work of the naturalists who deal with one side of the question for a solution of the whole problem . 
They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist , for the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscular movements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves ; the soul and free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we sprang from the apes . 
