The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry singers . 
`` Oh , the coxcombs ! '' 
he muttered reproachfully . 
`` It 's not the soldiers only , but I 've seen peasants today , too ... . 
The peasants -- even they have to go , '' said the soldier behind the cart , addressing Pierre with a sad smile . 
`` No distinctions made nowadays ... . 
They want the whole nation to fall on them -- in a word , it 's Moscow ! 
They want to make an end of it . '' 
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier 's words Pierre understood what he wanted to say and nodded approval . 
The road was clear again ; Pierre descended the hill and drove on . 
He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces , but only saw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of different branches of the service , who all looked with astonishment at his white hat and green tail coat . 
Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and eagerly addressed him . 
This was one of the head army doctors . 
He was driving toward Pierre in a covered gig , sitting beside a young surgeon , and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver 's seat to pull up . 
`` Count ! 
Your excellency , how come you to be here ? '' 
asked the doctor . 
`` Well , you know , I wanted to see ... '' `` Yes , yes , there will be something to see ... '' Pierre got out and talked to the doctor , explaining his intention of taking part in a battle . 
The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov . 
`` Why should you be God knows where out of sight , during the battle ? '' 
he said , exchanging glances with his young companion . 
`` Anyhow his Serene Highness knows you and will receive you graciously . 
That 's what you must do . '' 
The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry . 
`` You think so ? 
... Ah , I also wanted to ask you where our position is exactly ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` The position ? '' 
repeated the doctor . 
`` Well , that 's not my line . 
Drive past Tatarinova , a lot of digging is going on there . 
Go up the hillock and you 'll see . '' 
`` Can one see from there ? 
... If you would ... '' But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig . 
`` I would go with you but on my honor I 'm up to here '' -- and he pointed to his throat . 
`` I 'm galloping to the commander of the corps . 
How do matters stand ? 
... You know , Count , there 'll be a battle tomorrow . 
Out of an army of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded , and we have n't stretchers , or bunks , or dressers , or doctors enough for six thousand . 
We have ten thousand carts , but we need other things as well -- we must manage as best we can ! '' 
The strange thought that of the thousands of men , young and old , who had stared with merry surprise at his hat -LRB- perhaps the very men he had noticed -RRB- , twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death amazed Pierre . 
`` They may die tomorrow ; why are they thinking of anything but death ? '' 
And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozhaysk hill , the carts with the wounded , the ringing bells , the slanting rays of the sun , and the songs of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind . 
`` The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment think of what awaits them , but pass by , winking at the wounded . 
Yet from among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die , and they wonder at my hat ! 
Strange ! '' 
thought Pierre , continuing his way to Tatarinova . 
In front of a landowner 's house to the left of the road stood carriages , wagons , and crowds of orderlies and sentinels . 
The commander in chief was putting up there , but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and hardly any of the staff were there -- they had gone to the church service . 
Pierre drove on toward Gorki . 
When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street , he saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with crosses on their caps , who , talking and laughing loudly , animated and perspiring , were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to the right of the road . 
Some of them were digging , others were wheeling barrowloads of earth along planks , while others stood about doing nothing . 
Two officers were standing on the knoll , directing the men . 
On seeing these peasants , who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their position as soldiers , Pierre once more thought of the wounded men at Mozhaysk and understood what the soldier had meant when he said : `` They want the whole nation to fall on them . '' 
The sight of these bearded peasants at work on the battlefield , with their queer , clumsy boots and perspiring necks , and their shirts opening from the left toward the middle , unfastened , exposing their sunburned collarbones , impressed Pierre more strongly with the solemnity and importance of the moment than anything he had yet seen or heard . 
Pierre stepped out of his carriage and , passing the toiling militiamen , ascended the knoll from which , according to the doctor , the battlefield could be seen . 
It was about eleven o'clock . 
The sun shone somewhat to the left and behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which , rising like an amphitheater , extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere . 
From above on the left , bisecting that amphitheater , wound the Smolensk highroad , passing through a village with a white church some five hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it . 
This was Borodino . 
Below the village the road crossed the river by a bridge and , winding down and up , rose higher and higher to the village of Valuevo visible about four miles away , where Napoleon was then stationed . 
Beyond Valuevo the road disappeared into a yellowing forest on the horizon . 
Far in the distance in that birch and fir forest to the right of the road , the cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery gleamed in the sun . 
Here and there over the whole of that blue expanse , to right and left of the forest and the road , smoking campfires could be seen and indefinite masses of troops -- ours and the enemy 's . 
The ground to the right -- along the course of the Kolocha and Moskva rivers -- was broken and hilly . 
Between the hollows the villages of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in the distance . 
On the left the ground was more level ; there were fields of grain , and the smoking ruins of Semenovsk , which had been burned down , could be seen . 
All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the right side of the field fully satisfied his expectations . 
Nowhere could he see the battlefield he had expected to find , but only fields , meadows , troops , woods , the smoke of campfires , villages , mounds , and streams ; and try as he would he could descry no military `` position '' in this place which teemed with life , nor could he even distinguish our troops from the enemy 's . 
`` I must ask someone who knows , '' he thought , and addressed an officer who was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure . 
`` May I ask you , '' said Pierre , `` what village that is in front ? '' 
`` Burdino , is n't it ? '' 
said the officer , turning to his companion . 
`` Borodino , '' the other corrected him . 
The officer , evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk , moved up to Pierre . 
`` Are those our men there ? '' 
Pierre inquired . 
`` Yes , and there , further on , are the French , '' said the officer . 
`` There they are , there ... you can see them . '' 
`` Where ? 
Where ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` One can see them with the naked eye ... Why , there ! '' 
The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left beyond the river , and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre had noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face . 
`` Ah , those are the French ! 
And over there ? 
... '' Pierre pointed to a knoll on the left , near which some troops could be seen . 
`` Those are ours . '' 
`` Ah , ours ! 
And there ? 
... '' Pierre pointed to another knoll in the distance with a big tree on it , near a village that lay in a hollow where also some campfires were smoking and something black was visible . 
`` That 's his again , '' said the officer . 
-LRB- It was the Shevardino Redoubt . -RRB- 
`` It was ours yesterday , but now it is his . '' 
`` Then how about our position ? '' 
`` Our position ? '' 
replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction . 
`` I can tell you quite clearly , because I constructed nearly all our entrenchments . 
There , you see ? 
There 's our center , at Borodino , just there , '' and he pointed to the village in front of them with the white church . 
