Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to Mary Hendrikhovna , asking her to stir it with her finger . 
`` This is my cup , '' said he . 
`` Only dip your finger in it and I 'll drink it all up . '' 
When they had emptied the samovar , Rostov took a pack of cards and proposed that they should play `` Kings '' with Mary Hendrikhovna . 
They drew lots to settle who should make up her set . 
At Rostov 's suggestion it was agreed that whoever became `` King '' should have the right to kiss Mary Hendrikhovna 's hand , and that the `` Booby '' should go to refill and reheat the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke . 
`` Well , but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is ` King ' ? '' 
asked Ilyin . 
`` As it is , she is Queen , and her word is law ! '' 
They had hardly begun to play before the doctor 's disheveled head suddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna . 
He had been awake for some time , listening to what was being said , and evidently found nothing entertaining or amusing in what was going on . 
His face was sad and depressed . 
Without greeting the officers , he scratched himself and asked to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way . 
As soon as he had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and Mary Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became still more attractive to them . 
Returning from the yard , the doctor told his wife -LRB- who had ceased to smile so happily , and looked at him in alarm , awaiting her sentence -RRB- that the rain had ceased and they must go to sleep in their covered cart , or everything in it would be stolen . 
`` But I 'll send an orderly ... . 
Two of them ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` What an idea , doctor ! '' 
`` I 'll stand guard on it myself ! '' 
said Ilyin . 
`` No , gentlemen , you have had your sleep , but I have not slept for two nights , '' replied the doctor , and he sat down morosely beside his wife , waiting for the game to end . 
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife , the officers grew still merrier , and some of them could not refrain from laughter , for which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts . 
When he had gone , taking his wife with him , and had settled down with her in their covered cart , the officers lay down in the tavern , covering themselves with their wet cloaks , but they did not sleep for a long time ; now they exchanged remarks , recalling the doctor 's uneasiness and his wife 's delight , now they ran out into the porch and reported what was taking place in the covered trap . 
Several times Rostov , covering his head , tried to go to sleep , but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be resumed , to the accompaniment of unreasoning , merry , childlike laughter . 
It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep , when the quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town of Ostrovna . 
Still laughing and talking , the officers began hurriedly getting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar . 
But Rostov went off to his squadron without waiting for tea . 
Day was breaking , the rain had ceased , and the clouds were dispersing . 
It felt damp and cold , especially in clothes that were still moist . 
As they left the tavern in the twilight of the dawn , Rostov and Ilyin both glanced under the wet and glistening leather hood of the doctor 's cart , from under the apron of which his feet were sticking out , and in the middle of which his wife 's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing audible . 
`` She really is a dear little thing , '' said Rostov to Ilyin , who was following him . 
`` A charming woman ! '' 
said Ilyin , with all the gravity of a boy of sixteen . 
Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road . 
The command was heard to `` mount '' and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted . 
Rostov riding in front gave the order `` Forward ! '' 
and the hussars , with clanking sabers and subdued talk , their horses ' hoofs splashing in the mud , defiled in fours and moved along the broad road planted with birch trees on each side , following the infantry and a battery that had gone on in front . 
Tattered , blue-purple clouds , reddening in the east , were scudding before the wind . 
It was growing lighter and lighter . 
That curly grass which always grows by country roadsides became clearly visible , still wet with the night 's rain ; the drooping branches of the birches , also wet , swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of water to one side . 
The soldiers ' faces were more and more clearly visible . 
Rostov , always closely followed by Ilyin , rode along the side of the road between two rows of birch trees . 
When campaigning , Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not a regimental but a Cossack horse . 
A judge of horses and a sportsman , he had lately procured himself a large , fine , mettlesome , Donets horse , dun-colored , with light mane and tail , and when he rode it no one could outgallop him . 
To ride this horse was a pleasure to him , and he thought of the horse , of the morning , of the doctor 's wife , but not once of the impending danger . 
Formerly , when going into action , Rostov had felt afraid ; now he had not the least feeling of fear . 
He was fearless , not because he had grown used to being under fire -LRB- one can not grow used to danger -RRB- , but because he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger . 
He had grown accustomed when going into action to think about anything but what would seem most likely to interest him -- the impending danger . 
During the first period of his service , hard as he tried and much as he reproached himself with cowardice , he had not been able to do this , but with time it had come of itself . 
Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees , occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand , sometimes touching his horse 's side with his foot , or , without turning round , handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him , with as calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride . 
He glanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin , who talked much and in great agitation . 
He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could help him . 
As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds , the wind fell , as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning after the storm ; drops still continued to fall , but vertically now , and all was still . 
The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it . 
A few minutes later it reappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud , tearing its edge . 
Everything grew bright and glittered . 
And with that light , and as if in reply to it , came the sound of guns ahead of them . 
Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of that firing , Count Ostermann-Tolstoy 's adjutant came galloping from Vitebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road . 
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery -- which had also quickened their pace -- rode down a hill , and passing through an empty and deserted village again ascended . 
The horses began to lather and the men to flush . 
`` Halt ! 
Dress your ranks ! '' 
the order of the regimental commander was heard ahead . 
`` Forward by the left . 
Walk , march ! '' 
came the order from in front . 
And the hussars , passing along the line of troops on the left flank of our position , halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line . 
To the right stood our infantry in a dense column : they were the reserve . 
Higher up the hill , on the very horizon , our guns were visible through the wonderfully clear air , brightly illuminated by slanting morning sunbeams . 
In front , beyond a hollow dale , could be seen the enemy 's columns and guns . 
Our advanced line , already in action , could be heard briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale . 
At these sounds , long unheard , Rostov 's spirits rose , as at the strains of the merriest music . 
Trap-ta-ta-tap ! 
cracked the shots , now together , now several quickly one after another . 
Again all was silent and then again it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and exploding them . 
The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour . 
A cannonade began . 
Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron , halted , spoke to the commander of the regiment , and rode up the hill to the guns . 
After Ostermann had gone , a command rang out to the Uhlans . 
`` Form column ! 
Prepare to charge ! '' 
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry to pass . 
The Uhlans started , the streamers on their spears fluttering , and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to the left . 
As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill , the hussars were ordered up the hill to support the battery . 
As they took the places vacated by the Uhlans , bullets came from the front , whining and whistling , but fell spent without taking effect . 
The sounds , which he had not heard for so long , had an even more pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds of firing . 
Drawing himself up , he viewed the field of battle opening out before him from the hill , and with his whole soul followed the movement of the Uhlans . 
They swooped down close to the French dragoons , something confused happened there amid the smoke , and five minutes later our Uhlans were galloping back , not to the place they had occupied but more to the left , and among the orange-colored Uhlans on chestnut horses and behind them , in a large group , blue French dragoons on gray horses could be seen . 
Rostov , with his keen sportsman 's eye , was one of the first to catch sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans . 
Nearer and nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoons pursuing them . 
He could already see how these men , who looked so small at the foot of the hill , jostled and overtook one another , waving their arms and their sabers in the air . 
Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt . 
He felt instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now , the latter could not withstand them , but if a charge was to be made it must be done now , at that very moment , or it would be too late . 
He looked around . 
A captain , standing beside him , was gazing like himself with eyes fixed on the cavalry below them . 
`` Andrew Sevastyanych ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` You know , we could crush them ... '' `` A fine thing too ! '' 
replied the captain , `` and really ... '' Rostov , without waiting to hear him out , touched his horse , galloped to the front of his squadron , and before he had time to finish giving the word of command , the whole squadron , sharing his feeling , was following him . 
