they shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leg had been torn off . 
`` There , lads ... oh , oh ! '' 
they mimicked the peasants , `` they do n't like it at all ! '' 
Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt , and after every loss , the liveliness increased more and more . 
As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly and rapidly from an approaching thundercloud , so , as if in opposition to what was taking place , the lightning of hidden fire growing more and more intense glowed in the faces of these men . 
Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know what was happening there ; he was entirely absorbed in watching this fire which burned ever more brightly and which he felt was flaming up in the same way in his own soul . 
At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of the battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated . 
From the battery they could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on their muskets . 
A general with his suite came to the battery , and after speaking to the colonel gave Pierre an angry look and went away again having ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down , so as to be less exposed to fire . 
After this from amid the ranks of infantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts of command , and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry moved forward . 
Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck by a pale young officer who , letting his sword hang down , was walking backwards and kept glancing uneasily around . 
The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their long-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard . 
A few minutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from that direction . 
Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the battery . 
Several men were lying about who had not been removed . 
Around the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily . 
No one any longer took notice of Pierre . 
Once or twice he was shouted at for being in the way . 
The senior officer moved with big , rapid strides from one gun to another with a frowning face . 
The young officer , with his face still more flushed , commanded the men more scrupulously than ever . 
The soldiers handed up the charges , turned , loaded , and did their business with strained smartness . 
They gave little jumps as they walked , as though they were on springs . 
The stormcloud had come upon them , and in every face the fire which Pierre had watched kindle burned up brightly . 
Pierre standing beside the commanding officer . 
The young officer , his hand to his shako , ran up to his superior . 
`` I have the honor to report , sir , that only eight rounds are left . 
Are we to continue firing ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Grapeshot ! '' 
the senior shouted , without answering the question , looking over the wall of the trench . 
Suddenly something happened : the young officer gave a gasp and bending double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing . 
Everything became strange , confused , and misty in Pierre 's eyes . 
One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork , a soldier , or a gun . 
Pierre , who had not noticed these sounds before , now heard nothing else . 
On the right of the battery soldiers shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
were running not forwards but backwards , it seemed to Pierre . 
A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he was standing , crumbling down the earth ; a black ball flashed before his eyes and at the same instant plumped into something . 
Some militiamen who were entering the battery ran back . 
`` All with grapeshot ! '' 
shouted the officer . 
The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed him -LRB- as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of some wine asked for -RRB- that there were no more charges . 
`` The scoundrels ! 
What are they doing ? '' 
shouted the officer , turning to Pierre . 
The officer 's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered under his frowning brow . 
`` Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes ! '' 
he yelled , angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men . 
`` I 'll go , '' said Pierre . 
The officer , without answering him , strode across to the opposite side . 
`` Do n't fire ... . 
Wait ! '' 
he shouted . 
The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled against Pierre . 
`` Eh , sir , this is no place for you , '' said he , and ran down the slope . 
Pierre ran after him , avoiding the spot where the young officer was sitting . 
One cannon ball , another , and a third flew over him , falling in front , beside , and behind him . 
Pierre ran down the slope . 
`` Where am I going ? '' 
he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the green ammunition wagons . 
He halted irresolutely , not knowing whether to return or go on . 
Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards to the ground . 
At the same instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame , and immediately a deafening roar , crackling , and whistling made his ears tingle . 
When he came to himself he was sitting on the ground leaning on his hands ; the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longer existed , only charred green boards and rags littered the scorched grass , and a horse , dangling fragments of its shaft behind it , galloped past , while another horse lay , like Pierre , on the ground , uttering prolonged and piercing cries . 
Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery , as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him . 
On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doing something there but that no shots were being fired from the battery . 
He had no time to realize who these men were . 
He saw the senior officer lying on the earth wall with his back turned as if he were examining something down below and that one of the soldiers he had noticed before was struggling forward shouting `` Brothers ! '' 
and trying to free himself from some men who were holding him by the arm . 
He also saw something else that was strange . 
But he had not time to realize that the colonel had been killed , that the soldier shouting `` Brothers ! '' 
was a prisoner , and that another man had been bayoneted in the back before his eyes , for hardly had he run into the redoubt before a thin , sallow-faced , perspiring man in a blue uniform rushed on him sword in hand , shouting something . 
Instinctively guarding against the shock -- for they had been running together at full speed before they saw one another -- Pierre put out his hands and seized the man -LRB- a French officer -RRB- by the shoulder with one hand and by the throat with the other . 
The officer , dropping his sword , seized Pierre by his collar . 
For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another 's unfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and what they were to do next . 
`` Am I taken prisoner or have I taken him prisoner ? '' 
each was thinking . 
But the French officer was evidently more inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre 's strong hand , impelled by instinctive fear , squeezed his throat ever tighter and tighter . 
The Frenchman was about to say something , when just above their heads , terrible and low , a cannon ball whistled , and it seemed to Pierre that the French officer 's head had been torn off , so swiftly had he ducked it . 
Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall . 
Without further thought as to who had taken whom prisoner , the Frenchman ran back to the battery and Pierre ran down the slope stumbling over the dead and wounded who , it seemed to him , caught at his feet . 
But before he reached the foot of the knoll he was met by a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who , stumbling , tripping up , and shouting , ran merrily and wildly toward the battery . 
-LRB- This was the attack for which Ermolov claimed the credit , declaring that only his courage and good luck made such a feat possible : it was the attack in which he was said to have thrown some St. George 's Crosses he had in his pocket into the battery for the first soldiers to take who got there . -RRB- 
The French who had occupied the battery fled , and our troops shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult to call them back . 
The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among them was a wounded French general , whom the officers surrounded . 
Crowds of wounded -- some known to Pierre and some unknown -- Russians and French , with faces distorted by suffering , walked , crawled , and were carried on stretchers from the battery . 
Pierre again went up onto the knoll where he had spent over an hour , and of that family circle which had received him as a member he did not find a single one . 
There were many dead whom he did not know , but some he recognized . 
The young officer still sat in the same way , bent double , in a pool of blood at the edge of the earth wall . 
The red-faced man was still twitching , but they did not carry him away . 
Pierre ran down the slope once more . 
`` Now they will stop it , now they will be horrified at what they have done ! '' 
he thought , aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher bearers moving from the battlefield . 
But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high , and in front and especially to the left , near Semenovsk , something seemed to be seething in the smoke , and the roar of cannon and musketry did not diminish , but even increased to desperation like a man who , straining himself , shrieks with all his remaining strength . 
The chief action of the battle of Borodino was fought within the seven thousand feet between Borodino and Bagration 's fleches . 
Beyond that space there was , on the one side , a demonstration made by the Russians with Uvarov 's cavalry at midday , and on the other side , beyond Utitsa , Poniatowski 's collision with Tuchkov ; but these two were detached and feeble actions in comparison with what took place in the center of the battlefield . 
On the field between Borodino and the fleches , beside the wood , the chief action of the day took place on an open space visible from both sides and was fought in the simplest and most artless way . 
The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred guns . 
Then when the whole field was covered with smoke , two divisions , Campan 's and Dessaix 's , advanced from the French right , while Murat 's troops advanced on Borodino from their left . 
From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the fleches were two thirds of a mile away , and it was more than a mile as the crow flies to Borodino , so that Napoleon could not see what was happening there , especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hid the whole locality . 
