It 's as if it were a dream ! 
I like that . '' 
`` And do you remember how we rolled hard-boiled eggs in the ballroom , and suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet ? 
Was that real or not ? 
Do you remember what fun it was ? '' 
`` Yes , and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in the porch ? '' 
So they went through their memories , smiling with pleasure : not the sad memories of old age , but poetic , youthful ones -- those impressions of one 's most distant past in which dreams and realities blend -- and they laughed with quiet enjoyment . 
Sonya , as always , did not quite keep pace with them , though they shared the same reminiscences . 
Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind , and what she recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced . 
She simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it . 
She only really took part when they recalled Sonya 's first arrival . 
She told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a corded jacket and her nurse had told her that she , too , would be sewn up with cords . 
`` And I remember their telling me that you had been born under a cabbage , '' said Natasha , `` and I remember that I dared not disbelieve it then , but knew that it was not true , and I felt so uncomfortable . '' 
While they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door of the sitting room . 
`` They have brought the cock , Miss , '' she said in a whisper . 
`` It is n't wanted , Petya . 
Tell them to take it away , '' replied Natasha . 
In the middle of their talk in the sitting room , Dimmler came in and went up to the harp that stood there in a corner . 
He took off its cloth covering , and the harp gave out a jarring sound . 
`` Mr. Dimmler , please play my favorite nocturne by Field , '' came the old countess ' voice from the drawing room . 
Dimmler struck a chord and , turning to Natasha , Nicholas , and Sonya , remarked : `` How quiet you young people are ! '' 
`` Yes , we 're philosophizing , '' said Natasha , glancing round for a moment and then continuing the conversation . 
They were now discussing dreams . 
Dimmler began to play ; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table , took up a candle , carried it out , and returned , seating herself quietly in her former place . 
It was dark in the room especially where they were sitting on the sofa , but through the big windows the silvery light of the full moon fell on the floor . 
Dimmler had finished the piece but still sat softly running his fingers over the strings , evidently uncertain whether to stop or to play something else . 
`` Do you know , '' said Natasha in a whisper , moving closer to Nicholas and Sonya , `` that when one goes on and on recalling memories , one at last begins to remember what happened before one was in the world ... '' `` That is metempsychosis , '' said Sonya , who had always learned well , and remembered everything . 
`` The Egyptians believed that our souls have lived in animals , and will go back into animals again . '' 
`` No , I do n't believe we ever were in animals , '' said Natasha , still in a whisper though the music had ceased . 
`` But I am certain that we were angels somewhere there , and have been here , and that is why we remember ... '' `` May I join you ? '' 
said Dimmler who had come up quietly , and he sat down by them . 
`` If we have been angels , why have we fallen lower ? '' 
said Nicholas . 
`` No , that ca n't be ! '' 
`` Not lower , who said we were lower ? 
... How do I know what I was before ? '' 
Natasha rejoined with conviction . 
`` The soul is immortal -- well then , if I shall always live I must have lived before , lived for a whole eternity . '' 
`` Yes , but it is hard for us to imagine eternity , '' remarked Dimmler , who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescending smile but now spoke as quietly and seriously as they . 
`` Why is it hard to imagine eternity ? '' 
said Natasha . 
`` It is now today , and it will be tomorrow , and always ; and there was yesterday , and the day before ... '' `` Natasha ! 
Now it 's your turn . 
Sing me something , '' they heard the countess say . 
`` Why are you sitting there like conspirators ? '' 
`` Mamma , I do n't at all want to , '' replied Natasha , but all the same she rose . 
None of them , not even the middle-aged Dimmler , wanted to break off their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room , but Natasha got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord . 
Standing as usual in the middle of the hall and choosing the place where the resonance was best , Natasha began to sing her mother 's favorite song . 
She had said she did not want to sing , but it was long since she had sung , and long before she again sang , as she did that evening . 
The count , from his study where he was talking to Mitenka , heard her and , like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play , blundered in his talk while giving orders to the steward , and at last stopped , while Mitenka stood in front of him also listening and smiling . 
Nicholas did not take his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her . 
Sonya , as she listened , thought of the immense difference there was between herself and her friend , and how impossible it was for her to be anything like as bewitching as her cousin . 
The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad smile and with tears in her eyes , occasionally shaking her head . 
She thought of Natasha and of her own youth , and of how there was something unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prince Andrew . 
Dimmler , who had seated himself beside the countess , listened with closed eyes . 
`` Ah , Countess , '' he said at last , `` that 's a European talent , she has nothing to learn -- what softness , tenderness , and strength ... '' `` Ah , how afraid I am for her , how afraid I am ! '' 
said the countess , not realizing to whom she was speaking . 
Her maternal instinct told her that Natasha had too much of something , and that because of this she would not be happy . 
Before Natasha had finished singing , fourteen-year-old Petya rushed in delightedly , to say that some mummers had arrived . 
Natasha stopped abruptly . 
`` Idiot ! '' 
she screamed at her brother and , running to a chair , threw herself on it , sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a long time . 
`` It 's nothing , Mamma , really it 's nothing ; only Petya startled me , '' she said , trying to smile , but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked her . 
The mummers -LRB- some of the house serfs -RRB- dressed up as bears , Turks , innkeepers , and ladies -- frightening and funny -- bringing in with them the cold from outside and a feeling of gaiety , crowded , at first timidly , into the anteroom , then hiding behind one another they pushed into the ballroom where , shyly at first and then more and more merrily and heartily , they started singing , dancing , and playing Christmas games . 
The countess , when she had identified them and laughed at their costumes , went into the drawing room . 
The count sat in the ballroom , smiling radiantly and applauding the players . 
The young people had disappeared . 
Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in the ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt -- this was Nicholas . 
A Turkish girl was Petya . 
A clown was Dimmler . 
An hussar was Natasha , and a Circassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows . 
After the condescending surprise , nonrecognition , and praise , from those who were not themselves dressed up , the young people decided that their costumes were so good that they ought to be shown elsewhere . 
Nicholas , who , as the roads were in splendid condition , wanted to take them all for a drive in his troyka , proposed to take with them about a dozen of the serf mummers and drive to `` Uncle 's . '' 
`` No , why disturb the old fellow ? '' 
said the countess . 
`` Besides , you would n't have room to turn round there . 
If you must go , go to the Melyukovs ' . '' 
Melyukova was a widow , who , with her family and their tutors and governesses , lived three miles from the Rostovs . 
`` That 's right , my dear , '' chimed in the old count , thoroughly aroused . 
`` I 'll dress up at once and go with them . 
I 'll make Pashette open her eyes . '' 
But the countess would not agree to his going ; he had had a bad leg all these last days . 
It was decided that the count must not go , but that if Louisa Ivanovna -LRB- Madame Schoss -RRB- would go with them , the young ladies might go to the Melyukovs ' , Sonya , generally so timid and shy , more urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse . 
Sonya 's costume was the best of all . 
Her mustache and eyebrows were extraordinarily becoming . 
Everyone told her she looked very handsome , and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual with her . 
Some inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided , and in her male attire she seemed quite a different person . 
Louisa Ivanovna consented to go , and in half an hour four troyka sleighs with large and small bells , their runners squeaking and whistling over the frozen snow , drove up to the porch . 
Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone , which , passing from one to another , grew stronger and reached its climax when they all came out into the frost and got into the sleighs , talking , calling to one another , laughing , and shouting . 
Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs , the third was the old count 's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse , the fourth was Nicholas ' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse . 
Nicholas , in his old lady 's dress over which he had belted his hussar overcoat , stood in the middle of the sleigh , reins in hand . 
It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the metal harness disks and from the eyes of the horses , who looked round in alarm at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof . 
Natasha , Sonya , Madame Schoss , and two maids got into Nicholas ' sleigh ; Dimmler , his wife , and Petya , into the old count 's , and the rest of the mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs . 
`` You go ahead , Zakhar ! '' 
shouted Nicholas to his father 's coachman , wishing for a chance to race past him . 
The old count 's troyka , with Dimmler and his party , started forward , squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow , its deep-toned bell clanging . 
The side horses , pressing against the shafts of the middle horse , sank in the snow , which was dry and glittered like sugar , and threw it up . 
Nicholas set off , following the first sleigh ; behind him the others moved noisily , their runners squeaking . 
At first they drove at a steady trot along the narrow road . 
While they drove past the garden the shadows of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant moonlight , but as soon as they were past the fence , the snowy plain bathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glittering like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows . 
