Lord Jesus Christ , holy Saint Nicholas , Frola and Lavra ! 
Lord Jesus Christ , have mercy on us and save us ! '' 
he concluded , then bowed to the ground , got up , sighed , and sat down again on his heap of straw . 
`` That 's the way . 
Lay me down like a stone , O God , and raise me up like a loaf , '' he muttered as he lay down , pulling his coat over him . 
`` What prayer was that you were saying ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Eh ? '' 
murmured Platon , who had almost fallen asleep . 
`` What was I saying ? 
I was praying . 
Do n't you pray ? '' 
`` Yes , I do , '' said Pierre . 
`` But what was that you said : Frola and Lavra ? '' 
`` Well , of course , '' replied Platon quickly , `` the horses ' saints . 
One must pity the animals too . 
Eh , the rascal ! 
Now you 've curled up and got warm , you daughter of a bitch ! '' 
said Karataev , touching the dog that lay at his feet , and again turning over he fell asleep immediately . 
Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distance outside , and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed , but inside it was quiet and dark . 
For a long time Pierre did not sleep , but lay with eyes open in the darkness , listening to the regular snoring of Platon who lay beside him , and he felt that the world that had been shattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and on new and unshakable foundations . 
Twenty-three soldiers , three officers , and two officials were confined in the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained for four weeks . 
When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures to him except Platon Karataev , who always remained in his mind a most vivid and precious memory and the personification of everything Russian , kindly , and round . 
When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn the first impression of him , as of something round , was fully confirmed : Platon 's whole figure -- in a French overcoat girdled with a cord , a soldier 's cap , and bast shoes -- was round . 
His head was quite round , his back , chest , shoulders , and even his arms , which he held as if ever ready to embrace something , were rounded , his pleasant smile and his large , gentle brown eyes were also round . 
Platon Karataev must have been fifty , judging by his stories of campaigns he had been in , told as by an old soldier . 
He did not himself know his age and was quite unable to determine it . 
But his brilliantly white , strong teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he laughed -- as he often did -- were all sound and good , there was not a gray hair in his beard or on his head , and his whole body gave an impression of suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance . 
His face , despite its fine , rounded wrinkles , had an expression of innocence and youth , his voice was pleasant and musical . 
But the chief peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness . 
It was evident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say , and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an irresistible persuasiveness . 
His physical strength and agility during the first days of his imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue and sickness meant . 
Every night before lying down , he said : `` Lord , lay me down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf ! '' 
and every morning on getting up , he said : `` I lay down and curled up , I get up and shake myself . '' 
And indeed he only had to lie down , to fall asleep like a stone , and he only had to shake himself , to be ready without a moment 's delay for some work , just as children are ready to play directly they awake . 
He could do everything , not very well but not badly . 
He baked , cooked , sewed , planed , and mended boots . 
He was always busy , and only at night allowed himself conversation -- of which he was fond -- and songs . 
He did not sing like a trained singer who knows he is listened to , but like the birds , evidently giving vent to the sounds in the same way that one stretches oneself or walks about to get rid of stiffness , and the sounds were always high-pitched , mournful , delicate , and almost feminine , and his face at such times was very serious . 
Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow , he seemed to have thrown off all that had been forced upon him - everything military and alien to himself -- and had returned to his former peasant habits . 
`` A soldier on leave -- a shirt outside breeches , '' he would say . 
He did not like talking about his life as a soldier , though he did not complain , and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once during the whole of his army service . 
When he related anything it was generally some old and evidently precious memory of his `` Christian '' life , as he called his peasant existence . 
The proverbs , of which his talk was full , were for the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers employ , but those folk sayings which taken without a context seem so insignificant , but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significance of profound wisdom . 
He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous occasion , yet both would be right . 
He liked to talk and he talked well , adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings which Pierre thought he invented himself , but the chief charm of his talk lay in the fact that the commonest events -- sometimes just such as Pierre had witnessed without taking notice of them - assumed in Karataev 's a character of solemn fitness . 
He liked to hear the folk tales one of the soldiers used to tell of an evening -LRB- they were always the same -RRB- , but most of all he liked to hear stories of real life . 
He would smile joyfully when listening to such stories , now and then putting in a word or asking a question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clear to himself . 
Karataev had no attachments , friendships , or love , as Pierre understood them , but loved and lived affectionately with everything life brought him in contact with , particularly with man -- not any particular man , but those with whom he happened to be . 
He loved his dog , his comrades , the French , and Pierre who was his neighbor , but Pierre felt that in spite of Karataev 's affectionate tenderness for him -LRB- by which he unconsciously gave Pierre 's spiritual life its due -RRB- he would not have grieved for a moment at parting from him . 
And Pierre began to feel in the same way toward Karataev . 
To all the other prisoners Platon Karataev seemed a most ordinary soldier . 
They called him `` little falcon '' or `` Platosha , '' chaffed him good-naturedly , and sent him on errands . 
But to Pierre he always remained what he had seemed that first night : an unfathomable , rounded , eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth . 
Platon Karataev knew nothing by heart except his prayers . 
When he began to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude . 
Sometimes Pierre , struck by the meaning of his words , would ask him to repeat them , but Platon could never recall what he had said a moment before , just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his favorite song : native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurred in it , but when spoken and not sung , no meaning could be got out of it . 
He did not , and could not , understand the meaning of words apart from their context . 
Every word and action of his was the manifestation of an activity unknown to him , which was his life . 
But his life , as he regarded it , had no meaning as a separate thing . 
It had meaning only as part of a whole of which he was always conscious . 
His words and actions flowed from him as evenly , inevitably , and spontaneously as fragrance exhales from a flower . 
He could not understand the value or significance of any word or deed taken separately . 
When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the Rostovs at Yaroslavl she at once prepared to go there , in spite of her aunt 's efforts to dissuade her -- and not merely to go herself but to take her nephew with her . 
Whether it were difficult or easy , possible or impossible , she did not ask and did not want to know : it was her duty not only herself to be near her brother who was perhaps dying , but to do everything possible to take his son to him , and so she prepared to set off . 
That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself , Princess Mary attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering the long journey too hard and too dangerous for her and his son . 
In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start . 
Her equipages were the huge family coach in which she had traveled to Voronezh , a semiopen trap , and a baggage cart . 
With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne , little Nicholas and his tutor , her old nurse , three maids , Tikhon , and a young footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her . 
The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of , and the roundabout way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lipetsk , Ryazan , Vladimir , and Shuya was very long and , as post horses were not everywhere obtainable , very difficult , and near Ryazan where the French were said to have shown themselves was even dangerous . 
During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne , Dessalles , and Princess Mary 's servants were astonished at her energy and firmness of spirit . 
She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them , and no difficulties daunted her . 
Thanks to her activity and energy , which infected her fellow travelers , they approached Yaroslavl by the end of the second week . 
The last days of her stay in Voronezh had been the happiest of her life . 
Her love for Rostov no longer tormented or agitated her . 
It filled her whole soul , had become an integral part of herself , and she no longer struggled against it . 
Latterly she had become convinced that she loved and was beloved , though she never said this definitely to herself in words . 
She had become convinced of it at her last interview with Nicholas , when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the Rostovs . 
Not by a single word had Nicholas alluded to the fact that Prince Andrew 's relations with Natasha might , if he recovered , be renewed , but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought of this . 
Yet in spite of that , his relation to her -- considerate , delicate , and loving -- not only remained unchanged , but it sometimes seemed to Princess Mary that he was even glad that the family connection between them allowed him to express his friendship more freely . 
She knew that she loved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she was beloved , and was happy in regard to it . 
But this happiness on one side of her spiritual nature did not prevent her feeling grief for her brother with full force ; on the contrary , that spiritual tranquility on the one side made it the more possible for her to give full play to her feeling for her brother . 
That feeling was so strong at the moment of leaving Voronezh that those who saw her off , as they looked at her careworn , despairing face , felt sure she would fall ill on the journey . 
But the very difficulties and preoccupations of the journey , which she took so actively in hand , saved her for a while from her grief and gave her strength . 
As always happens when traveling , Princess Mary thought only of the journey itself , forgetting its object . 
But as she approached Yaroslavl the thought of what might await her there -- not after many days , but that very evening -- again presented itself to her and her agitation increased to its utmost limit . 
The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where the Rostovs were staying in Yaroslavl , and in what condition Prince Andrew was , when he met the big coach just entering the town gates was appalled by the terrible pallor of the princess ' face that looked out at him from the window . 
`` I have found out everything , your excellency : the Rostovs are staying at the merchant Bronnikov 's house , in the Square not far from here , right above the Volga , '' said the courier . 
Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry , not understanding why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know : how was her brother ? 
Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her . 
`` How is the prince ? '' 
she asked . 
`` His excellency is staying in the same house with them . '' 
`` Then he is alive , '' thought Princess Mary , and asked in a low voice : `` How is he ? '' 
`` The servants say he is still the same . '' 
What `` still the same '' might mean Princess Mary did not ask , but with an unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas , who was sitting in front of her looking with pleasure at the town , she bowed her head and did not raise it again till the heavy coach , rumbling , shaking and swaying , came to a stop . 
The carriage steps clattered as they were let down . 
The carriage door was opened . 
On the left there was water -- a great river -- and on the right a porch . 
There were people at the entrance : servants , and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair , smiling as it seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way . 
