`` Carrot ices . '' 
`` No ! 
What kind , Marya Dmitrievna ? 
What kind ? '' 
she almost screamed ; `` I want to know ! '' 
Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laughing , and all the guests joined in . 
Everyone laughed , not at Marya Dmitrievna 's answer but at the incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dared to treat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion . 
Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would be pineapple ice . 
Before the ices , champagne was served round . 
The band again struck up , the count and countess kissed , and the guests , leaving their seats , went up to `` congratulate '' the countess , and reached across the table to clink glasses with the count , with the children , and with one another . 
Again the footmen rushed about , chairs scraped , and in the same order in which they had entered but with redder faces , the guests returned to the drawing room and to the count 's study . 
The card tables were drawn out , sets made up for boston , and the count 's visitors settled themselves , some in the two drawing rooms , some in the sitting room , some in the library . 
The count , holding his cards fanwise , kept himself with difficulty from dropping into his usual after-dinner nap , and laughed at everything . 
The young people , at the countess ' instigation , gathered round the clavichord and harp . 
Julie by general request played first . 
After she had played a little air with variations on the harp , she joined the other young ladies in begging Natasha and Nicholas , who were noted for their musical talent , to sing something . 
Natasha , who was treated as though she were grown up , was evidently very proud of this but at the same time felt shy . 
`` What shall we sing ? '' 
she said . '' 
` The Brook , ' '' suggested Nicholas . 
`` Well , then , let 's be quick . 
Boris , come here , '' said Natasha . 
`` But where is Sonya ? '' 
She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran to look for her . 
Running into Sonya 's room and not finding her there , Natasha ran to the nursery , but Sonya was not there either . 
Natasha concluded that she must be on the chest in the passage . 
The chest in the passage was the place of mourning for the younger female generation in the Rostov household . 
And there in fact was Sonya lying face downward on Nurse 's dirty feather bed on the top of the chest , crumpling her gauzy pink dress under her , hiding her face with her slender fingers , and sobbing so convulsively that her bare little shoulders shook . 
Natasha 's face , which had been so radiantly happy all that saint 's day , suddenly changed : her eyes became fixed , and then a shiver passed down her broad neck and the corners of her mouth drooped . 
`` Sonya ! 
What is it ? 
What is the matter ? 
... Oo ... Oo ... Oo ... ! '' 
And Natasha 's large mouth widened , making her look quite ugly , and she began to wail like a baby without knowing why , except that Sonya was crying . 
Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not , and hid her face still deeper in the bed . 
Natasha wept , sitting on the blue-striped feather bed and hugging her friend . 
With an effort Sonya sat up and began wiping her eyes and explaining . 
`` Nicholas is going away in a week 's time , his ... papers ... have come ... he told me himself ... but still I should not cry , '' and she showed a paper she held in her hand -- with the verses Nicholas had written , `` still , I should not cry , but you ca n't ... no one can understand ... what a soul he has ! '' 
And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul . 
`` It 's all very well for you ... I am not envious ... I love you and Boris also , '' she went on , gaining a little strength ; `` he is nice ... there are no difficulties in your way ... . 
But Nicholas is my cousin ... one would have to ... the Metropolitan himself ... and even then it ca n't be done . 
And besides , if she tells Mamma '' -LRB- Sonya looked upon the countess as her mother and called her so -RRB- `` that I am spoiling Nicholas ' career and am heartless and ungrateful , while truly ... God is my witness , '' and she made the sign of the cross , `` I love her so much , and all of you , only Vera ... And what for ? 
What have I done to her ? 
I am so grateful to you that I would willingly sacrifice everything , only I have nothing ... '' Sonya could not continue , and again hid her face in her hands and in the feather bed . 
Natasha began consoling her , but her face showed that she understood all the gravity of her friend 's trouble . 
`` Sonya , '' she suddenly exclaimed , as if she had guessed the true reason of her friend 's sorrow , `` I 'm sure Vera has said something to you since dinner ? 
Has n't she ? '' 
`` Yes , these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others , and she found them on my table and said she 'd show them to Mamma , and that I was ungrateful , and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me , but that he 'll marry Julie . 
You see how he 's been with her all day ... Natasha , what have I done to deserve it ? 
... '' And again she began to sob , more bitterly than before . 
Natasha lifted her up , hugged her , and , smiling through her tears , began comforting her . 
`` Sonya , do n't believe her , darling ! 
Do n't believe her ! 
Do you remember how we and Nicholas , all three of us , talked in the sitting room after supper ? 
Why , we settled how everything was to be . 
I do n't quite remember how , but do n't you remember that it could all be arranged and how nice it all was ? 
There 's Uncle Shinshin 's brother has married his first cousin . 
And we are only second cousins , you know . 
And Boris says it is quite possible . 
You know I have told him all about it . 
And he is so clever and so good ! '' 
said Natasha . 
`` Do n't you cry , Sonya , dear love , darling Sonya ! '' 
and she kissed her and laughed . 
`` Vera 's spiteful ; never mind her ! 
And all will come right and she wo n't say anything to Mamma . 
Nicholas will tell her himself , and he does n't care at all for Julie . '' 
Natasha kissed her on the hair . 
Sonya sat up . 
The little kitten brightened , its eyes shone , and it seemed ready to lift its tail , jump down on its soft paws , and begin playing with the ball of worsted as a kitten should . 
`` Do you think so ? 
... Really ? 
Truly ? '' 
she said , quickly smoothing her frock and hair . 
`` Really , truly ! '' 
answered Natasha , pushing in a crisp lock that had strayed from under her friend 's plaits . 
Both laughed . 
`` Well , let 's go and sing ` The Brook . ' '' 
`` Come along ! '' 
`` Do you know , that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny ! '' 
said Natasha , stopping suddenly . 
`` I feel so happy ! '' 
And she set off at a run along the passage . 
Sonya , shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest , ran after Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed face and light , joyous steps . 
At the visitors ' request the young people sang the quartette , `` The Brook , '' with which everyone was delighted . 
Then Nicholas sang a song he had just learned : At nighttime in the moon 's fair glow How sweet , as fancies wander free , To feel that in this world there 's one Who still is thinking but of thee ! 
That while her fingers touch the harp Wafting sweet music music the lea , It is for thee thus swells her heart , Sighing its message out to thee ... A day or two , then bliss unspoilt , But oh ! 
till then I can not live ! 
... He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to get ready to dance in the large hall , and the sound of the feet and the coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery . 
Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged him , as a man recently returned from abroad , in a political conversation in which several others joined but which bored Pierre . 
When the music began Natasha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said , laughing and blushing : `` Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers . '' 
`` I am afraid of mixing the figures , '' Pierre replied ; `` but if you will be my teacher ... '' And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender little girl . 
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up , Pierre sat down with his little partner . 
Natasha was perfectly happy ; she was dancing with a grown-up man , who had been abroad . 
She was sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady . 
She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold . 
Assuming quite the pose of a society woman -LRB- heaven knows when and where she had learned it -RRB- she talked with her partner , fanning herself and smiling over the fan . 
`` Dear , dear ! 
Just look at her ! '' 
exclaimed the countess as she crossed the ballroom , pointing to Natasha . 
