We took Vienna , Berlin , Madrid , Naples , Rome , Warsaw , all the world 's capitals ... . 
We are feared , but we are loved . 
We are nice to know . 
And then the Emperor ... '' he began , but Pierre interrupted him . 
`` The Emperor , '' Pierre repeated , and his face suddenly became sad and embarrassed , `` is the Emperor ... ? '' 
`` The Emperor ? 
He is generosity , mercy , justice , order , genius - that 's what the Emperor is ! 
It is I , Ramballe , who tell you so ... . 
I assure you I was his enemy eight years ago . 
My father was an emigrant count ... . 
But that man has vanquished me . 
He has taken hold of me . 
I could not resist the sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France . 
When I understood what he wanted -- when I saw that he was preparing a bed of laurels for us , you know , I said to myself : ` That is a monarch , ' and I devoted myself to him ! 
So there ! 
Oh yes , mon cher , he is the greatest man of the ages past or future . '' 
`` Is he in Moscow ? '' 
Pierre stammered with a guilty look . 
The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled . 
`` No , he will make his entry tomorrow , '' he replied , and continued his talk . 
Their conversation was interrupted by the cries of several voices at the gate and by Morel , who came to say that some Wurttemberg hussars had come and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where the captain 's horses were . 
This difficulty had arisen chiefly because the hussars did not understand what was said to them in French . 
The captain had their senior sergeant called in , and in a stern voice asked him to what regiment he belonged , who was his commanding officer , and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters that were already occupied . 
The German who knew little French , answered the two first questions by giving the names of his regiment and of his commanding officer , but in reply to the third question which he did not understand said , introducing broken French into his own German , that he was the quartermaster of the regiment and his commander had ordered him to occupy all the houses one after another . 
Pierre , who knew German , translated what the German said to the captain and gave the captain 's reply to the Wurttemberg hussar in German . 
When he had understood what was said to him , the German submitted and took his men elsewhere . 
The captain went out into the porch and gave some orders in a loud voice . 
When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place as before , with his head in his hands . 
His face expressed suffering . 
He really was suffering at that moment . 
When the captain went out and he was left alone , suddenly he came to himself and realized the position he was in . 
It was not that Moscow had been taken or that the happy conquerors were masters in it and were patronizing him . 
Painful as that was it was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment . 
He was tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness . 
The few glasses of wine he had drunk and the conversation with this good-natured man had destroyed the mood of concentrated gloom in which he had spent the last few days and which was essential for the execution of his design . 
The pistol , dagger , and peasant coat were ready . 
Napoleon was to enter the town next day . 
Pierre still considered that it would be a useful and worthy action to slay the evildoer , but now he felt that he would not do it . 
He did not know why , but he felt a foreboding that he would not carry out his intention . 
He struggled against the confession of his weakness but dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his former gloomy frame of mind , concerning vengeance , killing , and self-sacrifice , had been dispersed like dust by contact with the first man he met . 
The captain returned to the room , limping slightly and whistling a tune . 
The Frenchman 's chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelled him . 
The tune he was whistling , his gait , and the gesture with which he twirled his mustache , all now seemed offensive . 
`` I will go away immediately . 
I wo n't say another word to him , '' thought Pierre . 
He thought this , but still sat in the same place . 
A strange feeling of weakness tied him to the spot ; he wished to get up and go away , but could not do so . 
The captain , on the other hand , seemed very cheerful . 
He paced up and down the room twice . 
His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he were smiling to himself at some amusing thought . 
`` The colonel of those Wurttembergers is delightful , '' he suddenly said . 
`` He 's a German , but a nice fellow all the same ... . 
But he 's a German . '' 
He sat down facing Pierre . 
`` By the way , you know German , then ? '' 
Pierre looked at him in silence . 
`` What is the German for ` shelter ' ? '' 
`` Shelter ? '' 
Pierre repeated . 
`` The German for shelter is Unterkunft . '' 
`` How do you say it ? '' 
the captain asked quickly and doubtfully . 
`` Unterkunft , '' Pierre repeated . 
`` Onterkoff , '' said the captain and looked at Pierre for some seconds with laughing eyes . 
`` These Germans are first-rate fools , do n't you think so , Monsieur Pierre ? '' 
he concluded . 
`` Well , let 's have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux , shall we ? 
Morel will warm us up another little bottle . 
Morel ! '' 
he called out gaily . 
Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine . 
The captain looked at Pierre by the candlelight and was evidently struck by the troubled expression on his companion 's face . 
Ramballe , with genuine distress and sympathy in his face , went up to Pierre and bent over him . 
`` There now , we 're sad , '' said he , touching Pierre 's hand . 
`` Have I upset you ? 
No , really , have you anything against me ? '' 
he asked Pierre . 
`` Perhaps it 's the state of affairs ? '' 
Pierre did not answer , but looked cordially into the Frenchman 's eyes whose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him . 
`` Honestly , without speaking of what I owe you , I feel friendship for you . 
Can I do anything for you ? 
Dispose of me . 
It is for life and death . 
I say it with my hand on my heart ! '' 
said he , striking his chest . 
`` Thank you , '' said Pierre . 
The captain gazed intently at him as he had done when he learned that `` shelter '' was Unterkunft in German , and his face suddenly brightened . 
`` Well , in that case , I drink to our friendship ! '' 
he cried gaily , filling two glasses with wine . 
Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it . 
Ramballe emptied his too , again pressed Pierre 's hand , and leaned his elbows on the table in a pensive attitude . 
`` Yes , my dear friend , '' he began , `` such is fortune 's caprice . 
Who would have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons in the service of Bonaparte , as we used to call him ? 
Yet here I am in Moscow with him . 
I must tell you , mon cher , '' he continued in the sad and measured tones of a man who intends to tell a long story , `` that our name is one of the most ancient in France . '' 
And with a Frenchman 's easy and naive frankness the captain told Pierre the story of his ancestors , his childhood , youth , and manhood , and all about his relations and his financial and family affairs , `` ma pauvre mere '' playing of course an important part in the story . 
`` But all that is only life 's setting , the real thing is love - love ! 
Am I not right , Monsieur Pierre ? '' 
said he , growing animated . 
`` Another glass ? '' 
