Very glad ! 
Kiss me , '' he said , having learned who the young stranger was . 
The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre . 
Before supper , Prince Andrew , coming back to his father 's study , found him disputing hotly with his visitor . 
Pierre was maintaining that a time would come when there would be no more wars . 
The old prince disputed it chaffingly , but without getting angry . 
`` Drain the blood from men 's veins and put in water instead , then there will be no more war ! 
Old women 's nonsense -- old women 's nonsense ! '' 
he repeated , but still he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder , and then went up to the table where Prince Andrew , evidently not wishing to join in the conversation , was looking over the papers his father had brought from town . 
The old prince went up to him and began to talk business . 
`` The marshal , a Count Rostov , has n't sent half his contingent . 
He came to town and wanted to invite me to dinner -- I gave him a pretty dinner ! 
... And there , look at this ... . 
Well , my boy , '' the old prince went on , addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder . 
`` A fine fellow -- your friend -- I like him ! 
He stirs me up . 
Another says clever things and one does n't care to listen , but this one talks rubbish yet stirs an old fellow up . 
Well , go ! 
Get along ! 
Perhaps I 'll come and sit with you at supper . 
We 'll have another dispute . 
Make friends with my little fool , Princess Mary , '' he shouted after Pierre , through the door . 
Only now , on his visit to Bald Hills , did Pierre fully realize the strength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew . 
That charm was not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family and with the household . 
With the stern old prince and the gentle , timid Princess Mary , though he had scarcely known them , Pierre at once felt like an old friend . 
They were all fond of him already . 
Not only Princess Mary , who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims , gave him her most radiant looks , but even the one-year-old `` Prince Nicholas '' -LRB- as his grandfather called him -RRB- smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in his arms , and Michael Ivanovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince . 
The old prince came in to supper ; this was evidently on Pierre 's account . 
And during the two days of the young man 's visit he was extremely kind to him and told him to visit them again . 
When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together , they began to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new acquaintance has left , but as seldom happens , no one said anything but what was good of him . 
When returning from his leave , Rostov felt , for the first time , how close was the bond that united him to Denisov and and the whole regiment . 
On approaching it , Rostov felt as he had done when approaching his home in Moscow . 
When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform of his regiment , when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and saw the picket ropes of the roan horses , when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to his master , `` The count has come ! '' 
and Denisov , who had been asleep on his bed , ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him , and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival , Rostov experienced the same feeling his mother , his father , and his sister had embraced him , and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak . 
The regiment was also a home , and as unalterably dear and precious as his parents ' house . 
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had been reassigned to his former squadron , had been on duty and had gone out foraging , when he had again entered into all the little interests of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one narrow , unchanging frame , he experienced the same sense of peace , of moral support , and the same sense being at home here in his own place , as he had felt under the parental roof . 
But here was none of all that turmoil of the world at large , where he did not know his right place and took mistaken decisions ; here was no Sonya with whom he ought , or ought not , to have an explanation ; here was no possibility of going there or not going there ; here there were not twenty-four hours in the day which could be spent in such a variety of ways ; there was not that innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or farther from him than another ; there were none of those uncertain and undefined money relations with his father , and nothing to recall that terrible loss to Dolokhov . 
Here , in the regiment , all was clear and simple . 
The whole world was divided into two unequal parts : one , our Pavlograd regiment ; the other , all the rest . 
And the rest was no concern of his . 
In the regiment , everything was definite : who was lieutenant , who captain , who was a good fellow , who a bad one , and most of all , who was a comrade . 
The canteenkeeper gave one credit , one 's pay came every four months , there was nothing to think out or decide , you had only to do nothing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and , when given an order , to do what was clearly , distinctly , and definitely ordered -- and all would be well . 
Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimental life , Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to rest . 
Life in the regiment , during this campaign , was all the pleasanter for him , because , after his loss to Dolokhov -LRB- for which , in spite of all his family 's efforts to console him , he could not forgive himself -RRB- , he had made up his mind to atone for his fault by serving , not as he had done before , but really well , and by being a perfectly first-rate comrade and officer -- in a word , a splendid man altogether , a thing which seemed so difficult out in the world , but so possible in the regiment . 
After his losses , he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents in five years . 
He received ten thousand rubles a year , but now resolved to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his parents . 
Our army , after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultusk and Preussisch-Eylau , was concentrated near Bartenstein . 
It was awaiting the Emperor 's arrival and the beginning of a new campaign . 
The Pavlograd regiment , belonging to that part of the army which had served in the 1805 campaign , had been recruiting up to strength in Russia , and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the campaign . 
It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and , when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign , was attached to Platov 's division . 
Platov 's division was acting independently of the main army . 
Several times parts of the Pavlograd regiment had exchanged shots with the enemy , had taken prisoners , and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot 's carriages . 
In April the Pavlograds were stationed immovably for some weeks near a totally ruined and deserted German village . 
A thaw had set in , it was muddy and cold , the ice on the river broke , and the roads became impassable . 
For days neither provisions for the men nor fodder for the horses had been issued . 
As no transports could arrive , the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villages , searching for potatoes , but found few even of these . 
Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled -- if any remained , they were worse than beggars and nothing more could be taken from them ; even the soldiers , usually pitiless enough , instead of taking anything from them , often gave them the last of their rations . 
The Pavlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action , but had lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness . 
In the hospitals , death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever , or the swelling that came from bad food , preferred to remain on duty , and hardly able to drag their legs went to the front rather than to the hospitals . 
When spring came on , the soldiers found a plant just showing out of the ground that looked like asparagus , which , for some reason , they called `` Mashka 's sweet root . '' 
It was very bitter , but they wandered about the fields seeking it and dug it out with their sabers and ate it , though they were ordered not to do so , as it was a noxious plant . 
That spring a new disease broke out among the soldiers , a swelling of the arms , legs , and face , which the doctors attributed to eating this root . 
But in spite of all this , the soldiers of Denisov 's squadron fed chiefly on `` Mashka 's sweet root , '' because it was the second week that the last of the biscuits were being doled out at the rate of half a pound a man and the last potatoes received had sprouted and frozen . 
The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatched roofs and had become terribly thin , though still covered with tufts of felty winter hair . 
Despite this destitution , the soldiers and officers went on living just as usual . 
Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms , the hussars formed line for roll call , kept things in order , groomed their horses , polished their arms , brought in straw from the thatched roofs in place of fodder , and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which they rose up hungry , joking about their nasty food and their hunger . 
As usual , in their spare time , they lit bonfires , steamed themselves before them naked ; smoked , picked out and baked sprouting rotten potatoes , told and listened to stories of Potemkin 's and Suvorov 's campaigns , or to legends of Alesha the Sly , or the priest 's laborer Mikolka . 
The officers , as usual , lived in twos and threes in the roofless , half-ruined houses . 
The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and , in general , food for the men . 
The younger ones occupied themselves as before , some playing cards -LRB- there was plenty of money , though there was no food -RRB- , some with more innocent games , such as quoits and skittles . 
The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken of , partly because nothing certain was known about it , partly because there was a vague feeling that in the main it was going badly . 
Rostov lived , as before , with Denisov , and since their furlough they had become more friendly than ever . 
Denisov never spoke of Rostov 's family , but by the tender friendship his commander showed him , Rostov felt that the elder hussar 's luckless love for Natasha played a part in strengthening their friendship . 
Denisov evidently tried to expose Rostov to danger as seldom as possible , and after an action greeted his safe return with evident joy . 
On one of his foraging expeditions , in a deserted and ruined village to which he had come in search of provisions , Rostov found a family consisting of an old Pole and his daughter with an infant in arms . 
They were half clad , hungry , too weak to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance . 
Rostov brought them to his quarters , placed them in his own lodging , and kept them for some weeks while the old man was recovering . 
One of his comrades , talking of women , began chaffing Rostov , saying that he was more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if he introduced to them the pretty Polish girl he had saved . 
Rostov took the joke as an insult , flared up , and said such unpleasant things to the officer that it was all Denisov could do to prevent a duel . 
When the officer had gone away , Denisov , who did not himself know what Rostov 's relations with the Polish girl might be , began to upbraid him for his quickness of temper , and Rostov replied : `` Say what you like ... . 
She is like a sister to me , and I ca n't tell you how it offended me ... because ... well , for that reason ... '' Denisov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room without looking at Rostov , as was his way at moments of deep feeling . 
`` Ah , what a mad bweed you Wostovs are ! '' 
he muttered , and Rostov noticed tears in his eyes . 
In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor 's arrival , but Rostov had no chance of being present at the review he held at Bartenstein , as the Pavlograds were at the outposts far beyond that place . 
They were bivouacking . 
Denisov and Rostov were living in an earth hut , dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf . 
The hut was made in the following manner , which had then come into vogue . 
A trench was dug three and a half feet wide , four feet eight inches deep , and eight feet long . 
At one end of the trench , steps were cut out and these formed the entrance and vestibule . 
The trench itself was the room , in which the lucky ones , such as the squadron commander , had a board , lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance , to serve as a table . 
On each side of the trench , the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two and a half feet , and this did duty for bedsteads and couches . 
The roof was so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trench and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table . 
Denisov , who was living luxuriously because the soldiers of his squadron liked him , had also a board in the roof at the farther end , with a piece of -LRB- broken but mended -RRB- glass in it for a window . 
When it was very cold , embers from the soldiers ' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of iron on the steps in the `` reception room '' -- as Denisov called that part of the hut - and it was then so warm that the officers , of whom there were always some with Denisov and Rostov , sat in their shirt sleeves . 
In April , Rostov was on orderly duty . 
One morning , between seven and eight , returning after a sleepless night , he sent for embers , changed his rain-soaked underclothes , said his prayers , drank tea , got warm , then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner , and , his face glowing from exposure to the wind and with nothing on but his shirt , lay down on his back , putting his arms under his head . 
He was pleasantly considering the probability of being promoted in a few days for his last reconnoitering expedition , and was awaiting Denisov , who had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk . 
Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut , evidently much excited . 
Rostov moved to the window to see whom he was speaking to , and saw the quartermaster , Topcheenko . 
`` I ordered you not to let them eat that Mashka woot stuff ! '' 
