As you know , I am quite indifferent to politics , but from my father 's remarks and his talks with Michael Ivanovich I know all that goes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred on Buonaparte , who only at Bald Hills in the whole world , it seems , is not accepted as a great man , still less as Emperor of France . 
And my father can not stand this . 
It seems to me that it is chiefly because of his political views that my father is reluctant to speak of going to Moscow ; for he foresees the encounters that would result from his way of expressing his views regardless of anybody . 
All the benefit he might derive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the disputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable . 
In any case it will be decided very shortly . 
Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew 's absence . 
He , as I wrote you before , has changed very much of late . 
After his sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits . 
He has again become as I used to know him when a child : kind , affectionate , with that heart of gold to which I know no equal . 
He has realized , it seems to me , that life is not over for him . 
But together with this mental change he has grown physically much weaker . 
He has become thinner and more nervous . 
I am anxious about him and glad he is taking this trip abroad which the doctors recommended long ago . 
I hope it will cure him . 
You write that in Petersburg he is spoken of as one of the most active , cultivated , and capable of the young men . 
Forgive my vanity as a relation , but I never doubted it . 
The good he has done to everybody here , from his peasants up to the gentry , is incalculable . 
On his arrival in Petersburg he received only his due . 
I always wonder at the way rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow , especially such false ones as that you write about -- I mean the report of my brother 's betrothal to the little Rostova . 
I do not think my brother will ever marry again , and certainly not her ; and this is why : first , I know that though he rarely speaks about the wife he has lost , the grief of that loss has gone too deep in his heart for him ever to decide to give her a successor and our little angel a stepmother . 
Secondly because , as far as I know , that girl is not the kind of girl who could please Prince Andrew . 
I do not think he would choose her for a wife , and frankly I do not wish it . 
But I am running on too long and am at the end of my second sheet . 
Good-by , my dear friend . 
May God keep you in His holy and mighty care . 
My dear friend , Mademoiselle Bourienne , sends you kisses . 
MARY In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpected letter from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and surprising news . 
He informed her of his engagement to Natasha Rostova . 
The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tender and confiding affection for his sister . 
He wrote that he had never loved as he did now and that only now did he understand and know what life was . 
He asked his sister to forgive him for not having told her of his resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills , though he had spoken of it to his father . 
He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her father to give his consent , irritating him and having to bear the brunt of his displeasure without attaining her object . 
`` Besides , '' he wrote , `` the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now . 
My father then insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months , half of that period , have passed , and my resolution is firmer than ever . 
If the doctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in Russia , but as it is I have to postpone my return for three months . 
You know me and my relations with Father . 
I want nothing from him . 
I have been and always shall be independent ; but to go against his will and arouse his anger , now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short time , would destroy half my happiness . 
I am now writing to him about the same question , and beg you to choose a good moment to hand him the letter and to let me know how he looks at the whole matter and whether there is hope that he may consent to reduce the term by four months . '' 
After long hesitations , doubts , and prayers , Princess Mary gave the letter to her father . 
The next day the old prince said to her quietly : `` Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead ... . 
It wo n't be long -- I shall soon set him free . '' 
The princess was about to reply , but her father would not let her speak and , raising his voice more and more , cried : `` Marry , marry , my boy ! 
... A good family ! 
... Clever people , eh ? 
Rich , eh ? 
Yes , a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have ! 
Write and tell him that he may marry tomorrow if he likes . 
She will be little Nicholas ' stepmother and I 'll marry Bourienne ! 
... Ha , ha , ha ! 
He must n't be without a stepmother either ! 
Only one thing , no more women are wanted in my house -- let him marry and live by himself . 
Perhaps you will go and live with him too ? '' 
he added , turning to Princess Mary . 
`` Go in heavens name ! 
Go out into the frost ... the frost ... the frost ! 
After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the matter . 
But repressed vexation at his son 's poor-spirited behavior found expression in his treatment of his daughter . 
To his former pretexts for irony a fresh one was now added -- allusions to stepmothers and amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
`` Why should n't I marry her ? '' 
he asked his daughter . 
`` She 'll make a splendid princess ! '' 
And latterly , to her surprise and bewilderment , Princess Mary noticed that her father was really associating more and more with the Frenchwoman . 
She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his letter , but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to the idea . 
Little Nicholas and his education , her brother Andrew , and religion were Princess Mary 's joys and consolations ; but besides that , since everyone must have personal hopes , Princess Mary in the profoundest depths of her heart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chief consolation of her life . 
This comforting dream and hope were given her by God 's folk -- the half-witted and other pilgrims who visited her without the prince 's knowledge . 
The longer she lived , the more experience and observation she had of life , the greater was her wonder at the short-sightedness of men who seek enjoyment and happiness here on earth : toiling , suffering , struggling , and harming one another , to obtain that impossible , visionary , sinful happiness . 
Prince Andrew had loved his wife , she died , but that was not enough : he wanted to bind his happiness to another woman . 
Her father objected to this because he wanted a more distinguished and wealthier match for Andrew . 
And they all struggled and suffered and tormented one another and injured their souls , their eternal souls , for the attainment of benefits which endure but for an instant . 
Not only do we know this ourselves , but Christ , the Son of God , came down to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and is a probation ; yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it . 
`` How is it that no one realizes this ? '' 
thought Princess Mary . 
`` No one except these despised God 's folk who , wallet on back , come to me by the back door , afraid of being seen by the prince , not for fear of ill-usage by him but for fear of causing him to sin . 
To leave family , home , and all the cares of worldly welfare , in order without clinging to anything to wander in hempen rags from place to place under an assumed name , doing no one any harm but praying for all - for those who drive one away as well as for those who protect one : higher than that life and truth there is no life or truth ! '' 
There was one pilgrim , a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called Theodosia , who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and worn heavy chains . 
Princess Mary was particularly fond of her . 
Once , when in a room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was talking of her life , the thought that Theodosia alone had found the true path of life suddenly came to Princess Mary with such force that she resolved to become a pilgrim herself . 
When Theodosia had gone to sleep Princess Mary thought about this for a long time , and at last made up her mind that , strange as it might seem , she must go on a pilgrimage . 
She disclosed this thought to no one but to her confessor , Father Akinfi , the monk , and he approved of her intention . 
Under guise of a present for the pilgrims , Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim 's complete costume for herself : a coarse smock , bast shoes , a rough coat , and a black kerchief . 
Often , approaching the chest of drawers containing this secret treasure , Princess Mary paused , uncertain whether the time had not already come to put her project into execution . 
Often , listening to the pilgrims ' tales , she was so stimulated by their simple speech , mechanical to them but to her so full of deep meaning , that several times she was on the point of abandoning everything and running away from home . 
In imagination she already pictured herself by Theodosia 's side , dressed in coarse rags , walking with a staff , a wallet on her back , along the dusty road , directing her wanderings from one saint 's shrine to another , free from envy , earthly love , or desire , and reaching at last the place where there is no more sorrow or sighing , but eternal joy and bliss . 
`` I shall come to a place and pray there , and before having time to get used to it or getting to love it , I shall go farther . 
I will go on till my legs fail , and I 'll lie down and die somewhere , and shall at last reach that eternal , quiet haven , where there is neither sorrow nor sighing ... '' thought Princess Mary . 
But afterwards , when she saw her father and especially little Koko -LRB- Nicholas -RRB- , her resolve weakened . 
She wept quietly , and felt that she was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God . 
The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor -- idleness -- was a condition of the first man 's blessedness before the Fall . 
Fallen man has retained a love of idleness , but the curse weighs on the race not only because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our brows , but because our moral nature is such that we can not be both idle and at ease . 
An inner voice tells us we are in the wrong if we are idle . 
If man could find a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilling his duty , he would have found one of the conditions of man 's primitive blessedness . 
And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idleness is the lot of a whole class - the military . 
The chief attraction of military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and irreproachable idleness . 
Nicholas Rostov experienced this blissful condition to the full when , after 1807 , he continued to serve in the Pavlograd regiment , in which he already commanded the squadron he had taken over from Denisov . 
Rostov had become a bluff , good-natured fellow , whom his Moscow acquaintances would have considered rather bad form , but who was liked and respected by his comrades , subordinates , and superiors , and was well contented with his life . 
Of late , in 1809 , he found in letters from home more frequent complaints from his mother that their affairs were falling into greater and greater disorder , and that it was time for him to come back to gladden and comfort his old parents . 
Reading these letters , Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to take him away from surroundings in which , protected from all the entanglements of life , he was living so calmly and quietly . 
He felt that sooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life , with its embarrassments and affairs to be straightened out , its accounts with stewards , quarrels , and intrigues , its ties , society , and with Sonya 's love and his promise to her . 
It was all dreadfully difficult and complicated ; and he replied to his mother in cold , formal letters in French , beginning : `` My dear Mamma , '' and ending : `` Your obedient son , '' which said nothing of when he would return . 
