`` How is he ? 
... '' The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of a court of justice . 
All were silent or talked in low tones . 
Prince Nicholas came in serious and taciturn . 
Princess Mary seemed even quieter and more diffident than usual . 
The guests were reluctant to address her , feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation . 
Count Rostopchin alone kept the conversation going , now relating the latest town news , and now the latest political gossip . 
Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in the conversation . 
Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judge receives a report , only now and then , silently or by a brief word , showing that he took heed of what was being reported to him . 
The tone of the conversation was such as indicated that no one approved of what was being done in the political world . 
Incidents were related evidently confirming the opinion that everything was going from bad to worse , but whether telling a story or giving an opinion the speaker always stopped , or was stopped , at the point beyond which his criticism might touch the sovereign himself . 
At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news : Napoleon 's seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg 's territory , and the Russian Note , hostile to Napoleon , which had been sent to all the European courts . 
`` Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel , '' said Count Rostopchin , repeating a phrase he had uttered several times before . 
`` One only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the crowned heads . 
Now the Pope 's turn has come and Bonaparte does n't scruple to depose the head of the Catholic Church -- yet all keep silent ! 
Our sovereign alone has protested against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg 's territory , and even ... '' Count Rostopchin paused , feeling that he had reached the limit beyond which censure was impossible . 
`` Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy of Oldenburg , '' said Prince Bolkonski . 
`` He shifts the Dukes about as I might move my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estates . '' 
`` The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength of character and resignation , '' remarked Boris , joining in respectfully . 
He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honor of being presented to the Duke . 
Prince Bolkonski glanced at the young man as if about to say something in reply , but changed his mind , evidently considering him too young . 
`` I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised how badly the Note was worded , '' remarked Count Rostopchin in the casual tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him . 
Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment , not understanding why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note . 
`` Does it matter , Count , how the Note is worded , '' he asked , `` so long as its substance is forcible ? '' 
`` My dear fellow , with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easy to have a good style , '' returned Count Rostopchin . 
Pierre now understood the count 's dissatisfaction with the wording of the Note . 
`` One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up , '' remarked the old prince . 
`` There in Petersburg they are always writing - not notes only but even new laws . 
My Andrew there has written a whole volume of laws for Russia . 
Nowadays they are always writing ! '' 
and he laughed unnaturally . 
There was a momentary pause in the conversation ; the old general cleared his throat to draw attention . 
`` Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg ? 
The figure cut by the new French ambassador . '' 
`` Eh ? 
Yes , I heard something : he said something awkward in His Majesty 's presence . '' 
`` His Majesty drew attention to the Grenadier division and to the march past , '' continued the general , `` and it seems the ambassador took no notice and allowed himself to reply that : ` We in France pay no attention to such trifles ! ' 
The Emperor did not condescend to reply . 
At the next review , they say , the Emperor did not once deign to address him . '' 
All were silent . 
On this fact relating to the Emperor personally , it was impossible to pass any judgment . 
`` Impudent fellows ! '' 
said the prince . 
`` You know Metivier ? 
I turned him out of my house this morning . 
He was here ; they admitted him spite of my request that they should let no one in , '' he went on , glancing angrily at his daughter . 
And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and the reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy . 
Though these reasons were very insufficient and obscure , no one made any rejoinder . 
After the roast , champagne was served . 
The guests rose to congratulate the old prince . 
Princess Mary , too , went round to him . 
He gave her a cold , angry look and offered her his wrinkled , clean-shaven cheek to kiss . 
The whole expression of his face told her that he had not forgotten the morning 's talk , that his decision remained in force , and only the presence of visitors hindered his speaking of it to her now . 
When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served , the old men sat together . 
Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on the impending war . 
He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long as we sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into European affairs , into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit . 
`` We ought not to fight either for or against Austria . 
Our political interests are all in the East , and in regard to Bonaparte the only thing is to have an armed frontier and a firm policy , and he will never dare to cross the Russian frontier , as was the case in 1807 ! '' 
`` How can we fight the French , Prince ? '' 
said Count Rostopchin . 
`` Can we arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities ? 
Look at our youths , look at our ladies ! 
The French are our Gods : Paris is our Kingdom of Heaven . '' 
He began speaking louder , evidently to be heard by everyone . 
`` French dresses , French ideas , French feelings ! 
There now , you turned Metivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and a scoundrel , but our ladies crawl after him on their knees . 
I went to a party last night , and there out of five ladies three were Roman Catholics and had the Pope 's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays . 
And they themselves sit there nearly naked , like the signboards at our Public Baths if I may say so . 
Ah , when one looks at our young people , Prince , one would like to take Peter the Great 's old cudgel out of the museum and belabor them in the Russian way till all the nonsense jumps out of them . '' 
All were silent . 
The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile and wagged his head approvingly . 
`` Well , good-by , your excellency , keep well ! '' 
said Rostopchin , getting up with characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the prince . 
`` Good-by , my dear fellow ... . 
His words are music , I never tire of hearing him ! '' 
said the old prince , keeping hold of the hand and offering his cheek to be kissed . 
Following Rostopchin 's example the others also rose . 
Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men 's talk and faultfinding , understood nothing of what she heard ; she only wondered whether the guests had all observed her father 's hostile attitude toward her . 
She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilities shown her during dinner by Boris Drubetskoy , who was visiting them for the third time already . 
Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to Pierre , who hat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests to approach her after the old prince had gone out and they were left alone in the drawing room . 
`` May I stay a little longer ? '' 
he said , letting his stout body sink into an armchair beside her . 
`` Oh yes , '' she answered . 
`` You noticed nothing ? '' 
her look asked . 
Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood . 
He looked straight before him and smiled quietly . 
`` Have you known that young man long , Princess ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Who ? '' 
`` Drubetskoy . '' 
`` No , not long ... '' `` Do you like him ? '' 
`` Yes , he is an agreeable young man ... . 
Why do you ask me that ? '' 
said Princess Mary , still thinking of that morning 's conversation with her father . 
`` Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave from Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying an heiress . '' 
`` You have observed that ? '' 
said Princess Mary . 
`` Yes , '' returned Pierre with a smile , `` and this young man now manages matters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too . 
I can read him like a book . 
