`` I expected nothing else , '' she told herself , calling her pride to her aid . 
`` I have nothing to do with him and I only wanted to see the old lady , who was always kind to me and to whom I am under many obligations . '' 
But she could not pacify herself with these reflections ; a feeling akin to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit . 
Though she had firmly resolved not to call on the Rostovs again and to forget the whole matter , she felt herself all the time in an awkward position . 
And when she asked herself what distressed her , she had to admit that it was her relation to Rostov . 
His cold , polite manner did not express his feeling for her -LRB- she knew that -RRB- but it concealed something , and until she could discover what that something was , she felt that she could not be at ease . 
One day in midwinter when sitting in the schoolroom attending to her nephew 's lessons , she was informed that Rostov had called . 
With a firm resolution not to betray herself and not show her agitation , she sent for Mademoiselle Bourienne and went with her to the drawing room . 
Her first glance at Nicholas ' face told her that he had only come to fulfill the demands of politeness , and she firmly resolved to maintain the tone in which he addressed her . 
They spoke of the countess ' health , of their mutual friends , of the latest war news , and when the ten minutes required by propriety had elapsed after which a visitor may rise , Nicholas got up to say good-by . 
With Mademoiselle Bourienne 's help the princess had maintained the conversation very well , but at the very last moment , just when he rose , she was so tired of talking of what did not interest her , and her mind was so full of the question why she alone was granted so little happiness in life , that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sat still , her luminous eyes gazing fixedly before her , not noticing that he had risen . 
Nicholas glanced at her and , wishing to appear not to notice her abstraction , made some remark to Mademoiselle Bourienne and then again looked at the princess . 
She still sat motionless with a look of suffering on her gentle face . 
He suddenly felt sorry for her and was vaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her face expressed . 
He wished to help her and say something pleasant , but could think of nothing to say . 
`` Good-by , Princess ! '' 
said he . 
She started , flushed , and sighed deeply . 
`` Oh , I beg your pardon , '' she said as if waking up . 
`` Are you going already , Count ? 
Well then , good-by ! 
Oh , but the cushion for the countess ! '' 
`` Wait a moment , I 'll fetch it , '' said Mademoiselle Bourienne , and she left the room . 
They both sat silent , with an occasional glance at one another . 
`` Yes , Princess , '' said Nicholas at last with a sad smile , `` it does n't seem long ago since we first met at Bogucharovo , but how much water has flowed since then ! 
In what distress we all seemed to be then , yet I would give much to bring back that time ... but there 's no bringing it back . '' 
Princess Mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones as he said this . 
She seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning of his words which would explain his feeling for her . 
`` Yes , yes , '' said she , `` but you have no reason to regret the past , Count . 
As I understand your present life , I think you will always recall it with satisfaction , because the self-sacrifice that fills it now ... '' `` I can not accept your praise , '' he interrupted her hurriedly . 
`` On the contrary I continually reproach myself ... . 
But this is not at all an interesting or cheerful subject . '' 
His face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression . 
But the princess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved , and it was to him that she now spoke . 
`` I thought you would allow me to tell you this , '' she said . 
`` I had come so near to you ... and to all your family that I thought you would not consider my sympathy misplaced , but I was mistaken , '' and suddenly her voice trembled . 
`` I do n't know why , '' she continued , recovering herself , `` but you used to be different , and ... '' `` There are a thousand reasons why , '' laying special emphasis on the why . 
`` Thank you , Princess , '' he added softly . 
`` Sometimes it is hard . '' 
`` So that 's why ! 
That 's why ! '' 
a voice whispered in Princess Mary 's soul . 
`` No , it was not only that gay , kind , and frank look , not only that handsome exterior , that I loved in him . 
I divined his noble , resolute , self-sacrificing spirit too , '' she said to herself . 
`` Yes , he is poor now and I am rich ... . 
Yes , that 's the only reason ... . 
Yes , were it not for that ... '' And remembering his former tenderness , and looking now at his kind , sorrowful face , she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness . 
`` But why , Count , why ? '' 
she almost cried , unconsciously moving closer to him . 
`` Why ? 
Tell me . 
You must tell me ! '' 
He was silent . 
`` I do n't understand your why , Count , '' she continued , `` but it 's hard for me ... I confess it . 
For some reason you wish to deprive me of our former friendship . 
And that hurts me . '' 
There were tears in her eyes and in her voice . 
`` I have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hard for me to bear ... . 
Excuse me , good-by ! '' 
and suddenly she began to cry and was hurrying from the room . 
`` Princess , for God 's sake ! '' 
he exclaimed , trying to stop her . 
`` Princess ! '' 
She turned round . 
For a few seconds they gazed silently into one another 's eyes -- and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly became possible , inevitable , and very near . 
In the winter of 1813 Nicholas married Princess Mary and moved to Bald Hills with his wife , his mother , and Sonya . 
Within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts without selling any of his wife 's property , and having received a small inheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre as well . 
In another three years , by 1820 , he had so managed his affairs that he was able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and was negotiating to buy back Otradnoe -- that being his pet dream . 
Having started farming from necessity , he soon grew so devoted to it that it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation . 
Nicholas was a plain farmer : he did not like innovations , especially the English ones then coming into vogue . 
He laughed at theoretical treatises on estate management , disliked factories , the raising of expensive products , and the buying of expensive seed corn , and did not make a hobby of any particular part of the work on his estate . 
He always had before his mind 's eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it . 
The chief thing in his eyes was not the nitrogen in the soil , nor the oxygen in the air , nor manures , nor special plows , but that most important agent by which nitrogen , oxygen , manure , and plow were made effective -- the peasant laborer . 
When Nicholas first began farming and began to understand its different branches , it was the serf who especially attracted his attention . 
The peasant seemed to him not merely a tool , but also a judge of farming and an end in himself . 
At first he watched the serfs , trying to understand their aims and what they considered good and bad , and only pretended to direct them and give orders while in reality learning from them their methods , their manner of speech , and their judgment of what was good and bad . 
Only when he had understood the peasants ' tastes and aspirations , had learned to talk their language , to grasp the hidden meaning of their words , and felt akin to them did he begin boldly to manage his serfs , that is , to perform toward them the duties demanded of him . 
And Nicholas ' management produced very brilliant results . 
Guided by some gift of insight , on taking up the management of the estates he at once unerringly appointed as bailiff , village elder , and delegate , the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had they had the right to choose , and these posts never changed hands . 
Before analyzing the properties of manure , before entering into the debit and credit -LRB- as he ironically called it -RRB- , he found out how many cattle the peasants had and increased the number by all possible means . 
He kept the peasant families together in the largest groups possible , not allowing the family groups to divide into separate households . 
He was hard alike on the lazy , the depraved , and the weak , and tried to get them expelled from the commune . 
He was as careful of the sowing and reaping of the peasants ' hay and corn as of his own , and few landowners had their crops sown and harvested so early and so well , or got so good a return , as did Nicholas . 
He disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs -- the `` drones '' as he called them -- and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity . 
When a decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf , especially if one had to be punished , he always felt undecided and consulted everybody in the house ; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscripted instead of a land worker he did so without the least hesitation . 
He never felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants . 
He knew that his every decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions . 
He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man , or to make things easy for or reward anyone , merely because he felt inclined to do so . 
He could not have said by what standard he judged what he should or should not do , but the standard was quite firm and definite in his own mind . 
Often , speaking with vexation of some failure or irregularity , he would say : `` What can one do with our Russian peasants ? '' 
and imagined that he could not bear them . 
Yet he loved `` our Russian peasants '' and their way of life with his whole soul , and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one way and manner of farming which produced good results . 
Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband 's and regretted that she could not share it ; but she could not understand the joys and vexations he derived from that world , to her so remote and alien . 
She could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy when , after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in the fields or on the threshing floor , he returned from the sowing or mowing or reaping to have tea with her . 
She did not understand why he spoke with such admiration and delight of the farming of the thrifty and well-to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin , who with his family had carted corn all night ; or of the fact that his -LRB- Nicholas ' -RRB- sheaves were already stacked before anyone else had his harvest in . 
She did not understand why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his mustache and winked so joyfully , when warm steady rain began to fall on the dry and thirsty shoots of the young oats , or why when the wind carried away a threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return from the barn , flushed , sunburned , and perspiring , with a smell of wormwood and gentian in his hair and , gleefully rubbing his hands , would say : `` Well , one more day and my grain and the peasants ' will all be under cover . '' 
Still less did she understand why he , kindhearted and always ready to anticipate her wishes , should become almost desperate when she brought him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her to be excused some work ; why he , that kind Nicholas , should obstinately refuse her , angrily asking her not to interfere in what was not her business . 
She felt he had a world apart , which he loved passionately and which had laws she had not fathomed . 
Sometimes when , trying to understand him , she spoke of the good work he was doing for his serfs , he would be vexed and reply : `` Not in the least ; it never entered my head and I would n't do that for their good ! 
That 's all poetry and old wives ' talk -- all that doing good to one 's neighbor ! 
