They say the cavalry are blocking the way , '' said an officer . 
`` Ah , those damned Germans ! 
They do n't know their own country ! '' 
said another . 
`` What division are you ? '' 
shouted an adjutant , riding up . 
`` The Eighteenth . '' 
`` Then why are you here ? 
You should have gone on long ago , now you wo n't get there till evening . '' 
`` What stupid orders ! 
They do n't themselves know what they are doing ! '' 
said the officer and rode off . 
Then a general rode past shouting something angrily , not in Russian . 
`` Tafa-lafa ! 
But what he 's jabbering no one can make out , '' said a soldier , mimicking the general who had ridden away . 
`` I 'd shoot them , the scoundrels ! '' 
`` We were ordered to be at the place before nine , but we have n't got halfway . 
Fine orders ! '' 
was being repeated on different sides . 
And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began to turn into vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at the Germans . 
The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry was moving toward our left flank , the higher command found that our center was too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all ordered to turn back to the right . 
Several thousand cavalry crossed in front of the infantry , who had to wait . 
At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and a Russian general . 
The general shouted a demand that the cavalry should be halted , the Austrian argued that not he , but the higher command , was to blame . 
The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited . 
After an hour 's delay they at last moved on , descending the hill . 
The fog that was dispersing on the hill lay still more densely below , where they were descending . 
In front in the fog a shot was heard and then another , at first irregularly at varying intervals -- trata ... tat -- and then more and more regularly and rapidly , and the action at the Goldbach Stream began . 
Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream , and having stumbled on him in the fog , hearing no encouraging word from their commanders , and with a consciousness of being too late spreading through the ranks , and above all being unable to see anything in front or around them in the thick fog , the Russians exchanged shots with the enemy lazily and advanced and again halted , receiving no timely orders from the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknown surroundings unable to find their own regiments . 
In this way the action began for the first , second , and third columns , which had gone down into the valley . 
The fourth column , with which Kutuzov was , stood on the Pratzen Heights . 
Below , where the fight was beginning , there was still thick fog ; on the higher ground it was clearing , but nothing could be seen of what was going on in front . 
Whether all the enemy forces were , as we supposed , six miles away , or whether they were near by in that sea of mist , no one knew till after eight o'clock . 
It was nine o'clock in the morning . 
The fog lay unbroken like a sea down below , but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon stood with his marshals around him , it was quite light . 
Above him was a clear blue sky , and the sun 's vast orb quivered like a huge hollow , crimson float on the surface of that milky sea of mist . 
The whole French army , and even Napoleon himself with his staff , were not on the far side of the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which we intended to take up our position and begin the action , but were on this side , so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could distinguish a mounted man from one on foot . 
Napoleon , in the blue cloak which he had worn on his Italian campaign , sat on his small gray Arab horse a little in front of his marshals . 
He gazed silently at the hills which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian troops were moving in the distance , and he listened to the sounds of firing in the valley . 
Not a single muscle of his face -- which in those days was still thin -- moved . 
His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on one spot . 
His predictions were being justified . 
Part of the Russian force had already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes and part were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack and regarded as the key to the position . 
He saw over the mist that in a hollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen , the Russian columns , their bayonets glittering , were moving continuously in one direction toward the valley and disappearing one after another into the mist . 
From information he had received the evening before , from the sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night , by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns , and from all indications , he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far away in front of them , and that the columns moving near Pratzen constituted the center of the Russian army , and that that center was already sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked . 
But still he did not begin the engagement . 
Today was a great day for him -- the anniversary of his coronation . 
Before dawn he had slept for a few hours , and refreshed , vigorous , and in good spirits , he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in that happy mood in which everything seems possible and everything succeeds . 
He sat motionless , looking at the heights visible above the mist , and his cold face wore that special look of confident , self-complacent happiness that one sees on the face of a boy happily in love . 
The marshals stood behind him not venturing to distract his attention . 
He looked now at the Pratzen Heights , now at the sun floating up out of the mist . 
When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog , and fields and mist were aglow with dazzling light -- as if he had only awaited this to begin the action -- he drew the glove from his shapely white hand , made a sign with it to the marshals , and ordered the action to begin . 
The marshals , accompanied by adjutants , galloped off in different directions , and a few minutes later the chief forces of the French army moved rapidly toward those Pratzen Heights which were being more and more denuded by Russian troops moving down the valley to their left . 
At eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth column , Miloradovich 's , the one that was to take the place of Przebyszewski 's and Langeron 's columns which had already gone down into the valley . 
He greeted the men of the foremost regiment and gave them the order to march , thereby indicating that he intended to lead that column himself . 
When he had reached the village of Pratzen he halted . 
Prince Andrew was behind , among the immense number forming the commander in chief 's suite . 
He was in a state of suppressed excitement and irritation , though controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of a long-awaited moment . 
He was firmly convinced that this was the day of his Toulon , or his bridge of Arcola . 
How it would come about he did not know , but he felt sure it would do so . 
The locality and the position of our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone in our army . 
His own strategic plan , which obviously could not now be carried out , was forgotten . 
Now , entering into Weyrother 's plan , Prince Andrew considered possible contingencies and formed new projects such as might call for his rapidity of perception and decision . 
To the left down below in the mist , the musketry fire of unseen forces could be heard . 
It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight would concentrate . 
`` There we shall encounter difficulties , and there , '' thought he , `` I shall be sent with a brigade or division , and there , standard in hand , I shall go forward and break whatever is in front of me . '' 
He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions . 
Seeing them he kept thinking , `` That may be the very standard with which I shall lead the army . '' 
In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was a hoar frost now turning to dew , but in the valleys it still lay like a milk-white sea . 
Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into which our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firing . 
Above the heights was the dark clear sky , and to the right the vast orb of the sun . 
In front , far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist , some wooded hills were discernible , and it was there the enemy probably was , for something could be descried . 
On the right the Guards were entering the misty region with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now and then a gleam of bayonets ; to the left beyond the village similar masses of cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist . 
In front and behind moved infantry . 
The commander in chief was standing at the end of the village letting the troops pass by him . 
That morning Kutuzov seemed worn and irritable . 
The infantry passing before him came to a halt without any command being given , apparently obstructed by something in front . 
`` Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the village ! '' 
he said angrily to a general who had ridden up . 
`` Do n't you understand , your excellency , my dear sir , that you must not defile through narrow village streets when we are marching against the enemy ? '' 
`` I intended to re-form them beyond the village , your excellency , '' answered the general . 
Kutuzov laughed bitterly . 
`` You 'll make a fine thing of it , deploying in sight of the enemy ! 
Very fine ! '' 
`` The enemy is still far away , your excellency . 
According to the dispositions ... '' `` The dispositions ! '' 
exclaimed Kutuzov bitterly . 
`` Who told you that ? 
... Kindly do as you are ordered . '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
`` My dear fellow , '' Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew , `` the old man is as surly as a dog . '' 
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hat galloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor 's name had the fourth column advanced into action . 
Kutuzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall upon Prince Andrew , who was beside him . 
Seeing him , Kutuzov 's malevolent and caustic expression softened , as if admitting that what was being done was not his adjutant 's fault , and still not answering the Austrian adjutant , he addressed Bolkonski . 
`` Go , my dear fellow , and see whether the third division has passed the village . 
Tell it to stop and await my orders . '' 
Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him . 
`` And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted , '' he added . 
`` What are they doing ? 
What are they doing ? '' 
