remarked another . 
`` Do n't kick up the dust , you infantry ! '' 
jested an hussar whose prancing horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers . 
`` I 'd like to put you on a two days ' march with a knapsack ! 
Your fine cords would soon get a bit rubbed , '' said an infantryman , wiping the mud off his face with his sleeve . 
`` Perched up there , you 're more like a bird than a man . '' 
`` There now , Zikin , they ought to put you on a horse . 
You 'd look fine , '' said a corporal , chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under the weight of his knapsack . 
`` Take a stick between your legs , that 'll suit you for a horse ! '' 
the hussar shouted back . 
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge , squeezing together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel . 
At last the baggage wagons had all crossed , the crush was less , and the last battalion came onto the bridge . 
Only Denisov 's squadron of hussars remained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy , who could be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from the bridge , for the horizon as seen from the valley through which the river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mile away . 
At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our Cossack scouts were moving . 
Suddenly on the road at the top of the high ground , artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen . 
These were the French . 
A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot . 
All the officers and men of Denisov 's squadron , though they tried to talk of other things and to look in other directions , thought only of what was there on the hilltop , and kept constantly looking at the patches appearing on the skyline , which they knew to be the enemy 's troops . 
The weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending brightly upon the Danube and the dark hills around it . 
It was calm , and at intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard from the hill . 
There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy except a few scattered skirmishers . 
An empty space of some seven hundred yards was all that separated them . 
The enemy ceased firing , and that stern , threatening , inaccessible , and intangible line which separates two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt . 
`` One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing the living from the dead lies uncertainty , suffering , and death . 
And what is there ? 
Who is there ? 
-- there beyond that field , that tree , that roof lit up by the sun ? 
No one knows , but one wants to know . 
You fear and yet long to cross that line , and know that sooner or later it must be crossed and you will have to find out what is there , just as you will inevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death . 
But you are strong , healthy , cheerful , and excited , and are surrounded by other such excitedly animated and healthy men . '' 
So thinks , or at any rate feels , anyone who comes in sight of the enemy , and that feeling gives a particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that takes place at such moments . 
On the high ground where the enemy was , the smoke of a cannon rose , and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron . 
The officers who had been standing together rode off to their places . 
The hussars began carefully aligning their horses . 
Silence fell on the whole squadron . 
All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron commander , awaiting the word of command . 
A second and a third cannon ball flew past . 
Evidently they were firing at the hussars , but the balls with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell somewhere beyond them . 
The hussars did not look round , but at the sound of each shot , as at the word of command , the whole squadron with its rows of faces so alike yet so different , holding its breath while the ball flew past , rose in the stirrups and sank back again . 
The soldiers without turning their heads glanced at one another , curious to see their comrades ' impression . 
Every face , from Denisov 's to that of the bugler , showed one common expression of conflict , irritation , and excitement , around chin and mouth . 
The quartermaster frowned , looking at the soldiers as if threatening to punish them . 
Cadet Mironov ducked every time a ball flew past . 
Rostov on the left flank , mounted on his Rook -- a handsome horse despite its game leg -- had the happy air of a schoolboy called up before a large audience for an examination in which he feels sure he will distinguish himself . 
He was glancing at everyone with a clear , bright expression , as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat under fire . 
But despite himself , on his face too that same indication of something new and stern showed round the mouth . 
`` Who 's that curtseying there ? 
Cadet Miwonov ! 
That 's not wight ! 
Look at me , '' cried Denisov who , unable to keep still on one spot , kept turning his horse in front of the squadron . 
The black , hairy , snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov , and his whole short sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in which he held the hilt of his naked saber , looked just as it usually did , especially toward evening when he had emptied his second bottle ; he was only redder than usual . 
With his shaggy head thrown back like birds when they drink , pressing his spurs mercilessly into the sides of his good horse , Bedouin , and sitting as though falling backwards in the saddle , he galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in a hoarse voice to the men to look to their pistols . 
He rode up to Kirsten . 
The staff captain on his broad-backed , steady mare came at a walk to meet him . 
His face with its long mustache was serious as always , only his eyes were brighter than usual . 
`` Well , what about it ? '' 
said he to Denisov . 
`` It wo n't come to a fight . 
You 'll see -- we shall retire . '' 
`` The devil only knows what they 're about ! '' 
muttered Denisov . 
`` Ah , Wostov , '' he cried noticing the cadet 's bright face , `` you 've got it at last . '' 
And he smiled approvingly , evidently pleased with the cadet . 
Rostov felt perfectly happy . 
Just then the commander appeared on the bridge . 
Denisov galloped up to him . 
`` Your excellency ! 
Let us attack them ! 
I 'll dwive them off . '' 
`` Attack indeed ! '' 
said the colonel in a bored voice , puckering up his face as if driving off a troublesome fly . 
`` And why are you stopping here ? 
Do n't you see the skirmishers are retreating ? 
Lead the squadron back . '' 
The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire without having lost a single man . 
The second squadron that had been in the front line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side of the river . 
The two Pavlograd squadrons , having crossed the bridge , retired up the hill one after the other . 
Their colonel , Karl Bogdanich Schubert , came up to Denisov 's squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostov , without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting for the first time since their encounter concerning Telyanin . 
Rostov , feeling that he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he now admitted that he had been to blame , did not lift his eyes from the colonel 's athletic back , his nape covered with light hair , and his red neck . 
It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanich was only pretending not to notice him , and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet 's courage , so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily ; then it seemed to him that Bogdanich rode so near in order to show him his courage . 
Next he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack just to punish him -- Rostov . 
Then he imagined how , after the attack , Bogdanich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously extend the hand of reconciliation . 
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov , familiar to the Pavlograds as he had but recently left their regiment , rode up to the colonel . 
After his dismissal from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in the regiment , saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he could get more rewards by doing nothing on the staff , and had succeeded in attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince Bagration . 
He now came to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear guard . 
`` Colonel , '' he said , addressing Rostov 's enemy with an air of gloomy gravity and glancing round at his comrades , `` there is an order to stop and fire the bridge . '' 
`` An order to who ? '' 
asked the colonel morosely . 
`` I do n't myself know ` to who , ' '' replied the cornet in a serious tone , `` but the prince told me to ` go and tell the colonel that the hussars must return quickly and fire the bridge . ' '' 
Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the colonel of hussars with the same order . 
After him the stout Nesvitski came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his weight . 
`` How 's this , Colonel ? '' 
he shouted as he approached . 
`` I told you to fire the bridge , and now someone has gone and blundered ; they are all beside themselves over there and one ca n't make anything out . '' 
The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvitski . 
`` You spoke to me of inflammable material , '' said he , `` but you said nothing about firing it . '' 
`` But , my dear sir , '' said Nesvitski as he drew up , taking off his cap and smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand , `` was n't I telling you to fire the bridge , when inflammable material had been put in position ? '' 
`` I am not your ` dear sir , ' Mr. Staff Officer , and you did not tell me to burn the bridge ! 
I know the service , and it is my habit orders strictly to obey . 
You said the bridge would be burned , but who would it burn , I could not know by the holy spirit ! '' 
