On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head , with its long hair curling to his shoulders , in a majestically royal manner , and looked inquiringly at the French colonel . 
The colonel respectfully informed His Majesty of Balashev 's mission , whose name he could not pronounce . 
`` De Bal-macheve ! '' 
said the King -LRB- overcoming by his assurance the difficulty that had presented itself to the colonel -RRB- . 
`` Charmed to make your acquaintance , General ! '' 
he added , with a gesture of kingly condescension . 
As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignity instantly forsook him , and without noticing it he passed into his natural tone of good-natured familiarity . 
He laid his hand on the withers of Balashev 's horse and said : `` Well , General , it all looks like war , '' as if regretting a circumstance of which he was unable to judge . 
`` Your Majesty , '' replied Balashev , `` my master , the Emperor , does not desire war and as Your Majesty sees ... '' said Balashev , using the words Your Majesty at every opportunity , with the affectation unavoidable in frequently addressing one to whom the title was still a novelty . 
Murat 's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to `` Monsieur de Bal-macheve . '' 
But royaute oblige ! 
* and he felt it incumbent on him , as a king and an ally , to confer on state affairs with Alexander 's envoy . 
He dismounted , took Balashev 's arm , and moving a few steps away from his suite , which waited respectfully , began to pace up and down with him , trying to speak significantly . 
He referred to the fact that the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his troops from Prussia , especially when that demand became generally known and the dignity of France was thereby offended . 
* `` Royalty has its obligations . '' 
Balashev replied that there was `` nothing offensive in the demand , because ... '' but Murat interrupted him . 
`` Then you do n't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor ? '' 
he asked unexpectedly , with a kindly and foolish smile . 
Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of the war . 
`` Oh , my dear general ! '' 
Murat again interrupted him , `` with all my heart I wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them , and that the war begun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible ! '' 
said he , in the tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another despite a quarrel between their masters . 
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his health , and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent with him in Naples . 
Then suddenly , as if remembering his royal dignity , Murat solemnly drew himself up , assumed the pose in which he had stood at his coronation , and , waving his right arm , said : `` I wo n't detain you longer , General . 
I wish success to your mission , '' and with his embroidered red mantle , his flowing feathers , and his glittering ornaments , he rejoined his suite who were respectfully awaiting him . 
Balashev rode on , supposing from Murat 's words that he would very soon be brought before Napoleon himself . 
But instead of that , at the next village the sentinels of Davout 's infantry corps detained him as the pickets of the vanguard had done , and an adjutant of the corps commander , who was fetched , conducted him into the village to Marshal Davout . 
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander -- though not a coward like Arakcheev , he was as precise , as cruel , and as unable to express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty . 
In the organism of states such men are necessary , as wolves are necessary in the organism of nature , and they always exist , always appear and hold their own , however incongruous their presence and their proximity to the head of the government may be . 
This inevitability alone can explain how the cruel Arakcheev , who tore out a grenadier 's mustache with his own hands , whose weak nerves rendered him unable to face danger , and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier , was able to maintain his powerful position with Alexander , whose own character was chivalrous , noble , and gentle . 
Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant 's hut , writing -- he was auditing accounts . 
Better quarters could have been found him , but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put themselves in most depressing conditions to have a justification for being gloomy . 
For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a hurry . 
`` How can I think of the bright side of life when , as you see , I am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed ? '' 
the expression of his face seemed to say . 
The chief pleasure and necessity of such men , when they encounter anyone who shows animation , is to flaunt their own dreary , persistent activity . 
Davout allowed himself that pleasure when Balashev was brought in . 
He became still more absorbed in his task when the Russian general entered , and after glancing over his spectacles at Balashev 's face , which was animated by the beauty of the morning and by his talk with Murat , he did not rise or even stir , but scowled still more and sneered malevolently . 
When he noticed in Balashev 's face the disagreeable impression this reception produced , Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he wanted . 
Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only because Davout did not know that he was adjutant general to the Emperor Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon , Balashev hastened to inform him of his rank and mission . 
Contrary to his expectation , Davout , after hearing him , became still surlier and ruder . 
`` Where is your dispatch ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` Give it to me . 
I will send it to the Emperor . '' 
Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the Emperor . 
`` Your Emperor 's orders are obeyed in your army , but here , '' said Davout , `` you must do as you 're told . '' 
And , as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his dependence on brute force , Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer on duty . 
Balashev took out the packet containing the Emperor 's letter and laid it on the table -LRB- made of a door with its hinges still hanging on it , laid across two barrels -RRB- . 
Davout took the packet and read the inscription . 
`` You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not , '' protested Balashev , `` but permit me to observe that I have the honor to be adjutant general to His Majesty ... '' Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the signs of agitation and confusion which appeared on Balashev 's face . 
`` You will be treated as is fitting , '' said he and , putting the packet in his pocket , left the shed . 
A minute later the marshal 's adjutant , de Castres , came in and conducted Balashev to the quarters assigned him . 
That day he dined with the marshal , at the same board on the barrels . 
Next day Davout rode out early and , after asking Balashev to come to him , peremptorily requested him to remain there , to move on with the baggage train should orders come for it to move , and to talk to no one except Monsieur de Castres . 
After four days of solitude , ennui , and consciousness of his impotence and insignificance -- particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of power in which he had so lately moved -- and after several marches with the marshal 's baggage and the French army , which occupied the whole district , Balashev was brought to Vilna -- now occupied by the French -- through the very gate by which he had left it four days previously . 
Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting , the Comte de Turenne , came to Balashev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon 's wish to honor him with an audience . 
Four days before , sentinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment had stood in front of the house to which Balashev was conducted , and now two French grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front and with shaggy caps on their heads , and an escort of hussars and Uhlans and a brilliant suite of aides-de-camp , pages , and generals , who were waiting for Napoleon to come out , were standing at the porch , round his saddle horse and his Mameluke , Rustan . 
Napoleon received Balashev in the very house in Vilna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission . 
Though Balashev was used to imperial pomp , he was amazed at the luxury and magnificence of Napoleon 's court . 
The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room where many generals , gentlemen-in-waiting , and Polish magnates -- several of whom Balashev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia -- were waiting . 
Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general before going for his ride . 
After some minutes , the gentleman-in-waiting who was on duty came into the great reception room and , bowing politely , asked Balashev to follow him . 
Balashev went into a small reception room , one door of which led into a study , the very one from which the Russian Emperor had dispatched him on his mission . 
He stood a minute or two , waiting . 
He heard hurried footsteps beyond the door , both halves of it were opened rapidly ; all was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps , firm and resolute -- they were those of Napoleon . 
He had just finished dressing for his ride , and wore a blue uniform , opening in front over a white waistcoat so long that it covered his rotund stomach , white leather breeches tightly fitting the fat thighs of his short legs , and Hessian boots . 
His short hair had evidently just been brushed , but one lock hung down in the middle of his broad forehead . 
His plump white neck stood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform , and he smelled of Eau de Cologne . 
His full face , rather young-looking , with its prominent chin , wore a gracious and majestic expression of imperial welcome . 
He entered briskly , with a jerk at every step and his head slightly thrown back . 
His whole short corpulent figure with broad thick shoulders , and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding , had that imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live in comfort . 
It was evident , too , that he was in the best of spirits that day . 
He nodded in answer to Balashav 's low and respectful bow , and coming up to him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of his time and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is sure he will always say the right thing and say it well . 
`` Good day , General ! '' 
said he . 
`` I have received the letter you brought from the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you . '' 
He glanced with his large eyes into Balashav 's face and immediately looked past him . 
It was plain that Balashev 's personality did not interest him at all . 
Evidently only what took place within his own mind interested him . 
Nothing outside himself had any significance for him , because everything in the world , it seemed to him , depended entirely on his will . 
`` I do not , and did not , desire war , '' he continued , `` but it has been forced on me . 
Even now '' -LRB- he emphasized the word -RRB- `` I am ready to receive any explanations you can give me . '' 
And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons for dissatisfaction with the Russian government . 
Judging by the calmly moderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke , Balashev was firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enter into negotiations . 
When Napoleon , having finished speaking , looked inquiringly at the Russian envoy , Balashev began a speech he had prepared long before : `` Sire ! 
The Emperor , my master ... '' but the sight of the Emperor 's eyes bent on him confused him . 
`` You are flurried -- compose yourself ! '' 
Napoleon seemed to say , as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at Balashev 's uniform and sword . 
Balashev recovered himself and began to speak . 
He said that the Emperor Alexander did not consider Kurakin 's demand for his passports a sufficient cause for war ; that Kurakin had acted on his own initiative and without his sovereign 's assent , that the Emperor Alexander did not desire war , and had no relations with England . 
`` Not yet ! '' 
interposed Napoleon , and , as if fearing to give vent to his feelings , he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashev might proceed . 
After saying all he had been instructed to say , Balashev added that the Emperor Alexander wished for peace , but would not enter into negotiations except on condition that ... Here Balashev hesitated : he remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in his letter , but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykov and had told Balashev to repeat to Napoleon . 
Balashev remembered these words , `` So long as a single armed foe remains on Russian soil , '' but some complex feeling restrained him . 
He could not utter them , though he wished to do so . 
He grew confused and said : `` On condition that the French army retires beyond the Niemen . '' 
Napoleon noticed Balashev 's embarrassment when uttering these last words ; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to quiver rhythmically . 
Without moving from where he stood he began speaking in a louder tone and more hurriedly than before . 
During the speech that followed , Balashev , who more than once lowered his eyes , involuntarily noticed the quivering of Napoleon 's left leg which increased the more Napoleon raised his voice . 
