`` Come , let 's argue then , '' said Prince Andrew , `` You talk of schools , '' he went on , crooking a finger , `` education and so forth ; that is , you want to raise him '' -LRB- pointing to a peasant who passed by them taking off his cap -RRB- `` from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual needs , while it seems to me that animal happiness is the only happiness possible , and that is just what you want to deprive him of . 
I envy him , but you want to make him what I am , without giving him my means . 
Then you say , ` lighten his toil . ' 
But as I see it , physical labor is as essential to him , as much a condition of his existence , as mental activity is to you or me . 
You ca n't help thinking . 
I go to bed after two in the morning , thoughts come and I ca n't sleep but toss about till dawn , because I think and ca n't help thinking , just as he ca n't help plowing and mowing ; if he did n't , he would go to the drink shop or fall ill . 
Just as I could not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week , so he could not stand my physical idleness , but would grow fat and die . 
The third thing -- what else was it you talked about ? '' 
and Prince Andrew crooked a third finger . 
`` Ah , yes , hospitals , medicine . 
He has a fit , he is dying , and you come and bleed him and patch him up . 
He will drag about as a cripple , a burden to everybody , for another ten years . 
It would be far easier and simpler for him to die . 
Others are being born and there are plenty of them as it is . 
It would be different if you grudged losing a laborer -- that 's how I regard him -- but you want to cure him from love of him . 
And he does not want that . 
And besides , what a notion that medicine ever cured anyone ! 
Killed them , yes ! '' 
said he , frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre . 
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was evident he had reflected on this subject more than once , and he spoke readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time . 
His glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless . 
`` Oh , that is dreadful , dreadful ! '' 
said Pierre . 
`` I do n't understand how one can live with such ideas . 
I had such moments myself not long ago , in Moscow and when traveling , but at such times I collapsed so that I do n't live at all -- everything seems hateful to me ... myself most of all . 
Then I do n't eat , do n't wash ... and how is it with you ? 
... '' `` Why not wash ? 
That is not cleanly , '' said Prince Andrew ; `` on the contrary one must try to make one 's life as pleasant as possible . 
I 'm alive , that is not my fault , so I must live out my life as best I can without hurting others . '' 
`` But with such ideas what motive have you for living ? 
One would sit without moving , undertaking nothing ... '' `` Life as it is leaves one no peace . 
I should be thankful to do nothing , but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the honor to choose me to be their marshal ; it was all I could do to get out of it . 
They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualifications for it -- the kind of good-natured , fussy shallowness necessary for the position . 
Then there 's this house , which must be built in order to have a nook of one 's own in which to be quiet . 
And now there 's this recruiting . '' 
`` Why are n't you serving in the army ? '' 
`` After Austerlitz ! '' 
said Prince Andrew gloomily . 
`` No , thank you very much ! 
I have promised myself not to serve again in the active Russian army . 
And I wo n't -- not even if Bonaparte were here at Smolensk threatening Bald Hills -- even then I would n't serve in the Russian army ! 
Well , as I was saying , '' he continued , recovering his composure , `` now there 's this recruiting . 
My father is chief in command of the Third District , and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve under him . '' 
`` Then you are serving ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
He paused a little while . 
`` And why do you serve ? '' 
`` Why , for this reason ! 
My father is one of the most remarkable men of his time . 
But he is growing old , and though not exactly cruel he has too energetic a character . 
He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is terrible , and now he has this authority of a commander in chief of the recruiting , granted by the Emperor . 
If I had been two hours late a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster 's clerk at Yukhnovna hanged , '' said Prince Andrew with a smile . 
`` So I am serving because I alone have any influence with my father , and now and then can save him from actions which would torment him afterwards . '' 
`` Well , there you see ! '' 
`` Yes , but it is not as you imagine , '' Prince Andrew continued . 
`` I did not , and do not , in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk who had stolen some boots from the recruits ; I should even have been very glad to see him hanged , but I was sorry for my father -- that again is for myself . '' 
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated . 
His eyes glittered feverishly while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no desire to do good to his neighbor . 
`` There now , you wish to liberate your serfs , '' he continued ; `` that is a very good thing , but not for you -- I do n't suppose you ever had anyone flogged or sent to Siberia -- and still less for your serfs . 
If they are beaten , flogged , or sent to Siberia , I do n't suppose they are any the worse off . 
In Siberia they lead the same animal life , and the stripes on their bodies heal , and they are happy as before . 
But it is a good thing for proprietors who perish morally , bring remorse upon themselves , stifle this remorse and grow callous , as a result of being able to inflict punishments justly and unjustly . 
It is those people I pity , and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs . 
You may not have seen , but I have seen , how good men brought up in those traditions of unlimited power , in time when they grow more irritable , become cruel and harsh , are conscious of it , but can not restrain themselves and grow more and more miserable . '' 
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father 's case . 
He did not reply . 
`` So that 's what I 'm sorry for -- human dignity , peace of mind , purity , and not the serfs ' backs and foreheads , which , beat and shave as you may , always remain the same backs and foreheads . '' 
`` No , no ! 
A thousand times no ! 
I shall never agree with you , '' said Pierre . 
In the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage and drove to Bald Hills . 
Prince Andrew , glancing at Pierre , broke the silence now and then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper . 
Pointing to the fields , he spoke of the improvements he was making in his husbandry . 
Pierre remained gloomily silent , answering in monosyllables and apparently immersed in his own thoughts . 
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy , had gone astray , did not see the true light , and that he , Pierre , ought to aid , enlighten , and raise him . 
But as soon as he thought of what he should say , he felt that Prince Andrew with one word , one argument , would upset all his teaching , and he shrank from beginning , afraid of exposing to possible ridicule what to him was precious and sacred . 
`` No , but why do you think so ? '' 
Pierre suddenly began , lowering his head and looking like a bull about to charge , `` why do you think so ? 
You should not think so . '' 
`` Think ? 
What about ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew with surprise . 
`` About life , about man 's destiny . 
It ca n't be so . 
I myself thought like that , and do you know what saved me ? 
Freemasonry ! 
No , do n't smile . 
Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect , as I thought it was : Freemasonry is the best expression of the best , the eternal , aspects of humanity . '' 
And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince Andrew . 
He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed from the bonds of State and Church , a teaching of equality , brotherhood , and love . 
`` Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life , all the rest is a dream , '' said Pierre . 
`` Understand , my dear fellow , that outside this union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree with you that nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out his life , like you , merely trying not to harm others . 
But make our fundamental convictions your own , join our brotherhood , give yourself up to us , let yourself be guided , and you will at once feel yourself , as I have felt myself , a part of that vast invisible chain the beginning of which is hidden in heaven , '' said Pierre . 
Prince Andrew , looking straight in front of him , listened in silence to Pierre 's words . 
More than once , when the noise of the wheels prevented his catching what Pierre said , he asked him to repeat it , and by the peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew 's eyes and by his silence , Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would not interrupt him or laugh at what he said . 
They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to cross by ferry . 
While the carriage and horses were being placed on it , they also stepped on the raft . 
Prince Andrew , leaning his arms on the raft railing , gazed silently at the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun . 
`` Well , what do you think about it ? '' 
Pierre asked . 
