`` Yes , God be thanked ! 
Yes ! 
They 've just finished supper . 
Let me have a look at you , your excellency . '' 
`` Is everything quite all right ? '' 
`` The Lord be thanked , yes ! '' 
Rostov , who had completely forgotten Denisov , not wishing anyone to forestall him , threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the large dark ballroom . 
All was the same : there were the same old card tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it ; but someone had already seen the young master , and , before he had reached the drawing room , something flew out from a side door like a tornado and began hugging and kissing him . 
Another and yet another creature of the same kind sprang from a second door and a third ; more hugging , more kissing , more outcries , and tears of joy . 
He could not distinguish which was Papa , which Natasha , and which Petya . 
Everyone shouted , talked , and kissed him at the same time . 
Only his mother was not there , he noticed that . 
`` And I did not know ... Nicholas ... My darling ! 
... '' `` Here he is ... our own ... Kolya , * dear fellow ... How he has changed ! 
... Where are the candles ? 
... Tea ! 
... '' * Nicholas . 
`` And me , kiss me ! '' 
`` Dearest ... and me ! '' 
Sonya , Natasha , Petya , Anna Mikhaylovna , Vera , and the old count were all hugging him , and the serfs , men and maids , flocked into the room , exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing . 
Petya , clinging to his legs , kept shouting , `` And me too ! '' 
Natasha , after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face with kisses , holding him tight by the skirt of his coat , sprang away and pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly . 
All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy , and all around were lips seeking a kiss . 
Sonya too , all rosy red , clung to his arm and , radiant with bliss , looked eagerly toward his eyes , waiting for the look for which she longed . 
Sonya now was sixteen and she was very pretty , especially at this moment of happy , rapturous excitement . 
She gazed at him , not taking her eyes off him , and smiling and holding her breath . 
He gave her a grateful look , but was still expectant and looking for someone . 
The old countess had not yet come . 
But now steps were heard at the door , steps so rapid that they could hardly be his mother 's . 
Yet it was she , dressed in a new gown which he did not know , made since he had left . 
All the others let him go , and he ran to her . 
When they met , she fell on his breast , sobbing . 
She could not lift her face , but only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar 's jacket . 
Denisov , who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone , stood there and wiped his eyes at the sight . 
`` Vasili Denisov , your son 's friend , '' he said , introducing himself to the count , who was looking inquiringly at him . 
`` You are most welcome ! 
I know , I know , '' said the count , kissing and embracing Denisov . 
`` Nicholas wrote us ... Natasha , Vera , look ! 
Here is Denisov ! '' 
The same happy , rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denisov . 
`` Darling Denisov ! '' 
screamed Natasha , beside herself with rapture , springing to him , putting her arms round him , and kissing him . 
This escapade made everybody feel confused . 
Denisov blushed too , but smiled and , taking Natasha 's hand , kissed it . 
Denisov was shown to the room prepared for him , and the Rostovs all gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room . 
The old countess , not letting go of his hand and kissing it every moment , sat beside him : the rest , crowding round him , watched every movement , word , or look of his , never taking their blissfully adoring eyes off him . 
His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea , handkerchief , and pipe . 
Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him ; but the first moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed insufficient , and he kept expecting something more , more and yet more . 
Next morning , after the fatigues of their journey , the travelers slept till ten o'clock . 
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers , satchels , sabretaches , open portmanteaus , and dirty boots . 
Two freshly cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall . 
The servants were bringing in jugs and basins , hot water for shaving , and their well-brushed clothes . 
There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco . 
`` Hallo , Gwiska -- my pipe ! '' 
came Vasili Denisov 's husky voice . 
`` Wostov , get up ! '' 
Rostov , rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together , raised his disheveled head from the hot pillow . 
`` Why , is it late ? '' 
`` Late ! 
It 's nearly ten o'clock , '' answered Natasha 's voice . 
A rustle of starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of girls ' voices came from the adjoining room . 
The door was opened a crack and there was a glimpse of something blue , of ribbons , black hair , and merry faces . 
It was Natasha , Sonya , and Petya , who had come to see whether they were getting up . 
`` Nicholas ! 
Get up ! '' 
Natasha 's voice was again heard at the door . 
`` Directly ! '' 
Meanwhile , Petya , having found and seized the sabers in the outer room , with the delight boys feel at the sight of a military elder brother , and forgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to see men undressed , opened the bedroom door . 
`` Is this your saber ? '' 
he shouted . 
The girls sprang aside . 
Denisov hid his hairy legs under the blanket , looking with a scared face at his comrade for help . 
The door , having let Petya in , closed again . 
A sound of laughter came from behind it . 
`` Nicholas ! 
Come out in your dressing gown ! '' 
said Natasha 's voice . 
`` Is this your saber ? '' 
asked Petya . 
`` Or is it yours ? '' 
he said , addressing the black-mustached Denisov with servile deference . 
Rostov hurriedly put something on his feet , drew on his dressing gown , and went out . 
Natasha had put on one spurred boot and was just getting her foot into the other . 
Sonya , when he came in , was twirling round and was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down . 
They were dressed alike , in new pale-blue frocks , and were both fresh , rosy , and bright . 
Sonya ran away , but Natasha , taking her brother 's arm , led him into the sitting room , where they began talking . 
They hardly gave one another time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousand little matters which could not interest anyone but themselves . 
Natasha laughed at every word he said or that she said herself , not because what they were saying was amusing , but because she felt happy and was unable to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter . 
`` Oh , how nice , how splendid ! '' 
she said to everything . 
Rostov felt that , under the influence of the warm rays of love , that childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left home now for the first time after eighteen months again brightened his soul and his face . 
`` No , but listen , '' she said , `` now you are quite a man , are n't you ? 
I 'm awfully glad you 're my brother . '' 
She touched his mustache . 
`` I want to know what you men are like . 
Are you the same as we ? 
No ? '' 
`` Why did Sonya run away ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` Ah , yes ! 
