at the sight of the portrait of the boy piercing the terrestrial globe with a toy stick , and just as they would have cried `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
at any nonsense that might be told them . 
There was nothing left for them to do but cry `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
and go to fight , in order to get food and rest as conquerors in Moscow . 
So it was not because of Napoleon 's commands that they killed their fellow men . 
And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle , for none of his orders were executed and during the battle he did not know what was going on before him . 
So the way in which these people killed one another was not decided by Napoleon 's will but occurred independently of him , in accord with the will of hundreds of thousands of people who took part in the common action . 
It only seemed to Napoleon that it all took place by his will . 
And so the question whether he had or had not a cold has no more historic interest than the cold of the least of the transport soldiers . 
Moreover , the assertion made by various writers that his cold was the cause of his dispositions not being as well planned as on former occasions , and of his orders during the battle not being as good as previously , is quite baseless , which again shows that Napoleon 's cold on the twenty-sixth of August was unimportant . 
The dispositions cited above are not at all worse , but are even better , than previous dispositions by which he had won victories . 
His pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse than formerly , but much the same as usual . 
These dispositions and orders only seem worse than previous ones because the battle of Borodino was the first Napoleon did not win . 
The profoundest and most excellent dispositions and orders seem very bad , and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks of importance , when they relate to a battle that has been lost , and the very worst dispositions and orders seem very good , and serious people fill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits , when they relate to a battle that has been won . 
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were a model of perfection for that kind of composition , but still they were criticized -- criticized for their very perfection , for their excessive minuteness . 
Napoleon at the battle of Borodino fulfilled his office as representative of authority as well as , and even better than , at other battles . 
He did nothing harmful to the progress of the battle ; he inclined to the most reasonable opinions , he made no confusion , did not contradict himself , did not get frightened or run away from the field of battle , but with his great tact and military experience carried out his role of appearing to command , calmly and with dignity . 
On returning from a second inspection of the lines , Napoleon remarked : `` The chessmen are set up , the game will begin tomorrow ! '' 
Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset , he began to talk to him about Paris and about some changes he meant to make the Empress ' household , surprising the prefect by his memory of minute details relating to the court . 
He showed an interest in trifles , joked about de Beausset 's love of travel , and chatted carelessly , as a famous , self-confident surgeon who knows his job does when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apron while a patient is being strapped to the operating table . 
`` The matter is in my hands and is clear and definite in my head . 
When the times comes to set to work I shall do it as no one else could , but now I can jest , and the more I jest and the calmer I am the more tranquil and confident you ought to be , and the more amazed at my genius . '' 
Having finished his second glass of punch , Napoleon went to rest before the serious business which , he considered , awaited him next day . 
He was so much interested in that task that he was unable to sleep , and in spite of his cold which had grown worse from the dampness of the evening , he went into the large division of the tent at three o'clock in the morning , loudly blowing his nose . 
He asked whether the Russians had not withdrawn , and was told that the enemy 's fires were still in the same places . 
He nodded approval . 
The adjutant in attendance came into the tent . 
`` Well , Rapp , do you think we shall do good business today ? '' 
Napoleon asked him . 
`` Without doubt , sire , '' replied Rapp . 
Napoleon looked at him . 
`` Do you remember , sire , what you did me the honor to say at Smolensk ? '' 
continued Rapp . 
`` The wine is drawn and must be drunk . '' 
Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on his hand . 
`` This poor army ! '' 
he suddenly remarked . 
`` It has diminished greatly since Smolensk . 
Fortune is frankly a courtesan , Rapp . 
I have always said so and I am beginning to experience it . 
But the Guards , Rapp , the Guards are intact ? '' 
he remarked interrogatively . 
`` Yes , sire , '' replied Rapp . 
Napoleon took a lozenge , put it in his mouth , and glanced at his watch . 
He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning . 
It was impossible to give further orders for the sake of killing time , for the orders had all been given and were now being executed . 
`` Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of the Guards ? '' 
asked Napoleon sternly . 
`` Yes , sire . '' 
`` The rice too ? '' 
Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor 's order about the rice , but Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that his order had been executed . 
An attendant came in with punch . 
Napoleon ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp , and silently sipped his own . 
`` I have neither taste nor smell , '' he remarked , sniffing at his glass . 
`` This cold is tiresome . 
They talk about medicine -- what is the good of medicine when it ca n't cure a cold ! 
Corvisart gave me these lozenges but they do n't help at all . 
What can doctors cure ? 
One ca n't cure anything . 
Our body is a machine for living . 
It is organized for that , it is its nature . 
Let life go on in it unhindered and let it defend itself , it will do more than if you paralyze it by encumbering it with remedies . 
Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain time ; watchmaker can not open it , he can only adjust it by fumbling , and that blindfold ... . 
Yes , our body is just a machine for living , that is all . '' 
And having entered on the path of definition , of which he was fond , Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one . 
`` Do you know , Rapp , what military art is ? '' 
asked he . 
`` It is the art of being stronger than the enemy at a given moment . 
That 's all . '' 
Rapp made no reply . 
`` Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov ! '' 
said Napoleon . 
`` We shall see ! 
Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three weeks and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments ... . 
We shall see ! '' 
He looked at his watch . 
It was still only four o'clock . 
He did not feel sleepy . 
The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do . 
He rose , walked to and fro , put on a warm overcoat and a hat , and went out of the tent . 
The night was dark and damp , a scarcely perceptible moisture was descending from above . 
Near by , the campfires were dimly burning among the French Guards , and in the distance those of the Russian line shone through the smoke . 
The weather was calm , and the rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to take up their positions were clearly audible . 
Napoleon walked about in front of his tent , looked at the fires and listened to these sounds , and as he was passing a tall guardsman in a shaggy cap , who was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawn himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor , Napoleon stopped in front of him . 
`` What year did you enter the service ? '' 
he asked with that affectation of military bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed the soldiers . 
The man answered the question . 
`` Ah ! 
One of the old ones ! 
Has your regiment had its rice ? '' 
`` It has , Your Majesty . '' 
Napoleon nodded and walked away . 
At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino . 
It was growing light , the sky was clearing , only a single cloud lay in the east . 
The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in the faint morning light . 
On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and died away in the prevailing silence . 
Some minutes passed . 
A second and a third report shook the air , then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the right . 
The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang out and yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another . 
Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he dismounted . 
