Prince Andrew was silent , but the princess noticed the ironical and contemptuous look that showed itself on his face . 
`` One must be indulgent to little weaknesses ; who is free from them , Andrew ? 
Do n't forget that she has grown up and been educated in society , and so her position now is not a rosy one . 
We should enter into everyone 's situation . 
Tout comprendre , c'est tout pardonner . 
* Think it must be for her , poor thing , after what she has been used to , to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country , in her condition ! 
It 's very hard . '' 
* To understand all is to forgive all . 
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister , as we smile at those we think we thoroughly understand . 
`` You live in the country and do n't think the life terrible , '' he replied . 
`` I. . . 
that 's different . 
Why speak of me ? 
I do n't want any other life , and ca n't , for I know no other . 
But think , Andrew : for a young society woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life , all alone -- for Papa is always busy , and I. . . 
well , you know what poor resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society . 
There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne ... '' `` I do n't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` No ? 
She is very nice and kind and , above all , she 's much to be pitied . 
She has no one , no one . 
To tell the truth , I do n't need her , and she 's even in my way . 
You know I always was a savage , and now am even more so . 
I like being alone ... . 
Father likes her very much . 
She and Michael Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind , because he has been a benefactor to them both . 
As Sterne says : ` We do n't love people so much for the good they have done us , as for the good we have done them . ' 
Father took her when she was homeless after losing her own father . 
She is very good-natured , and my father likes her way of reading . 
She reads to him in the evenings and reads splendidly . '' 
`` To be quite frank , Mary , I expect Father 's character sometimes makes things trying for you , does n't it ? '' 
Prince Andrew asked suddenly . 
Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question . 
`` For me ? 
For me ? 
... Trying for me ! 
... '' said she . 
`` He always was rather harsh ; and now I should think he 's getting very trying , '' said Prince Andrew , apparently speaking lightly of their father in order to puzzle or test his sister . 
`` You are good in every way , Andrew , but you have a kind of intellectual pride , '' said the princess , following the train of her own thoughts rather than the trend of the conversation -- `` and that 's a great sin . 
How can one judge Father ? 
But even if one might , what feeling except veneration could such a man as my father evoke ? 
And I am so contented and happy with him . 
I only wish you were all as happy as I am . '' 
Her brother shook his head incredulously . 
`` The only thing that is hard for me ... I will tell you the truth , Andrew ... is Father 's way of treating religious subjects . 
I do n't understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is as clear as day , and can go so far astray . 
That is the only thing that makes me unhappy . 
But even in this I can see lately a shade of improvement . 
His satire has been less bitter of late , and there was a monk he received and had a long talk with . '' 
`` Ah ! 
my dear , I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder , '' said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly . 
`` Ah ! 
mon ami , I only pray , and hope that God will hear me . 
Andrew ... '' she said timidly after a moment 's silence , `` I have a great favor to ask of you . '' 
`` What is it , dear ? '' 
`` No -- promise that you will not refuse ! 
It will give you no trouble and is nothing unworthy of you , but it will comfort me . 
Promise , Andrusha ! 
... '' said she , putting her hand in her reticule but not yet taking out what she was holding inside it , as if what she held were the subject of her request and must not be shown before the request was granted . 
She looked timidly at her brother . 
`` Even if it were a great deal of trouble ... '' answered Prince Andrew , as if guessing what it was about . 
`` Think what you please ! 
I know you are just like Father . 
Think as you please , but do this for my sake ! 
Please do ! 
Father 's father , our grandfather , wore it in all his wars . '' 
-LRB- She still did not take out what she was holding in her reticule . -RRB- 
`` So you promise ? '' 
`` Of course . 
What is it ? '' 
`` Andrew , I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will never take it off . 
Do you promise ? '' 
`` If it does not weigh a hundredweight and wo n't break my neck ... To please you ... '' said Prince Andrew . 
But immediately , noticing the pained expression his joke had brought to his sister 's face , he repented and added : `` I am glad ; really , dear , I am very glad . '' 
`` Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bring you to Himself , for in Him alone is truth and peace , '' said she in a voice trembling with emotion , solemnly holding up in both hands before her brother a small , oval , antique , dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a gold setting , on a finely wrought silver chain . 
She crossed herself , kissed the icon , and handed it to Andrew . 
`` Please , Andrew , for my sake ! 
... '' Rays of gentle light shone from her large , timid eyes . 
Those eyes lit up the whole of her thin , sickly face and made it beautiful . 
Her brother would have taken the icon , but she stopped him . 
Andrew understood , crossed himself and kissed the icon . 
There was a look of tenderness , for he was touched , but also a gleam of irony on his face . 
`` Thank you , my dear . '' 
She kissed him on the forehead and sat down again on the sofa . 
They were silent for a while . 
`` As I was saying to you , Andrew , be kind and generous as you always used to be . 
Do n't judge Lise harshly , '' she began . 
`` She is so sweet , so good-natured , and her position now is a very hard one . '' 
`` I do not think I have complained of my wife to you , Masha , or blamed her . 
Why do you say all this to me ? '' 
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary 's face and she was silent as if she felt guilty . 
`` I have said nothing to you , but you have already been talked to . 
And I am sorry for that , '' he went on . 
The patches grew deeper on her forehead , neck , and cheeks . 
She tried to say something but could not . 
Her brother had guessed right : the little princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodings about her confinement , and how she dreaded it , and had complained of her fate , her father-in-law , and her husband . 
After crying she had fallen asleep . 
Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister . 
`` Know this , Masha : I ca n't reproach , have not reproached , and never shall reproach my wife with anything , and I can not reproach myself with anything in regard to her ; and that always will be so in whatever circumstances I may be placed . 
But if you want to know the truth ... if you want to know whether I am happy ? 
No ! 
