It followed that there must have been a victory . 
And at once , without leaving the church , thanks were rendered to the Creator for His help and for the victory . 
Anna Pavlovna 's presentiment was justified , and all that morning a joyously festive mood reigned in the city . 
Everyone believed the victory to have been complete , and some even spoke of Napoleon 's having been captured , of his deposition , and of the choice of a new ruler for France . 
It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strength and completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from the scene of action . 
General events involuntarily group themselves around some particular incident . 
So now the courtiers ' pleasure was based as much on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor 's birthday as on the fact of the victory itself . 
It was like a successfully arranged surprise . 
Mention was made in Kutuzov 's report of the Russian losses , among which figured the names of Tuchkov , Bagration , and Kutaysov . 
In the Petersburg world this sad side of the affair again involuntarily centered round a single incident : Kutaysov 's death . 
Everybody knew him , the Emperor liked him , and he was young and interesting . 
That day everyone met with the words : `` What a wonderful coincidence ! 
Just during the service . 
But what a loss Kutaysov is ! 
How sorry I am ! '' 
`` What did I tell about Kutuzov ? '' 
Prince Vasili now said with a prophet 's pride . 
`` I always said he was the only man capable of defeating Napoleon . '' 
But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood grew anxious . 
The courtiers suffered because of the suffering the suspense occasioned the Emperor . 
`` Fancy the Emperor 's position ! '' 
said they , and instead of extolling Kutuzov as they had done the day before , they condemned him as the cause of the Emperor 's anxiety . 
That day Prince Vasili no longer boasted of his protege Kutuzov , but remained silent when the commander in chief was mentioned . 
Moreover , toward evening , as if everything conspired to make Petersburg society anxious and uneasy , a terrible piece of news was added . 
Countess Helene Bezukhova had suddenly died of that terrible malady it had been so agreeable to mention . 
Officially , at large gatherings , everyone said that Countess Bezukhova had died of a terrible attack of angina pectoris , but in intimate circles details were mentioned of how the private physician of the Queen of Spain had prescribed small doses of a certain drug to produce a certain effect ; but Helene , tortured by the fact that the old count suspected her and that her husband to whom she had written -LRB- that wretched , profligate Pierre -RRB- had not replied , had suddenly taken a very large dose of the drug , and had died in agony before assistance could be rendered her . 
It was said that Prince Vasili and the old count had turned upon the Italian , but the latter had produced such letters from the unfortunate deceased that they had immediately let the matter drop . 
Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts : the Emperor 's lack of news , the loss of Kutuzov , and the death of Helene . 
On the third day after Kutuzov 's report a country gentleman arrived from Moscow , and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread through the whole town . 
This was terrible ! 
What a position for the Emperor to be in ! 
Kutuzov was a traitor , and Prince Vasili during the visits of condolence paid to him on the occasion of his daughter 's death said of Kutuzov , whom he had formerly praised -LRB- it was excusable for him in his grief to forget what he had said -RRB- , that it was impossible to expect anything else from a blind and depraved old man . 
`` I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to such a man . '' 
As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it , but the next day the following communication was received from Count Rostopchin : Prince Kutuzov 's adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demands police officers to guide the army to the Ryazan road . 
He writes that he is regretfully abandoning Moscow . 
Sire ! 
Kutuzov 's action decides the fate of the capital and of your empire ! 
Russia will shudder to learn of the abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and in which lie the ashes of your ancestors ! 
I shall follow the army . 
I have had everything removed , and it only remains for me to weep over the fate of my fatherland . 
On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkonski to Kutuzov with the following rescript : Prince Michael Ilarionovich ! 
Since the twenty-ninth of August I have received no communication from you , yet on the first of September I received from the commander in chief of Moscow , via Yaroslavl , the sad news that you , with the army , have decided to abandon Moscow . 
You can yourself imagine the effect this news has had on me , and your silence increases my astonishment . 
I am sending this by Adjutant-General Prince Volkonski , to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons that have induced you to take this melancholy decision . 
Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow , a messenger from Kutuzov reached Petersburg with the official announcement of that event . 
This messenger was Michaud , a Frenchman who did not know Russian , but who was quoique etranger , russe de coeur et d'ame , * as he said of himself . 
* Though a foreigner , Russian in heart and soul . 
The Emperor at once received this messenger in his study at the palace on Stone Island . 
Michaud , who had never seen Moscow before the campaign and who did not know Russian , yet felt deeply moved -LRB- as he wrote -RRB- when he appeared before notre tres gracieux souverain * with the news of the burning of Moscow , dont les flammes eclairaient sa route . 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- * Our most gracious sovereign . 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- Whose flames illumined his route . 
Though the source of M. Michaud 's chagrin must have been different from that which caused Russians to grieve , he had such a sad face when shown into the Emperor 's study that the latter at once asked : `` Have you brought me sad news , Colonel ? '' 
`` Very sad , sire , '' replied Michaud , lowering his eyes with a sigh . 
`` The abandonment of Moscow . '' 
`` Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle ? '' 
asked the Emperor quickly , his face suddenly flushing . 
Michaud respectfully delivered the message Kutuzov had entrusted to him , which was that it had been impossible to fight before Moscow , and that as the only remaining choice was between losing the army as well as Moscow , or losing Moscow alone , the field marshal had to choose the latter . 
The Emperor listened in silence , not looking at Michaud . 
`` Has the enemy entered the city ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Yes , sire , and Moscow is now in ashes . 
I left it all in flames , '' replied Michaud in a decided tone , but glancing at the Emperor he was frightened by what he had done . 
The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly , his lower lip trembled , and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes . 
But this lasted only a moment . 
He suddenly frowned , as if blaming himself for his weakness , and raising his head addressed Michaud in a firm voice : `` I see , Colonel , from all that is happening , that Providence requires great sacrifices of us ... I am ready to submit myself in all things to His will ; but tell me , Michaud , how did you leave the army when it saw my ancient capital abandoned without a battle ? 
Did you not notice discouragement ? 
... '' Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm once more , Michaud also grew calm , but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor 's direct and relevant question which required a direct answer . 
`` Sire , will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier ? '' 
he asked to gain time . 
`` Colonel , I always require it , '' replied the Emperor . 
`` Conceal nothing from me , I wish to know absolutely how things are . '' 
`` Sire ! '' 
said Michaud with a subtle , scarcely perceptible smile on his lips , having now prepared a well-phrased reply , `` sire , I left the whole army , from its chiefs to the lowest soldier , without exception in desperate and agonized terror ... '' `` How is that ? '' 
the Emperor interrupted him , frowning sternly . 
`` Would misfortune make my Russians lose heart ? 
... Never ! '' 
Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he had prepared . 
`` Sire , '' he said , with respectful playfulness , `` they are only afraid lest Your Majesty , in the goodness of your heart , should allow yourself to be persuaded to make peace . 
They are burning for the combat , '' declared this representative of the Russian nation , `` and to prove to Your Majesty by the sacrifice of their lives how devoted they are ... '' `` Ah ! '' 
said the Emperor reassured , and with a kindly gleam in his eyes , he patted Michaud on the shoulder . 
`` You set me at ease , Colonel . '' 
He bent his head and was silent for some time . 
`` Well , then , go back to the army , '' he said , drawing himself up to his full height and addressing Michaud with a gracious and majestic gesture , `` and tell our brave men and all my good subjects wherever you go that when I have not a soldier left I shall put myself at the head of my beloved nobility and my good peasants and so use the last resources of my empire . 
It still offers me more than my enemies suppose , '' said the Emperor growing more and more animated ; `` but should it ever be ordained by Divine Providence , '' he continued , raising to heaven his fine eyes shining with emotion , `` that my dynasty should cease to reign on the throne of my ancestors , then after exhausting all the means at my command , I shall let my beard grow to here '' -LRB- he pointed halfway down his chest -RRB- `` and go and eat potatoes with the meanest of my peasants , rather than sign the disgrace of my country and of my beloved people whose sacrifices I know how to appreciate . '' 
Having uttered these words in an agitated voice the Emperor suddenly turned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his eyes , and went to the further end of his study . 
Having stood there a few moments , he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbow with a vigorous movement . 
The Emperor 's mild and handsome face was flushed and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger . 
`` Colonel Michaud , do not forget what I say to you here , perhaps we may recall it with pleasure someday ... Napoleon or I , '' said the Emperor , touching his breast . 
`` We can no longer both reign together . 
I have learned to know him , and he will not deceive me any more ... '' And the Emperor paused , with a frown . 
When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution in the Emperor 's eyes , Michaud -- quoique etranger , russe de coeur et d'ame -- at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that he had heard -LRB- as he used afterwards to say -RRB- , and gave expression to his own feelings and those of the Russian people whose representative he considered himself to be , in the following words : `` Sire ! '' 
said he , `` Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory of the nation and the salvation of Europe ! '' 
With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him . 
It is natural for us who were not living in those days to imagine that when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleeing to distant provinces , and one levy after another was being raised for the defense of the fatherland , all Russians from the greatest to the least were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves , saving their fatherland , or weeping over its downfall . 
The tales and descriptions of that time without exception speak only of the self-sacrifice , patriotic devotion , despair , grief , and the heroism of the Russians . 
But it was not really so . 
It appears so to us because we see only the general historic interest of that time and do not see all the personal human interests that people had . 
Yet in reality those personal interests of the moment so much transcend the general interests that they always prevent the public interest from being felt or even noticed . 
Most of the people at that time paid no attention to the general progress of events but were guided only by their private interests , and they were the very people whose activities at that period were most useful . 
Those who tried to understand the general course of events and to take part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless members of society , they saw everything upside down , and all they did for the common good turned out to be useless and foolish -- like Pierre 's and Mamonov 's regiments which looted Russian villages , and the lint the young ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded , and so on . 
