He was always conscious of some aspect of that skein , as with a buzzing in his head after dinner or supper he chatted or listened to conversation or read . 
But under the influence of wine he said to himself : `` It does n't matter . 
I 'll get it unraveled . 
I have a solution ready , but have no time now -- I 'll think it all out later on ! '' 
But the later on never came . 
In the morning , on an empty stomach , all the old questions appeared as insoluble and terrible as ever , and Pierre hastily picked up a book , and if anyone came to see him he was glad . 
Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when entrenched under the enemy 's fire , if they have nothing to do , try hard to find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger . 
To Pierre all men seemed like those soldiers , seeking refuge from life : some in ambition , some in cards , some in framing laws , some in women , some in toys , some in horses , some in politics , some in sport , some in wine , and some in governmental affairs . 
`` Nothing is trivial , and nothing is important , it 's all the same -- only to save oneself from it as best one can , '' thought Pierre . 
`` Only not to see it , that dreadful it ! '' 
At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his daughter moved to Moscow . 
At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander 's regime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailed there , and this , together with his past and his intellect and his originality , at once made Prince Nicholas Bolkonski an object of particular respect to the Moscovites and the center of the Moscow opposition to the government . 
The prince had aged very much that year . 
He showed marked signs of senility by a tendency to fall asleep , forgetfulness of quite recent events , remembrance of remote ones , and the childish vanity with which he accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition . 
In spite of this the old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feeling of respectful veneration -- especially of an evening when he came in to tea in his old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and , aroused by anyone , told his abrupt stories of the past , or uttered yet more abrupt and scathing criticisms of the present . 
For them all , that old-fashioned house with its gigantic mirrors , pre-Revolution furniture , powdered footmen , and the stern shrewd old man -LRB- himself a relic of the past century -RRB- with his gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted to him presented a majestic and agreeable spectacle . 
But the visitors did not reflect that besides the couple of hours during which they saw their host , there were also twenty-two hours in the day during which the private and intimate life of the house continued . 
Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary . 
There in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures -- talks with the pilgrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills -- and she had none of the advantages and pleasures of city life . 
She did not go out into society ; everyone knew that her father would not let her go anywhere without him , and his failing health prevented his going out himself , so that she was not invited to dinners and evening parties . 
She had quite abandoned the hope of getting married . 
She saw the coldness and malevolence with which the old prince received and dismissed the young men , possible suitors , who sometimes appeared at their house . 
She had no friends : during this visit to Moscow she had been disappointed in the two who had been nearest to her . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , with whom she had never been able to be quite frank , had now become unpleasant to her , and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her . 
Julie , with whom she had corresponded for the last five years , was in Moscow , but proved to be quite alien to her when they met . 
Just then Julie , who by the death of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow , was in the full whirl of society pleasures . 
She was surrounded by young men who , she fancied , had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth . 
Julie was at that stage in the life of a society woman when she feels that her last chance of marrying has come and that her fate must be decided now or never . 
On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a mournful smile that she now had no one to write to , since Julie -- whose presence gave her no pleasure was here and they met every week . 
Like the old emigre who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent his evenings for years , she regretted Julie 's presence and having no one to write to . 
In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to , no one to whom to confide her sorrow , and much sorrow fell to her lot just then . 
The time for Prince Andrew 's return and marriage was approaching , but his request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out ; in fact , it seemed as if matters were quite hopeless , for at every mention of the young Countess Rostova the old prince -LRB- who apart from that was usually in a bad temper -RRB- lost control of himself . 
Another lately added sorrow arose from the lessons she gave her six year-old nephew . 
To her consternation she detected in herself in relation to little Nicholas some symptoms of her father 's irritability . 
However often she told herself that she must not get irritable when teaching her nephew , almost every time that , pointer in hand , she sat down to show him the French alphabet , she so longed to pour her own knowledge quickly and easily into the child -- who was already afraid that Auntie might at any moment get angry -- that at his slightest inattention she trembled , became flustered and heated , raised her voice , and sometimes pulled him by the arm and put him in the corner . 
Having put him in the corner she would herself begin to cry over her cruel , evil nature , and little Nicholas , following her example , would sob , and without permission would leave his corner , come to her , pull her wet hands from her face , and comfort her . 
But what distressed the princess most of all was her father 's irritability , which was always directed against her and had of late amounted to cruelty . 
Had he forced her to prostrate herself to the ground all night , had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water , it would never have entered her mind to think her position hard ; but this loving despot -- the more cruel because he loved her and for that reason tormented himself and her -- knew how not merely to hurt and humiliate her deliberately , but to show her that she was always to blame for everything . 
Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess Mary more than anything else ; this was his ever-increasing intimacy with Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
The idea that at the first moment of receiving the news of his son 's intentions had occurred to him in jest -- that if Andrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne -- had evidently pleased him , and latterly he had persistently , and as it seemed to Princess Mary merely to offend her , shown special endearments to the companion and expressed his dissatisfaction with his daughter by demonstrations of love of Bourienne . 
One day in Moscow in Princess Mary 's presence -LRB- she thought her father did it purposely when she was there -RRB- the old prince kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne 's hand and , drawing her to him , embraced her affectionately . 
Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room . 
A few minutes later Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary 's room smiling and making cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice . 
Princess Mary hastily wiped away her tears , went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne , and evidently unconscious of what she was doing began shouting in angry haste at the Frenchwoman , her voice breaking : `` It 's horrible , vile , inhuman , to take advantage of the weakness ... '' She did not finish . 
`` Leave my room , '' she exclaimed , and burst into sobs . 
Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter , but she noticed that at dinner he gave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should be served first . 
After dinner , when the footman handed coffee and from habit began with the princess , the prince suddenly grew furious , threw his stick at Philip , and instantly gave instructions to have him conscripted for the army . 
`` He does n't obey ... I said it twice ... and he does n't obey ! 
She is the first person in this house ; she 's my best friend , '' cried the prince . 
`` And if you allow yourself , '' he screamed in a fury , addressing Princess Mary for the first time , `` to forget yourself again before her as you dared to do yesterday , I will show you who is master in this house . 
Go ! 
Do n't let me set eyes on you ; beg her pardon ! '' 
Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne 's pardon , and also her father 's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman , who had begged for her intervention . 
At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered in her soul . 
And suddenly that father whom she had judged would look for his spectacles in her presence , fumbling near them and not seeing them , or would forget something that had just occurred , or take a false step with his failing legs and turn to see if anyone had noticed his feebleness , or , worst of all , at dinner when there were no visitors to excite him would suddenly fall asleep , letting his napkin drop and his shaking head sink over his plate . 
`` He is old and feeble , and I dare to condemn him ! '' 
she thought at such moments , with a feeling of revulsion against herself . 
In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor -- Metivier -- who had rapidly become the fashion . 
He was enormously tall , handsome , amiable as Frenchmen are , and was , as all Moscow said , an extraordinarily clever doctor . 
He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor , but as an equal . 
Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine , but latterly on Mademoiselle Bourienne 's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and had grown accustomed to him . 
Metivier came to see the prince about twice a week . 
On December 6 -- St. Nicholas ' Day and the prince 's name day -- all Moscow came to the prince 's front door but he gave orders to admit no one and to invite to dinner only a small number , a list of whom he gave to Princess Mary . 
Metivier , who came in the morning with his felicitations , considered it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne , * as he told Princess Mary , and went in to see the prince . 
It happened that on that morning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods . 
He had been going about the house all the morning finding fault with everyone and pretending not to understand what was said to him and not to be understood himself . 
Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed querulousness , which generally culminated in a burst of rage , and she went about all that morning as though facing a cocked and loaded gun and awaited the inevitable explosion . 
Until the doctor 's arrival the morning had passed off safely . 
After admitting the doctor , Princess Mary sat down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which she could hear all that passed in the study . 
* To force the guard . 
At first she heard only Metivier 's voice , then her father 's , then both voices began speaking at the same time , the door was flung open , and on the threshold appeared the handsome figure of the terrified Metivier with his shock of black hair , and the prince in his dressing gown and fez , his face distorted with fury and the pupils of his eyes rolled downwards . 
`` You do n't understand ? '' 
shouted the prince , `` but I do ! 
French spy , slave of Buonaparte , spy , get out of my house ! 
Be off , I tell you ... '' Metivier , shrugging his shoulders , went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who at the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room . 
`` The prince is not very well : bile and rush of blood to the head . 
Keep calm , I will call again tomorrow , '' said Metivier ; and putting his fingers to his lips he hastened away . 
Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry : `` Spies , traitors , traitors everywhere ! 
Not a moment 's peace in my own house ! '' 
After Metivier 's departure the old prince called his daughter in , and the whole weight of his wrath fell on her . 
She was to blame that a spy had been admitted . 
Had he not told her , yes , told her to make a list , and not to admit anyone who was not on that list ? 
Then why was that scoundrel admitted ? 
She was the cause of it all . 
With her , he said , he could not have a moment 's peace and could not die quietly . 
`` No , ma'am ! 
We must part , we must part ! 
Understand that , understand it ! 
I can not endure any more , '' he said , and left the room . 
Then , as if afraid she might find some means of consolation , he returned and trying to appear calm added : `` And do n't imagine I have said this in a moment of anger . 
I am calm . 
I have thought it over , and it will be carried out -- we must part ; so find some place for yourself ... '' But he could not restrain himself and with the virulence of which only one who loves is capable , evidently suffering himself , he shook his fists at her and screamed : `` If only some fool would marry her ! '' 
Then he slammed the door , sent for Mademoiselle Bourienne , and subsided into his study . 
At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner . 
These guests -- the famous Count Rostopchin , Prince Lopukhin with his nephew , General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince 's , and of the younger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy -- awaited the prince in the drawing room . 
Boris , who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before , had been anxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski , and had contrived to ingratiate himself so well that the old prince in his case made an exception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in his house . 
The prince 's house did not belong to what is known as fashionable society , but his little circle -- though not much talked about in town -- was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other . 
Boris had realized this the week before when the commander in chief in his presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St. Nicholas ' Day , and Rostopchin had replied that he could not come : `` On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski . '' 
`` Oh , yes , yes ! '' 
replied the commander in chief . 
