`` Yes , but what luck for Lazarev ! 
Twelve hundred francs ' pension for life . '' 
`` Here 's a cap , lads ! '' 
shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier , donning a shaggy French cap . 
`` It 's a fine thing ! 
First-rate ! '' 
`` Have you heard the password ? '' 
asked one Guards ' officer of another . 
`` The day before yesterday it was ` Napoleon , France , bravoure ' ; yesterday , ` Alexandre , Russie , grandeur . ' 
One day our Emperor gives it and next day Napoleon . 
Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George 's Cross to the bravest of the French Guards . 
It has to be done . 
He must respond in kind . '' 
Boris , too , with his friend Zhilinski , came to see the Preobrazhensk banquet . 
On his way back , he noticed Rostov standing by the corner of a house . 
`` Rostov ! 
How d'you do ? 
We missed one another , '' he said , and could not refrain from asking what was the matter , so strangely dismal and troubled was Rostov 's face . 
`` Nothing , nothing , '' replied Rostov . 
`` You 'll call round ? '' 
`` Yes , I will . '' 
Rostov stood at that corner for a long time , watching the feast from a distance . 
In his mind , a painful process was going on which he could not bring to a conclusion . 
Terrible doubts rose in his soul . 
Now he remembered Denisov with his changed expression , his submission , and the whole hospital , with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease . 
So vividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he looked round to see where the smell came from . 
Next he thought of that self-satisfied Bonaparte , with his small white hand , who was now an Emperor , liked and respected by Alexander . 
Then why those severed arms and legs and those dead men ? 
... Then again he thought of Lazarev rewarded and Denisov punished and unpardoned . 
He caught himself harboring such strange thoughts that he was frightened . 
The smell of the food the Preobrazhenskis were eating and a sense of hunger recalled him from these reflections ; he had to get something to eat before going away . 
He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning . 
There he found so many people , among them officers who , like himself , had come in civilian clothes , that he had difficulty in getting a dinner . 
Two officers of his own division joined him . 
The conversation naturally turned on the peace . 
The officers , his comrades , like most of the army , were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle of Friedland . 
They said that had we held out a little longer Napoleon would have been done for , as his troops had neither provisions nor ammunition . 
Nicholas ate and drank -LRB- chiefly the latter -RRB- in silence . 
He finished a couple of bottles of wine by himself . 
The process in his mind went on tormenting him without reaching a conclusion . 
He feared to give way to his thoughts , yet could not get rid of them . 
Suddenly , on one of the officers ' saying that it was humiliating to look at the French , Rostov began shouting with uncalled-for wrath , and therefore much to the surprise of the officers : `` How can you judge what 's best ? '' 
he cried , the blood suddenly rushing to his face . 
`` How can you judge the Emperor 's actions ? 
What right have we to argue ? 
We can not comprehend either the Emperor 's or his actions ! '' 
`` But I never said a word about the Emperor ! '' 
said the officer , justifying himself , and unable to understand Rostov 's outburst , except on the supposition that he was drunk . 
But Rostov did not listen to him . 
`` We are not diplomatic officials , we are soldiers and nothing more , '' he went on . 
`` If we are ordered to die , we must die . 
If we 're punished , it means that we have deserved it , it 's not for us to judge . 
If the Emperor pleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude an alliance with him , it means that that is the right thing to do . 
If once we begin judging and arguing about everything , nothing sacred will be left ! 
That way we shall be saying there is no God -- nothing ! '' 
shouted Nicholas , banging the table -- very little to the point as it seemed to his listeners , but quite relevantly to the course of his own thoughts . 
`` Our business is to do our duty , to fight and not to think ! 
That 's all ... '' said he . 
`` And to drink , '' said one of the officers , not wishing to quarrel . 
`` Yes , and to drink , '' assented Nicholas . 
`` Hullo there ! 
Another bottle ! '' 
he shouted . 
In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview with the Emperor Napoleon , and in the upper circles of Petersburg there was much talk of the grandeur of this important meeting . 
In 1809 the intimacy between `` the world 's two arbiters , '' as Napoleon and Alexander were called , was such that when Napoleon declared war on Austria a Russian corps crossed the frontier to co-operate with our old enemy Bonaparte against our old ally the Emperor of Austria , and in court circles the possibility of marriage between Napoleon and one of Alexander 's sisters was spoken of . 
But besides considerations of foreign policy , the attention of Russian society was at that time keenly directed on the internal changes that were being undertaken in all the departments of government . 
Life meanwhile -- real life , with its essential interests of health and sickness , toil and rest , and its intellectual interests in thought , science , poetry , music , love , friendship , hatred , and passions -- went on as usual , independently of and apart from political friendship or enmity with Napoleon Bonaparte and from all the schemes of reconstruction . 
Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country . 
All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates -- and constantly changing from one thing to another had never accomplished -- were carried out by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty . 
He had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which Pierre lacked , and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going . 
On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liberated and became free agricultural laborers -- this being one of the first examples of the kind in Russia . 
On other estates the serfs ' compulsory labor was commuted for a quitrent . 
A trained midwife was engaged for Bogucharovo at his expense , and a priest was paid to teach reading and writing to the children of the peasants and household serfs . 
Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his son , who was still in the care of nurses . 
The other half he spent in `` Bogucharovo Cloister , '' as his father called Prince Andrew 's estate . 
Despite the indifference to the affairs of the world he had expressed to Pierre , he diligently followed all that went on , received many books , and to his surprise noticed that when he or his father had visitors from Petersburg , the very vortex of life , these people lagged behind himself -- who never left the country -- in knowledge of what was happening in home and foreign affairs . 
Besides being occupied with his estates and reading a great variety of books , Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a critical of survey our last two unfortunate campaigns , and with drawing up a proposal for a reform of the army rules and regulations . 
In the spring of 1809 he went to visit the Ryazan estates which had been inherited by his son , whose guardian he was . 
Warmed by the spring sunshine he sat in the caleche looking at the new grass , the first leaves on the birches , and the first puffs of white spring clouds floating across the clear blue sky . 
He was not thinking of anything , but looked absent-mindedly and cheerfully from side to side . 
They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the year before . 
They went through the muddy village , past threshing floors and green fields of winter rye , downhill where snow still lodged near the bridge , uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain , past strips of stubble land and bushes touched with green here and there , and into a birch forest growing on both sides of the road . 
In the forest it was almost hot , no wind could be felt . 
The birches with their sticky green leaves were motionless , and lilac-colored flowers and the first blades of green grass were pushing up and lifting last year 's leaves . 
The coarse evergreen color of the small fir trees scattered here and there among the birches was an unpleasant reminder of winter . 
On entering the forest the horses began to snort and sweated visibly . 
Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman ; the latter assented . 
But apparently the coachman 's sympathy was not enough for Peter , and he turned on the box toward his master . 
`` How pleasant it is , your excellency ! '' 
he said with a respectful smile . 
`` What ? '' 
`` It 's pleasant , your excellency ! '' 
`` What is he talking about ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew . 
`` Oh , the spring , I suppose , '' he thought as he turned round . 
`` Yes , really everything is green already ... . 
How early ! 
The birches and cherry and alders too are coming out ... . 
But the oaks show no sign yet . 
Ah , here is one oak ! '' 
