Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed : that most expensive luxury , the kind of life that can be changed at any moment , was no longer his nor did he wish for it . 
He felt that his way of life had now been settled once for all till death and that to change it was not in his power , and so that way of life proved economical . 
With a merry , smiling face Pierre was sorting his purchases . 
`` What do you think of this ? '' 
said he , unrolling a piece of stuff like a shopman . 
Natasha , who was sitting opposite to him with her eldest daughter on her lap , turned her sparkling eyes swiftly from her husband to the things he showed her . 
`` That 's for Belova ? 
Excellent ! '' 
She felt the quality of the material . 
`` It was a ruble an arshin , I suppose ? '' 
Pierre told her the price . 
`` Too dear ! '' 
Natasha remarked . 
`` How pleased the children will be and Mamma too ! 
Only you need not have bought me this , '' she added , unable to suppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold comb set with pearls , of a kind then just coming into fashion . 
`` Adele tempted me : she kept on telling me to buy it , '' returned Pierre . 
`` When am I to wear it ? '' 
and Natasha stuck it in her coil of hair . 
`` When I take little Masha into society ? 
Perhaps they will be fashionable again by then . 
Well , let 's go now . '' 
And collecting the presents they went first to the nursery and then to the old countess ' rooms . 
The countess was sitting with her companion Belova , playing grand-patience as usual , when Pierre and Natasha came into the drawing room with parcels under their arms . 
The countess was now over sixty , was quite gray , and wore a cap with a frill that surrounded her face . 
Her face had shriveled , her upper lip had sunk in , and her eyes were dim . 
After the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession , she felt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and left without aim or object for her existence . 
She ate , drank , slept , or kept awake , but did not live . 
Life gave her no new impressions . 
She wanted nothing from life but tranquillity , and that tranquillity only death could give her . 
But until death came she had to go on living , that is , to use her vital forces . 
A peculiarity one sees in very young children and very old people was particularly evident in her . 
Her life had no external aims -- only a need to exercise her various functions and inclinations was apparent . 
She had to eat , sleep , think , speak , weep , work , give vent to her anger , and so on , merely because she had a stomach , a brain , muscles , nerves , and a liver . 
She did these things not under any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do , when behind the purpose for which they strive that of exercising their functions remains unnoticed . 
She talked only because she physically needed to exercise her tongue and lungs . 
She cried as a child does , because her nose had to be cleared , and so on . 
What for people in their full vigor is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext . 
Thus in the morning -- especially if she had eaten anything rich the day before -- she felt a need of being angry and would choose as the handiest pretext Belova 's deafness . 
She would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the other end of the room . 
`` It seems a little warmer today , my dear , '' she would murmur . 
And when Belova replied : `` Oh yes , they 've come , '' she would mutter angrily : `` O Lord ! 
How stupid and deaf she is ! '' 
Another pretext would be her snuff , which would seem too dry or too damp or not rubbed fine enough . 
After these fits of irritability her face would grow yellow , and her maids knew by infallible symptoms when Belova would again be deaf , the snuff damp , and the countess ' face yellow . 
Just as she needed to work off her spleen so she had sometimes to exercise her still-existing faculty of thinking -- and the pretext for that was a game of patience . 
When she needed to cry , the deceased count would be the pretext . 
When she wanted to be agitated , Nicholas and his health would be the pretext , and when she felt a need to speak spitefully , the pretext would be Countess Mary . 
When her vocal organs needed exercise , which was usually toward seven o'clock when she had had an after-dinner rest in a darkened room , the pretext would be the retelling of the same stories over and over again to the same audience . 
The old lady 's condition was understood by the whole household though no one ever spoke of it , and they all made every possible effort to satisfy her needs . 
Only by a rare glance exchanged with a sad smile between Nicholas , Pierre , Natasha , and Countess Mary was the common understanding of her condition expressed . 
But those glances expressed something more : they said that she had played her part in life , that what they now saw was not her whole self , that we must all become like her , and that they were glad to yield to her , to restrain themselves for this once precious being formerly as full of life as themselves , but now so much to be pitied . 
`` Memento mori , '' said these glances . 
Only the really heartless , the stupid ones of that household , and the little children failed to understand this and avoided her . 
When Pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess was in one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion of playing patience , and so -- though by force of habit she greeted him with the words she always used when Pierre or her son returned after an absence : `` High time , my dear , high time ! 
We were all weary of waiting for you . 
Well , thank God ! '' 
and received her presents with another customary remark : `` It 's not the gift that 's precious , my dear , but that you give it to me , an old woman ... '' -- yet it was evident that she was not pleased by Pierre 's arrival at that moment when it diverted her attention from the unfinished game . 
She finished her game of patience and only then examined the presents . 
They consisted of a box for cards , of splendid workmanship , a bright-blue Sevres tea cup with shepherdesses depicted on it and with a lid , and a gold snuffbox with the count 's portrait on the lid which Pierre had had done by a miniaturist in Petersburg . 
The countess had long wished for such a box , but as she did not want to cry just then she glanced indifferently at the portrait and gave her attention chiefly to the box for cards . 
`` Thank you , my dear , you have cheered me up , '' said she as she always did . 
`` But best of all you have brought yourself back -- for I never saw anything like it , you ought to give your wife a scolding ! 
What are we to do with her ? 
She is like a mad woman when you are away . 
Does n't see anything , does n't remember anything , '' she went on , repeating her usual phrases . 
`` Look , Anna Timofeevna , '' she added to her companion , `` see what a box for cards my son has brought us ! '' 
Belova admired the presents and was delighted with her dress material . 
Though Pierre , Natasha , Nicholas , Countess Mary , and Denisov had much to talk about that they could not discuss before the old countess -- not that anything was hidden from her , but because she had dropped so far behindhand in many things that had they begun to converse in her presence they would have had to answer inopportune questions and to repeat what they had already told her many times : that so-and-so was dead and so-and-so was married , which she would again be unable to remember -- yet they sat at tea round the samovar in the drawing room from habit , and Pierre answered the countess ' questions as to whether Prince Vasili had aged and whether Countess Mary Alexeevna had sent greetings and still thought of them , and other matters that interested no one and to which she herself was indifferent . 
Conversation of this kind , interesting to no one yet unavoidable , continued all through teatime . 
All the grown-up members of the family were assembled near the round tea table at which Sonya presided beside the samovar . 
The children with their tutors and governesses had had tea and their voices were audible from the next room . 
At tea all sat in their accustomed places : Nicholas beside the stove at a small table where his tea was handed to him ; Milka , the old gray borzoi bitch -LRB- daughter of the first Milka -RRB- , with a quite gray face and large black eyes that seemed more prominent than ever , lay on the armchair beside him ; Denisov , whose curly hair , mustache , and whiskers had turned half gray , sat beside countess Mary with his general 's tunic unbuttoned ; Pierre sat between his wife and the old countess . 
He spoke of what he knew might interest the old lady and that she could understand . 
He told her of external social events and of the people who had formed the circle of her contemporaries and had once been a real , living , and distinct group , but who were now for the most part scattered about the world and like herself were garnering the last ears of the harvests they had sown in earlier years . 
But to the old countess those contemporaries of hers seemed to be the only serious and real society . 
Natasha saw by Pierre 's animation that his visit had been interesting and that he had much to tell them but dare not say it before the old countess . 
Denisov , not being a member of the family , did not understand Pierre 's caution and being , as a malcontent , much interested in what was occurring in Petersburg , kept urging Pierre to tell them about what had happened in the Semenovsk regiment , then about Arakcheev , and then about the Bible Society . 
Once or twice Pierre was carried away and began to speak of these things , but Nicholas and Natasha always brought him back to the health of Prince Ivan and Countess Mary Alexeevna . 
`` Well , and all this idiocy -- Gossner and Tatawinova ? '' 
Denisov asked . 
`` Is that weally still going on ? '' 
`` Going on ? '' 
Pierre exclaimed . 
`` Why more than ever ! 
The Bible Society is the whole government now ! '' 
`` What is that , mon cher ami ? '' 
asked the countess , who had finished her tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry after her meal . 
`` What are you saying about the government ? 
I do n't understand . '' 
`` Well , you know , Maman , '' Nicholas interposed , knowing how to translate things into his mother 's language , `` Prince Alexander Golitsyn has founded a society and in consequence has great influence , they say . '' 
`` Arakcheev and Golitsyn , '' incautiously remarked Pierre , `` are now the whole government ! 
And what a government ! 
They see treason everywhere and are afraid of everything . '' 
`` Well , and how is Prince Alexander to blame ? 
He is a most estimable man . 
I used to meet him at Mary Antonovna 's , '' said the countess in an offended tone ; and still more offended that they all remained silent , she went on : `` Nowadays everyone finds fault . 
A Gospel Society ! 
Well , and what harm is there in that ? '' 
and she rose -LRB- everybody else got up too -RRB- and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sitting room . 
The melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of the children 's voices and laughter from the next room . 
