Even those , fond of intellectual talk and of expressing their feelings , who discussed Russia 's position at the time involuntarily introduced into their conversation either a shade of pretense and falsehood or useless condemnation and anger directed against people accused of actions no one could possibly be guilty of . 
In historic events the rule forbidding us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge is specially applicable . 
Only unconscious action bears fruit , and he who plays a part in an historic event never understands its significance . 
If he tries to realize it his efforts are fruitless . 
The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking place in Russia the less did he realize their significance . 
In Petersburg and in the provinces at a distance from Moscow , ladies , and gentlemen in militia uniforms , wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked of self-sacrifice and so on ; but in the army which retired beyond Moscow there was little talk or thought of Moscow , and when they caught sight of its burned ruins no one swore to be avenged on the French , but they thought about their next pay , their next quarters , of Matreshka the vivandiere , and like matters . 
As the war had caught him in the service , Nicholas Rostov took a close and prolonged part in the defense of his country , but did so casually , without any aim at self-sacrifice , and he therefore looked at what was going on in Russia without despair and without dismally racking his brains over it . 
Had he been asked what he thought of the state of Russia , he would have said that it was not his business to think about it , that Kutuzov and others were there for that purpose , but that he had heard that the regiments were to be made up to their full strength , that fighting would probably go on for a long time yet , and that things being so it was quite likely he might be in command of a regiment in a couple of years ' time . 
As he looked at the matter in this way , he learned that he was being sent to Voronezh to buy remounts for his division , not only without regret at being prevented from taking part in the coming battle , but with the greatest pleasure -- which he did not conceal and which his comrades fully understood . 
A few days before the battle of Borodino , Nicholas received the necessary money and warrants , and having sent some hussars on in advance , he set out with post horses for Voronezh . 
Only a man who has experienced it -- that is , has passed some months continuously in an atmosphere of campaigning and war -- can understand the delight Nicholas felt when he escaped from the region covered by the army 's foraging operations , provision trains , and hospitals . 
When - free from soldiers , wagons , and the filthy traces of a camp -- he saw villages with peasants and peasant women , gentlemen 's country houses , fields where cattle were grazing , posthouses with stationmasters asleep in them , he rejoiced as though seeing all this for the first time . 
What for a long while specially surprised and delighted him were the women , young and healthy , without a dozen officers making up to each of them ; women , too , who were pleased and flattered that a passing officer should joke with them . 
In the highest spirits Nicholas arrived at night at a hotel in Voronezh , ordered things he had long been deprived of in camp , and next day , very clean-shaven and in a full-dress uniform he had not worn for a long time , went to present himself to the authorities . 
The commander of the militia was a civilian general , an old man who was evidently pleased with his military designation and rank . 
He received Nicholas brusquely -LRB- imagining this to be characteristically military -RRB- and questioned him with an important air , as if considering the general progress of affairs and approving and disapproving with full right to do so . 
Nicholas was in such good spirits that this merely amused him . 
From the commander of the militia he drove to the governor . 
The governor was a brisk little man , very simple and affable . 
He indicated the stud farms at which Nicholas might procure horses , recommended to him a horse dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who had the best horses , and promised to assist him in every way . 
`` You are Count Ilya Rostov 's son ? 
My wife was a great friend of your mother 's . 
We are at home on Thursdays -- today is Thursday , so please come and see us quite informally , '' said the governor , taking leave of him . 
Immediately on leaving the governor 's , Nicholas hired post horses and , taking his squadron quartermaster with him , drove at a gallop to the landowner , fourteen miles away , who had the stud . 
Everything seemed to him pleasant and easy during that first part of his stay in Voronezh and , as usually happens when a man is in a pleasant state of mind , everything went well and easily . 
The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor , an old cavalryman , a horse fancier , a sportsman , the possessor of some century-old brandy and some old Hungarian wine , who had a snuggery where he smoked , and who owned some splendid horses . 
In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for six thousand rubles -- to serve , as he said , as samples of his remounts . 
After dining and taking rather too much of the Hungarian wine , Nicholas -- having exchanged kisses with the landowner , with whom he was already on the friendliest terms -- galloped back over abominable roads , in the brightest frame of mind , continually urging on the driver so as to be in time for the governor 's party . 
When he had changed , poured water over his head , and scented himself , Nicholas arrived at the governor 's rather late , but with the phrase `` better late than never '' on his lips . 
It was not a ball , nor had dancing been announced , but everyone knew that Catherine Petrovna would play valses and the ecossaise on the clavichord and that there would be dancing , and so everyone had come as to a ball . 
Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual , but with this difference , that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of the arrival of many wealthy families from Moscow , and as in everything that went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable , an `` in for a penny , in for a pound -- who cares ? '' 
spirit , and the inevitable small talk , instead of turning on the weather and mutual acquaintances , now turned on Moscow , the army , and Napoleon . 
The society gathered together at the governor 's was the best in Voronezh . 
There were a great many ladies and some of Nicholas ' Moscow acquaintances , but there were no men who could at all vie with the cavalier of St. George , the hussar remount officer , the good-natured and well-bred Count Rostov . 
Among the men was an Italian prisoner , an officer of the French army ; and Nicholas felt that the presence of that prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero . 
The Italian was , as it were , a war trophy . 
Nicholas felt this , it seemed to him that everyone regarded the Italian in the same light , and he treated him cordially though with dignity and restraint . 
As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform , diffusing around him a fragrance of perfume and wine , and had uttered the words `` better late than never '' and heard them repeated several times by others , people clustered around him ; all eyes turned on him , and he felt at once that he had entered into his proper position in the province -- that of a universal favorite : a very pleasant position , and intoxicatingly so after his long privations . 
At posting stations , at inns , and in the landowner 's snuggery , maidservants had been flattered by his notice , and here too at the governor 's party there were -LRB- as it seemed to Nicholas -RRB- an inexhaustible number of pretty young women , married and unmarried , impatiently awaiting his notice . 
The women and girls flirted with him and , from the first day , the people concerned themselves to get this fine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down . 
Among these was the governor 's wife herself , who welcomed Rostov as a near relative and called him `` Nicholas . '' 
Catherine Petrovna did actually play valses and the ecossaise , and dancing began in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincial society by his agility . 
His particularly free manner of dancing even surprised them all . 
Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he danced that evening . 
He had never danced like that in Moscow and would even have considered such a very free and easy manner improper and in bad form , but here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all by something unusual , something they would have to accept as the regular thing in the capital though new to them in the provinces . 
All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a blue-eyed , plump and pleasing little blonde , the wife of one of the provincial officials . 
With the naive conviction of young men in a merry mood that other men 's wives were created for them , Rostov did not leave the lady 's side and treated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style , as if , without speaking of it , they knew how capitally Nicholas and the lady would get on together . 
The husband , however , did not seem to share that conviction and tried to behave morosely with Rostov . 
But the latter 's good-natured naivete was so boundless that sometimes even he involuntarily yielded to Nicholas ' good humor . 
Toward the end of the evening , however , as the wife 's face grew more flushed and animated , the husband 's became more and more melancholy and solemn , as though there were but a given amount of animation between them and as the wife 's share increased the husband 's diminished . 
Nicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair , bending closely over the blonde lady and paying her mythological compliments with a smile that never left his face . 
Jauntily shifting the position of his legs in their tight riding breeches , diffusing an odor of perfume , and admiring his partner , himself , and the fine outlines of his legs in their well-fitting Hessian boots , Nicholas told the blonde lady that he wished to run away with a certain lady here in Voronezh . 
`` Which lady ? '' 
`` A charming lady , a divine one . 
Her eyes '' -LRB- Nicholas looked at his partner -RRB- `` are blue , her mouth coral and ivory ; her figure '' -LRB- he glanced at her shoulders -RRB- `` like Diana 's ... '' The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talking about . 
`` Ah , Nikita Ivanych ! '' 
cried Nicholas , rising politely , and as if wishing Nikita Ivanych to share his joke , he began to tell him of his intention to elope with a blonde lady . 
The husband smiled gloomily , the wife gaily . 
The governor 's good-natured wife came up with a look of disapproval . 
`` Anna Ignatyevna wants to see you , Nicholas , '' said she , pronouncing the name so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ignatyevna was a very important person . 
`` Come , Nicholas ! 
You know you let me call you so ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , Aunt . 
Who is she ? '' 
`` Anna Ignatyevna Malvintseva . 
She has heard from her niece how you rescued her ... Can you guess ? '' 
`` I rescued such a lot of them ! '' 
said Nicholas . 
`` Her niece , Princess Bolkonskaya . 
She is here in Voronezh with her aunt . 
Oho ! 
How you blush . 
Why , are ... ? '' 
`` Not a bit ! 
Please do n't , Aunt ! '' 
`` Very well , very well ! 
... Oh , what a fellow you are ! '' 
The governor 's wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with a blue headdress , who had just finished her game of cards with the most important personages of the town . 
This was Malvintseva , Princess Mary 's aunt on her mother 's side , a rich , childless widow who always lived in Voronezh . 
When Rostov approached her she was standing settling up for the game . 
She looked at him and , screwing up her eyes sternly , continued to upbraid the general who had won from her . 
`` Very pleased , mon cher , '' she then said , holding out her hand to Nicholas . 
`` Pray come and see me . '' 
After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father , whom Malvintseva had evidently not liked , and having asked what Nicholas knew of Prince Andrew , who also was evidently no favorite of hers , the important old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitation to come to see her . 
Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed . 
At the mention of Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and even of fear , which he himself did not understand . 
When he had parted from Malvintseva Nicholas wished to return to the dancing , but the governor 's little wife placed her plump hand on his sleeve and , saying that she wanted to have a talk with him , led him to her sitting room , from which those who were there immediately withdrew so as not to be in her way . 
`` Do you know , dear boy , '' began the governor 's wife with a serious expression on her kind little face , `` that really would be the match for you : would you like me to arrange it ? '' 
`` Whom do you mean , Aunt ? '' 
asked Nicholas . 
`` I will make a match for you with the princess . 
Catherine Petrovna speaks of Lily , but I say , no -- the princess ! 
Do you want me to do it ? 
I am sure your mother will be grateful to me . 
What a charming girl she is , really ! 
And she is not at all so plain , either . '' 
`` Not at all , '' replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea . 
`` As befits a soldier , Aunt , I do n't force myself on anyone or refuse anything , '' he said before he had time to consider what he was saying . 
`` Well then , remember , this is not a joke ! '' 
`` Of course not ! '' 
