The soldiers of Dessaix 's division advancing against the fleches could only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and the fleches . 
As soon as they had descended into that hollow , the smoke of the guns and musketry on the fleches grew so dense that it covered the whole approach on that side of it . 
Through the smoke glimpses could be caught of something black -- probably men -- and at times the glint of bayonets . 
But whether they were moving or stationary , whether they were French or Russian , could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt . 
The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight into Napoleon 's face as , shading his eyes with his hand , he looked at the fleches . 
The smoke spread out before them , and at times it looked as if the smoke were moving , at times as if the troops moved . 
Sometimes shouts were heard through the firing , but it was impossible to tell what was being done there . 
Napoleon , standing on the knoll , looked through a field glass , and in its small circlet saw smoke and men , sometimes his own and sometimes Russians , but when he looked again with the naked eye , he could not tell where what he had seen was . 
He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it . 
Occasionally he stopped , listened to the firing , and gazed intently at the battlefield . 
But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where he was standing down below , or from the knoll above on which some of his generals had taken their stand , but even from the fleches themselves -- in which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers , alternately or together , dead , wounded , alive , frightened , or maddened -- even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out what was taking place . 
There for several hours amid incessant cannon and musketry fire , now Russians were seen alone , now Frenchmen alone , now infantry , and now cavalry : they appeared , fired , fell , collided , not knowing what to do with one another , screamed , and ran back again . 
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out , and orderlies from his marshals , kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress of the action , but all these reports were false , both because it was impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at any given moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual place of conflict but reported what they had heard from others ; and also because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleon circumstances changed and the news he brought was already becoming false . 
Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in the hands of the French . 
The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the troops to cross it ? 
Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up on the farther side and wait . 
But before that order was given - almost as soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino -- the bridge had been retaken by the Russians and burned , in the very skirmish at which Pierre had been present at the beginning of the battle . 
An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened face and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed , Campan wounded , and Davout killed ; yet at the very time the adjutant had been told that the French had been repulsed , the fleches had in fact been recaptured by other French troops , and Davout was alive and only slightly bruised . 
On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders , which had either been executed before he gave them or could not be and were not executed . 
The marshals and generals , who were nearer to the field of battle but , like Napoleon , did not take part in the actual fighting and only occasionally went within musket range , made their own arrangements without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to fire and where cavalry should gallop and infantry should run . 
But even their orders , like Napoleon 's , were seldom carried out , and then but partially . 
For the most part things happened contrary to their orders . 
Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting grapeshot ; soldiers ordered to remain where they were , suddenly , seeing Russians unexpectedly before them , sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward , and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying Russians . 
In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk hollow and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and galloped full speed back again . 
The infantry moved in the same way , sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to go to . 
All orders as to where and when to move the guns , when to send infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry -- all such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the units concerned , without asking either Ney , Davout , or Murat , much less Napoleon . 
They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling orders or for acting on their own initiative , for in battle what is at stake is what is dearest to man -- his own life -- and it sometimes seems that safety lies in running back , sometimes in running forward ; and these men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to the mood of the moment . 
In reality , however , all these movements forward and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops . 
All their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm , the harm of disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over the fields on which these men were floundering about . 
As soon as they left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about , their superiors , located in the background , re-formed them and brought them under discipline and under the influence of that discipline led them back to the zone of fire , where under the influence of fear of death they lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chance promptings of the throng . 
Napoleon 's generals -- Davout , Ney , and Murat , who were near that region of fire and sometimes even entered it -- repeatedly led into it huge masses of well-ordered troops . 
But contrary to what had always happened in their former battles , instead of the news they expected of the enemy 's flight , these orderly masses returned thence as disorganized and terrified mobs . 
The generals re-formed them , but their numbers constantly decreased . 
In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand reinforcements . 
Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll , drinking punch , when Murat 's adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed if His Majesty would let him have another division . 
`` Reinforcements ? '' 
said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise , looking at the adjutant -- a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat 's own -- as though he did not understand his words . 
`` Reinforcements ! '' 
thought Napoleon to himself . 
`` How can they need reinforcements when they already have half the army directed against a weak , unentrenched Russian wing ? '' 
`` Tell the King of Naples , '' said he sternly , `` that it is not noon yet , and I do n't yet see my chessboard clearly . 
Go ! 
... '' The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply without removing his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were being slaughtered . 
Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier began talking to them about matters unconnected with the battle . 
In the midst of this conversation , which was beginning to interest Napoleon , Berthier 's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite , who was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse . 
It was Belliard . 
Having dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in a loud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessity of sending reinforcements . 
He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if the Emperor would give another division . 
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and down without replying . 
Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to the generals of the suite around him . 
`` You are very fiery , Belliard , '' said Napoleon , when he again came up to the general . 
`` In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake . 
Go and have another look and then come back to me . '' 
Before Belliard was out of sight , a messenger from another part of the battlefield galloped up . 
`` Now then , what do you want ? '' 
asked Napoleon in the tone of a man irritated at being continually disturbed . 
`` Sire , the prince ... '' began the adjutant . 
`` Asks for reinforcements ? '' 
said Napoleon with an angry gesture . 
The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report , but the Emperor turned from him , took a couple of steps , stopped , came back , and called Berthier . 
`` We must give reserves , '' he said , moving his arms slightly apart . 
`` Who do you think should be sent there ? '' 
he asked of Berthier -LRB- whom he subsequently termed `` that gosling I have made an eagle '' -RRB- . 
`` Send Claparede 's division , sire , '' replied Berthier , who knew all the divisions regiments , and battalions by heart . 
Napoleon nodded assent . 
The adjutant galloped to Claparede 's division and a few minutes later the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward . 
Napoleon gazed silently in that direction . 
`` No ! '' 
he suddenly said to Berthier . 
`` I ca n't send Claparede . 
Send Friant 's division . '' 
Though there was no advantage in sending Friant 's division instead of Claparede 's , and even in obvious inconvenience and delay in stopping Claparede and sending Friant now , the order was carried out exactly . 
Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing the part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines -- a role he so justly understood and condemned . 
Friant 's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke of the battlefield . 
From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at a gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing . 
They all asked for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holding their positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army was melting away . 
Napoleon sat on a campstool , wrapped in thought . 
M. de Beausset , the man so fond of travel , having fasted since morning , came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest lunch to His Majesty . 
`` I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory ? '' 
said he . 
Napoleon silently shook his head in negation . 
Assuming the negation to refer only to the victory and not to the lunch , M. de Beausset ventured with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not having lunch when one can get it . 
`` Go away ... '' exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely , and turned aside . 
A beatific smile of regret , repentance , and ecstasy beamed on M. de Beausset 's face and he glided away to the other generals . 
Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an ever-lucky gambler who , after recklessly flinging money about and always winning , suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the game , finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he loses . 
His troops were the same , his generals the same , the same preparations had been made , the same dispositions , and the same proclamation courte et energique , he himself was still the same : he knew that and knew that he was now even more experienced and skillful than before . 
Even the enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland -- yet the terrible stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent . 
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success : the concentration of batteries on one point , an attack by reserves to break the enemy 's line , and a cavalry attack by `` the men of iron , '' all these methods had already been employed , yet not only was there no victory , but from all sides came the same news of generals killed and wounded , of reinforcements needed , of the impossibility of driving back the Russians , and of disorganization among his own troops . 
Formerly , after he had given two or three orders and uttered a few phrases , marshals and adjutants had come galloping up with congratulations and happy faces , announcing the trophies taken , the corps of prisoners , bundles of enemy eagles and standards , cannon and stores , and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry to gather in the baggage wagons . 
So it had been at Lodi , Marengo , Arcola , Jena , Austerlitz , Wagram , and so on . 
But now something strange was happening to his troops . 
Despite news of the capture of the fleches , Napoleon saw that this was not the same , not at all the same , as what had happened in his former battles . 
He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all the men about him experienced in the art of war . 
All their faces looked dejected , and they all shunned one another 's eyes -- only a de Beausset could fail to grasp the meaning of what was happening . 
But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours , after all efforts had been expended . 
He knew that it was a lost battle and that the least accident might now -- with the fight balanced on such a strained center -- destroy him and his army . 
When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaign in which not one battle had been won , and in which not a flag , or cannon , or army corps had been captured in two months , when he looked at the concealed depression on the faces around him and heard reports of the Russians still holding their ground -- a terrible feeling like a nightmare took possession of him , and all the unlucky accidents that might destroy him occurred to his mind . 
The Russians might fall on his left wing , might break through his center , he himself might be killed by a stray cannon ball . 
All this was possible . 
In former battles he had only considered the possibilities of success , but now innumerable unlucky chances presented themselves , and he expected them all . 
