Then it would suddenly seem to him that it was not she but he was so unusually beautiful , and that that was why they all looked so at him , and flattered by this general admiration he would expand his chest , raise his head , and rejoice at his good fortune . 
Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a second time . 
But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what was said . 
`` I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkonski , '' repeated Prince Vasili a third time . 
`` How absent-minded you are , my dear fellow . '' 
Prince Vasili smiled , and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at him and Helene . 
`` Well , what of it , if you all know it ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
`` What of it ? 
It 's the truth ! '' 
and he himself smiled his gentle childlike smile , and Helene smiled too . 
`` When did you get the letter ? 
Was it from Olmutz ? '' 
repeated Prince Vasili , who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a dispute . 
`` How can one talk or think of such trifles ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
`` Yes , from Olmutz , '' he answered , with a sigh . 
After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the drawing room . 
The guests began to disperse , some without taking leave of Helene . 
Some , as if unwilling to distract her from an important occupation , came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away , refusing to let her see them off . 
The diplomatist preserved a mournful silence as he left the drawing room . 
He pictured the vanity of his diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre 's happiness . 
The old general grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was . 
`` Oh , the old fool , '' he thought . 
`` That Princess Helene will be beautiful still when she 's fifty . '' 
`` I think I may congratulate you , '' whispered Anna Pavlovna to the old princess , kissing her soundly . 
`` If I had n't this headache I 'd have stayed longer . '' 
The old princess did not reply , she was tormented by jealousy of her daughter 's happiness . 
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time alone with Helene in the little drawing room where they were sitting . 
He had often before , during the last six weeks , remained alone with her , but had never spoken to her of love . 
Now he felt that it was inevitable , but he could not make up his mind to take the final step . 
He felt ashamed ; he felt that he was occupying someone else 's place here beside Helene . 
`` This happiness is not for you , '' some inner voice whispered to him . 
`` This happiness is for those who have not in them what there is in you . '' 
But , as he had to say something , he began by asking her whether she was satisfied with the party . 
She replied in her usual simple manner that this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had . 
Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left . 
They were sitting in the large drawing room . 
Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languid footsteps . 
Pierre rose and said it was getting late . 
Prince Vasili gave him a look of stern inquiry , as though what Pierre had just said was so strange that one could not take it in . 
But then the expression of severity changed , and he drew Pierre 's hand downwards , made him sit down , and smiled affectionately . 
`` Well , Lelya ? '' 
he asked , turning instantly to his daughter and addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to parents who have petted their children from babyhood , but which Prince Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents . 
And he again turned to Pierre . 
`` Sergey Kuzmich -- From all sides - '' he said , unbuttoning the top button of his waistcoat . 
Pierre smiled , but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story about Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then , and Prince Vasili saw that Pierre knew this . 
He suddenly muttered something and went away . 
It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted . 
The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world touched Pierre : he looked at Helene and she too seemed disconcerted , and her look seemed to say : `` Well , it is your own fault . '' 
`` The step must be taken but I can not , I can not ! '' 
thought Pierre , and he again began speaking about indifferent matters , about Sergey Kuzmich , asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly . 
Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it . 
When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room , the princess , his wife , was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre . 
`` Of course , it is a very brilliant match , but happiness , my dear ... '' `` Marriages are made in heaven , '' replied the elderly lady . 
Prince Vasili passed by , seeming not to hear the ladies , and sat down on a sofa in a far corner of the room . 
He closed his eyes and seemed to be dozing . 
His head sank forward and then he roused himself . 
`` Aline , '' he said to his wife , `` go and see what they are about . '' 
The princess went up to the door , passed by it with a dignified and indifferent air , and glanced into the little drawing room . 
Pierre and Helene still sat talking just as before . 
`` Still the same , '' she said to her husband . 
Prince Vasili frowned , twisting his mouth , his cheeks quivered and his face assumed the coarse , unpleasant expression peculiar to him . 
Shaking himself , he rose , threw back his head , and with resolute steps went past the ladies into the little drawing room . 
With quick steps he went joyfully up to Pierre . 
His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre rose in alarm on seeing it . 
`` Thank God ! '' 
said Prince Vasili . 
`` My wife has told me everything ! '' 
-LRB- He put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter . -RRB- 
-- `` My dear boy ... Lelya ... I am very pleased . '' 
-LRB- His voice trembled . -RRB- 
`` I loved your father ... and she will make you a good wife ... God bless you ! 
... '' He embraced his daughter , and then again Pierre , and kissed him with his malodorous mouth . 
Tears actually moistened his cheeks . 
`` Princess , come here ! '' 
he shouted . 
The old princess came in and also wept . 
The elderly lady was using her handkerchief too . 
Pierre was kissed , and he kissed the beautiful Helene 's hand several times . 
After a while they were left alone again . 
`` All this had to be and could not be otherwise , '' thought Pierre , `` so it is useless to ask whether it is good or bad . 
It is good because it 's definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt . '' 
Pierre held the hand of his betrothed in silence , looking at her beautiful bosom as it rose and fell . 
`` Helene ! '' 
he said aloud and paused . 
`` Something special is always said in such cases , '' he thought , but could not remember what it was that people say . 
He looked at her face . 
She drew nearer to him . 
Her face flushed . 
`` Oh , take those off ... those ... '' she said , pointing to his spectacles . 
Pierre took them off , and his eyes , besides the strange look eyes have from which spectacles have just been removed , had also a frightened and inquiring look . 
He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it , but with a rapid , almost brutal movement of her head , she intercepted his lips and met them with her own . 
Her face struck Pierre , by its altered , unpleasantly excited expression . 
`` It is too late now , it 's done ; besides I love her , '' thought Pierre . 
`` Je vous aime ! '' 
* he said , remembering what has to be said at such moments : but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself . 
* `` I love you . '' 
Six weeks later he was married , and settled in Count Bezukhov 's large , newly furnished Petersburg house , the happy possessor , as people said , of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money . 
Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in November , 1805 , announcing that he and his son would be paying him a visit . 
