The roar of guns , the whistling of projectiles , and the piteous moaning of the cook , which rose above the other sounds , did not cease for a moment . 
The mistress rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into the cellar asked in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained in the street . 
A shopman who entered told her that her husband had gone with others to the cathedral , whence they were fetching the wonder-working icon of Smolensk . 
Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside . 
Alpatych left the cellar and stopped in the doorway . 
The evening sky that had been so clear was clouded with smoke , through which , high up , the sickle of the new moon shone strangely . 
Now that the terrible din of the guns had ceased a hush seemed to reign over the town , broken only by the rustle of footsteps , the moaning , the distant cries , and the crackle of fires which seemed widespread everywhere . 
The cook 's moans had now subsided . 
On two sides black curling clouds of smoke rose and spread from the fires . 
Through the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in different directions like ants from a ruined ant-hill . 
Several of them ran into Ferapontov 's yard before Alpatych 's eyes . 
Alpatych went out to the gate . 
A retreating regiment , thronging and hurrying , blocked the street . 
Noticing him , an officer said : `` The town is being abandoned . 
Get away , get away ! '' 
and then , turning to the soldiers , shouted : `` I 'll teach you to run into the yards ! '' 
Alpatych went back to the house , called the coachman , and told him to set off . 
Ferapontov 's whole household came out too , following Alpatych and the coachman . 
The women , who had been silent till then , suddenly began to wail as they looked at the fires -- the smoke and even the flames of which could be seen in the failing twilight -- and as if in reply the same kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of the street . 
Inside the shed Alpatych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins and traces of their horses with trembling hands . 
As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiers in Ferapontov 's open shop , talking loudly and filling their bags and knapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds . 
Just then Ferapontov returned and entered his shop . 
On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout at them , but suddenly stopped and , clutching at his hair , burst into sobs and laughter : `` Loot everything , lads ! 
Do n't let those devils get it ! '' 
he cried , taking some bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street . 
Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away , others went on filling their bags . 
On seeing Alpatych , Ferapontov turned to him : `` Russia is done for ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Alpatych , I 'll set the place on fire myself . 
We 're done for ! 
... '' and Ferapontov ran into the yard . 
Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking it completely , so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait . 
Ferapontov 's wife and children were also sitting in a cart waiting till it was possible to drive out . 
Night had come . 
There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out amid the smoke that screened it . 
On the sloping descent to the Dnieper Alpatych 's cart and that of the innkeeper 's wife , which were slowly moving amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles , had to stop . 
In a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had stopped , a house and some shops were on fire . 
This fire was already burning itself out . 
The flames now died down and were lost in the black smoke , now suddenly flared up again brightly , lighting up with strange distinctness the faces of the people crowding at the crossroads . 
Black figures flitted about before the fire , and through the incessant crackling of the flames talking and shouting could be heard . 
Seeing that his trap would not be able to move on for some time , Alpatych got down and turned into the side street to look at the fire . 
Soldiers were continually rushing backwards and forwards near it , and he saw two of them and a man in a frieze coat dragging burning beams into another yard across the street , while others carried bundles of hay . 
Alpatych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which was blazing briskly . 
The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen in , the wooden roof was collapsing , and the rafters were alight . 
The crowd was evidently watching for the roof to fall in , and Alpatych watched for it too . 
`` Alpatych ! '' 
a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man . 
`` Mercy on us ! 
Your excellency ! '' 
answered Alpatych , immediately recognizing the voice of his young prince . 
Prince Andrew in his riding cloak , mounted on a black horse , was looking at Alpatych from the back of the crowd . 
`` Why are you here ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Your ... your excellency , '' stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs . 
`` Are we really lost ? 
Master ! 
... '' `` Why are you here ? '' 
Prince Andrew repeated . 
At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master 's pale worn face . 
Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it was to get away . 
`` Are we really quite lost , your excellency ? '' 
he asked again . 
Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his knee began writing in pencil on a page he tore out . 
He wrote to his sister : `` Smolensk is being abandoned . 
Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy within a week . 
Set off immediately for Moscow . 
Let me know at once when you will start . 
Send by special messenger to Usvyazh . '' 
Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych , he told him how to arrange for departure of the prince , the princess , his son , and the boy 's tutor , and how and where to let him know immediately . 
Before he had had time to finish giving these instructions , a chief of staff followed by a suite galloped up to him . 
`` You are a colonel ? '' 
shouted the chief of staff with a German accent , in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew . 
`` Houses are set on fire in your presence and you stand by ! 
What does this mean ? 
You will answer for it ! '' 
shouted Berg , who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army , a place , as Berg said , `` very agreeable and well en evidence . '' 
Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking to Alpatych . 
`` So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth , and if by the tenth I do n't receive news that they have all got away I shall have to throw up everything and come myself to Bald Hills . '' 
`` Prince , '' said Berg , recognizing Prince Andrew , `` I only spoke because I have to obey orders , because I always do obey exactly ... . 
You must please excuse me , '' he went on apologetically . 
Something cracked in the flames . 
The fire died down for a moment and wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof . 
There was another terrible crash and something huge collapsed . 
`` Ou-rou-rou ! '' 
yelled the crowd , echoing the crash of the collapsing roof of the barn , the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all around . 
The flames flared up again , lighting the animated , delighted , exhausted faces of the spectators . 
The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted : `` It 's fine , lads ! 
Now it 's raging ... It 's fine ! '' 
`` That 's the owner himself , '' cried several voices . 
`` Well then , '' continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych , `` report to them as I have told you '' ; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute beside him , he touched his horse and rode down the side street . 
From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat , followed by the enemy . 
On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching along the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills . 
Heat and drought had continued for more than three weeks . 
Each day fleecy clouds floated across the sky and occasionally veiled the sun , but toward evening the sky cleared again and the sun set in reddish-brown mist . 
Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth . 
The unreaped corn was scorched and shed its grain . 
The marshes dried up . 
The cattle lowed from hunger , finding no food on the sun-parched meadows . 
Only at night and in the forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness . 
But on the road , the highroad along which the troops marched , there was no such freshness even at night or when the road passed through the forest ; the dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inches deep . 
