`` Oh , tell that blockhead , '' he said in reply to the question from the Registrar 's Department , `` that he should remain to guard his documents . 
Now why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade ? 
They have horses , let them be off to Vladimir , and not leave them to the French . '' 
`` Your excellency , the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come : what are your commands ? '' 
`` My commands ? 
Let them go away , that 's all ... . 
And let the lunatics out into the town . 
When lunatics command our armies God evidently means these other madmen to be free . '' 
In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison , Count Rostopchin shouted angrily at the governor : `` Do you expect me to give you two battalions -- which we have not got - for a convoy ? 
Release them , that 's all about it ! '' 
`` Your excellency , there are some political prisoners , Meshkov , Vereshchagin ... '' `` Vereshchagin ! 
Has n't he been hanged yet ? '' 
shouted Rostopchin . 
`` Bring him to me ! '' 
Toward nine o'clock in the morning , when the troops were already moving through Moscow , nobody came to the count any more for instructions . 
Those who were able to get away were going of their own accord , those who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do . 
The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sokolniki , and sat in his study with folded hands , morose , sallow , and taciturn . 
In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator that it is only by his efforts that the whole population under his rule is kept going , and in this consciousness of being indispensable every administrator finds the chief reward of his labor and efforts . 
While the sea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in his frail bark , holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the people and himself moving , naturally imagines that his efforts move the ship he is holding on to . 
But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and the ship to move , such a delusion is no longer possible . 
The ship moves independently with its own enormous motion , the boat hook no longer reaches the moving vessel , and suddenly the administrator , instead of appearing a ruler and a source of power , becomes an insignificant , useless , feeble man . 
Rostopchin felt this , and it was this which exasperated him . 
The superintendent of police , whom the crowd had stopped , went in to see him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that the horses were harnessed . 
They were both pale , and the superintendent of police , after reporting that he had executed the instructions he had received , informed the count that an immense crowd had collected in the courtyard and wished to see him . 
Without saying a word Rostopchin rose and walked hastily to his light , luxurious drawing room , went to the balcony door , took hold of the handle , let it go again , and went to the window from which he had a better view of the whole crowd . 
The tall lad was standing in front , flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look . 
The blood stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face . 
A drone of voices was audible through the closed window . 
`` Is my carriage ready ? '' 
asked Rostopchin , stepping back from the window . 
`` It is , your excellency , '' replied the adjutant . 
Rostopchin went again to the balcony door . 
`` But what do they want ? '' 
he asked the superintendent of police . 
`` Your excellency , they say they have got ready , according to your orders , to go against the French , and they shouted something about treachery . 
But it is a turbulent crowd , your excellency -- I hardly managed to get away from it . 
Your excellency , I venture to suggest ... '' `` You may go . 
I do n't need you to tell me what to do ! '' 
exclaimed Rostopchin angrily . 
He stood by the balcony door looking at the crowd . 
`` This is what they have done with Russia ! 
This is what they have done with me ! '' 
thought he , full of an irrepressible fury that welled up within him against the someone to whom what was happening might be attributed . 
As often happens with passionate people , he was mastered by anger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it . 
`` Here is that mob , the dregs of the people , '' he thought as he gazed at the crowd : `` this rabble they have roused by their folly ! 
They want a victim , '' he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm . 
And this thought occurred to him just because he himself desired a victim , something on which to vent his rage . 
`` Is the carriage ready ? '' 
he asked again . 
`` Yes , your excellency . 
What are your orders about Vereshchagin ? 
He is waiting at the porch , '' said the adjutant . 
`` Ah ! '' 
exclaimed Rostopchin , as if struck by an unexpected recollection . 
And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony . 
The talking instantly ceased , hats and caps were doffed , and all eyes were raised to the count . 
`` Good morning , lads ! '' 
said the count briskly and loudly . 
`` Thank you for coming . 
I 'll come out to you in a moment , but we must first settle with the villain . 
We must punish the villain who has caused the ruin of Moscow . 
Wait for me ! '' 
And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammed the door behind him . 
A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd . 
`` He 'll settle with all the villains , you 'll see ! 
And you said the French ... He 'll show you what law is ! '' 
the mob were saying as if reproving one another for their lack of confidence . 
A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door , gave an order , and the dragoons formed up in line . 
The crowd moved eagerly from the balcony toward the porch . 
Rostopchin , coming out there with quick angry steps , looked hastily around as if seeking someone . 
`` Where is he ? '' 
he inquired . 
And as he spoke he saw a young man coming round the corner of the house between two dragoons . 
He had a long thin neck , and his head , that had been half shaved , was again covered by short hair . 
This young man was dressed in a threadbare blue cloth coat lined with fox fur , that had once been smart , and dirty hempen convict trousers , over which were pulled his thin , dirty , trodden-down boots . 
On his thin , weak legs were heavy chains which hampered his irresolute movements . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Rostopchin , hurriedly turning away his eyes from the young man in the fur-lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of the porch . 
`` Put him there . '' 
The young man in his clattering chains stepped clumsily to the spot indicated , holding away with one finger the coat collar which chafed his neck , turned his long neck twice this way and that , sighed , and submissively folded before him his thin hands , unused to work . 
For several seconds while the young man was taking his place on the step the silence continued . 
Only among the back rows of the people , who were all pressing toward the one spot , could sighs , groans , and the shuffling of feet be heard . 
While waiting for the young man to take his place on the step Rostopchin stood frowning and rubbing his face with his hand . 
`` Lads ! '' 
said he , with a metallic ring in his voice . 
`` This man , Vereshchagin , is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing . '' 
The young man in the fur-lined coat , stooping a little , stood in a submissive attitude , his fingers clasped before him . 
His emaciated young face , disfigured by the half-shaven head , hung down hopelessly . 
At the count 's first words he raised it slowly and looked up at him as if wishing to say something or at least to meet his eye . 
But Rostopchin did not look at him . 
A vein in the young man 's long thin neck swelled like a cord and went blue behind the ear , and suddenly his face flushed . 
All eyes were fixed on him . 
He looked at the crowd , and rendered more hopeful by the expression he read on the faces there , he smiled sadly and timidly , and lowering his head shifted his feet on the step . 
`` He has betrayed his Tsar and his country , he had gone over to Bonaparte . 
He alone of all the Russians has disgraced the Russian name , he has caused Moscow to perish , '' said Rostopchin in a sharp , even voice , but suddenly he glanced down at Vereshchagin who continued to stand in the same submissive attitude . 
As if inflamed by the sight , he raised his arm and addressed the people , almost shouting : `` Deal with him as you think fit ! 
I hand him over to you . '' 
The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer to one another . 
To keep one another back , to breathe in that stifling atmosphere , to be unable to stir , and to await something unknown , uncomprehended , and terrible , was becoming unbearable . 
Those standing in front , who had seen and heard what had taken place before them , all stood with wide open eyes and mouths , straining with all their strength , and held back the crowd that was pushing behind them . 
