After staggering into Smolensk which seemed to them a promised land , the French , searching for food , killed one another , sacked their own stores , and when everything had been plundered fled farther . 
They all went without knowing whither or why they were going . 
Still less did that genius , Napoleon , know it , for no one issued any orders to him . 
But still he and those about him retained their old habits : wrote commands , letters , reports , and orders of the day ; called one another sire , mon cousin , prince d'Eckmuhl , roi de Naples , and so on . 
But these orders and reports were only on paper , nothing in them was acted upon for they could not be carried out , and though they entitled one another Majesties , Highnesses , or Cousins , they all felt that they were miserable wretches who had done much evil for which they had now to pay . 
And though they pretended to be concerned about the army , each was thinking only of himself and of how to get away quickly and save himself . 
The movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaign from Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russian blindman 's bluff , in which two players are blindfolded and one of them occasionally rings a little bell to inform the catcher of his whereabouts . 
First he rings his bell fearlessly , but when he gets into a tight place he runs away as quietly as he can , and often thinking to escape runs straight into his opponent 's arms . 
At first while they were still moving along the Kaluga road , Napoleon 's armies made their presence known , but later when they reached the Smolensk road they ran holding the clapper of their bell tight -- and often thinking they were escaping ran right into the Russians . 
Owing to the rapidity of the French flight and the Russian pursuit and the consequent exhaustion of the horses , the chief means of approximately ascertaining the enemy 's position -- by cavalry scouting -- was not available . 
Besides , as a result of the frequent and rapid change of position by each army , even what information was obtained could not be delivered in time . 
If news was received one day that the enemy had been in a certain position the day before , by the third day when something could have been done , that army was already two days ' march farther on and in quite another position . 
One army fled and the other pursued . 
Beyond Smolensk there were several different roads available for the French , and one would have thought that during their stay of four days they might have learned where the enemy was , might have arranged some more advantageous plan and undertaken something new . 
But after a four days ' halt the mob , with no maneuvers or plans , again began running along the beaten track , neither to the right nor to the left but along the old -- the worst -- road , through Krasnoe and Orsha . 
Expecting the enemy from behind and not in front , the French separated in their flight and spread out over a distance of twenty-four hours . 
In front of them all fled the Emperor , then the kings , then the dukes . 
The Russian army , expecting Napoleon to take the road to the right beyond the Dnieper -- which was the only reasonable thing for him to do -- themselves turned to the right and came out onto the highroad at Krasnoe . 
And here as in a game of blindman 's buff the French ran into our vanguard . 
Seeing their enemy unexpectedly the French fell into confusion and stopped short from the sudden fright , but then they resumed their flight , abandoning their comrades who were farther behind . 
Then for three days separate portions of the French army -- first Murat 's -LRB- the vice-king 's -RRB- , then Davout 's , and then Ney 's -- ran , as it were , the gauntlet of the Russian army . 
They abandoned one another , abandoned all their heavy baggage , their artillery , and half their men , and fled , getting past the Russians by night by making semicircles to the right . 
Ney , who came last , had been busying himself blowing up the walls of Smolensk which were in nobody 's way , because despite the unfortunate plight of the French or because of it , they wished to punish the floor against which they had hurt themselves . 
Ney , who had had a corps of ten thousand men , reached Napoleon at Orsha with only one thousand men left , having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon , and having crossed the Dnieper at night by stealth at a wooded spot . 
From Orsha they fled farther along the road to Vilna , still playing at blindman 's buff with the pursuing army . 
At the Berezina they again became disorganized , many were drowned and many surrendered , but those who got across the river fled farther . 
Their supreme chief donned a fur coat and , having seated himself in a sleigh , galloped on alone , abandoning his companions . 
The others who could do so drove away too , leaving those who could not to surrender or die . 
This campaign consisted in a flight of the French during which they did all they could to destroy themselves . 
From the time they turned onto the Kaluga road to the day their leader fled from the army , none of the movements of the crowd had any sense . 
So one might have thought that regarding this period of the campaign the historians , who attributed the actions of the mass to the will of one man , would have found it impossible to make the story of the retreat fit their theory . 
But no ! 
Mountains of books have been written by the historians about this campaign , and everywhere are described Napoleon 's arrangements , the maneuvers , and his profound plans which guided the army , as well as the military genius shown by his marshals . 
The retreat from Malo-Yaroslavets when he had a free road into a well-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him along which Kutuzov afterwards pursued him -- this unnecessary retreat along a devastated road -- is explained to us as being due to profound considerations . 
Similarly profound considerations are given for his retreat from Smolensk to Orsha . 
Then his heroism at Krasnoe is described , where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battle and take personal command , and to have walked about with a birch stick and said : `` J'ai assez fait l'empereur ; il est temps de faire le general , '' * but nevertheless immediately ran away again , abandoning to its fate the scattered fragments of the army he left behind . 
* `` I have acted the Emperor long enough ; it is time to act the general . '' 
Then we are told of the greatness of soul of the marshals , especially of Ney -- a greatness of soul consisting in this : that he made his way by night around through the forest and across the Dnieper and escaped to Orsha , abandoning standards , artillery , and nine tenths of his men . 
And lastly , the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroic army is presented to us by the historians as something great and characteristic of genius . 
Even that final running away , described in ordinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child is taught to be ashamed of -- even that act finds justification in the historians ' language . 
When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads of historical ratiocination any farther , when actions are clearly contrary to all that humanity calls right or even just , the historians produce a saving conception of `` greatness . '' 
`` Greatness , '' it seems , excludes the standards of right and wrong . 
For the `` great '' man nothing is wrong , there is no atrocity for which a `` great '' man can be blamed . 
`` C'est grand ! '' 
* say the historians , and there no longer exists either good or evil but only `` grand '' and `` not grand . '' 
Grand is good , not grand is bad . 
Grand is the characteristic , in their conception , of some special animals called `` heroes . '' 
And Napoleon , escaping home in a warm fur coat and leaving to perish those who were not merely his comrades but were -LRB- in his opinion -RRB- men he had brought there , feels que c'est grand , * -LSB- 2 -RSB- and his soul is tranquil . 
* `` It is great . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- That it is great . 
`` Du sublime -LRB- he saw something sublime in himself -RRB- au ridicule il n ' y a qu'un pas , '' * said he . 
And the whole world for fifty years has been repeating : `` Sublime ! 
Grand ! 
Napoleon le Grand ! '' 
Du sublime au ridicule il n ' y a qu'un pas . 
* `` From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step . '' 
And it occurs to no one that to admit a greatness not commensurable with the standard of right and wrong is merely to admit one 's own nothingness and immeasurable meanness . 
For us with the standard of good and evil given us by Christ , no human actions are incommensurable . 
And there is no greatness where simplicity , goodness , and truth are absent . 
What Russian , reading the account of the last part of the campaign of 1812 , has not experienced an uncomfortable feeling of regret , dissatisfaction , and perplexity ? 
Who has not asked himself how it is that the French were not all captured or destroyed when our three armies surrounded them in superior numbers , when the disordered French , hungry and freezing , surrendered in crowds , and when -LRB- as the historians relate -RRB- the aim of the Russians was to stop the French , to cut them off , and capture them all ? 
How was it that the Russian army , which when numerically weaker than the French had given battle at Borodino , did not achieve its purpose when it had surrounded the French on three sides and when its aim was to capture them ? 
Can the French be so enormously superior to us that when we had surrounded them with superior forces we could not beat them ? 
How could that happen ? 
History -LRB- or what is called by that name -RRB- replying to these questions says that this occurred because Kutuzov and Tormasov and Chichagov , and this man and that man , did not execute such and such maneuvers ... But why did they not execute those maneuvers ? 
And why if they were guilty of not carrying out a prearranged plan were they not tried and punished ? 
But even if we admitted that Kutuzov , Chichagov , and others were the cause of the Russian failures , it is still incomprehensible why , the position of the Russian army being what it was at Krasnoe and at the Berezina -LRB- in both cases we had superior forces -RRB- , the French army with its marshals , kings , and Emperor was not captured , if that was what the Russians aimed at . 
The explanation of this strange fact given by Russian military historians -LRB- to the effect that Kutuzov hindered an attack -RRB- is unfounded , for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attacking at Vyazma and Tarutino . 
Why was the Russian army -- which with inferior forces had withstood the enemy in full strength at Borodino -- defeated at Krasnoe and the Berezina by the disorganized crowds of the French when it was numerically superior ? 
If the aim of the Russians consisted in cutting off and capturing Napoleon and his marshals -- and that aim was not merely frustrated but all attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled -- then this last period of the campaign is quite rightly considered by the French to be a series of victories , and quite wrongly considered victorious by Russian historians . 
The Russian military historians in so far as they submit to claims of logic must admit that conclusion , and in spite of their lyrical rhapsodies about valor , devotion , and so forth , must reluctantly admit that the French retreat from Moscow was a series of victories for Napoleon and defeats for Kutuzov . 
But putting national vanity entirely aside one feels that such a conclusion involves a contradiction , since the series of French victories brought the French complete destruction , while the series of Russian defeats led to the total destruction of their enemy and the liberation of their country . 
The source of this contradiction lies in the fact that the historians studying the events from the letters of the sovereigns and the generals , from memoirs , reports , projects , and so forth , have attributed to this last period of the war of 1812 an aim that never existed , namely that of cutting off and capturing Napoleon with his marshals and his army . 
There never was or could have been such an aim , for it would have been senseless and its attainment quite impossible . 
It would have been senseless , first because Napoleon 's disorganized army was flying from Russia with all possible speed , that is to say , was doing just what every Russian desired . 
So what was the use of performing various operations on the French who were running away as fast as they possibly could ? 
Secondly , it would have been senseless to block the passage of men whose whole energy was directed to flight . 
Thirdly , it would have been senseless to sacrifice one 's own troops in order to destroy the French army , which without external interference was destroying itself at such a rate that , though its path was not blocked , it could not carry across the frontier more than it actually did in December , namely a hundredth part of the original army . 
Fourthly , it would have been senseless to wish to take captive the Emperor , kings , and dukes -- whose capture would have been in the highest degree embarrassing for the Russians , as the most adroit diplomatists of the time -LRB- Joseph de Maistre and others -RRB- recognized . 
Still more senseless would have been the wish to capture army corps of the French , when our own army had melted away to half before reaching Krasnoe and a whole division would have been needed to convoy the corps of prisoners , and when our men were not always getting full rations and the prisoners already taken were perishing of hunger . 
All the profound plans about cutting off and capturing Napoleon and his army were like the plan of a market gardener who , when driving out of his garden a cow that had trampled down the beds he had planted , should run to the gate and hit the cow on the head . 
The only thing to be said in excuse of that gardener would be that he was very angry . 
But not even that could be said for those who drew up this project , for it was not they who had suffered from the trampled beds . 
But besides the fact that cutting off Napoleon with his army would have been senseless , it was impossible . 
It was impossible first because -- as experience shows that a three-mile movement of columns on a battlefield never coincides with the plans -- the probability of Chichagov , Kutuzov , and Wittgenstein effecting a junction on time at an appointed place was so remote as to be tantamount to impossibility , as in fact thought Kutuzov , who when he received the plan remarked that diversions planned over great distances do not yield the desired results . 
Secondly it was impossible , because to paralyze the momentum with which Napoleon 's army was retiring , incomparably greater forces than the Russians possessed would have been required . 
Thirdly it was impossible , because the military term `` to cut off '' has no meaning . 
One can cut off a slice of bread , but not an army . 
To cut off an army -- to bar its road -- is quite impossible , for there is always plenty of room to avoid capture and there is the night when nothing can be seen , as the military scientists might convince themselves by the example of Krasnoe and of the Berezina . 
It is only possible to capture prisoners if they agree to be captured , just as it is only possible to catch a swallow if it settles on one 's hand . 
Men can only be taken prisoners if they surrender according to the rules of strategy and tactics , as the Germans did . 
But the French troops quite rightly did not consider that this suited them , since death by hunger and cold awaited them in flight or captivity alike . 
Fourthly and chiefly it was impossible , because never since the world began has a war been fought under such conditions as those that obtained in 1812 , and the Russian army in its pursuit of the French strained its strength to the utmost and could not have done more without destroying itself . 
During the movement of the Russian army from Tarutino to Krasnoe it lost fifty thousand sick or stragglers , that is a number equal to the population of a large provincial town . 
Half the men fell out of the army without a battle . 
And it is of this period of the campaign -- when the army lacked boots and sheepskin coats , was short of provisions and without vodka , and was camping out at night for months in the snow with fifteen degrees of frost , when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight and the rest was night in which the influence of discipline can not be maintained , when men were taken into that region of death where discipline fails , not for a few hours only as in a battle , but for months , where they were every moment fighting death from hunger and cold , when half the army perished in a single month -- it is of this period of the campaign that the historians tell us how Miloradovich should have made a flank march to such and such a place , Tormasov to another place , and Chichagov should have crossed -LRB- more than knee-deep in snow -RRB- to somewhere else , and how so-and-so `` routed '' and `` cut off '' the French and so on and so on . 
The Russians , half of whom died , did all that could and should have been done to attain an end worthy of the nation , and they are not to blame because other Russians , sitting in warm rooms , proposed that they should do what was impossible . 
All that strange contradiction now difficult to understand between the facts and the historical accounts only arises because the historians dealing with the matter have written the history of the beautiful words and sentiments of various generals , and not the history of the events . 
To them the words of Miloradovich seem very interesting , and so do their surmises and the rewards this or that general received ; but the question of those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitals and in graves does not even interest them , for it does not come within the range of their investigation . 
Yet one need only discard the study of the reports and general plans and consider the movement of those hundreds of thousands of men who took a direct part in the events , and all the questions that seemed insoluble easily and simply receive an immediate and certain solution . 
