Nesvitski with an angry face , red and unlike himself , was shouting to Kutuzov that if he did not ride away at once he would certainly be taken prisoner . 
Kutuzov remained in the same place and without answering drew out a handkerchief . 
Blood was flowing from his cheek . 
Prince Andrew forced his way to him . 
`` You are wounded ? '' 
he asked , hardly able to master the trembling of his lower jaw . 
`` The wound is not here , it is there ! '' 
said Kutuzov , pressing the handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers . 
`` Stop them ! '' 
he shouted , and at the same moment , probably realizing that it was impossible to stop them , spurred his horse and rode to the right . 
A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it . 
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by them it was difficult to get out again . 
One was shouting , `` Get on ! 
Why are you hindering us ? '' 
Another in the same place turned round and fired in the air ; a third was striking the horse Kutuzov himself rode . 
Having by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men , Kutuzov , with his suite diminished by more than half , rode toward a sound of artillery fire near by . 
Having forced his way out of the crowd of fugitives , Prince Andrew , trying to keep near Kutuzov , saw on the slope of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing and Frenchmen running toward it . 
Higher up stood some Russian infantry , neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the fleeing crowd . 
A mounted general separated himself from the infantry and approached Kutuzov . 
Of Kutuzov 's suite only four remained . 
They were all pale and exchanged looks in silence . 
`` Stop those wretches ! '' 
gasped Kutuzov to the regimental commander , pointing to the flying soldiers ; but at that instant , as if to punish him for those words , bullets flew hissing across the regiment and across Kutuzov 's suite like a flock of little birds . 
The French had attacked the battery and , seeing Kutuzov , were firing at him . 
After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg ; several soldiers fell , and a second lieutenant who was holding the flag let it fall from his hands . 
It swayed and fell , but caught on the muskets of the nearest soldiers . 
The soldiers started firing without orders . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around ... `` Bolkonski ! '' 
he whispered , his voice trembling from a consciousness of the feebleness of age , `` Bolkonski ! '' 
he whispered , pointing to the disordered battalion and at the enemy , `` what 's that ? '' 
But before he had finished speaking , Prince Andrew , feeling tears of shame and anger choking him , had already leapt from his horse and run to the standard . 
`` Forward , lads ! '' 
he shouted in a voice piercing as a child 's . 
`` Here it is ! '' 
thought he , seizing the staff of the standard and hearing with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him . 
Several soldiers fell . 
`` Hurrah ! '' 
shouted Prince Andrew , and , scarcely able to hold up the heavy standard , he ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalion would follow him . 
And really he only ran a few steps alone . 
One soldier moved and then another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
and overtook him . 
A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew 's hands , but he was immediately killed . 
Prince Andrew again seized the standard and , dragging it by the staff , ran on with the battalion . 
In front he saw our artillerymen , some of whom were fighting , while others , having abandoned their guns , were running toward him . 
He also saw French infantry soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turning the guns round . 
Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty paces of the cannon . 
He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasingly and to right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and dropped . 
But he did not look at them : he looked only at what was going on in front of him -- at the battery . 
He now saw clearly the figure of a red-haired gunner with his shako knocked awry , pulling one end of a mop while a French soldier tugged at the other . 
He could distinctly see the distraught yet angry expression on the faces of these two men , who evidently did not realize what they were doing . 
`` What are they about ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them . 
`` Why does n't the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed ? 
Why does n't the Frenchman stab him ? 
He will not get away before the Frenchman remembers his bayonet and stabs him ... '' And really another French soldier , trailing his musket , ran up to the struggling men , and the fate of the red-haired gunner , who had triumphantly secured the mop and still did not realize what awaited him , was about to be decided . 
But Prince Andrew did not see how it ended . 
It seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him on the head with the full swing of a bludgeon . 
It hurt a little , but the worst of it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his seeing what he had been looking at . 
`` What 's this ? 
Am I falling ? 
My legs are giving way , '' thought he , and fell on his back . 
He opened his eyes , hoping to see how the struggle of the Frenchmen with the gunners ended , whether the red-haired gunner had been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or saved . 
But he saw nothing . 
Above him there was now nothing but the sky -- the lofty sky , not clear yet still immeasurably lofty , with gray clouds gliding slowly across it . 
`` How quiet , peaceful , and solemn ; not at all as I ran , '' thought Prince Andrew -- `` not as we ran , shouting and fighting , not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with frightened and angry faces struggled for the mop : how differently do those clouds glide across that lofty infinite sky ! 
How was it I did not see that lofty sky before ? 
And how happy I am to have found it at last ! 
Yes ! 
All is vanity , all falsehood , except that infinite sky . 
There is nothing , nothing , but that . 
But even it does not exist , there is nothing but quiet and peace . 
Thank God ! 
... '' On our right flank commanded by Bagration , at nine o'clock the battle had not yet begun . 
Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov 's demand to commence the action , and wishing to avert responsibility from himself , Prince Bagration proposed to Dolgorukov to send to inquire of the commander in chief . 
Bagration knew that as the distance between the two flanks was more than six miles , even if the messenger were not killed -LRB- which he very likely would be -RRB- , and found the commander in chief -LRB- which would be very difficult -RRB- , he would not be able to get back before evening . 
Bagration cast his large , expressionless , sleepy eyes round his suite , and the boyish face Rostov , breathless with excitement and hope , was the first to catch his eye . 
He sent him . 
`` And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander in chief , your excellency ? '' 
said Rostov , with his hand to his cap . 
`` You can give the message to His Majesty , '' said Dolgorukov , hurriedly interrupting Bagration . 
On being relieved from picket duty Rostov had managed to get a few hours ' sleep before morning and felt cheerful , bold , and resolute , with elasticity of movement , faith in his good fortune , and generally in that state of mind which makes everything seem possible , pleasant , and easy . 
All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning : there was to be a general engagement in which he was taking part , more than that , he was orderly to the bravest general , and still more , he was going with a message to Kutuzov , perhaps even to the sovereign himself . 
The morning was bright , he had a good horse under him , and his heart was full of joy and happiness . 
On receiving the order he gave his horse the rein and galloped along the line . 
At first he rode along the line of Bagration 's troops , which had not yet advanced into action but were standing motionless ; then he came to the region occupied by Uvarov 's cavalry and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle ; having passed Uvarov 's cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon and musketry ahead of him . 
The firing grew louder and louder . 
In the fresh morning air were now heard , not two or three musket shots at irregular intervals as before , followed by one or two cannon shots , but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of the hill before Pratzen , interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes several of them were not separated from one another but merged into a general roar . 
He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another down the hillsides , and clouds of cannon smoke rolling , spreading , and mingling with one another . 
He could also , by the gleam of bayonets visible through the smoke , make out moving masses of infantry and narrow lines of artillery with green caissons . 
Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was going on , but strain his attention as he would he could not understand or make out anything of what was happening : there in the smoke men of some sort were moving about , in front and behind moved lines of troops ; but why , whither , and who they were , it was impossible to make out . 
These sights and sounds had no depressing or intimidating effect on him ; on the contrary , they stimulated his energy and determination . 
`` Go on ! 
Go on ! 
Give it them ! '' 
he mentally exclaimed at these sounds , and again proceeded to gallop along the line , penetrating farther and farther into the region where the army was already in action . 
`` How it will be there I do n't know , but all will be well ! '' 
thought Rostov . 
