`` Will they give up Moscow like this ? 
They told you that for fun , and you believed it ! 
Are n't there plenty of troops on the march ? 
Let him in , indeed ! 
That 's what the government is for . 
You 'd better listen to what people are saying , '' said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth . 
By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gathered round a man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand . 
`` An ukase , they are reading an ukase ! 
Reading an ukase ! '' 
cried voices in the crowd , and the people rushed toward the reader . 
The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31 When the crowd collected round him he seemed confused , but at the demand of the tall lad who had pushed his way up to him , he began in a rather tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning . 
`` Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene Highness , '' he read -LRB- `` Sirin Highness , '' said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips and a frown on his brow -RRB- , `` to consult with him to act , and to aid the army to exterminate these scoundrels . 
We too will take part ... '' the reader went on , and then paused -LRB- `` Do you see , '' shouted the youth victoriously , `` he 's going to clear up the whole affair for you ... '' -RRB- , `` in destroying them , and will send these visitors to the devil . 
I will come back to dinner , and we 'll set to work . 
We will do , completely do , and undo these scoundrels . '' 
The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence . 
The tall lad hung his head gloomily . 
It was evident that no one had understood the last part . 
In particular , the words `` I will come back to dinner , '' evidently displeased both reader and audience . 
The people 's minds were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlessly comprehensible -- it was what any one of them might have said and therefore was what an ukase emanating from the highest authority should not say . 
They all stood despondent and silent . 
The tall youth moved his lips and swayed from side to side . 
`` We should ask him ... that 's he himself ? '' 
... `` Yes , ask him indeed ! 
... Why not ? 
He 'll explain '' ... voices in the rear of the crowd were suddenly heard saying , and the general attention turned to the police superintendent 's trap which drove into the square attended by two mounted dragoons . 
The superintendent of police , who had that morning by Count Rostopchin 's orders to burn the barges and had in connection with that matter acquired a large sum of money which was at that moment in his pocket , on seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told his coachman to stop . 
`` What people are these ? '' 
he shouted to the men , who were moving singly and timidly in the direction of his trap . 
`` What people are these ? '' 
he shouted again , receiving no answer . 
`` Your honor ... '' replied the shopman in the frieze coat , `` your honor , in accord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count , they desire to serve , not sparing their lives , and it is not any kind of riot , but as his highest excellence said ... '' `` The count has not left , he is here , and an order will be issued concerning you , '' said the superintendent of police . 
`` Go on ! '' 
he ordered his coachman . 
The crowd halted , pressing around those who had heard what the superintendent had said , and looking at the departing trap . 
The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scared look , said something to his coachman , and his horses increased their speed . 
`` It 's a fraud , lads ! 
Lead the way to him , himself ! '' 
shouted the tall youth . 
`` Do n't let him go , lads ! 
Let him answer us ! 
Keep him ! '' 
shouted different people and the people dashed in pursuit of the trap . 
Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the crowd went in the direction of the Lubyanka Street . 
`` There now , the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us to perish . 
Do they think we 're dogs ? '' 
voices in the crowd were heard saying more and more frequently . 
On the evening of the first of September , after his interview with Kutuzov , Count Rostopchin had returned to Moscow mortified and offended because he had not been invited to attend the council of war , and because Kutuzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part in the defense of the city ; amazed also at the novel outlook revealed to him at the camp , which treated the tranquillity of the capital and its patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant and unimportant matters . 
Distressed , offended , and surprised by all this , Rostopchin had returned to Moscow . 
After supper he lay down on a sofa without undressing , and was awakened soon after midnight by a courier bringing him a letter from Kutuzov . 
This letter requested the count to send police officers to guide the troops through the town , as the army was retreating to the Ryazan road beyond Moscow . 
This was not news to Rostopchin . 
He had known that Moscow would be abandoned not merely since his interview the previous day with Kutuzov on the Poklonny Hill but ever since the battle of Borodino , for all the generals who came to Moscow after that battle had said unanimously that it was impossible to fight another battle , and since then the government property had been removed every night , and half the inhabitants had left the city with Rostopchin 's own permission . 
Yet all the same this information astonished and irritated the count , coming as it did in the form of a simple note with an order from Kutuzov , and received at night , breaking in on his beauty sleep . 
When later on in his memoirs Count Rostopchin explained his actions at this time , he repeatedly says that he was then actuated by two important considerations : to maintain tranquillity in Moscow and expedite the departure of the inhabitants . 
If one accepts this twofold aim all Rostopchin 's actions appear irreproachable . 
`` Why were the holy relics , the arms , ammunition , gunpowder , and stores of corn not removed ? 
Why were thousands of inhabitants deceived into believing that Moscow would not be given up -- and thereby ruined ? '' 
`` To presence the tranquillity of the city , '' explains Count Rostopchin . 
`` Why were bundles of useless papers from the government offices , and Leppich 's balloon and other articles removed ? '' 
`` To leave the town empty , '' explains Count Rostopchin . 
One need only admit that public tranquillity is in danger and any action finds a justification . 
All the horrors of the reign of terror were based only on solicitude for public tranquillity . 
On what , then , was Count Rostopchin 's fear for the tranquillity of Moscow based in 1812 ? 
What reason was there for assuming any probability of an uprising in the city ? 
The inhabitants were leaving it and the retreating troops were filling it . 
Why should that cause the masses to riot ? 
Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling an insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town . 
More than ten thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second of September , and except for a mob in the governor 's courtyard , assembled there at his bidding , nothing happened . 
It is obvious that there would have been even less reason to expect a disturbance among the people if after the battle of Borodino , when the surrender of Moscow became certain or at least probable , Rostopchin instead of exciting the people by distributing arms and broadsheets had taken steps to remove all the holy relics , the gunpowder , munitions , and money , and had told the population plainly that the town would be abandoned . 
Rostopchin , though he had patriotic sentiments , was a sanguine and impulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrative circles and had no understanding at all of the people he supposed himself to be guiding . 
Ever since the enemy 's entry into Smolensk he had in imagination been playing the role of director of the popular feeling of `` the heart of Russia . '' 
Not only did it seem to him -LRB- as to all administrators -RRB- that he controlled the external actions of Moscow 's inhabitants , but he also thought he controlled their mental attitude by means of his broadsheets and posters , written in a coarse tone which the people despise in their own class and do not understand from those in authority . 
Rostopchin was so pleased with the fine role of leader of popular feeling , and had grown so used to it , that the necessity of relinquishing that role and abandoning Moscow without any heroic display took him unawares and he suddenly felt the ground slip away from under his feet , so that he positively did not know what to do . 
Though he knew it was coming , he did not till the last moment wholeheartedly believe that Moscow would be abandoned , and did not prepare for it . 
The inhabitants left against his wishes . 
If the government offices were removed , this was only done on the demand of officials to whom the count yielded reluctantly . 
He was absorbed in the role he had created for himself . 
As is often the case with those gifted with an ardent imagination , though he had long known that Moscow would be abandoned he knew it only with his intellect , he did not believe it in his heart and did not adapt himself mentally to this new position of affairs . 
All his painstaking and energetic activity -LRB- in how far it was useful and had any effect on the people is another question -RRB- had been simply directed toward arousing in the masses his own feeling of patriotic hatred of the French . 
But when events assumed their true historical character , when expressing hatred for the French in words proved insufficient , when it was not even possible to express that hatred by fighting a battle , when self-confidence was of no avail in relation to the one question before Moscow , when the whole population streamed out of Moscow as one man , abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative action all the depth of their national feeling , then the role chosen by Rostopchin suddenly appeared senseless . 
He unexpectedly felt himself ridiculous , weak , and alone , with no ground to stand on . 
When , awakened from his sleep , he received that cold , peremptory note from Kutuzov , he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself to blame . 
All that he had been specially put in charge of , the state property which he should have removed , was still in Moscow and it was no longer possible to take the whole of it away . 
`` Who is to blame for it ? 
Who has let things come to such a pass ? '' 
he ruminated . 
`` Not I , of course . 
I had everything ready . 
I had Moscow firmly in hand . 
And this is what they have let it come to ! 
Villains ! 
Traitors ! '' 
he thought , without clearly defining who the villains and traitors were , but feeling it necessary to hate those traitors whoever they might be who were to blame for the false and ridiculous position in which he found himself . 
All that night Count Rostopchin issued orders , for which people came to him from all parts of Moscow . 
Those about him had never seen the count so morose and irritable . 
`` Your excellency , the Director of the Registrar 's Department has sent for instructions ... From the Consistory , from the Senate , from the University , from the Foundling Hospital , the Suffragan has sent ... asking for information ... . 
What are your orders about the Fire Brigade ? 
From the governor of the prison ... from the superintendent of the lunatic asylum ... '' All night long such announcements were continually being received by the count . 
To all these inquiries he gave brief and angry replies indicating that orders from him were not now needed , that the whole affair , carefully prepared by him , had now been ruined by somebody , and that that somebody would have to bear the whole responsibility for all that might happen . 
