This equation does not give us the value of the unknown factor but gives us a ratio between two unknowns . 
And by bringing variously selected historic units -LRB- battles , campaigns , periods of war -RRB- into such equations , a series of numbers could be obtained in which certain laws should exist and might be discovered . 
The tactical rule that an army should act in masses when attacking , and in smaller groups in retreat , unconsciously confirms the truth that the strength of an army depends on its spirit . 
To lead men forward under fire more discipline -LRB- obtainable only by movement in masses -RRB- is needed than is needed to resist attacks . 
But this rule which leaves out of account the spirit of the army continually proves incorrect and is in particularly striking contrast to the facts when some strong rise or fall in the spirit of the troops occurs , as in all national wars . 
The French , retreating in 1812 -- though according to tactics they should have separated into detachments to defend themselves - congregated into a mass because the spirit of the army had so fallen that only the mass held the army together . 
The Russians , on the contrary , ought according to tactics to have attacked in mass , but in fact they split up into small units , because their spirit had so risen that separate individuals , without orders , dealt blows at the French without needing any compulsion to induce them to expose themselves to hardships and dangers . 
The so-called partisan war began with the entry of the French into Smolensk . 
Before partisan warfare had been officially recognized by the government , thousands of enemy stragglers , marauders , and foragers had been destroyed by the Cossacks and the peasants , who killed them off as instinctively as dogs worry a stray mad dog to death . 
Denis Davydov , with his Russian instinct , was the first to recognize the value of this terrible cudgel which regardless of the rules of military science destroyed the French , and to him belongs the credit for taking the first step toward regularizing this method of warfare . 
On August 24 Davydov 's first partisan detachment was formed and then others were recognized . 
The further the campaign progressed the more numerous these detachments became . 
The irregulars destroyed the great army piecemeal . 
They gathered the fallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree - the French army -- and sometimes shook that tree itself . 
By October , when the French were fleeing toward Smolensk , there were hundreds of such companies , of various sizes and characters . 
There were some that adopted all the army methods and had infantry , artillery , staffs , and the comforts of life . 
Others consisted solely of Cossack cavalry . 
There were also small scratch groups of foot and horse , and groups of peasants and landowners that remained unknown . 
A sacristan commanded one party which captured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month ; and there was Vasilisa , the wife of a village elder , who slew hundreds of the French . 
The partisan warfare flamed up most fiercely in the latter days of October . 
Its first period had passed : when the partisans themselves , amazed at their own boldness , feared every minute to be surrounded and captured by the French , and hid in the forests without unsaddling , hardly daring to dismount and always expecting to be pursued . 
By the end of October this kind of warfare had taken definite shape : it had become clear to all what could be ventured against the French and what could not . 
Now only the commanders of detachments with staffs , and moving according to rules at a distance from the French , still regarded many things as impossible . 
The small bands that had started their activities long before and had already observed the French closely considered things possible which the commanders of the big detachments did not dare to contemplate . 
The Cossacks and peasants who crept in among the French now considered everything possible . 
On October 22 , Denisov -LRB- who was one of the irregulars -RRB- was with his group at the height of the guerrilla enthusiasm . 
Since early morning he and his party had been on the move . 
All day long he had been watching from the forest that skirted the highroad a large French convoy of cavalry baggage and Russian prisoners separated from the rest of the army , which -- as was learned from spies and prisoners - was moving under a strong escort to Smolensk . 
Besides Denisov and Dolokhov -LRB- who also led a small party and moved in Denisov 's vicinity -RRB- , the commanders of some large divisions with staffs also knew of this convoy and , as Denisov expressed it , were sharpening their teeth for it . 
Two of the commanders of large parties -- one a Pole and the other a German -- sent invitations to Denisov almost simultaneously , requesting him to join up with their divisions to attack the convoy . 
`` No , bwother , I have gwown mustaches myself , '' said Denisov on reading these documents , and he wrote to the German that , despite his heartfelt desire to serve under so valiant and renowned a general , he had to forgo that pleasure because he was already under the command of the Polish general . 
To the Polish general he replied to the same effect , informing him that he was already under the command of the German . 
Having arranged matters thus , Denisov and Dolokhov intended , without reporting matters to the higher command , to attack and seize that convoy with their own small forces . 
On October 22 it was moving from the village of Mikulino to that of Shamshevo . 
To the left of the road between Mikulino and Shamshevo there were large forests , extending in some places up to the road itself though in others a mile or more back from it . 
Through these forests Denisov and his party rode all day , sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the very edge , but never losing sight of the moving French . 
That morning , Cossacks of Denisov 's party had seized and carried off into the forest two wagons loaded with cavalry saddles , which had stuck in the mud not far from Mikulino where the forest ran close to the road . 
Since then , and until evening , the party had the movements of the French without attacking . 
It was necessary to let the French reach Shamshevo quietly without alarming them and then , after joining Dolokhov who was to come that evening to a consultation at a watchman 's hut in the forest less than a mile from Shamshevo , to surprise the French at dawn , falling like an avalanche on their heads from two sides , and rout and capture them all at one blow . 
In their rear , more than a mile from Mikulino where the forest came right up to the road , six Cossacks were posted to report if any fresh columns of French should show themselves . 
Beyond Shamshevo , Dolokhov was to observe the road in the same way , to find out at what distance there were other French troops . 
They reckoned that the convoy had fifteen hundred men . 
Denisov had two hundred , and Dolokhov might have as many more , but the disparity of numbers did not deter Denisov . 
All that he now wanted to know was what troops these were and to learn that he had to capture a `` tongue '' -- that is , a man from the enemy column . 
That morning 's attack on the wagons had been made so hastily that the Frenchmen with the wagons had all been killed ; only a little drummer boy had been taken alive , and as he was a straggler he could tell them nothing definite about the troops in that column . 
Denisov considered it dangerous to make a second attack for fear of putting the whole column on the alert , so he sent Tikhon Shcherbaty , a peasant of his party , to Shamshevo to try and seize at least one of the French quartermasters who had been sent on in advance . 
It was a warm rainy autumn day . 
The sky and the horizon were both the color of muddy water . 
At times a sort of mist descended , and then suddenly heavy slanting rain came down . 
Denisov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rain ran down was riding a thin thoroughbred horse with sunken sides . 
Like his horse , which turned its head and laid its ears back , he shrank from the driving rain and gazed anxiously before him . 
His thin face with its short , thick black beard looked angry . 
Beside Denisov rode an esaul , * Denisov 's fellow worker , also in felt cloak and sheepskin cap , and riding a large sleek Don horse . 
* A captain of Cossacks . 
Esaul Lovayski the Third was a tall man as straight as an arrow , pale-faced , fair-haired , with narrow light eyes and with calm self-satisfaction in his face and bearing . 
Though it was impossible to say in what the peculiarity of the horse and rider lay , yet at first glance at the esaul and Denisov one saw that the latter was wet and uncomfortable and was a man mounted on a horse , while looking at the esaul one saw that he was as comfortable and as much at ease as always and that he was not a man who had mounted a horse , but a man who was one with his horse , a being consequently possessed of twofold strength . 
A little ahead of them walked a peasant guide , wet to the skin and wearing a gray peasant coat and a white knitted cap . 
A little behind , on a poor , small , lean Kirghiz mount with an enormous tail and mane and a bleeding mouth , rode a young officer in a blue French overcoat . 
Beside him rode an hussar , with a boy in a tattered French uniform and blue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse . 
The boy held on to the hussar with cold , red hands , and raising his eyebrows gazed about him with surprise . 
This was the French drummer boy captured that morning . 
Behind them along the narrow , sodden , cutup forest road came hussars in threes and fours , and then Cossacks : some in felt cloaks , some in French greatcoats , and some with horsecloths over their heads . 
The horses , being drenched by the rain , all looked black whether chestnut or bay . 
Their necks , with their wet , close-clinging manes , looked strangely thin . 
Steam rose from them . 
Clothes , saddles , reins , were all wet , slippery , and sodden , like the ground and the fallen leaves that strewed the road . 
The men sat huddled up trying not to stir , so as to warm the water that had trickled to their bodies and not admit the fresh cold water that was leaking in under their seats , their knees , and at the back of their necks . 
In the midst of the outspread line of Cossacks two wagons , drawn by French horses and by saddled Cossack horses that had been hitched on in front , rumbled over the tree stumps and branches and splashed through the water that lay in the ruts . 
Denisov 's horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumped his rider 's knee against a tree . 
`` Oh , the devil ! '' 
exclaimed Denisov angrily , and showing his teeth he struck his horse three times with his whip , splashing himself and his comrades with mud . 
Denisov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also from hunger -LRB- none of them had eaten anything since morning -RRB- , and yet more because he still had no news from Dolokhov and the man sent to capture a `` tongue '' had not returned . 
`` There 'll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today . 
It 's too risky to attack them by oneself , and if we put it off till another day one of the big guerrilla detachments will snatch the prey from under our noses , '' thought Denisov , continually peering forward , hoping to see a messenger from Dolokhov . 
On coming to a path in the forest along which he could see far to the right , Denisov stopped . 
`` There 's someone coming , '' said he . 
The esaul looked in the direction Denisov indicated . 
`` There are two , an officer and a Cossack . 
But it is not presupposable that it is the lieutenant colonel himself , '' said the esaul , who was fond of using words the Cossacks did not know . 
The approaching riders having descended a decline were no longer visible , but they reappeared a few minutes later . 
In front , at a weary gallop and using his leather whip , rode an officer , disheveled and drenched , whose trousers had worked up to above his knees . 
Behind him , standing in the stirrups , trotted a Cossack . 
The officer , a very young lad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes , galloped up to Denisov and handed him a sodden envelope . 
`` From the general , '' said the officer . 
`` Please excuse its not being quite dry . '' 
Denisov , frowning , took the envelope and opened it . 
`` There , they kept telling us : ` It 's dangerous , it 's dangerous , ' '' said the officer , addressing the esaul while Denisov was reading the dispatch . 
`` But Komarov and I '' -- he pointed to the Cossack -- `` were prepared . 
We have each of us two pistols ... . 
But what 's this ? '' 
he asked , noticing the French drummer boy . 
`` A prisoner ? 
You 've already been in action ? 
May I speak to him ? '' 
`` Wostov ! 
Petya ! '' 
exclaimed Denisov , having run through the dispatch . 
`` Why did n't you say who you were ? '' 
and turning with a smile he held out his hand to the lad . 
The officer was Petya Rostov . 
