In the silence that ensued , the snoring of those who had fallen asleep could be heard . 
Others turned over and warmed themselves , now and again exchanging a few words . 
From a campfire a hundred paces off came a sound of general , merry laughter . 
`` Hark at them roaring there in the Fifth Company ! '' 
said one of the soldiers , `` and what a lot of them there are ! '' 
One of the men got up and went over to the Fifth Company . 
`` They 're having such fun , '' said he , coming back . 
`` Two Frenchies have turned up . 
One 's quite frozen and the other 's an awful swaggerer . 
He 's singing songs ... '' `` Oh , I 'll go across and have a look ... '' And several of the men went over to the Fifth Company . 
The fifth company was bivouacking at the very edge of the forest . 
A huge campfire was blazing brightly in the midst of the snow , lighting up the branches of trees heavy with hoarfrost . 
About midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest , and the crackling of dry branches . 
`` A bear , lads , '' said one of the men . 
They all raised their heads to listen , and out of the forest into the bright firelight stepped two strangely clad human figures clinging to one another . 
These were two Frenchmen who had been hiding in the forest . 
They came up to the fire , hoarsely uttering something in a language our soldiers did not understand . 
One was taller than the other ; he wore an officer 's hat and seemed quite exhausted . 
On approaching the fire he had been going to sit down , but fell . 
The other , a short sturdy soldier with a shawl tied round his head , was stronger . 
He raised his companion and said something , pointing to his mouth . 
The soldiers surrounded the Frenchmen , spread a greatcoat on the ground for the sick man , and brought some buckwheat porridge and vodka for both of them . 
The exhausted French officer was Ramballe and the man with his head wrapped in the shawl was Morel , his orderly . 
When Morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porridge he suddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to the soldiers , who could not understand him . 
Ramballe refused food and resting his head on his elbow lay silent beside the campfire , looking at the Russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes . 
Occasionally he emitted a long-drawn groan and then again became silent . 
Morel , pointing to his shoulders , tried to impress on the soldiers the fact that Ramballe was an officer and ought to be warmed . 
A Russian officer who had come up to the fire sent to ask his colonel whether he would not take a French officer into his hut to warm him , and when the messenger returned and said that the colonel wished the officer to be brought to him , Ramballe was told to go . 
He rose and tried to walk , but staggered and would have fallen had not a soldier standing by held him up . 
`` You wo n't do it again , eh ? '' 
said one of the soldiers , winking and turning mockingly to Ramballe . 
`` Oh , you fool ! 
Why talk rubbish , lout that you are -- a real peasant ! '' 
came rebukes from all sides addressed to the jesting soldier . 
They surrounded Ramballe , lifted him on the crossed arms of two soldiers , and carried him to the hut . 
Ramballe put his arms around their necks while they carried him and began wailing plaintively : `` Oh , you fine fellows , my kind , kind friends ! 
These are men ! 
Oh , my brave , kind friends , '' and he leaned his head against the shoulder of one of the men like a child . 
Meanwhile Morel was sitting in the best place by the fire , surrounded by the soldiers . 
Morel , a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes , was wearing a woman 's cloak and had a shawl tied woman fashion round his head over his cap . 
He was evidently tipsy , and was singing a French song in a hoarse broken voice , with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier . 
The soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him . 
`` Now then , now then , teach us how it goes ! 
I 'll soon pick it up . 
How is it ? '' 
said the man -- a singer and a wag -- whom Morel was embracing . 
`` Vive Henri Quatre ! 
Vive ce roi valiant ! '' 
sang Morel , winking . 
`` Ce diable a quatre ... '' * * `` Long live Henry the Fourth , that valiant king ! 
That rowdy devil . '' 
`` Vivarika ! 
Vif-seruvaru ! 
Sedyablyaka ! '' 
repeated the soldier , flourishing his arm and really catching the tune . 
`` Bravo ! 
Ha , ha , ha ! '' 
rose their rough , joyous laughter from all sides . 
Morel , wrinkling up his face , laughed too . 
`` Well , go on , go on ! '' 
`` Qui eut le triple talent , De boire , de battre , Et d'etre un vert galant . '' 
* * Who had a triple talent For drinking , for fighting , And for being a gallant old boy ... `` It goes smoothly , too . 
Well , now , Zaletaev ! '' 
`` Ke ... '' Zaletaev , brought out with effort : `` ke-e-e-e , '' he drawled , laboriously pursing his lips , `` le-trip-ta-la-de-bu-de-ba , e de-tra-va-ga-la '' he sang . 
`` Fine ! 
Just like the Frenchie ! 
Oh , ho ho ! 
Do you want some more to eat ? '' 
`` Give him some porridge : it takes a long time to get filled up after starving . '' 
They gave him some more porridge and Morel with a laugh set to work on his third bowl . 
All the young soldiers smiled gaily as they watched him . 
The older men , who thought it undignified to amuse themselves with such nonsense , continued to lie at the opposite side of the fire , but one would occasionally raise himself on an elbow and glance at Morel with a smile . 
`` They are men too , '' said one of them as he wrapped himself up in his coat . 
`` Even wormwood grows on its own root . '' 
`` O Lord , O Lord ! 
How starry it is ! 
Tremendous ! 
That means a hard frost ... '' They all grew silent . 
The stars , as if knowing that no one was looking at them , began to disport themselves in the dark sky : now flaring up , now vanishing , now trembling , they were busy whispering something gladsome and mysterious to one another . 
The French army melted away at the uniform rate of a mathematical progression ; and that crossing of the Berezina about which so much has been written was only one intermediate stage in its destruction , and not at all the decisive episode of the campaign . 
If so much has been and still is written about the Berezina , on the French side this is only because at the broken bridge across that river the calamities their army had been previously enduring were suddenly concentrated at one moment into a tragic spectacle that remained in every memory , and on the Russian side merely because in Petersburg -- far from the seat of war -- a plan -LRB- again one of Pfuel 's -RRB- had been devised to catch Napoleon in a strategic trap at the Berezina River . 
Everyone assured himself that all would happen according to plan , and therefore insisted that it was just the crossing of the Berezina that destroyed the French army . 
In reality the results of the crossing were much less disastrous to the French -- in guns and men lost -- than Krasnoe had been , as the figures show . 
The sole importance of the crossing of the Berezina lies in the fact that it plainly and indubitably proved the fallacy of all the plans for cutting off the enemy 's retreat and the soundness of the only possible line of action -- the one Kutuzov and the general mass of the army demanded -- namely , simply to follow the enemy up . 
The French crowd fled at a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directed to reaching its goal . 
It fled like a wounded animal and it was impossible to block its path . 
This was shown not so much by the arrangements it made for crossing as by what took place at the bridges . 
When the bridges broke down , unarmed soldiers , people from Moscow and women with children who were with the French transport , all -- carried on by vis inertiae -- pressed forward into boats and into the ice-covered water and did not , surrender . 
That impulse was reasonable . 
The condition of fugitives and of pursuers was equally bad . 
As long as they remained with their own people each might hope for help from his fellows and the definite place he held among them . 
But those who surrendered , while remaining in the same pitiful plight , would be on a lower level to claim a share in the necessities of life . 
The French did not need to be informed of the fact that half the prisoners -- with whom the Russians did not know what to do -- perished of cold and hunger despite their captors ' desire to save them ; they felt that it could not be otherwise . 
The most compassionate Russian commanders , those favorable to the French -- and even the Frenchmen in the Russian service -- could do nothing for the prisoners . 
The French perished from the conditions to which the Russian army was itself exposed . 
It was impossible to take bread and clothes from our hungry and indispensable soldiers to give to the French who , though not harmful , or hated , or guilty , were simply unnecessary . 
Some Russians even did that , but they were exceptions . 
Certain destruction lay behind the French but in front there was hope . 
Their ships had been burned , there was no salvation save in collective flight , and on that the whole strength of the French was concentrated . 
The farther they fled the more wretched became the plight of the remnant , especially after the Berezina , on which -LRB- in consequence of the Petersburg plan -RRB- special hopes had been placed by the Russians , and the keener grew the passions of the Russian commanders , blamed one another and Kutuzov most of all . 
