He called for his horse and rode to his quarters . 
Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river , though boats were sent to their assistance . 
The majority struggled back to the bank from which they had started . 
The colonel and some of his men got across and with difficulty clambered out on the further bank . 
And as soon as they had got out , in their soaked and streaming clothes , they shouted `` Vivat ! '' 
and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but where he no longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy . 
That evening , between issuing one order that the forged Russian paper money prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as quickly as possible and another that a Saxon should be shot , on whom a letter containing information about the orders to the French army had been found , Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel who had needlessly plunged into the river should be enrolled in the Legion d'honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head . 
Quos vult perdere dementat . 
* * Those whom -LRB- God -RRB- wishes to destroy he drives mad . 
The Emperor of Russia had , meanwhile , been in Vilna for more than a month , reviewing troops and holding maneuvers . 
Nothing was ready for the war that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor had come from Petersburg . 
There was no general plan of action . 
The vacillation between the various plans that were proposed had even increased after the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month . 
Each of the three armies had its own commander in chief , but there was no supreme commander of all the forces , and the Emperor did not assume that responsibility himself . 
The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody - tired of waiting -- prepare for the war . 
All the efforts of those who surrounded the sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his time pleasantly and forget that war was impending . 
In June , after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates , by the courtiers , and by the Emperor himself , it occurred to one of the Polish aides-de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should be given for the Emperor by his aides-de-camp . 
This idea was eagerly received . 
The Emperor gave his consent . 
The aides-de-camp collected money by subscription . 
The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to the Emperor was invited to act as hostess . 
Count Bennigsen , being a landowner in the Vilna province , offered his country house for the fete , and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball , dinner , regatta , and fireworks at Zakret , Count Bennigsen 's country seat . 
The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen , and his vanguard , driving off the Cossacks , crossed the Russian frontier , Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by his aides-de-camp at Bennigsen 's country house . 
It was a gay and brilliant fete . 
Connoisseurs of such matters declared that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place . 
Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who had followed the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed the refined Polish ladies by her massive , so called Russian type of beauty . 
The Emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance . 
Boris Drubetskoy , having left his wife in Moscow and being for the present en garcon -LRB- as he phrased it -RRB- , was also there and , though not an aide-de-camp , had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses . 
Boris was now a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer sought patronage but stood on an equal footing with the highest of those of his own age . 
He was meeting Helene in Vilna after not having seen her for a long time and did not recall the past , but as Helene was enjoying the favors of a very important personage and Boris had only recently married , they met as good friends of long standing . 
At midnight dancing was still going on . 
Helene , not having a suitable partner , herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris . 
They were the third couple . 
Boris , coolly looking at Helene 's dazzling bare shoulders which emerged from a dark , gold-embroidered , gauze gown , talked to her of old acquaintances and at the same time , unaware of it himself and unnoticed by others , never for an instant ceased to observe the Emperor who was in the same room . 
The Emperor was not dancing , he stood in the doorway , stopping now one pair and now another with gracious words which he alone knew how to utter . 
As the mazurka began , Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev , one of those in closest attendance on the Emperor , went up to him and contrary to court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish lady . 
Having finished speaking to her , the Emperor looked inquiringly at Balashev and , evidently understanding that he only acted thus because there were important reasons for so doing , nodded slightly to the lady and turned to him . 
Hardly had Balashev begun to speak before a look of amazement appeared on the Emperor 's face . 
He took Balashev by the arm and crossed the room with him , unconsciously clearing a path seven yards wide as the people on both sides made way for him . 
Boris noticed Arakcheev 's excited face when the sovereign went out with Balashev . 
Arakcheev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and , sniffing with his red nose , stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor to address him . 
-LRB- Boris understood that Arakcheev envied Balashev and was displeased that evidently important news had reached the Emperor otherwise than through himself . -RRB- 
But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated garden without noticing Arakcheev who , holding his sword and glancing wrathfully around , followed some twenty paces behind them . 
All the time Boris was going through the figures of the mazurka , he was worried by the question of what news Balashev had brought and how he could find it out before others . 
In the figure in which he had to choose two ladies , he whispered to Helene that he meant to choose Countess Potocka who , he thought , had gone out onto the veranda , and glided over the parquet to the door opening into the garden , where , seeing Balashev and the Emperor returning to the veranda , he stood still . 
They were moving toward the door . 
Boris , fluttering as if he had not had time to withdraw , respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head . 
The Emperor , with the agitation of one who has been personally affronted , was finishing with these words : `` To enter Russia without declaring war ! 
I will not make peace as long as a single armed enemy remains in my country ! '' 
It seemed to Boris that it gave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words . 
He was satisfied with the form in which he had expressed his thoughts , but displeased that Boris had overheard it . 
`` Let no one know of it ! '' 
the Emperor added with a frown . 
Boris understood that this was meant for him and , closing his eyes , slightly bowed his head . 
The Emperor re-entered the ballroom and remained there about another half-hour . 
Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French army had crossed the Niemen and , thanks to this , was able to show certain important personages that much that was concealed from others was usually known to him , and by this means he rose higher in their estimation . 
The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen was particularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations , and at a ball . 
On first receiving the news , under the influence of indignation and resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him , fully expressed his feelings , and has since become famous . 
On returning home at two o'clock that night he sent for his secretary , Shishkov , and told him to write an order to the troops and a rescript to Field Marshal Prince Saltykov , in which he insisted on the words being inserted that he would not make peace so long as a single armed Frenchman remained on Russian soil . 
Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon : Monsieur mon frere , Yesterday I learned that , despite the loyalty which I have kept my engagements with Your Majesty , your troops have crossed the Russian frontier , and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note , in which Count Lauriston informs me , as a reason for this aggression , that Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with me from the time Prince Kuragin asked for his passports . 
The reasons on which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him would never have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext for aggression . 
In fact , the ambassador , as he himself has declared , was never authorized to make that demand , and as soon as I was informed of it I let him know how much I disapproved of it and ordered him to remain at his post . 
If Your Majesty does not intend to shed the blood of our peoples for such a misunderstanding , and consents to withdraw your troops from Russian territory , I will regard what has passed as not having occurred and an understanding between us will be possible . 
In the contrary case , Your Majesty , I shall see myself forced to repel an attack that nothing on my part has provoked . 
It still depends on Your Majesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war . 
I am , etc. , -LRB- signed -RRB- Alexander At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June , the Emperor , having sent for Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon , ordered him to take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor . 
When dispatching Balashev , the Emperor repeated to him the words that he would not make peace so long as a single armed enemy remained on Russian soil and told him to transmit those words to Napoleon . 
Alexander did not insert them in his letter to Napoleon , because with his characteristic tact he felt it would be injudicious to use them at a moment when a last attempt at reconciliation was being made , but he definitely instructed Balashev to repeat them personally to Napoleon . 
Having set off in the small hours of the fourteenth , accompanied by a bugler and two Cossacks , Balashev reached the French outposts at the village of Rykonty , on the Russian side of the Niemen , by dawn . 
There he was stopped by French cavalry sentinels . 
A French noncommissioned officer of hussars , in crimson uniform and a shaggy cap , shouted to the approaching Balashev to halt . 
Balashev did not do so at once , but continued to advance along the road at a walking pace . 
The noncommissioned officer frowned and , muttering words of abuse , advanced his horse 's chest against Balashev , put his hand to his saber , and shouted rudely at the Russian general , asking : was he deaf that he did not do as he was told ? 
Balashev mentioned who he was . 
The noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about regimental matters without looking at the Russian general . 
After living at the seat of the highest authority and power , after conversing with the Emperor less than three hours before , and in general being accustomed to the respect due to his rank in the service , Balashev found it very strange here on Russian soil to encounter this hostile , and still more this disrespectful , application of brute force to himself . 
The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds , the air was fresh and dewy . 
A herd of cattle was being driven along the road from the village , and over the fields the larks rose trilling , one after another , like bubbles rising in water . 
Balashev looked around him , awaiting the arrival of an officer from the village . 
The Russian Cossacks and bugler and the French hussars looked silently at one another from time to time . 
A French colonel of hussars , who had evidently just left his bed , came riding from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse , accompanied by two hussars . 
The officer , the soldiers , and their horses all looked smart and well kept . 
It was that first period of a campaign when troops are still in full trim , almost like that of peacetime maneuvers , but with a shade of martial swagger in their clothes , and a touch of the gaiety and spirit of enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campaign . 
The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn , but was polite and evidently understood Balashev 's importance . 
He led him past his soldiers and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to the Emperor would most likely be satisfied immediately , as the Emperor 's quarters were , he believed , not far off . 
They rode through the village of Rykonty , past tethered French hussar horses , past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared with curiosity at a Russian uniform , and came out at the other end of the village . 
The colonel said that the commander of the division was a mile and a quarter away and would receive Balashev and conduct him to his destination . 
The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure . 
They had hardly ridden up a hill , past a tavern , before they saw a group of horsemen coming toward them . 
In front of the group , on a black horse with trappings that glittered in the sun , rode a tall man with plumes in his hat and black hair curling down to his shoulders . 
He wore a red mantle , and stretched his long legs forward in French fashion . 
This man rode toward Balashev at a gallop , his plumes flowing and his gems and gold lace glittering in the bright June sunshine . 
Balashev was only two horses ' length from the equestrian with the bracelets , plunies , necklaces , and gold embroidery , who was galloping toward him with a theatrically solemn countenance , when Julner , the French colonel , whispered respectfully : `` The King of Naples ! '' 
It was , in fact , Murat , now called `` King of Naples . '' 
Though it was quite incomprehensible why he should be King of Naples , he was called so , and was himself convinced that he was so , and therefore assumed a more solemn and important air than formerly . 
He was so sure that he really was the King of Naples that when , on the eve of his departure from that city , while walking through the streets with his wife , some Italians called out to him : `` Viva il re ! '' 
* he turned to his wife with a pensive smile and said : `` Poor fellows , they do n't know that I am leaving them tomorrow ! '' 
* `` Long live the king . '' 
But though he firmly believed himself to be King of Naples and pitied the grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning , latterly , after he had been ordered to return to military service -- and especially since his last interview with Napoleon in Danzig , when his august brother-in-law had told him : `` I made you King that you should reign in my way , but not in yours ! '' 
-- he had cheerfully taken up his familiar business , and -- like a well-fed but not overfat horse that feels himself in harness and grows skittish between the shafts -- he dressed up in clothes as variegated and expensive as possible , and gaily and contentedly galloped along the roads of Poland , without himself knowing why or whither . 
