Boris belonged to the latter and no one else , while showing servile respect to Kutuzov , could so create an impression that the old fellow was not much good and that Bennigsen managed everything . 
Now the decisive moment of battle had come when Kutuzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennigsen , or even if Kutuzov won the battle it would be felt that everything was done by Bennigsen . 
In any case many great rewards would have to be given for tomorrow 's action , and new men would come to the front . 
So Boris was full of nervous vivacity all day . 
After Kaysarov , others whom Pierre knew came up to him , and he had not time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered upon him , or to listen to all that was told him . 
The faces all expressed animation and apprehension , but it seemed to Pierre that the cause of the excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly in questions of personal success ; his mind , however , was occupied by the different expression he saw on other faces -- an expression that spoke not of personal matters but of the universal questions of life and death . 
Kutuzov noticed Pierre 's figure and the group gathered round him . 
`` Call him to me , '' said Kutuzov . 
An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness ' wish , and Pierre went toward Kutuzov 's bench . 
But a militiaman got there before him . 
It was Dolokhov . 
`` How did that fellow get here ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` He 's a creature that wriggles in anywhere ! '' 
was the answer . 
`` He has been degraded , you know . 
Now he wants to bob up again . 
He 's been proposing some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy 's picket line at night ... . 
He 's a brave fellow . '' 
Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov . 
`` I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might send me away or say that you knew what I was reporting , but then I should n't lose anything ... '' Dolokhov was saying . 
`` Yes , yes . '' 
`` But if I were right , I should be rendering a service to my Fatherland for which I am ready to die . '' 
`` Yes , yes . '' 
`` And should your Serene Highness require a man who will not spare his skin , please think of me ... . 
Perhaps I may prove useful to your Serene Highness . '' 
`` Yes ... Yes ... '' Kutuzov repeated , his laughing eye narrowing more and more as he looked at Pierre . 
Just then Boris , with his courtierlike adroitness , stepped up to Pierre 's side near Kutuzov and in a most natural manner , without raising his voice , said to Pierre , as though continuing an interrupted conversation : `` The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die . 
What heroism , Count ! '' 
Boris evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard by his Serene Highness . 
He knew Kutuzov 's attention would be caught by those words , and so it was . 
`` What are you saying about the militia ? '' 
he asked Boris . 
`` Preparing for tomorrow , your Serene Highness -- for death -- they have put on clean shirts . '' 
`` Ah ... a wonderful , a matchless people ! '' 
said Kutuzov ; and he closed his eyes and swayed his head . 
`` A matchless people ! '' 
he repeated with a sigh . 
`` So you want to smell gunpowder ? '' 
he said to Pierre . 
`` Yes , it 's a pleasant smell . 
I have the honor to be one of your wife 's adorers . 
Is she well ? 
My quarters are at your service . '' 
And as often happens with old people , Kutuzov began looking about absent-mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do . 
Then , evidently remembering what he wanted , he beckoned to Andrew Kaysarov , his adjutant 's brother . 
`` Those verses ... those verses of Marin 's ... how do they go , eh ? 
Those he wrote about Gerakov : ` Lectures for the corps inditing ' ... Recite them , recite them ! '' 
said he , evidently preparing to laugh . 
Kaysarov recited ... . 
Kutuzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm of the verses . 
When Pierre had left Kutuzov , Dolokhov came up to him and took his hand . 
`` I am very glad to meet you here , Count , '' he said aloud , regardless of the presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute and solemn tone . 
`` On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of us is fated to survive , I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that I regret the misunderstandings that occurred between us and should wish you not to have any ill feeling for me . 
I beg you to forgive me . '' 
Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile , not knowing what to say to him . 
With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him . 
Boris said a few words to his general , and Count Bennigsen turned to Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line . 
`` It will interest you , '' said he . 
`` Yes , very much , '' replied Pierre . 
Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova , and Bennigsen and his suite , with Pierre among them , set out on their ride along the line . 
From Gorki , Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which , when they had looked it from the hill , the officer had pointed out as being the center of our position and where rows of fragrant new-mown hay lay by the riverside . 
They rode across that bridge into the village of Borodino and thence turned to the left , passing an enormous number of troops and guns , and came to a high knoll where militiamen were digging . 
This was the redoubt , as yet unnamed , which afterwards became known as the Raevski Redoubt , or the Knoll Battery , but Pierre paid no special attention to it . 
He did not know that it would become more memorable to him than any other spot on the plain of Borodino . 
They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk , where the soldiers were dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns . 
Then they rode downhill and uphill , across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by hail , following a track freshly made by the artillery over the furrows of the plowed land , and reached some fleches * which were still being dug . 
* A kind of entrenchment . 
At the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the Shevardino Redoubt opposite , which had been ours the day before and where several horsemen could be descried . 
The officers said that either Napoleon or Murat was there , and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of horsemen . 
Pierre also looked at them , trying to guess which of the scarcely discernible figures was Napoleon . 
At last those mounted men rode away from the mound and disappeared . 
Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him , and began explaining the whole position of our troops . 
Pierre listened to him , straining each faculty to understand the essential points of the impending battle , but was mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for the task . 
He could make nothing of it . 
Bennigsen stopped speaking and , noticing that Pierre was listening , suddenly said to him : `` I do n't think this interests you ? '' 
`` On the contrary it 's very interesting ! '' 
replied Pierre not quite truthfully . 
From the fleches they rode still farther to the left , along a road winding through a thick , low-growing birch wood . 
In the middle of the wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and , scared by the tramp of the many horses , grew so confused that it leaped along the road in front of them for some time , arousing general attention and laughter , and only when several voices shouted at it did it dart to one side and disappear in the thicket . 
After going through the wood for about a mile and a half they came out on a glade where troops of Tuchkov 's corps were stationed to defend the left flank . 
Here , at the extreme left flank , Bennigsen talked a great deal and with much heat , and , as it seemed to Pierre , gave orders of great military importance . 
In front of Tuchkov 's troops was some high ground not occupied by troops . 
Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake , saying that it was madness to leave a height which commanded the country around unoccupied and to place troops below it . 
Some of the generals expressed the same opinion . 
One in particular declared with martial heat that they were put there to be slaughtered . 
Bennigsen on his own authority ordered the troops to occupy the high ground . 
This disposition on the left flank increased Pierre 's doubt of his own capacity to understand military matters . 
Listening to Bennigsen and the generals criticizing the position of the troops behind the hill , he quite understood them and shared their opinion , but for that very reason he could not understand how the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so gross and palpable a blunder . 
Pierre did not know that these troops were not , as Bennigsen supposed , put there to defend the position , but were in a concealed position as an ambush , that they should not be seen and might be able to strike an approaching enemy unexpectedly . 
Bennigsen did not know this and moved the troops forward according to his own ideas without mentioning the matter to the commander in chief . 
On that bright evening of August 25 , Prince Andrew lay leaning on his elbow in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkovo at the further end of his regiment 's encampment . 
Through a gap in the broken wall he could see , beside the wooden fence , a row of thirty year-old birches with their lower branches lopped off , a field on which shocks of oats were standing , and some bushes near which rose the smoke of campfires -- the soldiers ' kitchens . 
Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to him , Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as he had done seven years before at Austerlitz . 
He had received and given the orders for next day 's battle and had nothing more to do . 
But his thoughts -- the simplest , clearest , and therefore most terrible thoughts -- would give him no peace . 
He knew that tomorrow 's battle would be the most terrible of all he had taken part in , and for the first time in his life the possibility of death presented itself to him -- not in relation to any worldly matter or with reference to its effect on others , but simply in relation to himself , to his own soul -- vividly , plainly , terribly , and almost as a certainty . 
And from the height of this perception all that had previously tormented and preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light without shadows , without perspective , without distinction of outline . 
All life appeared to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he had long been gazing by artificial light through a glass . 
Now he suddenly saw those badly daubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass . 
