He sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree . 
On his face , besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while telling the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently , there was now an expression of quiet solemnity . 
Karataev looked at Pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled with tears , evidently wishing him to come near that he might say something to him . 
But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself . 
He made as if he did not notice that look and moved hastily away . 
When the prisoners again went forward Pierre looked round . 
Karataev was still sitting at the side of the road under the birch tree and two Frenchmen were talking over his head . 
Pierre did not look round again but went limping up the hill . 
From behind , where Karataev had been sitting , came the sound of a shot . 
Pierre heard it plainly , but at that moment he remembered that he had not yet finished reckoning up how many stages still remained to Smolensk -- a calculation he had begun before the marshal went by . 
And he again started reckoning . 
Two French soldiers ran past Pierre , one of whom carried a lowered and smoking gun . 
They both looked pale , and in the expression on their faces -- one of them glanced timidly at Pierre -- there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of the young soldier at the execution . 
Pierre looked at the soldier and remembered that , two days before , that man had burned his shirt while drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him . 
Behind him , where Karataev had been sitting , the dog began to howl . 
`` What a stupid beast ! 
Why is it howling ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
His comrades , the prisoner soldiers walking beside him , avoided looking back at the place where the shot had been fired and the dog was howling , just as Pierre did , but there was a set look on all their faces . 
The stores , the prisoners , and the marshal 's baggage train stopped at the village of Shamshevo . 
The men crowded together round the campfires . 
Pierre went up to the fire , ate some roast horseflesh , lay down with his back to the fire , and immediately fell asleep . 
He again slept as he had done at Mozhaysk after the battle of Borodino . 
Again real events mingled with dreams and again someone , he or another , gave expression to his thoughts , and even to the same thoughts that had been expressed in his dream at Mozhaysk . 
`` Life is everything . 
Life is God . 
Everything changes and moves and that movement is God . 
And while there is life there is joy in consciousness of the divine . 
To love life is to love God . 
Harder and more blessed than all else is to love this life in one 's sufferings , in innocent sufferings . '' 
`` Karataev ! '' 
came to Pierre 's mind . 
And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten , kindly old man who had given him geography lessons in Switzerland . 
`` Wait a bit , '' said the old man , and showed Pierre a globe . 
This globe was alive -- a vibrating ball without fixed dimensions . 
Its whole surface consisted of drops closely pressed together , and all these drops moved and changed places , sometimes several of them merging into one , sometimes one dividing into many . 
Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much space as possible , but others striving to do the same compressed it , sometimes destroyed it , and sometimes merged with it . 
`` That is life , '' said the old teacher . 
`` How simple and clear it is , '' thought Pierre . 
`` How is it I did not know it before ? '' 
`` God is in the midst , and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect Him to the greatest extent . 
And it grows , merges , disappears from the surface , sinks to the depths , and again emerges . 
There now , Karataev has spread out and disappeared . 
Do you understand , my child ? '' 
said the teacher . 
`` Do you understand , damn you ? '' 
shouted a voice , and Pierre woke up . 
He lifted himself and sat up . 
A Frenchman who had just pushed a Russian soldier away was squatting by the fire , engaged in roasting a piece of meat stuck on a ramrod . 
His sleeves were rolled up and his sinewy , hairy , red hands with their short fingers deftly turned the ramrod . 
His brown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow of the charcoal . 
`` It 's all the same to him , '' he muttered , turning quickly to a soldier who stood behind him . 
`` Brigand ! 
Get away ! '' 
And twisting the ramrod he looked gloomily at Pierre , who turned away and gazed into the darkness . 
A prisoner , the Russian soldier the Frenchman had pushed away , was sitting near the fire patting something with his hand . 
Looking more closely Pierre recognized the blue-gray dog , sitting beside the soldier , wagging its tail . 
`` Ah , he 's come ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` And Plat - '' he began , but did not finish . 
Suddenly and simultaneously a crowd of memories awoke in his fancy -- of the look Platon had given him as he sat under the tree , of the shot heard from that spot , of the dog 's howl , of the guilty faces of the two Frenchmen as they ran past him , of the lowered and smoking gun , and of Karataev 's absence at this halt -- and he was on the point of realizing that Karataev had been killed , but just at that instant , he knew not why , the recollection came to his mind of a summer evening he had spent with a beautiful Polish lady on the veranda of his house in Kiev . 
And without linking up the events of the day or drawing a conclusion from them , Pierre closed his eyes , seeing a vision of the country in summertime mingled with memories of bathing and of the liquid , vibrating globe , and he sank into water so that it closed over his head . 
Before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapid firing . 
French soldiers were running past him . 
`` The Cossacks ! '' 
one of them shouted , and a moment later a crowd of Russians surrounded Pierre . 
For a long time he could not understand what was happening to him . 
All around he heard his comrades sobbing with joy . 
`` Brothers ! 
Dear fellows ! 
Darlings ! '' 
old soldiers exclaimed , weeping , as they embraced Cossacks and hussars . 
The hussars and Cossacks crowded round the prisoners ; one offered them clothes , another boots , and a third bread . 
Pierre sobbed as he sat among them and could not utter a word . 
He hugged the first soldier who approached him , and kissed him , weeping . 
Dolokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house , letting a crowd of disarmed Frenchmen pass by . 
The French , excited by all that had happened , were talking loudly among themselves , but as they passed Dolokhov who gently switched his boots with his whip and watched them with cold glassy eyes that boded no good , they became silent . 
On the opposite side stood Dolokhov 's Cossack , counting the prisoners and marking off each hundred with a chalk line on the gate . 
`` How many ? '' 
Dolokhov asked the Cossack . 
`` The second hundred , '' replied the Cossack . 
`` Filez , filez ! '' 
* Dolokhov kept saying , having adopted this expression from the French , and when his eyes met those of the prisoners they flashed with a cruel light . 
* `` Get along , get along ! '' 
Denisov , bareheaded and with a gloomy face , walked behind some Cossacks who were carrying the body of Petya Rostov to a hole that had been dug in the garden . 
After the twenty-eighth of October when the frosts began , the flight of the French assumed a still more tragic character , with men freezing , or roasting themselves to death at the campfires , while carriages with people dressed in furs continued to drive past , carrying away the property that had been stolen by the Emperor , kings , and dukes ; but the process of the flight and disintegration of the French army went on essentially as before . 
From Moscow to Vyazma the French army of seventy-three thousand men not reckoning the Guards -LRB- who did nothing during the whole war but pillage -RRB- was reduced to thirty-six thousand , though not more than five thousand had fallen in battle . 
From this beginning the succeeding terms of the progression could be determined mathematically . 
The French army melted away and perished at the same rate from Moscow to Vyazma , from Vyazma to Smolensk , from Smolensk to the Berezina , and from the Berezina to Vilna -- independently of the greater or lesser intensity of the cold , the pursuit , the barring of the way , or any other particular conditions . 
Beyond Vyazma the French army instead of moving in three columns huddled together into one mass , and so went on to the end . 
Berthier wrote to his Emperor -LRB- we know how far commanding officers allow themselves to diverge from the truth in describing the condition of an army -RRB- and this is what he said : I deem it my duty to report to Your Majesty the condition of the various corps I have had occasion to observe during different stages of the last two or three days ' march . 
They are almost disbanded . 
Scarcely a quarter of the soldiers remain with the standards of their regiments , the others go off by themselves in different directions hoping to find food and escape discipline . 
In general they regard Smolensk as the place where they hope to recover . 
During the last few days many of the men have been seen to throw away their cartridges and their arms . 
In such a state of affairs , whatever your ultimate plans may be , the interest of Your Majesty 's service demands that the army should be rallied at Smolensk and should first of all be freed from ineffectives , such as dismounted cavalry , unnecessary baggage , and artillery material that is no longer in proportion to the present forces . 
The soldiers , who are worn out with hunger and fatigue , need these supplies as well as a few days ' rest . 
Many have died last days on the road or at the bivouacs . 
This state of things is continually becoming worse and makes one fear that unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer be under control in case of an engagement . 
November 9 : twenty miles from Smolensk . 
