After them other couples followed , filling the whole dining hall , and last of all the children , tutors , and governesses followed singly . 
The footmen began moving about , chairs scraped , the band struck up in the gallery , and the guests settled down in their places . 
Then the strains of the count 's household band were replaced by the clatter of knives and forks , the voices of visitors , and the soft steps of the footmen . 
At one end of the table sat the countess with Marya Dmitrievna on her right and Anna Mikhaylovna on her left , the other lady visitors were farther down . 
At the other end sat the count , with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other male visitors on his right . 
Midway down the long table on one side sat the grownup young people : Vera beside Berg , and Pierre beside Boris ; and on the other side , the children , tutors , and governesses . 
From behind the crystal decanters and fruit vases the count kept glancing at his wife and her tall cap with its light-blue ribbons , and busily filled his neighbors ' glasses , not neglecting his own . 
The countess in turn , without omitting her duties as hostess , threw significant glances from behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed by their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair . 
At the ladies ' end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time , at the men 's end the voices sounded louder and louder , especially that of the colonel of hussars who , growing more and more flushed , ate and drank so much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests . 
Berg with tender smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but a heavenly feeling . 
Boris was telling his new friend Pierre who the guests were and exchanging glances with Natasha , who was sitting opposite . 
Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces , and ate a great deal . 
Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went on to the game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines . 
These latter the butler thrust mysteriously forward , wrapped in a napkin , from behind the next man 's shoulders and whispered : `` Dry Madeira '' ... `` Hungarian '' ... or `` Rhine wine '' as the case might be . 
Of the four crystal glasses engraved with the count 's monogram that stood before his plate , Pierre held out one at random and drank with enjoyment , gazing with ever-increasing amiability at the other guests . 
Natasha , who sat opposite , was looking at Boris as girls of thirteen look at the boy they are in love with and have just kissed for the first time . 
Sometimes that same look fell on Pierre , and that funny lively little girl 's look made him inclined to laugh without knowing why . 
Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya , beside Julie Karagina , to whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile . 
Sonya wore a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy ; now she turned pale , now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas and Julie were saying to one another . 
The governess kept looking round uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the children . 
The German tutor was trying to remember all the dishes , wines , and kinds of dessert , in order to send a full description of the dinner to his people in Germany ; and he felt greatly offended when the butler with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by . 
He frowned , trying to appear as if he did not want any of that wine , but was mortified because no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from greediness that he wanted it , but simply from a conscientious desire for knowledge . 
At the men 's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated . 
The colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in Petersburg and that a copy , which he had himself seen , had that day been forwarded by courier to the commander in chief . 
`` And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte ? '' 
remarked Shinshin . 
`` He has stopped Austria 's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next . '' 
The colonel was a stout , tall , plethoric German , evidently devoted to the service and patriotically Russian . 
He resented Shinshin 's remark . 
`` It is for the reasson , my goot sir , '' said he , speaking with a German accent , `` for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat . 
He declares in ze manifessto zat he can not fiew wiz indifference ze danger vreatening Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctity of its alliances ... '' he spoke this last word with particular emphasis as if in it lay the gist of the matter . 
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he repeated from the opening words of the manifesto : ... and the wish , which constitutes the Emperor 's sole and absolute aim -- to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations -- has now decided him to despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition for the attainment of that purpose . 
`` Zat , my dear sir , is vy ... '' he concluded , drinking a tumbler of wine with dignity and looking to the count for approval . 
`` Connaissez-vous le Proverbe : * ` Jerome , Jerome , do not roam , but turn spindles at home ! ' ? '' 
said Shinshin , puckering his brows and smiling . 
`` Cela nous convient a merveille . 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- Suvorov now -- he knew what he was about ; yet they beat him a plate couture , * -LSB- 3 -RSB- and where are we to find Suvorovs now ? 
Je vous demande un peu , '' * -LSB- 4 -RSB- said he , continually changing from French to Russian . 
* Do you know the proverb ? 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- That suits us down to the ground . 
* -LSB- 3 -RSB- Hollow . 
* -LSB- 4 -RSB- I just ask you that . 
`` Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood ! '' 
said the colonel , thumping the table ; `` and ve must tie for our Emperor , and zen all vill pe vell . 
And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible '' ... he dwelt particularly on the word possible ... `` as po-o-ossible , '' he ended , again turning to the count . 
`` Zat is how ve old hussars look at it , and zere 's an end of it ! 
And how do you , a young man and a young hussar , how do you judge of it ? '' 
he added , addressing Nicholas , who when he heard that the war was being discussed had turned from his partner with eyes and ears intent on the colonel . 
`` I am quite of your opinion , '' replied Nicholas , flaming up , turning his plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision and desperation as though he were at that moment facing some great danger . 
`` I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer , '' he concluded , conscious -- as were others -- after the words were uttered that his remarks were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and were therefore awkward . 
`` What you said just now was splendid ! '' 
said his partner Julie . 
Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and down to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking . 
Pierre listened to the colonel 's speech and nodded approvingly . 
`` That 's fine , '' said he . 
`` The young man 's a real hussar ! '' 
shouted the colonel , again thumping the table . 
`` What are you making such a noise about over there ? '' 
Marya Dmitrievna 's deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table . 
`` What are you thumping the table for ? '' 
she demanded of the hussar , `` and why are you exciting yourself ? 
Do you think the French are here ? '' 
`` I am speaking ze truce , '' replied the hussar with a smile . 
`` It 's all about the war , '' the count shouted down the table . 
`` You know my son 's going , Marya Dmitrievna ? 
My son is going . '' 
`` I have four sons in the army but still I do n't fret . 
It is all in God 's hands . 
You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a battle , '' replied Marya Dmitrievna 's deep voice , which easily carried the whole length of the table . 
`` That 's true ! '' 
Once more the conversations concentrated , the ladies ' at the one end and the men 's at the other . 
`` You wo n't ask , '' Natasha 's little brother was saying ; `` I know you wo n't ask ! '' 
`` I will , '' replied Natasha . 
Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution . 
She half rose , by a glance inviting Pierre , who sat opposite , to listen to what was coming , and turning to her mother : `` Mamma ! '' 
rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice , audible the whole length of the table . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked the countess , startled ; but seeing by her daughter 's face that it was only mischief , she shook a finger at her sternly with a threatening and forbidding movement of her head . 
The conversation was hushed . 
`` Mamma ! 
What sweets are we going to have ? '' 
and Natasha 's voice sounded still more firm and resolute . 
The countess tried to frown , but could not . 
Marya Dmitrievna shook her fat finger . 
`` Cossack ! '' 
she said threateningly . 
Most of the guests , uncertain how to regard this sally , looked at the elders . 
`` You had better take care ! '' 
said the countess . 
`` Mamma ! 
What sweets are we going to have ? '' 
Natasha again cried boldly , with saucy gaiety , confident that her prank would be taken in good part . 
Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with laughter . 
`` You see ! 
I have asked , '' whispered Natasha to her little brother and to Pierre , glancing at him again . 
`` Ice pudding , but you wo n't get any , '' said Marya Dmitrievna . 
Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` Marya Dmitrievna ! 
What kind of ice pudding ? 
I do n't like ice cream . '' 
