Je vous en conjure ... '' The princess did not reply . 
Their efforts in the struggle for the portfolio were the only sounds audible , but it was evident that if the princess did speak , her words would not be flattering to Anna Mikhaylovna . 
Though the latter held on tenaciously , her voice lost none of its honeyed firmness and softness . 
`` Pierre , my dear , come here . 
I think he will not be out of place in a family consultation ; is it not so , Prince ? '' 
`` Why do n't you speak , cousin ? '' 
suddenly shrieked the princess so loud that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled . 
`` Why do you remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere , making a scene on the very threshold of a dying man 's room ? 
Intriguer ! '' 
she hissed viciously , and tugged with all her might at the portfolio . 
But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the portfolio , and changed her grip . 
Prince Vasili rose . 
`` Oh ! '' 
said he with reproach and surprise , `` this is absurd ! 
Come , let go I tell you . '' 
The princess let go . 
`` And you too ! '' 
But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him . 
`` Let go , I tell you ! 
I will take the responsibility . 
I myself will go and ask him , I ! 
... does that satisfy you ? '' 
`` But , Prince , '' said Anna Mikhaylovna , `` after such a solemn sacrament , allow him a moment 's peace ! 
Here , Pierre , tell them your opinion , '' said she , turning to the young man who , having come quite close , was gazing with astonishment at the angry face of the princess which had lost all dignity , and at the twitching cheeks of Prince Vasili . 
`` Remember that you will answer for the consequences , '' said Prince Vasili severely . 
`` You do n't know what you are doing . '' 
`` Vile woman ! '' 
shouted the princess , darting unexpectedly at Anna Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her . 
Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands . 
At this moment that terrible door , which Pierre had watched so long and which had always opened so quietly , burst noisily open and banged against the wall , and the second of the three sisters rushed out wringing her hands . 
`` What are you doing ! '' 
she cried vehemently . 
`` He is dying and you leave me alone with him ! '' 
Her sister dropped the portfolio . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , stooping , quickly caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom . 
The eldest princess and Prince Vasili , recovering themselves , followed her . 
A few minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face , again biting her underlip . 
At sight of Pierre her expression showed an irrepressible hatred . 
`` Yes , now you may be glad ! '' 
said she ; `` this is what you have been waiting for . '' 
And bursting into tears she hid her face in her handkerchief and rushed from the room . 
Prince Vasili came next . 
He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was sitting and dropped onto it , covering his face with his hand . 
Pierre noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an ague . 
`` Ah , my friend ! '' 
said he , taking Pierre by the elbow ; and there was in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it before . 
`` How often we sin , how much we deceive , and all for what ? 
I am near sixty , dear friend ... I too ... All will end in death , all ! 
Death is awful ... '' and he burst into tears . 
Anna Mikhaylovna came out last . 
She approached Pierre with slow , quiet steps . 
`` Pierre ! '' 
she said . 
Pierre gave her an inquiring look . 
She kissed the young man on his forehead , wetting him with her tears . 
Then after a pause she said : `` He is no more ... '' Pierre looked at her over his spectacles . 
`` Come , I will go with you . 
Try to weep , nothing gives such relief as tears . '' 
She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could see his face . 
Anna Mikhaylovna left him , and when she returned he was fast asleep with his head on his arm . 
In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre : `` Yes , my dear , this is a great loss for us all , not to speak of you . 
But God will support you : you are young , and are now , I hope , in command of an immense fortune . 
The will has not yet been opened . 
I know you well enough to be sure that this will not turn your head , but it imposes duties on you , and you must be a man . '' 
Pierre was silent . 
`` Perhaps later on I may tell you , my dear boy , that if I had not been there , God only knows what would have happened ! 
You know , Uncle promised me only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris . 
But he had no time . 
I hope , my dear friend , you will carry out your father 's wish ? '' 
Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in silence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna . 
After her talk with Pierre , Anna Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs ' and went to bed . 
On waking in the morning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of Count Bezukhov 's death . 
She said the count had died as she would herself wish to die , that his end was not only touching but edifying . 
As to the last meeting between father and son , it was so touching that she could not think of it without tears , and did not know which had behaved better during those awful moments -- the father who so remembered everything and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son , or Pierre , whom it had been pitiful to see , so stricken was he with grief , though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father . 
`` It is painful , but it does one good . 
It uplifts the soul to see such men as the old count and his worthy son , '' said she . 
Of the behavior of the eldest princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly , but in whispers and as a great secret . 
At Bald Hills , Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski 's estate , the arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected , but this expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the old prince 's household . 
General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich -LRB- nicknamed in society , `` the King of Prussia '' -RRB- ever since the Emperor Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuously with his daughter , Princess Mary , and her companion , Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
Though in the new reign he was free to return to the capitals , he still continued to live in the country , remarking that anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to Bald Hills , while he himself needed no one and nothing . 
He used to say that there are only two sources of human vice -- idleness and superstition , and only two virtues -- activity and intelligence . 
He himself undertook his daughter 's education , and to develop these two cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry till she was twenty , and arranged her life so that her whole time was occupied . 
He was himself always occupied : writing his memoirs , solving problems in higher mathematics , turning snuffboxes on a lathe , working in the garden , or superintending the building that was always going on at his estate . 
As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity , regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of exactitude . 
He always came to table under precisely the same conditions , and not only at the same hour but at the same minute . 
With those about him , from his daughter to his serfs , the prince was sharp and invariably exacting , so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fear and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused . 
Although he was in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs , every high official appointed to the province in which the prince 's estate lay considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber ante chamber just as the architect , gardener , or Princess Mary did , till the prince appeared punctually to the appointed hour . 
Everyone sitting in this antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather small old man , with powdered wig , small withered hands , and bushy gray eyebrows which , when he frowned , sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd , youthfully glittering eyes . 
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive , Princess Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the morning greeting , crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a silent prayer . 
Every morning she came in like that , and every morning prayed that the daily interview might pass off well . 
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose quietly and said in a whisper : `` Please walk in . '' 
Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe . 
The princess timidly opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily . 
She paused at the entrance . 
The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round continued his work . 
The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use . 
The large table covered with books and plans , the tall glass-fronted bookcases with keys in the locks , the high desk for writing while standing up , on which lay an open exercise book , and the lathe with tools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around -- all indicated continuous , varied , and orderly activity . 
The motion of the small foot shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver , and the firm pressure of the lean sinewy hand , showed that the prince still possessed the tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age . 
After a few more turns of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal , wiped his chisel , dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe , and , approaching the table , summoned his daughter . 
He never gave his children a blessing , so he simply held out his bristly cheek -LRB- as yet unshaven -RRB- and , regarding her tenderly and attentively , said severely : `` Quite well ? 
