`` I desire peace , no less than the Emperor Alexander , '' he began . 
`` Have I not for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it ? 
I have waited eighteen months for explanations . 
But in order to begin negotiations , what is demanded of me ? '' 
he said , frowning and making an energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump hand . 
`` The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen , sire , '' replied Balashev . 
`` The Niemen ? '' 
repeated Napoleon . 
`` So now you want me to retire beyond the Niemen -- only the Niemen ? '' 
repeated Napoleon , looking straight at Balashev . 
The latter bowed his head respectfully . 
Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania , only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded . 
Napoleon turned quickly and began to pace the room . 
`` You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen before commencing negotiations , but in just the same way two months ago the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder , and yet you are willing to negotiate . '' 
He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and again stopped in front of Balashev . 
Balashev noticed that his left leg was quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern expression . 
This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was conscious of . 
`` The vibration of my left calf is a great sign with me , '' he remarked at a later date . 
`` Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to a Prince of Baden , but not to me ! '' 
Napoleon almost screamed , quite to his own surprise . 
`` If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could not accept such conditions . 
You say I have begun this war ! 
But who first joined his army ? 
The Emperor Alexander , not I ! 
And you offer me negotiations when I have expended millions , when you are in alliance with England , and when your position is a bad one . 
You offer me negotiations ! 
But what is the aim of your alliance with England ? 
What has she given you ? '' 
he continued hurriedly , evidently no longer trying to show the advantages of peace and discuss its possibility , but only to prove his own rectitude and power and Alexander 's errors and duplicity . 
The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with the intention of demonstrating the advantages of his position and showing that he was nevertheless willing to negotiate . 
But he had begun talking , and the more he talked the less could he control his words . 
The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and insult Alexander -- just what he had least desired at the commencement of the interview . 
`` I hear you have made peace with Turkey ? '' 
Balashev bowed his head affirmatively . 
`` Peace has been concluded ... '' he began . 
But Napoleon did not let him speak . 
He evidently wanted to do all the talking himself , and continued to talk with the sort of eloquence and unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone . 
`` Yes , I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtaining Moldavia and Wallachia ; I would have given your sovereign those provinces as I gave him Finland . 
Yes , '' he went on , `` I promised and would have given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia , and now he wo n't have those splendid provinces . 
Yet he might have united them to his empire and in a single reign would have extended Russia from the Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube . 
Catherine the Great could not have done more , '' said Napoleon , growing more and more excited as he paced up and down the room , repeating to Balashev almost the very words he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit . 
`` All that , he would have owed to my friendship . 
Oh , what a splendid reign ! '' 
he repeated several times , then paused , drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox , lifted it to his nose , and greedily sniffed at it . 
`` What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander 's might have been ! '' 
He looked compassionately at Balashev , and as soon as the latter tried to make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him . 
`` What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained through my friendship ? '' 
demanded Napoleon , shrugging his shoulders in perplexity . 
`` But no , he has preferred to surround himself with my enemies , and with whom ? 
With Steins , Armfeldts , Bennigsens , and Wintzingerodes ! 
Stein , a traitor expelled from his own country ; Armfeldt , a rake and an intriguer ; Wintzingerode , a fugitive French subject ; Bennigsen , rather more of a soldier than the others , but all the same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807 and who should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander 's mind ... . 
Granted that were they competent they might be made use of , '' continued Napoleon -- hardly able to keep pace in words with the rush of thoughts that incessantly sprang up , proving how right and strong he was -LRB- in his perception the two were one and the same -RRB- - `` but they are not even that ! 
They are neither fit for war nor peace ! 
Barclay is said to be the most capable of them all , but I can not say so , judging by his first movements . 
And what are they doing , all these courtiers ? 
Pfuel proposes , Armfeldt disputes , Bennigsen considers , and Barclay , called on to act , does not know what to decide on , and time passes bringing no result . 
Bagration alone is a military man . 
He 's stupid , but he has experience , a quick eye , and resolution ... . 
And what role is your young monarch playing in that monstrous crowd ? 
They compromise him and throw on him the responsibility for all that happens . 
A sovereign should not be with the army unless he is a general ! '' 
said Napoleon , evidently uttering these words as a direct challenge to the Emperor . 
He knew how Alexander desired to be a military commander . 
`` The campaign began only a week ago , and you have n't even been able to defend Vilna . 
You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polish provinces . 
Your army is grumbling . '' 
`` On the contrary , Your Majesty , '' said Balashev , hardly able to remember what had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with difficulty , `` the troops are burning with eagerness ... '' `` I know everything ! '' 
Napoleon interrupted him . 
`` I know everything . 
I know the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own . 
You have not two hundred thousand men , and I have three times that number . 
I give you my word of honor , '' said Napoleon , forgetting that his word of honor could carry no weight -- `` I give you my word of honor that I have five hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula . 
The Turks will be of no use to you ; they are worth nothing and have shown it by making peace with you . 
As for the Swedes -- it is their fate to be governed by mad kings . 
Their king was insane and they changed him for another -- Bernadotte , who promptly went mad -- for no Swede would ally himself with Russia unless he were mad . '' 
Napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose . 
Balashev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon 's remarks , and would have done so ; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing to say something , but Napoleon always interrupted him . 
To the alleged insanity of the Swedes , Balashev wished to reply that when Russia is on her side Sweden is practically an island : but Napoleon gave an angry exclamation to drown his voice . 
Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which a man has to talk , talk , and talk , merely to convince himself that he is in the right . 
Balashev began to feel uncomfortable : as envoy he feared to demean his dignity and felt the necessity of replying ; but , as a man , he shrank before the transport of groundless wrath that had evidently seized Napoleon . 
He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon had any significance , and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of them when he came to his senses . 
Balashev stood with downcast eyes , looking at the movements of Napoleon 's stout legs and trying to avoid meeting his eyes . 
`` But what do I care about your allies ? '' 
said Napoleon . 
`` I have allies -- the Poles . 
There are eighty thousand of them and they fight like lions . 
And there will be two hundred thousand of them . '' 
And probably still more perturbed by the fact that he had uttered this obvious falsehood , and that Balashev still stood silently before him in the same attitude of submission to fate , Napoleon abruptly turned round , drew close to Balashev 's face , and , gesticulating rapidly and energetically with his white hands , almost shouted : `` Know that if you stir up Prussia against me , I 'll wipe it off the map of Europe ! '' 
he declared , his face pale and distorted by anger , and he struck one of his small hands energetically with the other . 
`` Yes , I will throw you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper , and will re-erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of Europe to allow to be destroyed . 
Yes , that is what will happen to you . 
That is what you have gained by alienating me ! '' 
And he walked silently several times up and down the room , his fat shoulders twitching . 
He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket , took it out again , lifted it several times to his nose , and stopped in front of Balashev . 
He paused , looked ironically straight into Balashev 's eyes , and said in a quiet voice : `` And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had ! '' 
Balashev , feeling it incumbent on him to reply , said that from the Russian side things did not appear in so gloomy a light . 
Napoleon was silent , still looking derisively at him and evidently not listening to him . 
Balashev said that in Russia the best results were expected from the war . 
Napoleon nodded condescendingly , as if to say , `` I know it 's your duty to say that , but you do n't believe it yourself . 
I have convinced you . '' 
