Bang , bang ! 
went the first sleigh over a cradle hole in the snow of the road , and each of the other sleighs jolted in the same way , and rudely breaking the frost-bound stillness , the troykas began to speed along the road , one after the other . 
`` A hare 's track , a lot of tracks ! '' 
rang out Natasha 's voice through the frost-bound air . 
`` How light it is , Nicholas ! '' 
came Sonya 's voice . 
Nicholas glanced round at Sonya , and bent down to see her face closer . 
Quite a new , sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped up at him from her sable furs -- so close and yet so distant - in the moonlight . 
`` That used to be Sonya , '' thought he , and looked at her closer and smiled . 
`` What is it , Nicholas ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' said he and turned again to the horses . 
When they came out onto the beaten highroad -- polished by sleigh runners and cut up by rough-shod hoofs , the marks of which were visible in the moonlight -- the horses began to tug at the reins of their own accord and increased their pace . 
The near side horse , arching his head and breaking into a short canter , tugged at his traces . 
The shaft horse swayed from side to side , moving his ears as if asking : `` Is n't it time to begin now ? '' 
In front , already far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing farther and farther off , the black horses driven by Zakhar could be clearly seen against the white snow . 
From that sleigh one could hear the shouts , laughter , and voices of the mummers . 
`` Gee up , my darlings ! '' 
shouted Nicholas , pulling the reins to one side and flourishing the whip . 
It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by the side horses who pulled harder -- ever increasing their gallop - that one noticed how fast the troyka was flying . 
Nicholas looked back . 
With screams squeals , and waving of whips that caused even the shaft horses to gallop -- the other sleighs followed . 
The shaft horse swung steadily beneath the bow over its head , with no thought of slackening pace and ready to put on speed when required . 
Nicholas overtook the first sleigh . 
They were driving downhill and coming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow , near a river . 
`` Where are we ? '' 
thought he . 
`` It 's the Kosoy meadow , I suppose . 
But no -- this is something new I 've never seen before . 
This is n't the Kosoy meadow nor the Demkin hill , and heaven only knows what it is ! 
It is something new and enchanted . 
Well , whatever it may be ... '' And shouting to his horses , he began to pass the first sleigh . 
Zakhar held back his horses and turned his face , which was already covered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows . 
Nicholas gave the horses the rein , and Zakhar , stretching out his arms , clucked his tongue and let his horses go . 
`` Now , look out , master ! '' 
he cried . 
Faster still the two troykas flew side by side , and faster moved the feet of the galloping side horses . 
Nicholas began to draw ahead . 
Zakhar , while still keeping his arms extended , raised one hand with the reins . 
`` No you wo n't , master ! '' 
he shouted . 
Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhar . 
The horses showered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh - beside them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused glimpses of swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they were passing . 
The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girls shrieking were heard from different sides . 
Again checking his horses , Nicholas looked around him . 
They were still surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled with stars . 
`` Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left , but why to the left ? '' 
thought Nicholas . 
`` Are we getting to the Melyukovs ' ? 
Is this Melyukovka ? 
Heaven only knows where we are going , and heaven knows what is happening to us -- but it is very strange and pleasant whatever it is . '' 
And he looked round in the sleigh . 
`` Look , his mustache and eyelashes are all white ! '' 
said one of the strange , pretty , unfamiliar people -- the one with fine eyebrows and mustache . 
`` I think this used to be Natasha , '' thought Nicholas , `` and that was Madame Schoss , but perhaps it 's not , and this Circassian with the mustache I do n't know , but I love her . '' 
`` Are n't you cold ? '' 
he asked . 
They did not answer but began to laugh . 
Dimmler from the sleigh behind shouted something -- probably something funny -- but they could not make out what he said . 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
some voices answered , laughing . 
`` But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows , and a glitter of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy buildings and the shrill yells of some animals . 
And if this is really Melyukovka , it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where and have come to Melyukovka , '' thought Nicholas . 
It really was Melyukovka , and maids and footmen with merry faces came running , out to the porch carrying candles . 
`` Who is it ? '' 
asked someone in the porch . 
`` The mummers from the count 's . 
I know by the horses , '' replied some voices . 
Pelageya Danilovna Melyukova , a broadly built , energetic woman wearing spectacles , sat in the drawing room in a loose dress , surrounded by her daughters whom she was trying to keep from feeling dull . 
They were quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows the wax figures would throw on the wall , when they heard the steps and voices of new arrivals in the vestibule . 
Hussars , ladies , witches , clowns , and bears , after clearing their throats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule , came into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted . 
The clown -- Dimmler -- and the lady -- Nicholas -- started a dance . 
Surrounded by the screaming children the mummers , covering their faces and disguising their voices , bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about the room . 
`` Dear me ! 
there 's no recognizing them ! 
And Natasha ! 
See whom she looks like ! 
She really reminds me of somebody . 
But Herr Dimmler -- is n't he good ! 
I did n't know him ! 
And how he dances . 
Dear me , there 's a Circassian . 
Really , how becoming it is to dear Sonya . 
And who is that ? 
Well , you have cheered us up ! 
Nikita and Vanya -- clear away the tables ! 
And we were sitting so quietly . 
Ha , ha , ha ! 
... The hussar , the hussar ! 
Just like a boy ! 
And the legs ! 
... I ca n't look at him ... '' different voices were saying . 
Natasha , the young Melyukovs ' favorite , disappeared with them into the back rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male garments were called for and received from the footman by bare girlish arms from behind the door . 
Ten minutes later , all the young Melyukovs joined the mummers . 
Pelageya Danilovna , having given orders to clear the rooms for the visitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs , went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles , peering into their faces with a suppressed smile and failing to recognize any of them . 
It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to recognize , she did not even recognize her own daughters , or her late husband 's , dressing gowns and uniforms , which they had put on . 
`` And who is is this ? '' 
she asked her governess , peering into the face of her own daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar . 
`` I suppose it is one of the Rostovs ! 
Well , Mr. Hussar , and what regiment do you serve in ? '' 
she asked Natasha . 
