Nothing . 
He had merely understood that the woman he had known as a child , of whom when her beauty was mentioned he had said absent-mindedly : `` Yes , she 's good looking , '' he had understood that this woman might belong to him . 
`` But she 's stupid . 
I have myself said she is stupid , '' he thought . 
`` There is something nasty , something wrong , in the feeling she excites in me . 
I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her and she with him , that there was quite a scandal and that that 's why he was sent away . 
Hippolyte is her brother ... Prince Vasili is her father ... It 's bad ... '' he reflected , but while he was thinking this -LRB- the reflection was still incomplete -RRB- , he caught himself smiling and was conscious that another line of thought had sprung up , and while thinking of her worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would be his wife , how she would love him become quite different , and how all he had thought and heard of her might be false . 
And he again saw her not as the daughter of Prince Vasili , but visualized her whole body only veiled by its gray dress . 
`` But no ! 
Why did this thought never occur to me before ? '' 
and again he told himself that it was impossible , that there would be something unnatural , and as it seemed to him dishonorable , in this marriage . 
He recalled her former words and looks and the words and looks of those who had seen them together . 
He recalled Anna Pavlovna 's words and looks when she spoke to him about his house , recalled thousands of such hints from Prince Vasili and others , and was seized by terror lest he had already , in some way , bound himself to do something that was evidently wrong and that he ought not to do . 
But at the very time he was expressing this conviction to himself , in another part of his mind her image rose in all its womanly beauty . 
In November , 1805 , Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of inspection in four different provinces . 
He had arranged this for himself so as to visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole where his regiment was stationed , and take him to visit Prince Nicholas Bolkonski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that rich old man . 
But before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs , Prince Vasili had to settle matters with Pierre , who , it is true , had latterly spent whole days at home , that is , in Prince Vasili 's house where he was staying , and had been absurd , excited , and foolish in Helene 's presence -LRB- as a lover should be -RRB- , but had not yet proposed to her . 
`` This is all very fine , but things must be settled , '' said Prince Vasili to himself , with a sorrowful sigh , one morning , feeling that Pierre who was under such obligations to him -LRB- `` But never mind that '' -RRB- was not behaving very well in this matter . 
`` Youth , frivolity ... well , God be with him , '' thought he , relishing his own goodness of heart , `` but it must be brought to a head . 
The day after tomorrow will be Lelya 's name day . 
I will invite two or three people , and if he does not understand what he ought to do then it will be my affair - yes , my affair . 
I am her father . '' 
Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna 's `` At Home '' and after the sleepless night when he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and that he ought to avoid her and go away , Pierre , despite that decision , had not left Prince Vasili 's and felt with terror that in people 's eyes he was every day more and more connected with her , that it was impossible for him to return to his former conception of her , that he could not break away from her , and that though it would be a terrible thing he would have to unite his fate with hers . 
He might perhaps have been able to free himself but that Prince Vasili -LRB- who had rarely before given receptions -RRB- now hardly let a day go by without having an evening party at which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil the general pleasure and disappoint everyone 's expectation . 
Prince Vasili , in the rare moments when he was at home , would take Pierre 's hand in passing and draw it downwards , or absent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled , clean-shaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say : `` Till tomorrow , '' or , `` Be in to dinner or I shall not see you , '' or , `` I am staying in for your sake , '' and so on . 
And though Prince Vasili , when he stayed in -LRB- as he said -RRB- for Pierre 's sake , hardly exchanged a couple of words with him , Pierre felt unable to disappoint him . 
Every day he said to himself one and the same thing : `` It is time I understood her and made up my mind what she really is . 
Was I mistaken before , or am I mistaken now ? 
No , she is not stupid , she is an excellent girl , '' he sometimes said to himself `` she never makes a mistake , never says anything stupid . 
She says little , but what she does say is always clear and simple , so she is not stupid . 
She never was abashed and is not abashed now , so she can not be a bad woman ! '' 
He had often begun to make reflections or think aloud in her company , and she had always answered him either by a brief but appropriate remark -- showing that it did not interest her -- or by a silent look and smile which more palpably than anything else showed Pierre her superiority . 
She was right in regarding all arguments as nonsense in comparison with that smile . 
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him alone , in which there was something more significant than in the general smile that usually brightened her face . 
Pierre knew that everyone was waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line , and he knew that sooner or later he would step across it , but an incomprehensible terror seized him at the thought of that dreadful step . 
A thousand times during that month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to that dreadful abyss , Pierre said to himself : `` What am I doing ? 
I need resolution . 
Can it be that I have none ? '' 
He wished to take a decision , but felt with dismay that in this matter he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and really possessed . 
Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feel themselves quite innocent , and since that day when he was overpowered by a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna 's , an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire paralyzed his will . 
On Helene 's name day , a small party of just their own people -- as his wife said -- met for supper at Prince Vasili 's . 
All these friends and relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young girl would be decided that evening . 
The visitors were seated at supper . 
Princess Kuragina , a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome , was sitting at the head of the table . 
On either side of her sat the more important guests -- an old general and his wife , and Anna Pavlovna Scherer . 
At the other end sat the younger and less important guests , and there too sat the members of the family , and Pierre and Helene , side by side . 
Prince Vasili was not having any supper : he went round the table in a merry mood , sitting down now by one , now by another , of the guests . 
To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark except to Pierre and Helene , whose presence he seemed not to notice . 
He enlivened the whole party . 
The wax candles burned brightly , the silver and crystal gleamed , so did the ladies ' toilets and the gold and silver of the men 's epaulets ; servants in scarlet liveries moved round the table , the clatter of plates , knives , and glasses mingled with the animated hum of several conversations . 
At one end of the table , the old chamberlain was heard assuring an old baroness that he loved her passionately , at which she laughed ; at the other could be heard the story of the misfortunes of some Mary Viktorovna or other . 
At the center of the table , Prince Vasili attracted everybody 's attention . 
With a facetious smile on his face , he was telling the ladies about last Wednesday 's meeting of the Imperial Council , at which Sergey Kuzmich Vyazmitinov , the new military governor general of Petersburg , had received and read the then famous rescript of the Emperor Alexander from the army to Sergey Kuzmich , in which the Emperor said that he was receiving from all sides declarations of the people 's loyalty , that the declaration from Petersburg gave him particular pleasure , and that he was proud to be at the head of such a nation and would endeavor to be worthy of it . 
This rescript began with the words : `` Sergey Kuzmich , From all sides reports reach me , '' etc. `` Well , and so he never got farther than : ` Sergey Kuzmich ' ? '' 
asked one of the ladies . 
`` Exactly , not a hair 's breadth farther , '' answered Prince Vasili , laughing , '' ` Sergey Kuzmich ... From all sides ... From all sides ... Sergey Kuzmich ... ' Poor Vyazmitinov could not get any farther ! 
He began the rescript again and again , but as soon as he uttered ` Sergey ' he sobbed , ` Kuz-mi-ch , ' tears , and ` From all sides ' was smothered in sobs and he could get no farther . 
And again his handkerchief , and again : ` Sergey Kuzmich , From all sides , ' ... and tears , till at last somebody else was asked to read it . '' 
`` Kuzmich ... From all sides ... and then tears , '' someone repeated laughing . 
`` Do n't be unkind , '' cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the table holding up a threatening finger . 
`` He is such a worthy and excellent man , our dear Vyazmitinov ... '' Everybody laughed a great deal . 
At the head of the table , where the honored guests sat , everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under the influence of a variety of exciting sensations . 
Only Pierre and Helene sat silently side by side almost at the bottom of the table , a suppressed smile brightening both their faces , a smile that had nothing to do with Sergey Kuzmich -- a smile of bashfulness at their own feelings . 
But much as all the rest laughed , talked , and joked , much as they enjoyed their Rhine wine , saute , and ices , and however they avoided looking at the young couple , and heedless and unobservant as they seemed of them , one could feel by the occasional glances they gave that the story about Sergey Kuzmich , the laughter , and the food were all a pretense , and that the whole attention of that company was directed to -- Pierre and Helene . 
Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbing of Sergey Kuzmich and at the same time his eyes glanced toward his daughter , and while he laughed the expression on his face clearly said : `` Yes ... it 's getting on , it will all be settled today . '' 
Anna Pavlovna threatened him on behalf of `` our dear Vyazmitinov , '' and in her eyes , which , for an instant , glanced at Pierre , Prince Vasili read a congratulation on his future son-in-law and on his daughter 's happiness . 
The old princess sighed sadly as she offered some wine to the old lady next to her and glanced angrily at her daughter , and her sigh seemed to say : `` Yes , there 's nothing left for you and me but to sip sweet wine , my dear , now that the time has come for these young ones to be thus boldly , provocatively happy . '' 
`` And what nonsense all this is that I am saying ! '' 
thought a diplomatist , glancing at the happy faces of the lovers . 
`` That 's happiness ! '' 
Into the insignificant , trifling , and artificial interests uniting that society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy and handsome young man and woman for one another . 
And this human feeling dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter . 
Jests fell flat , news was not interesting , and the animation was evidently forced . 
Not only the guests but even the footmen waiting at table seemed to feel this , and they forgot their duties as they looked at the beautiful Helene with her radiant face and at the red , broad , and happy though uneasy face of Pierre . 
It seemed as if the very light of the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone . 
Pierre felt that he was the center of it all , and this both pleased and embarrassed him . 
He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation . 
He did not see , hear , or understand anything clearly . 
Only now and then detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot unexpectedly through his mind . 
`` So it is all finished ! '' 
he thought . 
`` And how has it all happened ? 
How quickly ! 
Now I know that not because of her alone , nor of myself alone , but because of everyone , it must inevitably come about . 
They are all expecting it , they are so sure that it will happen that I can not , I can not , disappoint them . 
But how will it be ? 
I do not know , but it will certainly happen ! '' 
thought Pierre , glancing at those dazzling shoulders close to his eyes . 
Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what . 
He felt it awkward to attract everyone 's attention and to be considered a lucky man and , with his plain face , to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed of a Helen . 
`` But no doubt it always is and must be so ! '' 
he consoled himself . 
`` And besides , what have I done to bring it about ? 
How did it begin ? 
I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili . 
Then there was nothing . 
So why should I not stay at his house ? 
Then I played cards with her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her . 
How did it begin , when did it all come about ? '' 
And here he was sitting by her side as her betrothed , seeing , hearing , feeling her nearness , her breathing , her movements , her beauty . 
