It is pitiable and sad , and the whole army is in despair that this most important place has been wantonly abandoned . 
I , for my part , begged him personally most urgently and finally wrote him , but nothing would induce him to consent . 
I swear to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before and might have lost half his army but could not have taken Smolensk . 
Our troops fought , and are fighting , as never before . 
With fifteen thousand men I held the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and beat him ; but he would not hold out even for fourteen hours . 
It is disgraceful , a stain on our army , and as for him , he ought , it seems to me , not to live . 
If he reports that our losses were great , it is not true ; perhaps about four thousand , not more , and not even that ; but even were they ten thousand , that 's war ! 
But the enemy has lost masses ... What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days ? 
They would have had to retire of their own accord , for they had no water for men or horses . 
He gave me his word he would not retreat , but suddenly sent instructions that he was retiring that night . 
We can not fight in this way , or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow ... There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace . 
God forbid that you should make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats ! 
You would set all Russia against you and every one of us would feel ashamed to wear the uniform . 
If it has come to this -- we must fight as long as Russia can and as long as there are men able to stand ... One man ought to be in command , and not two . 
Your Minister may perhaps be good as a Minister , but as a general he is not merely bad but execrable , yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country ... . 
I am really frantic with vexation ; forgive my writing boldly . 
It is clear that the man who advocates the conclusion of a peace , and that the Minister should command the army , does not love our sovereign and desires the ruin of us all . 
So I write you frankly : call out the militia . 
For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to Moscow in a most masterly way . 
The whole army feels great suspicion of the Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen . 
He is said to be more Napoleon 's man than ours , and he is always advising the Minister . 
I am not merely civil to him but obey him like a corporal , though I am his senior . 
This is painful , but , loving my benefactor and sovereign , I submit . 
Only I am sorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our fine army to such as he . 
Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatigue and left in the hospital more than fifteen thousand men , and had we attacked this would not have happened . 
Tell me , for God 's sake , what will Russia , our mother Russia , say to our being so frightened , and why are we abandoning our good and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting feelings of hatred and shame in all our subjects ? 
What are we scared at and of whom are we afraid ? 
I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillating , a coward , dense , dilatory , and has all bad qualities . 
The whole army bewails it and calls down curses upon him ... Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of human life one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails and those in which form prevails . 
To the latter -- as distinguished from village , country , provincial , or even Moscow life -- we may allot Petersburg life , and especially the life of its salons . 
That life of the salons is unchanging . 
Since the year 1805 we had made peace and had again quarreled with Bonaparte and had made constitutions and unmade them again , but the salons of Anna Pavlovna Helene remained just as they had been -- the one seven and the other five years before . 
At Anna Pavlovna 's they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte 's successes just as before and saw in them and in the subservience shown to him by the European sovereigns a malicious conspiracy , the sole object of which was to cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna Pavlovna was the representative . 
And in Helene 's salon , which Rumyantsev himself honored with his visits , regarding Helene as a remarkably intelligent woman , they talked with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808 of the `` great nation '' and the `` great man , '' and regretted our rupture with France , a rupture which , according to them , ought to be promptly terminated by peace . 
Of late , since the Emperor 's return from the army , there had been some excitement in these conflicting salon circles and some demonstrations of hostility to one another , but each camp retained its own tendency . 
In Anna Pavlovna 's circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were deep-rooted legitimists , and patriotic views were expressed to the effect that one ought not to go to the French theater and that to maintain the French troupe was costing the government as much as a whole army corps . 
The progress of the war was eagerly followed , and only the reports most flattering to our army were circulated . 
In the French circle of Helene and Rumyantsev the reports of the cruelty of the enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon 's attempts at conciliation were discussed . 
In that circle they discountenanced those who advised hurried preparations for a removal to Kazan of the court and the girls ' educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager Empress . 
In Helene 's circle the war in general was regarded as a series of formal demonstrations which would very soon end in peace , and the view prevailed expressed by Bilibin -- who now in Petersburg was quite at home in Helene 's house , which every clever man was obliged to visit - that not by gunpowder but by those who invented it would matters be settled . 
In that circle the Moscow enthusiasm -- news of which had reached Petersburg simultaneously with the Emperor 's return -- was ridiculed sarcastically and very cleverly , though with much caution . 
Anna Pavlovna 's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this enthusiasm and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients . 
Prince Vasili , who still occupied his former important posts , formed a connecting link between these two circles . 
He visited his `` good friend Anna Pavlovna '' as well as his daughter 's `` diplomatic salon , '' and often in his constant comings and goings between the two camps became confused and said at Helene 's what he should have said at Anna Pavlovna 's and vice versa . 
Soon after the Emperor 's return Prince Vasili in a conversation about the war at Anna Pavlovna 's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly , but was undecided as to who ought to be appointed commander in chief . 
One of the visitors , usually spoken of as `` a man of great merit , '' having described how he had that day seen Kutuzov , the newly chosen chief of the Petersburg militia , presiding over the enrollment of recruits at the Treasury , cautiously ventured to suggest that Kutuzov would be the man to satisfy all requirements . 
Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done nothing but cause the Emperor annoyance . 
`` I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility , '' Prince Vasili interrupted , `` but they did not listen to me . 
I told them his election as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor . 
They did not listen to me . 
`` It 's all this mania for opposition , '' he went on . 
`` And who for ? 
It is all because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites , '' Prince Vasili continued , forgetting for a moment that though at Helene 's one had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm , at Anna Pavlovna 's one had to be ecstatic about it . 
But he retrieved his mistake at once . 
`` Now , is it suitable that Count Kutuzov , the oldest general in Russia , should preside at that tribunal ? 
He will get nothing for his pains ! 
How could they make a man commander in chief who can not mount a horse , who drops asleep at a council , and has the very worst morals ! 
A good reputation he made for himself at Bucharest ! 
I do n't speak of his capacity as a general , but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit , blind old man , positively blind ? 
A fine idea to have a blind general ! 
He ca n't see anything . 
To play blindman 's bluff ? 
He ca n't see at all ! '' 
No one replied to his remarks . 
This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July . 
But on the twenty-ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince . 
This might indicate a wish to get rid of him , and therefore Prince Vasili 's opinion continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry to express it . 
But on the eighth of August a committee , consisting of Field Marshal Saltykov , Arakcheev , Vyazmitinov , Lopukhin , and Kochubey met to consider the progress of the war . 
This committee came to the conclusion that our failures were due to a want of unity in the command and though the members of the committee were aware of the Emperor 's dislike of Kutuzov , after a short deliberation they agreed to advise his appointment as commander in chief . 
That same day Kutuzov was appointed commander in chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole region occupied by them . 
On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna 's again met the `` man of great merit . '' 
The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna because he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational establishments for young ladies . 
Prince Vasili entered the room with the air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires . 
`` Well , have you heard the great news ? 
Prince Kutuzov is field marshal ! 
All dissensions are at an end ! 
I am so glad , so delighted ! 
At last we have a man ! '' 
said he , glancing sternly and significantly round at everyone in the drawing room . 
The `` man of great merit , '' despite his desire to obtain the post of director , could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his former opinion . 
Though this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna Pavlovna 's drawing room , and also to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received the news with delight , he could not resist the temptation . 
`` But , Prince , they say he is blind ! '' 
said he , reminding Prince Vasili of his own words . 
`` Eh ? 
Nonsense ! 
He sees well enough , '' said Prince Vasili rapidly , in a deep voice and with a slight cough -- the voice and cough with which he was wont to dispose of all difficulties . 
`` He sees well enough , '' he added . 
`` And what I am so pleased about , '' he went on , `` is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all the armies and the whole region -- powers no commander in chief ever had before . 
He is a second autocrat , '' he concluded with a victorious smile . 
`` God grant it ! 
God grant it ! '' 
said Anna Pavlovna . 
The `` man of great merit , '' who was still a novice in court circles , wishing to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position on this question , observed : `` It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers . 
They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read , when he said to Kutuzov : ` Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor . ' '' 
`` Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech , '' said Anna Pavlovna . 
`` Oh , no , no ! '' 
warmly rejoined Prince Vasili , who would not now yield Kutuzov to anyone ; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirable himself , but was adored by everybody . 
`` No , that 's impossible , '' said he , `` for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before . '' 
`` God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel , '' observed Anna Pavlovna . 
Understanding at once to whom she alluded , Prince Vasili said in a whisper : `` I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition that the Tsarevich should not be with the army . 
