The convicts stopped when they reached the post and , while sacks were being brought , looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approaching huntsman . 
One crossed himself continually , the other scratched his back and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile . 
With hurried hands the soldiers blindfolded them , drawing the sacks over their heads , and bound them to the post . 
Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm regular tread and halted eight paces from the post . 
Pierre turned away to avoid seeing what was going to happen . 
Suddenly a crackling , rolling noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific thunder , and he looked round . 
There was some smoke , and the Frenchmen were doing something near the pit , with pale faces and trembling hands . 
Two more prisoners were led up . 
In the same way and with similar looks , these two glanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal for protection in their eyes , evidently unable to understand or believe what was going to happen to them . 
They could not believe it because they alone knew what their life meant to them , and so they neither understood nor believed that it could be taken from them . 
Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away ; but again the sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear , and at the same moment he saw smoke , blood , and the pale , scared faces of the Frenchmen who were again doing something by the post , their trembling hands impeding one another . 
Pierre , breathing heavily , looked around as if asking what it meant . 
The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his . 
On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers without exception , he read the same dismay , horror , and conflict that were in his own heart . 
`` But who , after all , is doing this ? 
They are all suffering as I am . 
Who then is it ? 
Who ? '' 
flashed for an instant through his mind . 
`` Sharpshooters of the 86th , forward ! '' 
shouted someone . 
The fifth prisoner , the one next to Pierre , was led away -- alone . 
Pierre did not understand that he was saved , that he and the rest had been brought there only to witness the execution . 
With ever-growing horror , and no sense of joy or relief , he gazed at what was taking place . 
The fifth man was the factory lad in the loose cloak . 
The moment they laid hands on him he sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre . 
-LRB- Pierre shuddered and shook himself free . -RRB- 
The lad was unable to walk . 
They dragged him along , holding him up under the arms , and he screamed . 
When they got him to the post he grew quiet , as if he suddenly understood something . 
Whether he understood that screaming was useless or whether he thought it incredible that men should kill him , at any rate he took his stand at the post , waiting to be blindfolded like the others , and like a wounded animal looked around him with glittering eyes . 
Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes . 
His curiosity and agitation , like that of the whole crowd , reached the highest pitch at this fifth murder . 
Like the others this fifth man seemed calm ; he wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other . 
When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which hurt the back of his head ; then when they propped him against the bloodstained post , he leaned back and , not being comfortable in that position , straightened himself , adjusted his feet , and leaned back again more comfortably . 
Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss his slightest movement . 
Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports of eight muskets ; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember having heard the slightest sound of the shots . 
He only saw how the workman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him , how blood showed itself in two places , how the ropes slackened under the weight of the hanging body , and how the workman sat down , his head hanging unnaturally and one leg bent under him . 
Pierre ran up to the post . 
No one hindered him . 
Pale , frightened people were doing something around the workman . 
The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he untied the ropes . 
The body collapsed . 
The soldiers dragged it awkwardly from the post and began pushing it into the pit . 
They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible . 
Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying with his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other . 
That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively , but spadefuls of earth were already being thrown over the whole body . 
One of the soldiers , evidently suffering , shouted gruffly and angrily at Pierre to go back . 
But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post , and no one drove him away . 
When the pit had been filled up a command was given . 
Pierre was taken back to his place , and the rows of troops on both sides of the post made a half turn and went past it at a measured pace . 
The twenty-four sharpshooters with discharged muskets , standing in the center of the circle , ran back to their places as the companies passed by . 
Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in couples out of the circle . 
All but one rejoined their companies . 
This one , a young soldier , his face deadly pale , his shako pushed back , and his musket resting on the ground , still stood near the pit at the spot from which he had fired . 
He swayed like a drunken man , taking some steps forward and back to save himself from falling . 
An old , noncommissioned officer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him to his company . 
The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse . 
They all went away silently and with drooping heads . 
`` That will teach them to start fires , '' said one of the Frenchmen . 
Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who was trying to find some relief after what had been done , but was not able to do so . 
Without finishing what he had begun to say he made a hopeless movement with his arm and went away . 
After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners and placed alone in a small , ruined , and befouled church . 
Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks for the prisoners of war . 
Without understanding what was said to him , Pierre got up and went with the soldiers . 
They took him to the upper end of the field , where there were some sheds built of charred planks , beams , and battens , and led him into one of them . 
In the darkness some twenty different men surrounded Pierre . 
He looked at them without understanding who they were , why they were there , or what they wanted of him . 
He heard what they said , but did not understand the meaning of the words and made no kind of deduction from or application of them . 
He replied to questions they put to him , but did not consider who was listening to his replies , nor how they would understand them . 
He looked at their faces and figures , but they all seemed to him equally meaningless . 
From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed by men who did not wish to commit them , it was as if the mainspring of his life , on which everything depended and which made everything appear alive , had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed into a heap of meaningless rubbish . 
Though he did not acknowledge it to himself , his faith in the right ordering of the universe , in humanity , in his own soul , and in God , had been destroyed . 
He had experienced this before , but never so strongly as now . 
When similar doubts had assailed him before , they had been the result of his own wrongdoing , and at the bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from those doubts was to be found within himself . 
But now he felt that the universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruins remained , and this not by any fault of his own . 
He felt that it was not in his power to regain faith in the meaning of life . 
Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently something about him interested them greatly . 
They were telling him something and asking him something . 
Then they led him away somewhere , and at last he found himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing and talking on all sides . 
`` Well , then , mates ... that very prince who ... '' some voice at the other end of the shed was saying , with a strong emphasis on the word who . 
Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall , Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes . 
But as soon as he closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory lad -- especially dreadful because of its simplicity -- and the faces of the murderers , even more dreadful because of their disquiet . 
And he opened his eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness around him . 
Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence he was first made aware by a strong smell of perspiration which came from him every time he moved . 
This man was doing something to his legs in the darkness , and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man continually glanced at him . 
On growing used to the darkness Pierre saw that the man was taking off his leg bands , and the way he did it aroused Pierre 's interest . 
Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg , he carefully coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg , glancing up at Pierre . 
While one hand hung up the first string the other was already unwinding the band on the second leg . 
In this way , having carefully removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following one another uninterruptedly , the man hung the leg bands up on some pegs fixed above his head . 
Then he took out a knife , cut something , closed the knife , placed it under the head of his bed , and , seating himself comfortably , clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyes on Pierre . 
The latter was conscious of something pleasant , comforting , and well rounded in these deft movements , in the man 's well-ordered arrangements in his corner , and even in his very smell , and he looked at the man without taking his eyes from him . 
`` You 've seen a lot of trouble , sir , eh ? '' 
the little man suddenly said . 
And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voice that Pierre tried to reply , but his jaw trembled and he felt tears rising to his eyes . 
The little fellow , giving Pierre no time to betray his confusion , instantly continued in the same pleasant tones : `` Eh , lad , do n't fret ! '' 
said he , in the tender singsong caressing voice old Russian peasant women employ . 
`` Do n't fret , friend -- ` suffer an hour , live for an age ! ' 
that 's how it is , my dear fellow . 
And here we live , thank heaven , without offense . 
