`` My head , be it good or bad , must depend on itself , '' said he , rising from the bench , and he rode to Fili where his carriages were waiting . 
The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov 's hut . 
The men , women , and children of the large peasant family crowded into the back room across the passage . 
Only Malasha , Andrew 's six-year-old granddaughter whom his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugar while drinking his tea , remained on the top of the brick oven in the larger room . 
Malasha looked down from the oven with shy delight at the faces , uniforms , and decorations of the generals , who one after another came into the room and sat down on the broad benches in the corner under the icons . 
`` Granddad '' himself , as Malasha in her own mind called Kutuzov , sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven . 
He sat , sunk deep in a folding armchair , and continually cleared his throat and pulled at the collar of his coat which , though it was unbuttoned , still seemed to pinch his neck . 
Those who entered went up one by one to the field marshal ; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others . 
His adjutant Kaysarov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facing Kutuzov , but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysarov understood that his Serene Highness did not wish his face to be seen . 
Round the peasant 's deal table , on which lay maps , plans , pencils , and papers , so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in another bench and put it beside the table . 
Ermolov , Kaysarov , and Toll , who had just arrived , sat down on this bench . 
In the foremost place , immediately under the icons , sat Barclay de Tolly , his high forehead merging into his bald crown . 
He had a St. George 's Cross round his neck and looked pale and ill . 
He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering and in pain . 
Beside him sat Uvarov , who with rapid gesticulations was giving him some information , speaking in low tones as they all did . 
Chubby little Dokhturov was listening attentively with eyebrows raised and arms folded on his stomach . 
On the other side sat Count Ostermann-Tolstoy , seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts . 
His broad head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand . 
Raevski , twitching forward the black hair on his temples as was his habit , glanced now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a look of impatience . 
Konovnitsyn 's firm , handsome , and kindly face was lit up by a tender , sly smile . 
His glance met Malasha 's , and the expression of his eyes caused the little girl to smile . 
They were all waiting for Bennigsen , who on the pretext of inspecting the position was finishing his savory dinner . 
They waited for him from four till six o'clock and did not begin their deliberations all that time talked in low tones of other matters . 
Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his corner and draw toward the table , but not near enough for the candles that had been placed there to light up his face . 
Bennigsen opened the council with the question : `` Are we to abandon Russia 's ancient and sacred capital without a struggle , or are we to defend it ? '' 
A prolonged and general silence followed . 
There was a frown on every face and only Kutuzov 's angry grunts and occasional cough broke the silence . 
All eyes were gazing at him . 
Malasha too looked at `` Granddad . '' 
She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered ; he seemed about to cry , but this did not last long . 
`` Russia 's ancient and sacred capital ! '' 
he suddenly said , repeating Bennigsen 's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention to the false note in them . 
`` Allow me to tell you , your excellency , that that question has no meaning for a Russian . '' 
-LRB- He lurched his heavy body forward . -RRB- 
`` Such a question can not be put ; it is senseless ! 
The question I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military one . 
The question is that of saving Russia . 
Is it better to give up Moscow without a battle , or by accepting battle to risk losing the army as well as Moscow ? 
That is the question on which I want your opinion , '' and he sank back in his chair . 
The discussion began . 
Bennigsen did not yet consider his game lost . 
Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at Fili was impossible , but imbued with Russian patriotism and the love of Moscow , he proposed to move troops from the right to the left flank during the night and attack the French right flank the following day . 
Opinions were divided , and arguments were advanced for and against that project . 
Ermolov , Dokhturov , and Raevski agreed with Bennigsen . 
Whether feeling it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandoning the capital or guided by other , personal considerations , these generals seemed not to understand that this council could not alter the inevitable course of events and that Moscow was in effect already abandoned . 
The other generals , however , understood it and , leaving aside the question of Moscow , of the direction the army should take in its retreat . 
Malasha , who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her , understood the meaning of the council differently . 
It seemed to her that it was only a personal struggle between `` Granddad '' and `` Long-coat '' as she termed Bennigsen . 
She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to one another , and in her heart she sided with `` Granddad . '' 
In the midst of the conversation she noticed `` Granddad '' give Bennigsen a quick , subtle glance , and then to her joys he saw that `` Granddad '' said something to `` Long-coat '' which settled him . 
Bennigsen suddenly reddened and paced angrily up and down the room . 
What so affected him was Kutuzov 's calm and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen 's proposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank to attack the French right wing . 
`` Gentlemen , '' said Kutuzov , `` I can not approve of the count 's plan . 
Moving troops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous , and military history supports that view . 
For instance ... '' Kutuzov seemed to reflect , searching for an example , then with a clear , naive look at Bennigsen he added : `` Oh yes ; take the battle of Friedland , which I think the count well remembers , and which was ... not fully successful , only because our troops were rearranged too near the enemy ... '' There followed a momentary pause , which seemed very long to them all . 
The discussion recommenced , but pauses frequently occurred and they all felt that there was no more to be said . 
During one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing to speak . 
They all looked at him . 
`` Well , gentlemen , I see that it is I who will have to pay for the broken crockery , '' said he , and rising slowly he moved to the table . 
`` Gentlemen , I have heard your views . 
Some of you will not agree with me . 
But I , '' he paused , `` by the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign and country , order a retreat . '' 
After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity and circumspect silence of people who are leaving , after a funeral . 
Some of the generals , in low tones and in a strain very different from the way they had spoken during the council , communicated something to their commander in chief . 
Malasha , who had long been expected for supper , climbed carefully backwards down from the oven , her bare little feet catching at its projections , and slipping between the legs of the generals she darted out of the room . 
When he had dismissed the generals Kutuzov sat a long time with his elbows on the table , thinking always of the same terrible question : `` When , when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable ? 
When was that done which settled the matter ? 
And who was to blame for it ? '' 
`` I did not expect this , '' said he to his adjutant Schneider when the latter came in late that night . 
`` I did not expect this ! 
I did not think this would happen . '' 
`` You should take some rest , your Serene Highness , '' replied Schneider . 
`` But no ! 
They shall eat horseflesh yet , like the Turks ! '' 
exclaimed Kutuzov without replying , striking the table with his podgy fist . 
`` They shall too , if only ... '' At that very time , in circumstances even more important than retreating without a battle , namely the evacuation and burning of Moscow , Rostopchin , who is usually represented as being the instigator of that event , acted in an altogether different manner from Kutuzov . 
After the battle of Borodino the abandonment and burning of Moscow was as inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow without fighting . 
Every Russian might have predicted it , not by reasoning but by the feeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers . 
The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all the towns and villages on Russian soil beginning with Smolensk , without the participation of Count Rostopchin and his broadsheets . 
The people awaited the enemy unconcernedly , did not riot or become excited or tear anyone to pieces , but faced its fate , feeling within it the strength to find what it should do at that most difficult moment . 
And as soon as the enemy drew near the wealthy classes went away abandoning their property , while the poorer remained and burned and destroyed what was left . 
The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and is present in the heart of every Russian . 
And a consciousness of this , and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken , was present in Russian Moscow society in 1812 . 
Those who had quitted Moscow already in July and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this . 
Those who went away , taking what they could and abandoning their houses and half their belongings , did so from the latent patriotism which expresses itself not by phrases or by giving one 's children to save the fatherland and similar unnatural exploits , but unobtrusively , simply , organically , and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results . 
`` It is disgraceful to run away from danger ; only cowards are running away from Moscow , '' they were told . 
In his broadsheets Rostopchin impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful . 
They were ashamed to be called cowards , ashamed to leave , but still they left , knowing it had to be done . 
Why did they go ? 
It is impossible to suppose that Rostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had committed in conquered countries . 
The first people to go away were the rich educated people who knew quite well that Vienna and Berlin had remained intact and that during Napoleon 's occupation the inhabitants had spent their time pleasantly in the company of the charming Frenchmen whom the Russians , and especially the Russian ladies , then liked so much . 
They went away because for Russians there could be no question as to whether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow . 
It was out of the question to be under French rule , it would be the worst thing that could happen . 
They went away even before the battle of Borodino and still more rapidly after it , despite Rostopchin 's calls to defend Moscow or the announcement of his intention to take the wonder-working icon of the Iberian Mother of God and go to fight , or of the balloons that were to destroy the French , and despite all the nonsense Rostopchin wrote in his broadsheets . 
They knew that it was for the army to fight , and that if it could not succeed it would not do to take young ladies and house serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fight Napoleon , and that they must go away , sorry as they were to abandon their property to destruction . 
They went away without thinking of the tremendous significance of that immense and wealthy city being given over to destruction , for a great city with wooden buildings was certain when abandoned by its inhabitants to be burned . 
They went away each on his own account , and yet it was only in consequence of their going away that the momentous event was accomplished that will always remain the greatest glory of the Russian people . 
The lady who , afraid of being stopped by Count Rostopchin 's orders , had already in June moved with her Negroes and her women jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate , with a vague consciousness that she was not Bonaparte 's servant , was really , simply , and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia . 
But Count Rostopchin , who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had the government offices removed ; now distributed quite useless weapons to the drunken rabble ; now had processions displaying the icons , and now forbade Father Augustin to remove icons or the relics of saints ; now seized all the private carts in Moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six of them removed the balloon that was being constructed by Leppich ; now hinted that he would burn Moscow and related how he had set fire to his own house ; now wrote a proclamation to the French solemnly upbraiding them for having destroyed his Orphanage ; now claimed the glory of having hinted that he would burn Moscow and now repudiated the deed ; now ordered the people to catch all spies and bring them to him , and now reproached them for doing so ; now expelled all the French residents from Moscow , and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalme -LRB- the center of the whole French colony in Moscow -RRB- to remain , but ordered the venerable old postmaster Klyucharev to be arrested and exiled for no particular offense ; now assembled the people at the Three Hills to fight the French and now , to get rid of them , handed over to them a man to be killed and himself drove away by a back gate ; now declared that he would not survive the fall of Moscow , and now wrote French verses in albums concerning his share in the affair -- this man did not understand the meaning of what was happening but merely wanted to do something himself that would astonish people , to perform some patriotically heroic feat ; and like a child he made sport of the momentous , and unavoidable event -- the abandonment and burning of Moscow -- and tried with his puny hand now to speed and now to stay the enormous , popular tide that bore him along with it . 
Helene , having returned with the court from Vilna to Petersburg , found herself in a difficult position . 
