Idiot ! '' 
shouted Pierre , abusing his coachman -- a thing he rarely did . 
`` Home , I told you ! 
And drive faster , blockhead ! '' 
`` I must get away this very day , '' he murmured to himself . 
At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the Lobnoe Place , Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no longer remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day that it seemed to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the man ought to have known it for himself . 
On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey -- his head coachman who knew everything , could do anything , and was known to all Moscow - that he would leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk , and that his saddle horses should be sent there . 
This could not all be arranged that day , so on Evstafey 's representation Pierre had to put off his departure till next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance . 
On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain , and after dinner Pierre left Moscow . 
When changing horses that night in Perkhushkovo , he learned that there had been a great battle that evening . 
-LRB- This was the battle of Shevardino . -RRB- 
He was told that there in Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firing , but nobody could answer his questions as to who had won . 
At dawn next day Pierre was approaching Mozhaysk . 
Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it , and at the hostel where Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room to be had . 
It was full of officers . 
Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it , troops were stationed or on the march . 
Cossacks , foot and horse soldiers , wagons , caissons , and cannon were everywhere . 
Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could , and the farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea of troops the more was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and joyful feeling he had not experienced before . 
It was a feeling akin to what he had felt at the Sloboda Palace during the Emperor 's visit -- a sense of the necessity of undertaking something and sacrificing something . 
He now experienced a glad consciousness that everything that constitutes men 's happiness -- the comforts of life , wealth , even life itself -- is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away , compared with something ... With what ? 
Pierre could not say , and he did not try to determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in sacrificing everything . 
He was not occupied with the question of what to sacrifice for ; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and joyous sensation . 
On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt was fought , on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side , and on the twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself took place . 
Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and accepted ? 
Why was the battle of Borodino fought ? 
There was not the least sense in it for either the French or the Russians . 
Its immediate result for the Russians was , and was bound to be , that we were brought nearer to the destruction of Moscow -- which we feared more than anything in the world ; and for the French its immediate result was that they were brought nearer to the destruction of their whole army -- which they feared more than anything in the world . 
What the result must be was quite obvious , and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle . 
If the commanders had been guided by reason , it would seem that it must have been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen hundred miles and giving battle with a probability of losing a quarter of his army , he was advancing to certain destruction , and it must have been equally clear to Kutuzov that by accepting battle and risking the loss of a quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow . 
For Kutuzov this was mathematically clear , as it is that if when playing draughts I have one man less and go on exchanging , I shall certainly lose , and therefore should not exchange . 
When my opponent has sixteen men and I have fourteen , I am only one eighth weaker than he , but when I have exchanged thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am . 
Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the French was about as five to six , but after that battle it was little more than one to two : previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and twenty thousand ; afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a hundred thousand . 
Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the battle , while Napoleon , who was said to be a commander of genius , gave it , losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines of communication still more . 
If it is said that he expected to end the campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by occupying Vienna , there is much evidence to the contrary . 
Napoleon 's historians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards he wished to stop , knew the danger of his extended position , and knew that the occupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campaign , for he had seen at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him , and had not received a single reply to his repeated announcements of his wish to negotiate . 
In giving and accepting battle at Borodino , Kutuzov acted involuntarily and irrationally . 
But later on , to fit what had occurred , the historians provided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius the generals who , of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved and involuntary . 
The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish the whole interest of the story , and we are still unable to accustom ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are meaningless . 
On the other question , how the battle of Borodino and the preceding battle of Shevardino were fought , there also exists a definite and well-known , but quite false , conception . 
All the historians describe the affair as follows : The Russian army , they say , in its retreat from Smolensk sought out for itself the best position for a general engagement and found such a position at Borodino . 
The Russians , they say , fortified this position in advance on the left of the highroad -LRB- from Moscow to Smolensk -RRB- and almost at a right angle to it , from Borodino to Utitsa , at the very place where the battle was fought . 
In front of this position , they say , a fortified outpost was set up on the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy . 
On the twenty-fourth , we are told , Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it , and , on the twenty-sixth , attacked the whole Russian army , which was in position on the field of Borodino . 
So the histories say , and it is all quite wrong , as anyone who cares to look into the matter can easily convince himself . 
The Russians did not seek out the best position but , on the contrary , during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodino . 
They did not stop at any one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to occupy a position he had not himself chosen , because the popular demand for a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough , and because Miloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia , and for many other reasons . 
The fact is that other positions they had passed were stronger , and that the position at Borodino -LRB- the one where the battle was fought -RRB- , far from being strong , was no more a position than any other spot one might find in the Russian Empire by sticking a pin into the map at hazard . 
Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of Borodino to the left of , and at a right angle to , the highroad -LRB- that is , the position on which the battle took place -RRB- , but never till the twenty-fifth of August , 1812 , did they think that a battle might be fought there . 
This was shown first by the fact that there were no entrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed , and secondly , by the position of the Shevardino Redoubt . 
That redoubt was quite senseless in front of the position where the battle was accepted . 
Why was it more strongly fortified than any other post ? 
And why were all efforts exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at night on the twenty-fourth ? 
A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe the enemy . 
Thirdly , as proof that the position on which the battle was fought had not been foreseen and that the Shevardino Redoubt was not an advanced post of that position , we have the fact that up to the twenty-fifth , Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were convinced that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position , and that Kutuzov himself in his report , written in hot haste after the battle , speaks of the Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position . 
It was much later , when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure , that the incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented -LRB- probably to justify the mistakes of a commander in chief who had to be represented as infallible -RRB- that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post -- whereas in reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank -- and that the battle of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position previously selected , where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot which was almost unentrenched . 
The case was evidently this : a position was selected along the river Kolocha -- which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute angle -- so that the left flank was at Shevardino , the right flank near the village of Novoe , and the center at Borodino at the confluence of the rivers Kolocha and Voyna . 
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how the battle was actually fought , this position , protected by the river Kolocha , presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to prevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow . 
Napoleon , riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth , did not see -LRB- as the history books say he did -RRB- the position of the Russians from Utitsa to Borodino -LRB- he could not have seen that position because it did not exist -RRB- , nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army , but while pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the Russian position -- at the Shevardino Redoubt -- and unexpectedly for the Russians moved his army across the Kolocha . 
And the Russians , not having time to begin a general engagement , withdrew their left wing from the position they had intended to occupy and took up a new position which had not been foreseen and was not fortified . 
By crossing to the other side of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad , Napoleon shifted the whole forthcoming battle from right to left -LRB- looking from the Russian side -RRB- and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa , Semenovsk , and Borodino -- a plain no more advantageous as a position than any other plain in Russia -- and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of August took place . 
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the Kolocha , and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt but had begun the attack next morning , no one would have doubted that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our and the battle would have taken place where we expected it . 
In that case we should probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt -- our left flank -- still more obstinately . 
We should have attacked Napoleon in the center or on the right , and the engagement would have taken place on the twenty-fifth , in the position we intended and had fortified . 
But as the attack on our left flank took place in the evening after the retreat of our rear guard -LRB- that is , immediately after the fight at Gridneva -RRB- , and as the Russian commanders did not wish , or were not in time , to begin a general engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth , the first and chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on the twenty-fourth , and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on the twenty-sixth . 
After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt , we found ourselves on the morning of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank , and were forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to be . 
Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak , unfinished entrenchments , but the disadvantage of that position was increased by the fact that the Russian commanders -- not having fully realized what had happened , namely the loss of our position on the left flank and the shifting of the whole field of the forthcoming battle from right to left -- maintained their extended position from the village of Novoe to Utitsa , and consequently had to move their forces from right to left during the battle . 
So it happened that throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed the entire French army launched against our left flank with but half as many men . 
-LRB- Poniatowski 's action against Utitsa , and Uvarov 's on the right flank against the French , were actions distinct from the main course of the battle . -RRB- 
So the battle of Borodino did not take place at all as -LRB- in an effort to conceal our commanders ' mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian army and people -RRB- it has been described . 
The battle of Borodino was not fought on a chosen and entrenched position with forces only slightly weaker than those of the enemy , but , as a result of the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt , the Russians fought the battle of Borodino on an open and almost unentrenched position , with forces only half as numerous as the French ; that is to say , under conditions in which it was not merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive result , but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete disintegration and flight . 
On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk . 
At the descent of the high steep hill , down which a winding road led out of the town past the cathedral on the right , where a service was being held and the bells were ringing , Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded on foot . 
Behind him a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded by its singers . 
Coming up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who had been wounded in the engagement the day before . 
The peasant drivers , shouting and lashing their horses , kept crossing from side to side . 
The carts , in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were lying or sitting , jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep incline to make it something like a road . 
The wounded , bandaged with rags , with pale cheeks , compressed lips , and knitted brows , held on to the sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another . 
Almost all of them stared with naive , childlike curiosity at Pierre 's white hat and green swallow-tail coat . 
Pierre 's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to one side of the road . 
The cavalry regiment , as it descended the hill with its singers , surrounded Pierre 's carriage and blocked the road . 
Pierre stopped , being pressed against the side of the cutting in which the road ran . 
The sunshine from behind the hill did not penetrate into the cutting and there it was cold and damp , but above Pierre 's head was the bright August sunshine and the bells sounded merrily . 
One of the carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre . 
The driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it , placed a stone under one of its tireless hind wheels , and began arranging the breech-band on his little horse . 
One of the wounded , an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following the cart on foot , caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned to look at Pierre . 
`` I say , fellow countryman ! 
Will they set us down here or take us on to Moscow ? '' 
he asked . 
Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question . 
He was looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded , now at the cart by which he was standing , in which two wounded men were sitting and one was lying . 
One of those sitting up in the cart had probably been wounded in the cheek . 
His whole head was wrapped in rags and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby 's head . 
His nose and mouth were twisted to one side . 
This soldier was looking at the cathedral and crossing himself . 
Another , a young lad , a fair-haired recruit as white as though there was no blood in his thin face , looked at Pierre kindly , with a fixed smile . 
The third lay prone so that his face was not visible . 
The cavalry singers were passing close by : Ah lost , quite lost ... is my head so keen , Living in a foreign land . 
they sang their soldiers ' dance song . 
As if responding to them but with a different sort of merriment , the metallic sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot rays of the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort of merriment . 
But beneath the slope , by the cart with the wounded near the panting little nag where Pierre stood , it was damp , somber , and sad . 
