added the other -- `` A real fool ! '' 
Two hours later the carts were standing in the courtyard of the Bogucharovo house . 
The peasants were briskly carrying out the proprietor 's goods and packing them on the carts , and Dron , liberated at Princess Mary 's wish from the cupboard where he had been confined , was standing in the yard directing the men . 
`` Do n't put it in so carelessly , '' said one of the peasants , a man with a round smiling face , taking a casket from a housemaid . 
`` You know it has cost money ! 
How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord where it 'll get rubbed ? 
I do n't like that way of doing things . 
Let it all be done properly , according to rule . 
Look here , put it under the bast matting and cover it with hay -- that 's the way ! '' 
`` Eh , books , books ! '' 
said another peasant , bringing out Prince Andrew 's library cupboards . 
`` Do n't catch up against it ! 
It 's heavy , lads -- solid books . '' 
`` Yes , they worked all day and did n't play ! '' 
remarked the tall , round-faced peasant gravely , pointing with a significant wink at the dictionaries that were on the top . 
Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess , Rostov did not go back to the house but remained in the village awaiting her departure . 
When her carriage drove out of the house , he mounted and accompanied her eight miles from Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by our troops . 
At the inn at Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her , for the first time permitting himself to kiss her hand . 
`` How can you speak so ! '' 
he blushingly replied to Princess Mary 's expressions of gratitude for her deliverance , as she termed what had occurred . 
`` Any police officer would have done as much ! 
If we had had only peasants to fight , we should not have let the enemy come so far , '' said he with a sense of shame and wishing to change the subject . 
`` I am only happy to have had the opportunity of making your acquaintance . 
Good-by , Princess . 
I wish you happiness and consolation and hope to meet you again in happier circumstances . 
If you do n't want to make me blush , please do n't thank me ! '' 
But the princess , if she did not again thank him in words , thanked him with the whole expression of her face , radiant with gratitude and tenderness . 
She could not believe that there was nothing to thank him for . 
On the contrary , it seemed to her certain that had he not been there she would have perished at the hands of the mutineers and of the French , and that he had exposed himself to terrible and obvious danger to save her , and even more certain was it that he was a man of lofty and noble soul , able to understand her position and her sorrow . 
His kind , honest eyes , with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun to cry as she spoke of her loss , did leave her memory . 
When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt her eyes filling with tears , and then not for the first time the strange question presented itself to her : did she love him ? 
On the rest of the way to Moscow , though the princess ' position was not a cheerful one , Dunyasha , who went with her in the carriage , more than once noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at something with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow . 
`` Well , supposing I do love him ? '' 
thought Princess Mary . 
Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen in love with a man who would perhaps never love her , she comforted herself with the thought that no one would ever know it and that she would not be to blame if , without ever speaking of it to anyone , she continued to the end of her life to love the man with whom she had fallen in love for the first and last time in her life . 
Sometimes when she recalled his looks , his sympathy , and his words , happiness did not appear impossible to her . 
It was at those moments that Dunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window . 
`` Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo , and at that very moment ? '' 
thought Princess Mary . 
`` And that caused his sister to refuse my brother ? '' 
And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence . 
The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreeable one . 
To remember her gave him pleasure , and when his comrades , hearing of his adventure at Bogucharovo , rallied him on having gone to look for hay and having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia , he grew angry . 
It made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentle Princess Mary , who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune , had against his will more than once entered his head . 
For himself personally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife : by marrying her he would make the countess his mother happy , would be able to put his father 's affairs in order , and would even -- he felt it - ensure Princess Mary 's happiness . 
But Sonya ? 
And his plighted word ? 
That was why Rostov grew angry when he was rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya . 
On receiving command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Prince Andrew and sent an order for him to report at headquarters . 
Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and at the very hour that Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the first time . 
He stopped in the village at the priest 's house in front of which stood the commander in chief 's carriage , and he sat down on the bench at the gate awaiting his Serene Highness , as everyone now called Kutuzov . 
From the field beyond the village came now sounds of regimental music and now the roar of many voices shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
to the new commander in chief . 
Two orderlies , a courier and a major-domo , stood near by , some ten paces from Prince Andrew , availing themselves of Kutuzov 's absence and of the fine weather . 
A short , swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick mustaches and whiskers rode up to the gate and , glancing at Prince Andrew , inquired whether his Serene Highness was putting up there and whether he would soon be back . 
Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness ' staff but was himself a new arrival . 
The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart orderly , who , with the peculiar contempt with which a commander in chief 's orderly speaks to officers , replied : `` What ? 
His Serene Highness ? 
I expect he 'll be here soon . 
What do you want ? '' 
The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at the orderly 's tone , dismounted , gave his horse to a dispatch runner , and approached Bolkonski with a slight bow . 
Bolkonski made room for him on the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him . 
`` You 're also waiting for the commander in chief ? '' 
said he . 
`` They say he weceives evewyone , thank God ! 
... It 's awful with those sausage eaters ! 
Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German ! 
Now p ` waps Wussians will get a look in . 
As it was , devil only knows what was happening . 
We kept wetweating and wetweating . 
Did you take part in the campaign ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I had the pleasure , '' replied Prince Andrew , `` not only of taking part in the retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear -- not to mention the estate and home of my birth -- my father , who died of grief . 
I belong to the province of Smolensk . '' 
`` Ah ? 
You 're Pwince Bolkonski ? 
Vewy glad to make your acquaintance ! 
I 'm Lieutenant Colonel Denisov , better known as ` Vaska , ' '' said Denisov , pressing Prince Andrew 's hand and looking into his face with a particularly kindly attention . 
`` Yes , I heard , '' said he sympathetically , and after a short pause added : `` Yes , it 's Scythian warfare . 
It 's all vewy well -- only not for those who get it in the neck . 
So you are Pwince Andwew Bolkonski ? '' 
He swayed his head . 
`` Vewy pleased , Pwince , to make your acquaintance ! '' 
he repeated again , smiling sadly , and he again pressed Prince Andrew 's hand . 
Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of her first suitor . 
This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful feelings of which he had not thought lately , but which still found place in his soul . 
Of late he had received so many new and very serious impressions -- such as the retreat from Smolensk , his visit to Bald Hills , and the recent news of his father 's death -- and had experienced so many emotions , that for a long time past those memories had not entered his mind , and now that they did , they did not act on him with nearly their former strength . 
For Denisov , too , the memories awakened by the name of Bolkonski belonged to a distant , romantic past , when after supper and after Natasha 's singing he had proposed to a little girl of fifteen without realizing what he was doing . 
He smiled at the recollection of that time and of his love for Natasha , and passed at once to what now interested him passionately and exclusively . 
This was a plan of campaign he had devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat . 
He had proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it to Kutuzov . 
The plan was based on the fact that the French line of operation was too extended , and it proposed that instead of , or concurrently with , action on the front to bar the advance of the French , we should attack their line of communication . 
He began explaining his plan to Prince Andrew . 
`` They ca n't hold all that line . 
It 's impossible . 
I will undertake to bweak thwough . 
Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line , that 's certain ! 
There 's only one way -- guewilla warfare ! '' 
Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan to Bolkonski . 
In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the army , growing more incoherent and more diffused , mingling with music and songs and coming from the field where the review was held . 
