The presence and remarks of Willarski who continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of Russia and its backwardness compared with Europe only heightened Pierre 's pleasure . 
Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinary strength and vitality -- the strength which in that vast space amid the snows maintained the life of this original , peculiar , and unique people . 
He did not contradict Willarski and even seemed to agree with him -- an apparent agreement being the simplest way to avoid discussions that could lead to nothing -- and he smiled joyfully as he listened to him . 
It would be difficult to explain why and whither ants whose heap has been destroyed are hurrying : some from the heap dragging bits of rubbish , larvae , and corpses , others back to the heap , or why they jostle , overtake one another , and fight , and it would be equally difficult to explain what caused the Russians after the departure of the French to throng to the place that had formerly been Moscow . 
But when we watch the ants round their ruined heap , the tenacity , energy , and immense number of the delving insects prove that despite the destruction of the heap , something indestructible , which though intangible is the real strength of the colony , still exists ; and similarly , though in Moscow in the month of October there was no government no churches , shrines , riches , or houses -- it was still the Moscow it had been in August . 
All was destroyed , except something intangible yet powerful and indestructible . 
The motives of those who thronged from all sides to Moscow after it had been cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal , and at first for the most part savage and brutal . 
One motive only they all had in common : a desire to get to the place that had been called Moscow , to apply their activities there . 
Within a week Moscow already had fifteen thousand inhabitants , in a fortnight twenty-five thousand , and so on . 
By the autumn of 1813 the number , ever increasing and increasing , exceeded what it had been in 1812 . 
The first Russians to enter Moscow were the Cossacks of Wintzingerode 's detachment , peasants from the adjacent villages , and residents who had fled from Moscow and had been hiding in its vicinity . 
The Russians who entered Moscow , finding it plundered , plundered it in their turn . 
They continued what the French had begun . 
Trains of peasant carts came to Moscow to carry off to the villages what had been abandoned in the ruined houses and the streets . 
The Cossacks carried off what they could to their camps , and the householders seized all they could find in other houses and moved it to their own , pretending that it was their property . 
But the first plunderers were followed by a second and a third contingent , and with increasing numbers plundering became more and more difficult and assumed more definite forms . 
The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the organizations of regular life , with diverse branches of commerce and craftsmanship , with luxury , and governmental and religious institutions . 
These forms were lifeless but still existed . 
There were bazaars , shops , warehouses , market stalls , granaries -- for the most part still stocked with goods -- and there were factories and workshops , palaces and wealthy houses filled with luxuries , hospitals , prisons , government offices , churches , and cathedrals . 
The longer the French remained the more these forms of town life perished , until finally all was merged into one confused , lifeless scene of plunder . 
The more the plundering by the French continued , the more both the wealth of Moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed . 
But plundering by the Russians , with which the reoccupation of the city began , had an opposite effect : the longer it continued and the greater the number of people taking part in it the more rapidly was the wealth of the city and its regular life restored . 
Besides the plunderers , very various people , some drawn by curiosity , some by official duties , some by self-interest -- house owners , clergy , officials of all kinds , tradesmen , artisans , and peasants -- streamed into Moscow as blood flows to the heart . 
Within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry off plunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpses out of the town . 
Other peasants , having heard of their comrades ' discomfiture , came to town bringing rye , oats , and hay , and beat down one another 's prices to below what they had been in former days . 
Gangs of carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in Moscow every day , and on all sides logs were being hewn , new houses built , and old , charred ones repaired . 
Tradesmen began trading in booths . 
Cookshops and taverns were opened in partially burned houses . 
The clergy resumed the services in many churches that had not been burned . 
Donors contributed Church property that had been stolen . 
Government clerks set up their baize-covered tables and their pigeonholes of documents in small rooms . 
The higher authorities and the police organized the distribution of goods left behind by the French . 
The owners of houses in which much property had been left , brought there from other houses , complained of the injustice of taking everything to the Faceted Palace in the Kremlin ; others insisted that as the French had gathered things from different houses into this or that house , it would be unfair to allow its owner to keep all that was found there . 
They abused the police and bribed them , made out estimates at ten times their value for government stores that had perished in the fire , and demanded relief . 
And Count Rostopchin wrote proclamations . 
At the end of January Pierre went to Moscow and stayed in an annex of his house which had not been burned . 
He called on Count Rostopchin and on some acquaintances who were back in Moscow , and he intended to leave for Petersburg two days later . 
Everybody was celebrating the victory , everything was bubbling with life in the ruined but reviving city . 
Everyone was pleased to see Pierre , everyone wished to meet him , and everyone questioned him about what he had seen . 
Pierre felt particularly well disposed toward them all , but was now instinctively on his guard for fear of binding himself in any way . 
To all questions put to him -- whether important or quite trifling -- such as : Where would he live ? 
Was he going to rebuild ? 
When was he going to Petersburg and would he mind taking a parcel for someone ? 
-- he replied : `` Yes , perhaps , '' or , `` I think so , '' and so on . 
He had heard that the Rostovs were at Kostroma but the thought of Natasha seldom occurred to him . 
If it did it was only as a pleasant memory of the distant past . 
He felt himself not only free from social obligations but also from that feeling which , it seemed to him , he had aroused in himself . 
On the third day after his arrival he heard from the Drubetskoys that Princess Mary was in Moscow . 
The death , sufferings , and last days of Prince Andrew had often occupied Pierre 's thoughts and now recurred to him with fresh vividness . 
Having heard at dinner that Princess Mary was in Moscow and living in her house -- which had not been burned -- in Vozdvizhenka Street , he drove that same evening to see her . 
On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew , of their friendship , of his various meetings with him , and especially of the last one at Borodino . 
`` Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in ? 
Is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to him before he died ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
He recalled Karataev and his death and involuntarily began to compare these two men , so different , and yet so similar in that they had both lived and both died and in the love he felt for both of them . 
Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood . 
The house had escaped the fire ; it showed signs of damage but its general aspect was unchanged . 
The old footman , who met Pierre with a stern face as if wishing to make the visitor feel that the absence of the old prince had not disturbed the order of things in the house , informed him that the princess had gone to her own apartments , and that she received on Sundays . 
`` Announce me . 
Perhaps she will see me , '' said Pierre . 
`` Yes , sir , '' said the man . 
`` Please step into the portrait gallery . '' 
A few minutes later the footman returned with Dessalles , who brought word from the princess that she would be very glad to see Pierre if he would excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment . 
In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with her another person dressed in black . 
Pierre remembered that the princess always had lady companions , but who they were and what they were like he never knew or remembered . 
`` This must be one of her companions , '' he thought , glancing at the lady in the black dress . 
The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand . 
`` Yes , '' she said , looking at his altered face after he had kissed her hand , `` so this is how we meet again . 
He spoke of you even at the very last , '' she went on , turning her eyes from Pierre to her companion with a shyness that surprised him for an instant . 
`` I was so glad to hear of your safety . 
It was the first piece of good news we had received for a long time . '' 
Again the princess glanced round at her companion with even more uneasiness in her manner and was about to add something , but Pierre interrupted her . 
`` Just imagine -- I knew nothing about him ! '' 
said he . 
`` I thought he had been killed . 
All I know I heard at second hand from others . 
I only know that he fell in with the Rostovs ... . 
What a strange coincidence ! '' 
Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation . 
He glanced once at the companion 's face , saw her attentive and kindly gaze fixed on him , and , as often happens when one is talking , felt somehow that this companion in the black dress was a good , kind , excellent creature who would not hinder his conversing freely with Princess Mary . 
But when he mentioned the Rostovs , Princess Mary 's face expressed still greater embarrassment . 
She again glanced rapidly from Pierre 's face to that of the lady in the black dress and said : `` Do you really not recognize her ? '' 
Pierre looked again at the companion 's pale , delicate face with its black eyes and peculiar mouth , and something near to him , long forgotten and more than sweet , looked at him from those attentive eyes . 
`` But no , it ca n't be ! '' 
he thought . 
`` This stern , thin , pale face that looks so much older ! 
It can not be she . 
It merely reminds me of her . '' 
But at that moment Princess Mary said , `` Natasha ! '' 
And with difficulty , effort , and stress , like the opening of a door grown rusty on its hinges , a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes , and from that opening door came a breath of fragrance which suffused Pierre with a happiness he had long forgotten and of which he had not even been thinking -- especially at that moment . 
It suffused him , seized him , and enveloped him completely . 
When she smiled doubt was no longer possible , it was Natasha and he loved her . 
At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her , to Princess Mary , and above all to himself , a secret of which he himself had been unaware . 
He flushed joyfully yet with painful distress . 
He tried to hide his agitation . 
But the more he tried to hide it the more clearly -- clearer than any words could have done -- did he betray to himself , to her , and to Princess Mary that he loved her . 
`` No , it 's only the unexpectedness of it , '' thought Pierre . 
But as soon as he tried to continue the conversation he had begun with Princess Mary he again glanced at Natasha , and a still-deeper flush suffused his face and a still-stronger agitation of mingled joy and fear seized his soul . 
He became confused in his speech and stopped in the middle of what he was saying . 
Pierre had failed to notice Natasha because he did not at all expect to see her there , but he had failed to recognize her because the change in her since he last saw her was immense . 
