muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper . 
`` What , Monsieur Pierre ... Do you consider that assassination shows greatness of soul ? '' 
said the little princess , smiling and drawing her work nearer to her . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
exclaimed several voices . 
`` Capital ! '' 
said Prince Hippolyte in English , and began slapping his knee with the palm of his hand . 
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders . 
Pierre looked solemnly at his audience over his spectacles and continued . 
`` I say so , '' he continued desperately , `` because the Bourbons fled from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy , and Napoleon alone understood the Revolution and quelled it , and so for the general good , he could not stop short for the sake of one man 's life . '' 
`` Wo n't you come over to the other table ? '' 
suggested Anna Pavlovna . 
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her . 
`` No , '' cried he , becoming more and more eager , `` Napoleon is great because he rose superior to the Revolution , suppressed its abuses , preserved all that was good in it -- equality of citizenship and freedom of speech and of the press -- and only for that reason did he obtain power . '' 
`` Yes , if having obtained power , without availing himself of it to commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king , I should have called him a great man , '' remarked the vicomte . 
`` He could not do that . 
The people only gave him power that he might rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man . 
The Revolution was a grand thing ! '' 
continued Monsieur Pierre , betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind . 
`` What ? 
Revolution and regicide a grand thing ? 
... Well , after that ... But wo n't you come to this other table ? '' 
repeated Anna Pavlovna . 
`` Rousseau 's Contrat social , '' said the vicomte with a tolerant smile . 
`` I am not speaking of regicide , I am speaking about ideas . '' 
`` Yes : ideas of robbery , murder , and regicide , '' again interjected an ironical voice . 
`` Those were extremes , no doubt , but they are not what is most important . 
What is important are the rights of man , emancipation from prejudices , and equality of citizenship , and all these ideas Napoleon has retained in full force . '' 
`` Liberty and equality , '' said the vicomte contemptuously , as if at last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were , `` high-sounding words which have long been discredited . 
Who does not love liberty and equality ? 
Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality . 
Have people since the Revolution become happier ? 
On the contrary . 
We wanted liberty , but Buonaparte has destroyed it . '' 
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess . 
In the first moment of Pierre 's outburst Anna Pavlovna , despite her social experience , was horror-struck . 
But when she saw that Pierre 's sacrilegious words had not exasperated the vicomte , and had convinced herself that it was impossible to stop him , she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator . 
`` But , my dear Monsieur Pierre , '' said she , `` how do you explain the fact of a great man executing a duc -- or even an ordinary man who -- is innocent and untried ? '' 
`` I should like , '' said the vicomte , `` to ask how monsieur explains the 18th Brumaire ; was not that an imposture ? 
It was a swindle , and not at all like the conduct of a great man ! '' 
`` And the prisoners he killed in Africa ? 
That was horrible ! '' 
said the little princess , shrugging her shoulders . 
`` He 's a low fellow , say what you will , '' remarked Prince Hippolyte . 
Pierre , not knowing whom to answer , looked at them all and smiled . 
His smile was unlike the half-smile of other people . 
When he smiled , his grave , even rather gloomy , look was instantaneously replaced by another -- a childlike , kindly , even rather silly look , which seemed to ask forgiveness . 
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested . 
All were silent . 
`` How do you expect him to answer you all at once ? '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` Besides , in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between his acts as a private person , as a general , and as an emperor . 
So it seems to me . '' 
`` Yes , yes , of course ! '' 
Pierre chimed in , pleased at the arrival of this reinforcement . 
`` One must admit , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` that Napoleon as a man was great on the bridge of Arcola , and in the hospital at Jaffa where he gave his hand to the plague-stricken ; but ... but there are other acts which it is difficult to justify . '' 
Prince Andrew , who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of Pierre 's remarks , rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to go . 
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend , and asking them all to be seated began : `` I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it . 
Excuse me , Vicomte -- I must tell it in Russian or the point will be lost ... '' And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia . 
Everyone waited , so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their attention to his story . 
`` There is in Moscow a lady , une dame , and she is very stingy . 
She must have two footmen behind her carriage , and very big ones . 
That was her taste . 
And she had a lady 's maid , also big . 
She said ... '' Here Prince Hippolyte paused , evidently collecting his ideas with difficulty . 
`` She said ... Oh yes ! 
She said , ` Girl , ' to the maid , ` put on a livery , get up behind the carriage , and come with me while I make some calls . ' '' 
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his audience , which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator . 
Several persons , among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna , did however smile . 
`` She went . 
Suddenly there was a great wind . 
The girl lost her hat and her long hair came down ... '' Here he could contain himself no longer and went on , between gasps of laughter : `` And the whole world knew ... '' And so the anecdote ended . 
Though it was unintelligible why he had told it , or why it had to be told in Russian , still Anna Pavlovna and the others appreciated Prince Hippolyte 's social tact in so agreeably ending Pierre 's unpleasant and unamiable outburst . 
After the anecdote the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and next balls , about theatricals , and who would meet whom , and when and where . 
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree , the guests began to take their leave . 
Pierre was ungainly . 
Stout , about the average height , broad , with huge red hands ; he did not know , as the saying is , how to enter a drawing room and still less how to leave one ; that is , how to say something particularly agreeable before going away . 
Besides this he was absent-minded . 
When he rose to go , he took up instead of his own , the general 's three-cornered hat , and held it , pulling at the plume , till the general asked him to restore it . 
All his absent-mindedness and inability to enter a room and converse in it was , however , redeemed by his kindly , simple , and modest expression . 
Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and , with a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion , nodded and said : `` I hope to see you again , but I also hope you will change your opinions , my dear Monsieur Pierre . '' 
When she said this , he did not reply and only bowed , but again everybody saw his smile , which said nothing , unless perhaps , `` Opinions are opinions , but you see what a capital , good-natured fellow I am . '' 
And everyone , including Anna Pavlovna , felt this . 
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall , and , turning his shoulders to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak , listened indifferently to his wife 's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also come into the hall . 
Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty , pregnant princess , and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass . 
`` Go in , Annette , or you will catch cold , '' said the little princess , taking leave of Anna Pavlovna . 
`` It is settled , '' she added in a low voice . 
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she contemplated between Anatole and the little princess ' sister-in-law . 
`` I rely on you , my dear , '' said Anna Pavlovna , also in a low tone . 
`` Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter . 
Au revoir ! '' 
-- and she left the hall . 
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and , bending his face close to her , began to whisper something . 
Two footmen , the princess ' and his own , stood holding a shawl and a cloak , waiting for the conversation to finish . 
They listened to the French sentences which to them were meaningless , with an air of understanding but not wishing to appear to do so . 
The princess as usual spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh . 
`` I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador 's , '' said Prince Hippolyte '' - so dull - . 
It has been a delightful evening , has it not ? 
Delightful ! '' 
