He seemed to have forgotten what he had been saying , and sat plunged in thought . 
Five minutes later , gently swaying on the soft springs of the carriage , he turned to Prince Andrew . 
There was not a trace of agitation on his face . 
With delicate irony he questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the Emperor , about the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Krems affair , and about some ladies they both knew . 
On November 1 Kutuzov had received , through a spy , news that the army he commanded was in an almost hopeless position . 
The spy reported that the French , after crossing the bridge at Vienna , were advancing in immense force upon Kutuzov 's line of communication with the troops that were arriving from Russia . 
If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems , Napoleon 's army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him off completely and surround his exhausted army of forty thousand , and he would find himself in the position of Mack at Ulm . 
If Kutuzov decided to abandon the road connecting him with the troops arriving from Russia , he would have to march with no road into unknown parts of the Bohemian mountains , defending himself against superior forces of the enemy and abandoning all hope of a junction with Buxhowden . 
If Kutuzov decided to retreat along the road from Krems to Olmutz , to unite with the troops arriving from Russia , he risked being forestalled on that road by the French who had crossed the Vienna bridge , and encumbered by his baggage and transport , having to accept battle on the march against an enemy three times as strong , who would hem him in from two sides . 
Kutuzov chose this latter course . 
The French , the spy reported , having crossed the Vienna bridge , were advancing by forced marches toward Znaim , which lay sixty-six miles off on the line of Kutuzov 's retreat . 
If he reached Znaim before the French , there would be great hope of saving the army ; to let the French forestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to a disgrace such as that of Ulm , or to utter destruction . 
But to forestall the French with his whole army was impossible . 
The road for the French from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for the Russians from Krems to Znaim . 
The night he received the news , Kutuzov sent Bagration 's vanguard , four thousand strong , to the right across the hills from the Krems-Znaim to the Vienna-Znaim road . 
Bagration was to make this march without resting , and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear , and if he succeeded in forestalling the French he was to delay them as long as possible . 
Kutuzov himself with all his transport took the road to Znaim . 
Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills , with his hungry , ill-shod soldiers , and losing a third of his men as stragglers by the way , Bagration came out on the Vienna-Znaim road at Hollabrunn a few hours ahead of the French who were approaching Hollabrunn from Vienna . 
Kutuzov with his transport had still to march for some days before he could reach Znaim . 
Hence Bagration with his four thousand hungry , exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army that came upon him at Hollabrunn , which was clearly impossible . 
But a freak of fate made the impossible possible . 
The success of the trick that had placed the Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way . 
Meeting Bagration 's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be Kutuzov 's whole army . 
To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited the arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna , and with this object offered a three days ' truce on condition that both armies should remain in position without moving . 
Murat declared that negotiations for peace were already proceeding , and that he therefore offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed . 
Count Nostitz , the Austrian general occupying the advanced posts , believed Murat 's emissary and retired , leaving Bagration 's division exposed . 
Another emissary rode to the Russian line to announce the peace negotiations and to offer the Russian army the three days ' truce . 
Bagration replied that he was not authorized either to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to Kutuzov to report the offer he had received . 
A truce was Kutuzov 's sole chance of gaining time , giving Bagration 's exhausted troops some rest , and letting the transport and heavy convoys -LRB- whose movements were concealed from the French -RRB- advance if but one stage nearer Znaim . 
The offer of a truce gave the only , and a quite unexpected , chance of saving the army . 
On receiving the news he immediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzingerode , who was in attendance on him , to the enemy camp . 
Wintzingerode was not merely to agree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation , and meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost the movements of the baggage trains of the entire army along the Krems-Znaim road . 
Bagration 's exhausted and hungry detachment , which alone covered this movement of the transport and of the whole army , had to remain stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself . 
Kutuzov 's expectations that the proposals of capitulation -LRB- which were in no way binding -RRB- might give time for part of the transport to pass , and also that Murat 's mistake would very soon be discovered , proved correct . 
As soon as Bonaparte -LRB- who was at Schonbrunn , sixteen miles from Hollabrunn -RRB- received Murat 's dispatch with the proposal of a truce and a capitulation , he detected a ruse and wrote the following letter to Murat : Schonbrunn , 25th Brumaire , 1805 , at eight o'clock in the morning To PRINCE MURAT , I can not find words to express to you my displeasure . 
You command only my advance guard , and have no right to arrange an armistice without my order . 
You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign . 
Break the armistice immediately and march on the enemy . 
Inform him that the general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so , and that no one but the Emperor of Russia has that right . 
If , however , the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention , I will ratify it ; but it is only a trick . 
March on , destroy the Russian army ... . 
You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery . 
The Russian Emperor 's aide-de-camp is an impostor . 
Officers are nothing when they have no powers ; this one had none ... . 
The Austrians let themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge , you are letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor . 
NAPOLEON Bonaparte 's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to Murat . 
Bonaparte himself , not trusting to his generals , moved with all the Guards to the field of battle , afraid of letting a ready victim escape , and Bagration 's four thousand men merrily lighted campfires , dried and warmed themselves , cooked their porridge for the first time for three days , and not one of them knew or imagined what was in store for him . 
Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew , who had persisted in his request to Kutuzov , arrived at Grunth and reported himself to Bagration . 
Bonaparte 's adjutant had not yet reached Murat 's detachment and the battle had not yet begun . 
In Bagration 's detachment no one knew anything of the general position of affairs . 
They talked of peace but did not believe in its possibility ; others talked of a battle but also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement . 
Bagration , knowing Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant , received him with distinction and special marks of favor , explaining to him that there would probably be an engagement that day or the next , and giving him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join the rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat , `` which is also very important . '' 
`` However , there will hardly be an engagement today , '' said Bagration as if to reassure Prince Andrew . 
`` If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard , but if he wishes to stay with me , let him ... he 'll be of use here if he 's a brave officer , '' thought Bagration . 
Prince Andrew , without replying , asked the prince 's permission to ride round the position to see the disposition of the forces , so as to know his bearings should he be sent to execute an order . 
The officer on duty , a handsome , elegantly dressed man with a diamond ring on his forefinger , who was fond of speaking French though he spoke it badly , offered to conduct Prince Andrew . 
On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who seemed to be seeking something , and soldiers dragging doors , benches , and fencing from the village . 
`` There now , Prince ! 
We ca n't stop those fellows , '' said the staff officer pointing to the soldiers . 
`` The officers do n't keep them in hand . 
And there , '' he pointed to a sutler 's tent , `` they crowd in and sit . 
This morning I turned them all out and now look , it 's full again . 
I must go there , Prince , and scare them a bit . 
It wo n't take a moment . '' 
`` Yes , let 's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese , '' said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything . 
`` Why did n't you mention it , Prince ? 
I would have offered you something . '' 
They dismounted and entered the tent . 
Several officers , with flushed and weary faces , were sitting at the table eating and drinking . 
`` Now what does this mean , gentlemen ? '' 
said the staff officer , in the reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more than once . 
`` You know it wo n't do to leave your posts like this . 
The prince gave orders that no one should leave his post . 
Now you , Captain , '' and he turned to a thin , dirty little artillery officer who without his boots -LRB- he had given them to the canteen keeper to dry -RRB- , in only his stockings , rose when they entered , smiling not altogether comfortably . 
`` Well , are n't you ashamed of yourself , Captain Tushin ? '' 
he continued . 
`` One would think that as an artillery officer you would set a good example , yet here you are without your boots ! 
The alarm will be sounded and you 'll be in a pretty position without your boots ! '' 
-LRB- The staff officer smiled . -RRB- 
`` Kindly return to your posts , gentlemen , all of you , all ! '' 
he added in a tone of command . 
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer Tushin , who silent and smiling , shifting from one stockinged foot to the other , glanced inquiringly with his large , intelligent , kindly eyes from Prince Andrew to the staff officer . 
`` The soldiers say it feels easier without boots , '' said Captain Tushin smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position , evidently wishing to adopt a jocular tone . 
But before he had finished he felt that his jest was unacceptable and had not come off . 
He grew confused . 
`` Kindly return to your posts , '' said the staff officer trying to preserve his gravity . 
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer 's small figure . 
There was something peculiar about it , quite unsoldierly , rather comic , but extremely attractive . 
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on . 
Having ridden beyond the village , continually meeting and overtaking soldiers and officers of various regiments , they saw on their left some entrenchments being thrown up , the freshly dug clay of which showed up red . 
Several battalions of soldiers , in their shirt sleeves despite the cold wind , swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants ; spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the bank by unseen hands . 
Prince Andrew and the officer rode up , looked at the entrenchment , and went on again . 
Just behind it they came upon some dozens of soldiers , continually replaced by others , who ran from the entrenchment . 
They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines . 
`` Voila l'agrement des camps , monsieur le Prince , '' * said the staff officer . 
* `` This is a pleasure one gets in camp , Prince . '' 
They rode up the opposite hill . 
From there the French could already be seen . 
Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position . 
`` That 's our battery , '' said the staff officer indicating the highest point . 
