All our important business here is now settled , and I ought to have been off long ago . 
Here is something I have received from the chancellor . 
I asked him for you , and you have been entered in the diplomatic corps and made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber . 
The diplomatic career now lies open before you . '' 
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words were pronounced , Pierre , who had so long been considering his career , wished to make some suggestion . 
But Prince Vasili interrupted him in the special deep cooing tone , precluding the possibility of interrupting his speech , which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was needed . 
`` Mais , mon cher , I did this for my own sake , to satisfy my conscience , and there is nothing to thank me for . 
No one has ever complained yet of being too much loved ; and besides , you are free , you could throw it up tomorrow . 
But you will see everything for yourself when you get to Petersburg . 
It is high time for you to get away from these terrible recollections . '' 
Prince Vasili sighed . 
`` Yes , yes , my boy . 
And my valet can go in your carriage . 
Ah ! 
I was nearly forgetting , '' he added . 
`` You know , mon cher , your father and I had some accounts to settle , so I have received what was due from the Ryazan estate and will keep it ; you wo n't require it . 
We 'll go into the accounts later . '' 
By `` what was due from the Ryazan estate '' Prince Vasili meant several thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre 's peasants , which the prince had retained for himself . 
In Petersburg , as in Moscow , Pierre found the same atmosphere of gentleness and affection . 
He could not refuse the post , or rather the rank -LRB- for he did nothing -RRB- , that Prince Vasili had procured for him , and acquaintances , invitations , and social occupations were so numerous that , even more than in Moscow , he felt a sense of bewilderment , bustle , and continual expectation of some good , always in front of him but never attained . 
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg . 
The Guards had gone to the front ; Dolokhov had been reduced to the ranks ; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces ; Prince Andrew was abroad ; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he used to like to spend them , or to open his mind by intimate talks with a friend older than himself and whom he respected . 
His whole time was taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili 's house in the company of the stout princess , his wife , and his beautiful daughter Helene . 
Like the others , Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of attitude toward him that had taken place in society . 
Formerly in Anna Pavlovna 's presence , Pierre had always felt that what he was saying was out of place , tactless and unsuitable , that remarks which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish as soon as he uttered them , while on the contrary Hippolyte 's stupidest remarks came out clever and apt . 
Now everything Pierre said was charmant . 
Even if Anna Pavlovna did not say so , he could see that she wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty . 
In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna Pavlovna 's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added : `` You will find the beautiful Helene here , whom it is always delightful to see . '' 
When he read that sentence , Pierre felt for the first time that some link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and Helene , and that thought both alarmed him , as if some obligation were being imposed on him which he could not fulfill , and pleased him as an entertaining supposition . 
Anna Pavlovna 's `` At Home '' was like the former one , only the novelty she offered her guests this time was not Mortemart , but a diplomatist fresh from Berlin with the very latest details of the Emperor Alexander 's visit to Potsdam , and of how the two august friends had pledged themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold the cause of justice against the enemy of the human race . 
Anna Pavlovna received Pierre with a shade of melancholy , evidently relating to the young man 's recent loss by the death of Count Bezukhov -LRB- everyone constantly considered it a duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly afflicted by the death of the father he had hardly known -RRB- , and her melancholy was just like the august melancholy she showed at the mention of her most august Majesty the Empress Marya Fedorovna . 
Pierre felt flattered by this . 
Anna Pavlovna arranged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitual skill . 
The large group , in which were Prince Vasili and the generals , had the benefit of the diplomat . 
Another group was at the tea table . 
Pierre wished to join the former , but Anna Pavlovna -- who was in the excited condition of a commander on a battlefield to whom thousands of new and brilliant ideas occur which there is hardly time to put in action -- seeing Pierre , touched his sleeve with her finger , saying : `` Wait a bit , I have something in view for you this evening . '' 
-LRB- She glanced at Helene and smiled at her . -RRB- 
`` My dear Helene , be charitable to my poor aunt who adores you . 
Go and keep her company for ten minutes . 
And that it will not be too dull , here is the dear count who will not refuse to accompany you . '' 
The beauty went to the aunt , but Anna Pavlovna detained Pierre , looking as if she had to give some final necessary instructions . 
`` Is n't she exquisite ? '' 
she said to Pierre , pointing to the stately beauty as she glided away . 
`` And how she carries herself ! 
For so young a girl , such tact , such masterly perfection of manner ! 
It comes from her heart . 
Happy the man who wins her ! 
With her the least worldly of men would occupy a most brilliant position in society . 
Do n't you think so ? 
I only wanted to know your opinion , '' and Anna Pavlovna let Pierre go . 
Pierre , in reply , sincerely agreed with her as to Helene 's perfection of manner . 
If he ever thought of Helene , it was just of her beauty and her remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in society . 
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner , but seemed desirous of hiding her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to show her fear of Anna Pavlovna . 
She looked at her niece , as if inquiring what she was to do with these people . 
On leaving them , Anna Pavlovna again touched Pierre 's sleeve , saying : `` I hope you wo n't say that it is dull in my house again , '' and she glanced at Helene . 
Helene smiled , with a look implying that she did not admit the possibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted . 
The aunt coughed , swallowed , and said in French that she was very pleased to see Helene , then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome and the same look . 
In the middle of a dull and halting conversation , Helene turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave to everyone . 
Pierre was so used to that smile , and it had so little meaning for him , that he paid no attention to it . 
The aunt was just speaking of a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre 's father , Count Bezukhov , and showed them her own box . 
Princess Helene asked to see the portrait of the aunt 's husband on the box lid . 
`` That is probably the work of Vinesse , '' said Pierre , mentioning a celebrated miniaturist , and he leaned over the table to take the snuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table . 
He half rose , meaning to go round , but the aunt handed him the snuffbox , passing it across Helene 's back . 
Helene stooped forward to make room , and looked round with a smile . 
She was , as always at evening parties , wearing a dress such as was then fashionable , cut very low at front and back . 
Her bust , which had always seemed like marble to Pierre , was so close to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive the living charm of her neck and shoulders , so near to his lips that he need only have bent his head a little to have touched them . 
He was conscious of the warmth of her body , the scent of perfume , and the creaking of her corset as she moved . 
He did not see her marble beauty forming a complete whole with her dress , but all the charm of her body only covered by her garments . 
And having once seen this he could not help being aware it , just as we can not renew an illusion we have once seen through . 
`` So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am ? '' 
Helene seemed to say . 
`` You had not noticed that I am a woman ? 
Yes , I am a woman who may belong to anyone -- to you too , '' said her glance . 
And at that moment Pierre felt that Helene not only could , but must , be his wife , and that it could not be otherwise . 
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the altar with her . 
How and when this would be he did not know , he did not even know if it would be a good thing -LRB- he even felt , he knew not why , that it would be a bad thing -RRB- , but he knew it would happen . 
Pierre dropped his eyes , lifted them again , and wished once more to see her as a distant beauty far removed from him , as he had seen her every day until then , but he could no longer do it . 
He could not , any more than a man who has been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the mist and taking it for a tree can again take it for a tree after he has once recognized it to be a tuft of grass . 
She was terribly close to him . 
She already had power over him , and between them there was no longer any barrier except the barrier of his own will . 
`` Well , I will leave you in your little corner , '' came Anna Pavlovna 's voice , `` I see you are all right there . '' 
And Pierre , anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything reprehensible , looked round with a blush . 
It seemed to him that everyone knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself . 
A little later when he went up to the large circle , Anna Pavlovna said to him : `` I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house ? '' 
This was true . 
The architect had told him that it was necessary , and Pierre , without knowing why , was having his enormous Petersburg house done up . 
`` That 's a good thing , but do n't move from Prince Vasili 's . 
It is good to have a friend like the prince , '' she said , smiling at Prince Vasili . 
`` I know something about that . 
Do n't I ? 
And you are still so young . 
You need advice . 
Do n't be angry with me for exercising an old woman 's privilege . '' 
She paused , as women always do , expecting something after they have mentioned their age . 
`` If you marry it will be a different thing , '' she continued , uniting them both in one glance . 
Pierre did not look at Helene nor she at him . 
But she was just as terribly close to him . 
He muttered something and colored . 
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what had happened . 
What had happened ? 
