`` What am I ? 
An illegitimate son ! '' 
He suddenly blushed crimson , and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say this . 
`` Without a name and without means ... And it really ... '' But he did not say what `` it really '' was . 
`` For the present I am free and am all right . 
Only I have n't the least idea what I am to do ; I wanted to consult you seriously . '' 
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him , yet his glance -- friendly and affectionate as it was -- expressed a sense of his own superiority . 
`` I am fond of you , especially as you are the one live man among our whole set . 
Yes , you 're all right ! 
Choose what you will ; it 's all the same . 
You 'll be all right anywhere . 
But look here : give up visiting those Kuragins and leading that sort of life . 
It suits you so badly -- all this debauchery , dissipation , and the rest of it ! '' 
`` What would you have , my dear fellow ? '' 
answered Pierre , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` Women , my dear fellow ; women ! '' 
`` I do n't understand it , '' replied Prince Andrew . 
`` Women who are comme il faut , that 's a different matter ; but the Kuragins ' set of women , ` women and wine ' I do n't understand ! '' 
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin 's and sharing the dissipated life of his son Anatole , the son whom they were planning to reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew 's sister . 
`` Do you know ? '' 
said Pierre , as if suddenly struck by a happy thought , `` seriously , I have long been thinking of it ... . 
Leading such a life I ca n't decide or think properly about anything . 
One 's head aches , and one spends all one 's money . 
He asked me for tonight , but I wo n't go . '' 
`` You give me your word of honor not to go ? '' 
`` On my honor ! '' 
It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend . 
It was a cloudless , northern , summer night . 
Pierre took an open cab intending to drive straight home . 
But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night . 
It was light enough to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning or evening than night . 
On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin was expecting the usual set for cards that evening , after which there was generally a drinking bout , finishing with visits of a kind Pierre was very fond of . 
`` I should like to go to Kuragin 's , '' thought he . 
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go there . 
Then , as happens to people of weak character , he desired so passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to that he decided to go . 
The thought immediately occurred to him that his promise to Prince Andrew was of no account , because before he gave it he had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering ; `` besides , '' thought he , `` all such ` words of honor ' are conventional things with no definite meaning , especially if one considers that by tomorrow one may be dead , or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all the same ! '' 
Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort , nullifying all his decisions and intentions . 
He went to Kuragin 's . 
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards ' barracks , in which Anatole lived , Pierre entered the lighted porch , ascended the stairs , and went in at the open door . 
There was no one in the anteroom ; empty bottles , cloaks , and overshoes were lying about ; there was a smell of alcohol , and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance . 
Cards and supper were over , but the visitors had not yet dispersed . 
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room , in which were the remains of supper . 
A footman , thinking no one saw him , was drinking on the sly what was left in the glasses . 
From the third room came sounds of laughter , the shouting of familiar voices , the growling of a bear , and general commotion . 
Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously round an open window . 
Three others were romping with a young bear , one pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others . 
`` I bet a hundred on Stevens ! '' 
shouted one . 
`` Mind , no holding on ! '' 
cried another . 
`` I bet on Dolokhov ! '' 
cried a third . 
`` Kuragin , you part our hands . '' 
`` There , leave Bruin alone ; here 's a bet on . '' 
`` At one draught , or he loses ! '' 
shouted a fourth . 
`` Jacob , bring a bottle ! '' 
shouted the host , a tall , handsome fellow who stood in the midst of the group , without a coat , and with his fine linen shirt unfastened in front . 
`` Wait a bit , you fellows ... . 
Here is Petya ! 
Good man ! '' 
cried he , addressing Pierre . 
Another voice , from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes , particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring , cried from the window : `` Come here ; part the bets ! '' 
This was Dolokhov , an officer of the Semenov regiment , a notorious gambler and duelist , who was living with Anatole . 
Pierre smiled , looking about him merrily . 
`` I do n't understand . 
What 's it all about ? '' 
`` Wait a bit , he is not drunk yet ! 
A bottle here , '' said Anatole , taking a glass from the table he went up to Pierre . 
`` First of all you must drink ! '' 
Pierre drank one glass after another , looking from under his brows at the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window , and listening to their chatter . 
Anatole kept on refilling Pierre 's glass while explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens , an English naval officer , that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge of the third floor window with his legs hanging out . 
`` Go on , you must drink it all , '' said Anatole , giving Pierre the last glass , `` or I wo n't let you go ! '' 
`` No , I wo n't , '' said Pierre , pushing Anatole aside , and he went up to the window . 
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman 's hand and clearly and distinctly repeating the terms of the bet , addressing himself particularly to Anatole and Pierre . 
Dolokhov was of medium height , with curly hair and light-blue eyes . 
He was about twenty-five . 
Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache , so that his mouth , the most striking feature of his face , was clearly seen . 
The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved . 
The middle of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm lower one , and something like two distinct smiles played continually round the two corners of the mouth ; this , together with the resolute , insolent intelligence of his eyes , produced an effect which made it impossible not to notice his face . 
Dolokhov was a man of small means and no connections . 
Yet , though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles , Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that all who knew them , including Anatole himself , respected him more than they did Anatole . 
Dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won . 
However much he drank , he never lost his clearheadedness . 
Both Kuragin and Dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of Petersburg . 
The bottle of rum was brought . 
The window frame which prevented anyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen , who were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of the gentlemen around . 
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window . 
He wanted to smash something . 
Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame , but could not move it . 
He smashed a pane . 
`` You have a try , Hercules , '' said he , turning to Pierre . 
Pierre seized the crossbeam , tugged , and wrenched the oak frame out with a crash . 
`` Take it right out , or they 'll think I 'm holding on , '' said Dolokhov . 
`` Is the Englishman bragging ? 
... Eh ? 
Is it all right ? '' 
said Anatole . 
`` First-rate , '' said Pierre , looking at Dolokhov , who with a bottle of rum in his hand was approaching the window , from which the light of the sky , the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset , was visible . 
Dolokhov , the bottle of rum still in his hand , jumped onto the window sill . 
