He was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him . 
`` It must be one of ours , a prisoner . 
Yes . 
Can it be that they will take me too ? 
Who are these men ? '' 
thought Rostov , scarcely believing his eyes . 
`` Can they be French ? '' 
He looked at the approaching Frenchmen , and though but a moment before he had been galloping to get at them and hack them to pieces , their proximity now seemed so awful that he could not believe his eyes . 
`` Who are they ? 
Why are they running ? 
Can they be coming at me ? 
And why ? 
To kill me ? 
Me whom everyone is so fond of ? '' 
He remembered his mother 's love for him , and his family 's , and his friends ' , and the enemy 's intention to kill him seemed impossible . 
`` But perhaps they may do it ! '' 
For more than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing the situation . 
The foremost Frenchman , the one with the hooked nose , was already so close that the expression of his face could be seen . 
And the excited , alien face of that man , his bayonet hanging down , holding his breath , and running so lightly , frightened Rostov . 
He seized his pistol and , instead of firing it , flung it at the Frenchman and ran with all his might toward the bushes . 
He did not now run with the feeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge , but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds . 
One single sentiment , that of fear for his young and happy life , possessed his whole being . 
Rapidly leaping the furrows , he fled across the field with the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay , now and then turning his good-natured , pale , young face to look back . 
A shudder of terror went through him : `` No , better not look , '' he thought , but having reached the bushes he glanced round once more . 
The French had fallen behind , and just as he looked round the first man changed his run to a walk and , turning , shouted something loudly to a comrade farther back . 
Rostov paused . 
`` No , there 's some mistake , '' thought he . 
`` They ca n't have wanted to kill me . '' 
But at the same time , his left arm felt as heavy as if a seventy-pound weight were tied to it . 
He could run no more . 
The Frenchman also stopped and took aim . 
Rostov closed his eyes and stooped down . 
One bullet and then another whistled past him . 
He mustered his last remaining strength , took hold of his left hand with his right , and reached the bushes . 
Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters . 
The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts of the wood ran out of it , the different companies getting mixed , and retreated as a disorderly crowd . 
One soldier , in his fear , uttered the senseless cry , `` Cut off ! '' 
that is so terrible in battle , and that word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic . 
`` Surrounded ! 
Cut off ? 
We 're lost ! '' 
shouted the fugitives . 
The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind , the general realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment , and the thought that he , an exemplary officer of many years ' service who had never been to blame , might be held responsible at headquarters for negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that , forgetting the recalcitrant cavalry colonel , his own dignity as a general , and above all quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation , he clutched the crupper of his saddle and , spurring his horse , galloped to the regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around , but fortunately missed him . 
His one desire was to know what was happening and at any cost correct , or remedy , the mistake if he had made one , so that he , an exemplary officer of twenty-two years ' service , who had never been censured , should not be held to blame . 
Having galloped safely through the French , he reached a field behind the copse across which our men , regardless of orders , were running and descending the valley . 
That moment of moral hesitation which decides the fate of battles had arrived . 
Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers attend to the voice of their commander , or would they , disregarding him , continue their flight ? 
Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem so terrible to the soldiers , despite his furious purple countenance distorted out of all likeness to his former self , and the flourishing of his saber , the soldiers all continued to run , talking , firing into the air , and disobeying orders . 
The moral hesitation which decided the fate of battles was evidently culminating in a panic . 
The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the powder smoke and stopped in despair . 
Everything seemed lost . 
But at that moment the French who were attacking , suddenly and without any apparent reason , ran back and disappeared from the outskirts , and Russian sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse . 
It was Timokhin 's company , which alone had maintained its order in the wood and , having lain in ambush in a ditch , now attacked the French unexpectedly . 
Timokhin , armed only with a sword , had rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry and such mad , drunken determination that , taken by surprise , the French had thrown down their muskets and run . 
Dolokhov , running beside Timokhin , killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was the first to seize the surrendering French officer by his collar . 
Our fugitives returned , the battalions re-formed , and the French who had nearly cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed . 
Our reserve units were able to join up , and the fight was at an end . 
The regimental commander and Major Ekonomov had stopped beside a bridge , letting the retreating companies pass by them , when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander 's stirrup , almost leaning against him . 
The man was wearing a bluish coat of broadcloth , he had no knapsack or cap , his head was bandaged , and over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung . 
He had an officer 's sword in his hand . 
The soldier was pale , his blue eyes looked impudently into the commander 's face , and his lips were smiling . 
Though the commander was occupied in giving instructions to Major Ekonomov , he could not help taking notice of the soldier . 
`` Your excellency , here are two trophies , '' said Dolokhov , pointing to the French sword and pouch . 
`` I have taken an officer prisoner . 
I stopped the company . '' 
Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abrupt sentences . 
`` The whole company can bear witness . 
I beg you will remember this , your excellency ! '' 
`` All right , all right , '' replied the commander , and turned to Major Ekonomov . 
But Dolokhov did not go away ; he untied the handkerchief around his head , pulled it off , and showed the blood congealed on his hair . 
`` A bayonet wound . 
I remained at the front . 
Remember , your excellency ! '' 
Tushin 's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the action did Prince Bagration , still hearing the cannonade in the center , send his orderly staff officer , and later Prince Andrew also , to order the battery to retire as quickly as possible . 
When the supports attached to Tushin 's battery had been moved away in the middle of the action by someone 's order , the battery had continued firing and was only not captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone could have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended guns . 
On the contrary , the energetic action of that battery led the French to suppose that here -- in the center - the main Russian forces were concentrated . 
Twice they had attempted to attack this point , but on each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated guns on the hillock . 
Soon after Prince Bagration had left him , Tushin had succeeded in setting fire to Schon Grabern . 
`` Look at them scurrying ! 
It 's burning ! 
Just see the smoke ! 
Fine ! 
Grand ! 
Look at the smoke , the smoke ! '' 
exclaimed the artillerymen , brightening up . 
All the guns , without waiting for orders , were being fired in the direction of the conflagration . 
As if urging each other on , the soldiers cried at each shot : `` Fine ! 
That 's good ! 
Look at it ... Grand ! '' 
The fire , fanned by the breeze , was rapidly spreading . 
The French columns that had advanced beyond the village went back ; but as though in revenge for this failure , the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village and began firing them at Tushin 's battery . 
In their childlike glee , aroused by the fire and their luck in successfully cannonading the French , our artillerymen only noticed this battery when two balls , and then four more , fell among our guns , one knocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagon driver 's leg . 
Their spirits once roused were , however , not diminished , but only changed character . 
The horses were replaced by others from a reserve gun carriage , the wounded were carried away , and the four guns were turned against the ten-gun battery . 
Tushin 's companion officer had been killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hour seventeen of the forty men of the guns ' crews had been disabled , but the artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever . 
Twice they noticed the French appearing below them , and then they fired grapeshot at them . 
Little Tushin , moving feebly and awkwardly , kept telling his orderly to `` refill my pipe for that one ! '' 
and then , scattering sparks from it , ran forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French . 
`` Smack at 'em , lads ! '' 
he kept saying , seizing the guns by the wheels and working the screws himself . 
