Natasha blushed and laughed . 
`` Well , really , Mamma ! 
Why should you ? 
What is there to be surprised at ? '' 
In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs being pushed back in the sitting room where the count and Marya Dmitrievna had been playing cards with the majority of the more distinguished and older visitors . 
They now , stretching themselves after sitting so long , and replacing their purses and pocketbooks , entered the ballroom . 
First came Marya Dmitrievna and the count , both with merry countenances . 
The count , with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style , offered his bent arm to Marya Dmitrievna . 
He drew himself up , a smile of debonair gallantry lit up his face and as soon as the last figure of the ecossaise was ended , he clapped his hands to the musicians and shouted up to their gallery , addressing the first violin : `` Semen ! 
Do you know the Daniel Cooper ? '' 
This was the count 's favorite dance , which he had danced in his youth . 
-LRB- Strictly speaking , Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise . -RRB- 
`` Look at Papa ! '' 
shouted Natasha to the whole company , and quite forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her curly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter . 
And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the jovial old gentleman , who standing beside his tall and stout partner , Marya Dmitrievna , curved his arms , beat time , straightened his shoulders , turned out his toes , tapped gently with his foot , and , by a smile that broadened his round face more and more , prepared the onlookers for what was to follow . 
As soon as the provocatively gay strains of Daniel Cooper -LRB- somewhat resembling those of a merry peasant dance -RRB- began to sound , all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly filled by the domestic serfs -- the men on one side and the women on the other -- who with beaming faces had come to see their master making merry . 
`` Just look at the master ! 
A regular eagle he is ! '' 
loudly remarked the nurse , as she stood in one of the doorways . 
The count danced well and knew it . 
But his partner could not and did not want to dance well . 
Her enormous figure stood erect , her powerful arms hanging down -LRB- she had handed her reticule to the countess -RRB- , and only her stern but handsome face really joined in the dance . 
What was expressed by the whole of the count 's plump figure , in Marya Dmitrievna found expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose . 
But if the count , getting more and more into the swing of it , charmed the spectators by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and the agility with which he capered about on his light feet , Marya Dmitrievna produced no less impression by slight exertions -- the least effort to move her shoulders or bend her arms when turning , or stamp her foot -- which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual severity . 
The dance grew livelier and livelier . 
The other couples could not attract a moment 's attention to their own evolutions and did not even try to do so . 
All were watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna . 
Natasha kept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress , urging them to `` look at Papa ! '' 
though as it was they never took their eyes off the couple . 
In the intervals of the dance the count , breathing deeply , waved and shouted to the musicians to play faster . 
Faster , faster , and faster ; lightly , more lightly , and yet more lightly whirled the count , flying round Marya Dmitrievna , now on his toes , now on his heels ; until , turning his partner round to her seat , he executed the final pas , raising his soft foot backwards , bowing his perspiring head , smiling and making a wide sweep with his arm , amid a thunder of applause and laughter led by Natasha . 
Both partners stood still , breathing heavily and wiping their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs . 
`` That 's how we used to dance in our time , ma chere , '' said the count . 
`` That was a Daniel Cooper ! '' 
exclaimed Marya Dmitrievna , tucking up her sleeves and puffing heavily . 
While in the Rostovs ' ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced , to a tune in which the weary musicians blundered , and while tired footmen and cooks were getting the supper , Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke . 
The doctors pronounced recovery impossible . 
After a mute confession , communion was administered to the dying man , preparations made for the sacrament of unction , and in his house there was the bustle and thrill of suspense usual at such moments . 
Outside the house , beyond the gates , a group of undertakers , who hid whenever a carriage drove up , waited in expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral . 
The Military Governor of Moscow , who had been assiduous in sending aides-de-camp to inquire after the count 's health , came himself that evening to bid a last farewell to the celebrated grandee of Catherine 's court , Count Bezukhov . 
The magnificent reception room was crowded . 
Everyone stood up respectfully when the Military Governor , having stayed about half an hour alone with the dying man , passed out , slightly acknowledging their bows and trying to escape as quickly as from the glances fixed on him by the doctors , clergy , and relatives of the family . 
Prince Vasili , who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days , escorted him to the door , repeating something to him several times in low tones . 
When the Military Governor had gone , Prince Vasili sat down all alone on a chair in the ballroom , crossing one leg high over the other , leaning his elbow on his knee and covering his face with his hand . 
After sitting so for a while he rose , and , looking about him with frightened eyes , went with unusually hurried steps down the long corridor leading to the back of the house , to the room of the eldest princess . 
Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous whispers , and , whenever anyone went into or came from the dying man 's room , grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at his door , which creaked slightly when opened . 
`` The limits of human life ... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed , '' said an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was listening naively to his words . 
`` I wonder , is it not too late to administer unction ? '' 
asked the lady , adding the priest 's clerical title , as if she had no opinion of her own on the subject . 
`` Ah , madam , it is a great sacrament , '' replied the priest , passing his hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald head . 
`` Who was that ? 
The Military Governor himself ? '' 
was being asked at the other side of the room . 
`` How young-looking he is ! '' 
`` Yes , and he is over sixty . 
I hear the count no longer recognizes anyone . 
They wished to administer the sacrament of unction . '' 
`` I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times . '' 
The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red from weeping and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain , who was sitting in a graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine , leaning his elbow on a table . 
`` Beautiful , '' said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather . 
`` The weather is beautiful , Princess ; and besides , in Moscow one feels as if one were in the country . '' 
`` Yes , indeed , '' replied the princess with a sigh . 
`` So he may have something to drink ? '' 
Lorrain considered . 
`` Has he taken his medicine ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
The doctor glanced at his watch . 
`` Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar , '' and he indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch . 
`` Dere has neffer been a gase , '' a German doctor was saying to an aide-de-camp , `` dat one liffs after de sird stroke . '' 
`` And what a well-preserved man he was ! '' 
remarked the aide-de-camp . 
`` And who will inherit his wealth ? '' 
he added in a whisper . 
`` It vo n't go begging , '' replied the German with a smile . 
Everyone again looked toward the door , which creaked as the second princess went in with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain 's instructions . 
The German doctor went up to Lorrain . 
`` Do you think he can last till morning ? '' 
asked the German , addressing Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly . 
Lorrain , pursing up his lips , waved a severely negative finger before his nose . 
`` Tonight , not later , '' said he in a low voice , and he moved away with a decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to understand and state the patient 's condition . 
Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess ' room . 
In this room it was almost dark ; only two tiny lamps were burning before the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles . 
The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture , whatnots , cupboards , and little tables . 
The quilt of a high , white feather bed was just visible behind a screen . 
A small dog began to bark . 
`` Ah , is it you , cousin ? '' 
She rose and smoothed her hair , which was as usual so extremely smooth that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with varnish . 
`` Has anything happened ? '' 
she asked . 
`` I am so terrified . '' 
`` No , there is no change . 
I only came to have a talk about business , Catiche , '' * muttered the prince , seating himself wearily on the chair she had just vacated . 
`` You have made the place warm , I must say , '' he remarked . 
`` Well , sit down : let 's have a talk . '' 
* Catherine . 
`` I thought perhaps something had happened , '' she said with her unchanging stonily severe expression ; and , sitting down opposite the prince , she prepared to listen . 
`` I wished to get a nap , mon cousin , but I ca n't . '' 
`` Well , my dear ? '' 
said Prince Vasili , taking her hand and bending it downwards as was his habit . 
It was plain that this `` well ? '' 
