On Konovnitsyn 's handsome , resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever , there still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remote from present affairs , but then he suddenly started and his face assumed its habitual calm and firm appearance . 
`` Well , what is it ? 
From whom ? '' 
he asked immediately but without hurry , blinking at the light . 
While listening to the officer 's report Konovnitsyn broke the seal and read the dispatch . 
Hardly had he done so before he lowered his legs in their woolen stockings to the earthen floor and began putting on his boots . 
Then he took off his nightcap , combed his hair over his temples , and donned his cap . 
`` Did you get here quickly ? 
Let us go to his Highness . '' 
Konovnitsyn had understood at once that the news brought was of great importance and that no time must be lost . 
He did not consider or ask himself whether the news was good or bad . 
That did not interest him . 
He regarded the whole business of the war not with his intelligence or his reason but by something else . 
There was within him a deep unexpressed conviction that all would be well , but that one must not trust to this and still less speak about it , but must only attend to one 's own work . 
And he did his work , giving his whole strength to the task . 
Peter Petrovich Konovnitsyn , like Dokhturov , seems to have been included merely for propriety 's sake in the list of the so-called heroes of 1812 -- the Barclays , Raevskis , Ermolovs , Platovs , and Miloradoviches . 
Like Dokhturov he had the reputation of being a man of very limited capacity and information , and like Dokhturov he never made plans of battle but was always found where the situation was most difficult . 
Since his appointment as general on duty he had always slept with his door open , giving orders that every messenger should be allowed to wake him up . 
In battle he was always under fire , so that Kutuzov reproved him for it and feared to send him to the front , and like Dokhturov he was one of those unnoticed cogwheels that , without clatter or noise , constitute the most essential part of the machine . 
Coming out of the hut into the damp , dark night Konovnitsyn frowned - partly from an increased pain in his head and partly at the unpleasant thought that occurred to him , of how all that nest of influential men on the staff would be stirred up by this news , especially Bennigsen , who ever since Tarutino had been at daggers drawn with Kutuzov ; and how they would make suggestions , quarrel , issue orders , and rescind them . 
And this premonition was disagreeable to him though he knew it could not be helped . 
And in fact Toll , to whom he went to communicate the news , immediately began to expound his plans to a general sharing his quarters , until Konovnitsyn , who listened in weary silence , reminded him that they must go to see his Highness . 
Kutuzov like all old people did not sleep much at night . 
He often fell asleep unexpectedly in the daytime , but at night , lying on his bed without undressing , he generally remained awake thinking . 
So he lay now on his bed , supporting his large , heavy , scarred head on his plump hand , with his one eye open , meditating and peering into the darkness . 
Since Bennigsen , who corresponded with the Emperor and had more influence than anyone else on the staff , had begun to avoid him , Kutuzov was more at ease as to the possibility of himself and his troops being obliged to take part in useless aggressive movements . 
The lesson of the Tarutino battle and of the day before it , which Kutuzov remembered with pain , must , he thought , have some effect on others too . 
`` They must understand that we can only lose by taking the offensive . 
Patience and time are my warriors , my champions , '' thought Kutuzov . 
He knew that an apple should not be plucked while it is green . 
It will fall of itself when ripe , but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled , the tree is harmed , and your teeth are set on edge . 
Like an experienced sportsman he knew that the beast was wounded , and wounded as only the whole strength of Russia could have wounded it , but whether it was mortally wounded or not was still an undecided question . 
Now by the fact of Lauriston and Barthelemi having been sent , and by the reports of the guerrillas , Kutuzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal . 
But he needed further proofs and it was necessary to wait . 
`` They want to run to see how they have wounded it . 
Wait and we shall see ! 
Continual maneuvers , continual advances ! '' 
thought he . 
`` What for ? 
Only to distinguish themselves ! 
As if fighting were fun . 
They are like children from whom one ca n't get any sensible account of what has happened because they all want to show how well they can fight . 
But that 's not what is needed now . 
`` And what ingenious maneuvers they all propose to me ! 
It seems to them that when they have thought of two or three contingencies '' -LRB- he remembered the general plan sent him from Petersburg -RRB- `` they have foreseen everything . 
But the contingencies are endless . '' 
The undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at Borodino was mortal or not had hung over Kutuzov 's head for a whole month . 
On the one hand the French had occupied Moscow . 
On the other Kutuzov felt assured with all his being that the terrible blow into which he and all the Russians had put their whole strength must have been mortal . 
But in any case proofs were needed ; he had waited a whole month for them and grew more impatient the longer he waited . 
Lying on his bed during those sleepless nights he did just what he reproached those younger generals for doing . 
He imagined all sorts of possible contingencies , just like the younger men , but with this difference , that he saw thousands of contingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them . 
The longer he thought the more contingencies presented themselves . 
He imagined all sorts of movements of the Napoleonic army as a whole or in sections -- against Petersburg , or against him , or to outflank him . 
He thought too of the possibility -LRB- which he feared most of all -RRB- that Napoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in Moscow awaiting him . 
Kutuzov even imagined that Napoleon 's army might turn back through Medyn and Yukhnov , but the one thing he could not foresee was what happened -- the insane , convulsive stampede of Napoleon 's army during its first eleven days after leaving Moscow : a stampede which made possible what Kutuzov had not yet even dared to think of -- the complete extermination of the French . 
Dorokhov 's report about Broussier 's division , the guerrillas ' reports of distress in Napoleon 's army , rumors of preparations for leaving Moscow , all confirmed the supposition that the French army was beaten and preparing for flight . 
But these were only suppositions , which seemed important to the younger men but not to Kutuzov . 
With his sixty years ' experience he knew what value to attach to rumors , knew how apt people who desire anything are to group all news so that it appears to confirm what they desire , and he knew how readily in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary . 
And the more he desired it the less he allowed himself to believe it . 
This question absorbed all his mental powers . 
All else was to him only life 's customary routine . 
To such customary routine belonged his conversations with the staff , the letters he wrote from Tarutino to Madame de Stael , the reading of novels , the distribution of awards , his correspondence with Petersburg , and so on . 
But the destruction of the French , which he alone foresaw , was his heart 's one desire . 
On the night of the eleventh of October he lay leaning on his arm and thinking of that . 
There was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of Toll , Konovnitsyn , and Bolkhovitinov . 
`` Eh , who 's there ? 
Come in , come in ! 
What news ? '' 
the field marshal called out to them . 
While a footman was lighting a candle , Toll communicated the substance of the news . 
`` Who brought it ? '' 
asked Kutuzov with a look which , when the candle was lit , struck Toll by its cold severity . 
`` There can be no doubt about it , your Highness . '' 
`` Call him in , call him here . '' 
Kutuzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his big paunch resting against the other which was doubled under him . 
He screwed up his seeing eye to scrutinize the messenger more carefully , as if wishing to read in his face what preoccupied his own mind . 
`` Tell me , tell me , friend , '' said he to Bolkhovitinov in his low , aged voice , as he pulled together the shirt which gaped open on his chest , `` come nearer -- nearer . 
What news have you brought me ? 
Eh ? 
That Napoleon has left Moscow ? 
Are you sure ? 
Eh ? '' 
Bolkhovitinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he had been told to report . 
`` Speak quicker , quicker ! 
Do n't torture me ! '' 
Kutuzov interrupted him . 
Bolkhovitinov told him everything and was then silent , awaiting instructions . 
Toll was beginning to say something but Kutuzov checked him . 
He tried to say something , but his face suddenly puckered and wrinkled ; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite side of the room , to the corner darkened by the icons that hung there . 
`` O Lord , my Creator , Thou has heard our prayer ... '' said he in a tremulous voice with folded hands . 
`` Russia is saved . 
I thank Thee , O Lord ! '' 
and he wept . 
From the time he received this news to the end of the campaign all Kutuzov 's activity was directed toward restraining his troops , by authority , by guile , and by entreaty , from useless attacks , maneuvers , or encounters with the perishing enemy . 
Dokhturov went to Malo-Yaroslavets , but Kutuzov lingered with the main army and gave orders for the evacuation of Kaluga -- a retreat beyond which town seemed to him quite possible . 
Everywhere Kutuzov retreated , but the enemy without waiting for his retreat fled in the opposite direction . 
Napoleon 's historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers at Tarutino and Malo-Yaroslavets , and make conjectures as to what would have happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern provinces . 
But not to speak of the fact that nothing prevented him from advancing into those southern provinces -LRB- for the Russian army did not bar his way -RRB- , the historians forget that nothing could have saved his army , for then already it bore within itself the germs of inevitable ruin . 
How could that army -- which had found abundant supplies in Moscow and had trampled them underfoot instead of keeping them , and on arriving at Smolensk had looted provisions instead of storing them -- how could that army recuperate in Kaluga province , which was inhabited by Russians such as those who lived in Moscow , and where fire had the same property of consuming what was set ablaze ? 
