Alpatych moved forward and next time the official came out addressed him , one hand placed in the breast of his buttoned coat , and handed him two letters . 
`` To his Honor Baron Asch , from General-in-Chief Prince Bolkonski , '' he announced with such solemnity and significance that the official turned to him and took the letters . 
A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedly said to him : `` Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing : I acted on the highest instructions -- here ... '' and he handed a paper to Alpatych . 
`` Still , as the prince is unwell my advice is that they should go to Moscow . 
I am just starting myself . 
Inform them ... '' But the Governor did not finish : a dusty perspiring officer ran into the room and began to say something in French . 
The Governor 's face expressed terror . 
`` Go , '' he said , nodding his head to Alpatych , and began questioning the officer . 
Eager , frightened , helpless glances were turned on Alpatych when he came out of the Governor 's room . 
Involuntarily listening now to the firing , which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength , Alpatych hurried to his inn . 
The paper handed to him by the Governor said this : `` I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightest danger as yet and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with any . 
I from the one side and Prince Bagration from the other are marching to unite our forces before Smolensk , which junction will be effected on the 22nd instant , and both armies with their united forces will defend our compatriots of the province entrusted to your care till our efforts shall have beaten back the enemies of our Fatherland , or till the last warrior in our valiant ranks has perished . 
From this you will see that you have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of Smolensk , for those defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of victory . '' 
-LRB- Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch , the civil governor of Smolensk , 1812 . -RRB- 
People were anxiously roaming about the streets . 
Carts piled high with household utensils , chairs , and cupboards kept emerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets . 
Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapontov 's and women were wailing and lamenting as they said good-by . 
A small watchdog ran round barking in front of the harnessed horses . 
Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went straight to the shed where his horses and trap were . 
The coachman was asleep . 
He woke him up , told him to harness , and went into the passage . 
From the host 's room came the sounds of a child crying , the despairing sobs of a woman , and the hoarse angry shouting of Ferapontov . 
The cook began running hither and thither in the passage like a frightened hen , just as Alpatych entered . 
`` He 's done her to death . 
Killed the mistress ! 
... Beat her ... dragged her about so ! 
... '' `` What for ? '' 
asked Alpatych . 
`` She kept begging to go away . 
She 's a woman ! 
` Take me away , ' says she , ` do n't let me perish with my little children ! 
Folks , ' she says , ` are all gone , so why , ' she says , ` do n't we go ? ' 
And he began beating and pulling her about so ! '' 
At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval , and not wishing to hear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper 's , where he had left his purchases . 
`` You brute , you murderer ! '' 
screamed a thin , pale woman who , with a baby in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head , burst through the door at that moment and down the steps into the yard . 
Ferapontov came out after her , but on seeing Alpatych adjusted his waistcoat , smoothed his hair , yawned , and followed Alpatych into the opposite room . 
`` Going already ? '' 
said he . 
Alpatych , without answering or looking at his host , sorted his packages and asked how much he owed . 
`` We 'll reckon up ! 
Well , have you been to the Governor 's ? '' 
asked Ferapontov . 
`` What has been decided ? '' 
Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anything definite . 
`` With our business , how can we get away ? '' 
said Ferapontov . 
`` We 'd have to pay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell them they 're not Christians to ask it ! 
Selivanov , now , did a good stroke last Thursday -- sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack . 
Will you have some tea ? '' 
he added . 
While the horses were being harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over their tea talked of the price of corn , the crops , and the good weather for harvesting . 
`` Well , it seems to be getting quieter , '' remarked Ferapontov , finishing his third cup of tea and getting up . 
`` Ours must have got the best of it . 
The orders were not to let them in . 
So we 're in force , it seems ... . 
They say the other day Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into the river Marina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day . '' 
Alpatych collected his parcels , handed them to the coachman who had come in , and settled up with the innkeeper . 
The noise of wheels , hoofs , and bells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out . 
It was by now late in the afternoon . 
Half the street was in shadow , the other half brightly lit by the sun . 
Alpatych looked out of the window and went to the door . 
Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistling and thud was heard , followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull roar that set the windows rattling . 
He went out into the street : two men were running past toward the bridge . 
From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of cannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town . 
But these sounds were hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside the town and attracted little attention from the inhabitants . 
The town was being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered up after four o'clock . 
The people did not at once realize the meaning of this bombardment . 
At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only aroused curiosity . 
Ferapontov 's wife , who till then had not ceased wailing under the shed , became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the gate , listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people . 
The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate . 
With lively curiosity everyone tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over their heads . 
Several people came round the corner talking eagerly . 
`` What force ! '' 
remarked one . 
`` Knocked the roof and ceiling all to splinters ! '' 
`` Routed up the earth like a pig , '' said another . 
`` That 's grand , it bucks one up ! '' 
laughed the first . 
`` Lucky you jumped aside , or it would have wiped you out ! '' 
Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen on a house close to them . 
Meanwhile still more projectiles , now with the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball , now with the agreeable intermittent whistle of a shell , flew over people 's heads incessantly , but not one fell close by , they all flew over . 
Alpatych was getting into his trap . 
The innkeeper stood at the gate . 
`` What are you staring at ? '' 
he shouted to the cook , who in her red skirt , with sleeves rolled up , swinging her bare elbows , had stepped to the corner to listen to what was being said . 
`` What marvels ! '' 
she exclaimed , but hearing her master 's voice she turned back , pulling down her tucked-up skirt . 
Once more something whistled , but this time quite close , swooping downwards like a little bird ; a flame flashed in the middle of the street , something exploded , and the street was shrouded in smoke . 
`` Scoundrel , what are you doing ? '' 
shouted the innkeeper , rushing to the cook . 
At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from different sides , the frightened baby began to cry , and people crowded silently with pale faces round the cook . 
The loudest sound in that crowd was her wailing . 
`` Oh-h-h ! 
Dear souls , dear kind souls ! 
Do n't let me die ! 
My good souls ! 
... '' Five minutes later no one remained in the street . 
The cook , with her thigh broken by a shell splinter , had been carried into the kitchen . 
Alpatych , his coachman , Ferapontov 's wife and children and the house porter were all sitting in the cellar , listening . 
