He regarded his whole life as a continual round of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him . 
And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and ugly heiress in the same way . 
All this might , he thought , turn out very well and amusingly . 
`` And why not marry her if she really has so much money ? 
That never does any harm , '' thought Anatole . 
He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which had become habitual to him and , his handsome head held high , entered his father 's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him . 
Prince Vasili 's two valets were busy dressing him , and he looked round with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter entered , as if to say : `` Yes , that 's how I want you to look . '' 
`` I say , Father , joking apart , is she very hideous ? '' 
Anatole asked , as if continuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned during the journey . 
`` Enough ! 
What nonsense ! 
Above all , try to be respectful and cautious with the old prince . '' 
`` If he starts a row I 'll go away , '' said Prince Anatole . 
`` I ca n't bear those old men ! 
Eh ? '' 
`` Remember , for you everything depends on this . '' 
In the meantime , not only was it known in the maidservants ' rooms that the minister and his son had arrived , but the appearance of both had been minutely described . 
Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room , vainly trying to master her agitation . 
`` Why did they write , why did Lise tell me about it ? 
It can never happen ! '' 
she said , looking at herself in the glass . 
`` How shall I enter the drawing room ? 
Even if I like him I ca n't now be myself with him . '' 
The mere thought of her father 's look filled her with terror . 
The little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha , the lady 's maid , the necessary report of how handsome the minister 's son was , with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows , and with what difficulty the father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed him like an eagle , three steps at a time . 
Having received this information , the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne , whose chattering voices had reached her from the corridor , went into Princess Mary 's room . 
`` You know they 've come , Marie ? '' 
said the little princess , waddling in , and sinking heavily into an armchair . 
She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning , but had on one of her best dresses . 
Her hair was carefully done and her face was animated , which , however , did not conceal its sunken and faded outlines . 
Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society , it was still more noticeable how much plainer she had become . 
Some unobtrusive touch had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne 's toilet which rendered her fresh and pretty face yet more attractive . 
`` What ! 
Are you going to remain as you are , dear princess ? '' 
she began . 
`` They 'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and we shall have to go down , and you have not smartened yourself up at all ! '' 
The little princess got up , rang for the maid , and hurriedly and merrily began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be dressed . 
Princess Mary 's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that the arrival of a suitor agitated her , and still more so by both her companions ' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise . 
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to betray her agitation , while to decline their offers to dress her would prolong their banter and insistence . 
She flushed , her beautiful eyes grew dim , red blotches came on her face , and it took on the unattractive martyrlike expression it so often wore , as she submitted herself to Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise . 
Both these women quite sincerely tried to make her look pretty . 
She was so plain that neither of them could think of her as a rival , so they began dressing her with perfect sincerity , and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress can make a face pretty . 
`` No really , my dear , this dress is not pretty , '' said Lise , looking sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance . 
`` You have a maroon dress , have it fetched . 
Really ! 
You know the fate of your whole life may be at stake . 
But this one is too light , it 's not becoming ! '' 
It was not the dress , but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary that was not pretty , but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little princess felt this ; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placed in the hair , the hair combed up , and the blue scarf arranged lower on the best maroon dress , and so on , all would be well . 
They forgot that the frightened face and the figure could not be altered , and that however they might change the setting and adornment of that face , it would still remain piteous and plain . 
After two or three changes to which Princess Mary meekly submitted , just as her hair had been arranged on the top of her head -LRB- a style that quite altered and spoiled her looks -RRB- and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf , the little princess walked twice round her , now adjusting a fold of the dress with her little hand , now arranging the scarf and looking at her with her head bent first on one side and then on the other . 
`` No , it will not do , '' she said decidedly , clasping her hands . 
`` No , Mary , really this dress does not suit you . 
I prefer you in your little gray everyday dress . 
Now please , do it for my sake . 
Katie , '' she said to the maid , `` bring the princess her gray dress , and you 'll see , Mademoiselle Bourienne , how I shall arrange it , '' she added , smiling with a foretaste of artistic pleasure . 
But when Katie brought the required dress , Princess Mary remained sitting motionless before the glass , looking at her face , and saw in the mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering , ready to burst into sobs . 
`` Come , dear princess , '' said Mademoiselle Bourienne , `` just one more little effort . '' 
The little princess , taking the dress from the maid , came up to Princess Mary . 
`` Well , now we 'll arrange something quite simple and becoming , '' she said . 
The three voices , hers , Mademoiselle Bourienne 's , and Katie 's , who was laughing at something , mingled in a merry sound , like the chirping of birds . 
`` No , leave me alone , '' said Princess Mary . 
Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birds was silenced at once . 
They looked at the beautiful , large , thoughtful eyes full of tears and of thoughts , gazing shiningly and imploringly at them , and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist . 
`` At least , change your coiffure , '' said the little princess . 
`` Did n't I tell you , '' she went on , turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne , `` Mary 's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least . 
Not in the least ! 
Please change it . '' 
`` Leave me alone , please leave me alone ! 
It is all quite the same to me , '' answered a voice struggling with tears . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain , worse than usual , but it was too late . 
She was looking at them with an expression they both knew , an expression thoughtful and sad . 
This expression in Princess Mary did not frighten them -LRB- she never inspired fear in anyone -RRB- , but they knew that when it appeared on her face , she became mute and was not to be shaken in her determination . 
`` You will change it , wo n't you ? '' 
said Lise . 
And as Princess Mary gave no answer , she left the room . 
Princess Mary was left alone . 
She did not comply with Lise 's request , she not only left her hair as it was , but did not even look in her glass . 
Letting her arms fall helplessly , she sat with downcast eyes and pondered . 
A husband , a man , a strong dominant and strangely attractive being rose in her imagination , and carried her into a totally different happy world of his own . 
She fancied a child , her own -- such as she had seen the day before in the arms of her nurse 's daughter -- at her own breast , the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the child . 
`` But no , it is impossible , I am too ugly , '' she thought . 
`` Please come to tea . 
The prince will be out in a moment , '' came the maid 's voice at the door . 
She roused herself , and felt appalled at what she had been thinking , and before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and , her eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a lamp , she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments . 
A painful doubt filled her soul . 
Could the joy of love , of earthly love for a man , be for her ? 
In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of happiness and of children , but her strongest , most deeply hidden longing was for earthly love . 
The more she tried to hide this feeling from others and even from herself , the stronger it grew . 
`` O God , '' she said , `` how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil ? 
How am I to renounce forever these vile fancies , so as peacefully to fulfill Thy will ? '' 
And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her the answer in her own heart . 
`` Desire nothing for thyself , seek nothing , be not anxious or envious . 
Man 's future and thy own fate must remain hidden from thee , but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything . 
If it be God 's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage , be ready to fulfill His will . '' 
With this consoling thought -LRB- but yet with a hope for the fulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing -RRB- Princess Mary sighed , and having crossed herself went down , thinking neither of her gown and coiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say . 
What could all that matter in comparison with the will of God , without Whose care not a hair of man 's head can fall ? 
When Princess Mary came down , Prince Vasili and his son were already in the drawing room , talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
When she entered with her heavy step , treading on her heels , the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess , indicating her to the gentlemen , said : `` Voila Marie ! '' 
Princess Mary saw them all and saw them in detail . 
She saw Prince Vasili 's face , serious for an instant at the sight of her , but immediately smiling again , and the little princess curiously noting the impression `` Marie '' produced on the visitors . 
