he murmured to himself , still not replying to the Austrian . 
Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order . 
Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance , he stopped the third division and convinced himself that there really were no sharpshooters in front of our columns . 
The colonel at the head of the regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief 's order to throw out skirmishers . 
He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops in front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away . 
There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren descent hidden by dense mist . 
Having given orders in the commander in chief 's name to rectify this omission , Prince Andrew galloped back . 
Kutuzov still in the same place , his stout body resting heavily in the saddle with the lassitude of age , sat yawning wearily with closed eyes . 
The troops were no longer moving , but stood with the butts of their muskets on the ground . 
`` All right , all right ! '' 
he said to Prince Andrew , and turned to a general who , watch in hand , was saying it was time they started as all the left-flank columns had already descended . 
`` Plenty of time , your excellency , '' muttered Kutuzov in the midst of a yawn . 
`` Plenty of time , '' he repeated . 
Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of regiments saluting , and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended line of the advancing Russian columns . 
Evidently the person they were greeting was riding quickly . 
When the soldiers of the regiment in front of which Kutuzov was standing began to shout , he rode a little to one side and looked round with a frown . 
Along the road from Pratzen galloped what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms . 
Two of them rode side by side in front , at full gallop . 
One in a black uniform with white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse , the other who was in a white uniform rode a black one . 
These were the two Emperors followed by their suites . 
Kutuzov , affecting the manners of an old soldier at the front , gave the command `` Attention ! '' 
and rode up to the Emperors with a salute . 
His whole appearance and manner were suddenly transformed . 
He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys without reasoning . 
With an affectation of respect which evidently struck Alexander unpleasantly , he rode up and saluted . 
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished . 
After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field of Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first time abroad , but there was still the same bewitching combination of majesty and mildness in his fine gray eyes , and on his delicate lips the same capacity for varying expression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocent youth . 
At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic ; here he seemed brighter and more energetic . 
He was slightly flushed after galloping two miles , and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round at the faces of his suite , young and animated as his own . 
Czartoryski , Novosiltsev , Prince Volkonsky , Strogonov , and the others , all richly dressed gay young men on splendid , well-groomed , fresh , only slightly heated horses , exchanging remarks and smiling , had stopped behind the Emperor . 
The Emperor Francis , a rosy , long faced young man , sat very erect on his handsome black horse , looking about him in a leisurely and preoccupied manner . 
He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked some question -- `` Most likely he is asking at what o'clock they started , '' thought Prince Andrew , watching his old acquaintance with a smile he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brunn . 
In the Emperors ' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the Guard and line regiments , Russian and Austrian . 
Among them were grooms leading the Tsar 's beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths . 
As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters a stuffy room , so a whiff of youthfulness , energy , and confidence of success reached Kutuzov 's cheerless staff with the galloping advent of all these brilliant young men . 
`` Why are n't you beginning , Michael Ilarionovich ? '' 
said the Emperor Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov , glancing courteously at the same time at the Emperor Francis . 
`` I am waiting , Your Majesty , '' answered Kutuzov , bending forward respectfully . 
The Emperor , frowning slightly , bent his ear forward as if he had not quite heard . 
`` Waiting , Your Majesty , '' repeated Kutuzov . 
-LRB- Prince Andrew noted that Kutuzov 's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word `` waiting . '' -RRB- 
`` Not all the columns have formed up yet , Your Majesty . '' 
The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply ; he shrugged his rather round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him , as if complaining of Kutuzov . 
`` You know , Michael Ilarionovich , we are not on the Empress ' Field where a parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled , '' said the Tsar with another glance at the Emperor Francis , as if inviting him if not to join in at least to listen to what he was saying . 
But the Emperor Francis continued to look about him and did not listen . 
`` That is just why I do not begin , sire , '' said Kutuzov in a resounding voice , apparently to preclude the possibility of not being heard , and again something in his face twitched -- `` That is just why I do not begin , sire , because we are not on parade and not on the Empress ' Field . '' 
said clearly and distinctly . 
In the Emperor 's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressed dissatisfaction and reproach . 
`` Old though he may be , he should not , he certainly should not , speak like that , '' their glances seemed to say . 
The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov 's eye waiting to hear whether he would say anything more . 
But Kutuzov , with respectfully bowed head , seemed also to be waiting . 
The silence lasted for about a minute . 
`` However , if you command it , Your Majesty , '' said Kutuzov , lifting his head and again assuming his former tone of a dull , unreasoning , but submissive general . 
He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich , the commander of the column , gave him the order to advance . 
The troops again began to move , and two battalions of the Novgorod and one of the Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor . 
As this Apsheron battalion marched by , the red-faced Miloradovich , without his greatcoat , with his Orders on his breast and an enormous tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front and back , galloped strenuously forward , and with a dashing salute reined in his horse before the Emperor . 
`` God be with you , general ! '' 
said the Emperor . 
`` Ma foi , sire , nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite , sire , '' * he answered gaily , raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the gentlemen of the Tsar 's suite by his poor French . 
* `` Indeed , Sire , we shall do everything it is possible to do , Sire . '' 
Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little behind the Emperor . 
The Apsheron men , excited by the Tsar 's presence , passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold , brisk pace . 
`` Lads ! '' 
shouted Miloradovich in a loud , self-confident , and cheery voice , obviously so elated by the sound of firing , by the prospect of battle , and by the sight of the gallant Apsherons , his comrades in Suvorov 's time , now passing so gallantly before the Emperors , that he forgot the sovereigns ' presence . 
`` Lads , it 's not the first village you 've had to take , '' cried he . 
`` Glad to do our best ! '' 
shouted the soldiers . 
The Emperor 's horse started at the sudden cry . 
This horse that had carried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the field of Austerlitz , enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and pricking its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on the Empress ' Field , not understanding the significance of the firing , nor of the nearness of the Emperor Francis ' black cob , nor of all that was being said , thought , and felt that day by its rider . 
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a remark to him , pointing to the gallant Apsherons . 
Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the carabineers . 
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he stopped at a solitary , deserted house that had probably once been an inn , where two roads parted . 
Both of them led downhill and troops were marching along both . 
The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights . 
Down below , on the left , the firing became more distinct . 
Kutuzov had stopped and was speaking to an Austrian general . 
Prince Andrew , who was a little behind looking at them , turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass . 
`` Look , look ! '' 
said this adjutant , looking not at the troops in the distance , but down the hill before him . 
`` It 's the French ! '' 
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass , trying to snatch it from one another . 
The expression on all their faces suddenly changed to one of horror . 
The French were supposed to be a mile and a half away , but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in front of us . 
`` It 's the enemy ? 
... No ! 
... Yes , see it is ! 
... for certain ... . 
But how is that ? '' 
said different voices . 
With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right , not more than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing , a dense French column coming up to meet the Apsherons . 
`` Here it is ! 
The decisive moment has arrived . 
My turn has come , '' thought Prince Andrew , and striking his horse he rode up to Kutuzov . 
`` The Apsherons must be stopped , your excellency , '' cried he . 
But at that very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round , firing was heard quite close at hand , and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from Prince Andrew shouted , `` Brothers ! 
All 's lost ! '' 
And at this as if at a command , everyone began to run . 
Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors . 
Not only would it have been difficult to stop that crowd , it was even impossible not to be carried back with it oneself . 
Bolkonski only tried not to lose touch with it , and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what was happening in front of him . 
