She had grown thin and pale , but that was not what made her unrecognizable ; she was unrecognizable at the moment he entered because on that face whose eyes had always shone with a suppressed smile of the joy of life , now when he first entered and glanced at her there was not the least shadow of a smile : only her eyes were kindly attentive and sadly interrogative . 
Pierre 's confusion was not reflected by any confusion on Natasha 's part , but only by the pleasure that just perceptibly lit up her whole face . 
`` She has come to stay with me , '' said Princess Mary . 
`` The count and countess will be here in a few days . 
The countess is in a dreadful state ; but it was necessary for Natasha herself to see a doctor . 
They insisted on her coming with me . '' 
`` Yes , is there a family free from sorrow now ? '' 
said Pierre , addressing Natasha . 
`` You know it happened the very day we were rescued . 
I saw him . 
What a delightful boy he was ! '' 
Natasha looked at him , and by way of answer to his words her eyes widened and lit up . 
`` What can one say or think of as a consolation ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` Nothing ! 
Why had such a splendid boy , so full of life , to die ? '' 
`` Yes , in these days it would be hard to live without faith ... '' remarked Princess Mary . 
`` Yes , yes , that is really true , '' Pierre hastily interrupted her . 
`` Why is it true ? '' 
Natasha asked , looking attentively into Pierre 's eyes . 
`` How can you ask why ? '' 
said Princess Mary . 
`` The thought alone of what awaits ... '' Natasha without waiting for Princess Mary to finish again looked inquiringly at Pierre . 
`` And because , '' Pierre continued , `` only one who believes that there is a God ruling us can bear a loss such as hers and ... yours . '' 
Natasha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenly stopped . 
Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed Princess Mary , asking about his friend 's last days . 
Pierre 's confusion had now almost vanished , but at the same time he felt that his freedom had also completely gone . 
He felt that there was now a judge of his every word and action whose judgment mattered more to him than that of all the rest of the world . 
As he spoke now he was considering what impression his words would make on Natasha . 
He did not purposely say things to please her , but whatever he was saying he regarded from her standpoint . 
Princess Mary -- reluctantly as is usual in such cases -- began telling of the condition in which she had found Prince Andrew . 
But Pierre 's face quivering with emotion , his questions and his eager restless expression , gradually compelled her to go into details which she feared to recall for her own sake . 
`` Yes , yes , and so ... ? '' 
Pierre kept saying as he leaned toward her with his whole body and eagerly listened to her story . 
`` Yes , yes ... so he grew tranquil and softened ? 
With all his soul he had always sought one thing -- to be perfectly good -- so he could not be afraid of death . 
The faults he had -- if he had any -- were not of his making . 
So he did soften ? 
... What a happy thing that he saw you again , '' he added , suddenly turning to Natasha and looking at her with eyes full of tears . 
Natasha 's face twitched . 
She frowned and lowered her eyes for a moment . 
She hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not . 
`` Yes , that was happiness , '' she then said in her quiet voice with its deep chest notes . 
`` For me it certainly was happiness . '' 
She paused . 
`` And he ... he ... he said he was wishing for it at the very moment I entered the room ... '' Natasha 's voice broke . 
She blushed , pressed her clasped hands on her knees , and then controlling herself with an evident effort lifted her head and began to speak rapidly . 
`` We knew nothing of it when we started from Moscow . 
I did not dare to ask about him . 
Then suddenly Sonya told me he was traveling with us . 
I had no idea and could not imagine what state he was in , all I wanted was to see him and be with him , '' she said , trembling , and breathing quickly . 
And not letting them interrupt her she went on to tell what she had never yet mentioned to anyone -- all she had lived through during those three weeks of their journey and life at Yaroslavl . 
Pierre listened to her with lips parted and eyes fixed upon her full of tears . 
As he listened he did not think of Prince Andrew , nor of death , nor of what she was telling . 
He listened to her and felt only pity for her , for what she was suffering now while she was speaking . 
Princess Mary , frowning in her effort to hold back her tears , sat beside Natasha , and heard for the first time the story of those last days of her brother 's and Natasha 's love . 
Evidently Natasha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale . 
She spoke , mingling most trifling details with the intimate secrets of her soul , and it seemed as if she could never finish . 
Several times she repeated the same thing twice . 
Dessalles ' voice was heard outside the door asking whether little Nicholas might come in to say good night . 
`` Well , that 's all -- everything , '' said Natasha . 
She got up quickly just as Nicholas entered , almost ran to the door which was hidden by curtains , struck her head against it , and rushed from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow . 
Pierre gazed at the door through which she had disappeared and did not understand why he suddenly felt all alone in the world . 
Princess Mary roused him from his abstraction by drawing his attention to her nephew who had entered the room . 
At that moment of emotional tenderness young Nicholas ' face , which resembled his father 's , affected Pierre so much that when he had kissed the boy he got up quickly , took out his handkerchief , and went to the window . 
He wished to take leave of Princess Mary , but she would not let him go . 
`` No , Natasha and I sometimes do n't go to sleep till after two , so please do n't go . 
I will order supper . 
Go downstairs , we will come immediately . '' 
Before Pierre left the room Princess Mary told him : `` This is the first time she has talked of him like that . '' 
Pierre was shown into the large , brightly lit dining room ; a few minutes later he heard footsteps and Princess Mary entered with Natasha . 
Natasha was calm , though a severe and grave expression had again settled on her face . 
They all three of them now experienced that feeling of awkwardness which usually follows after a serious and heartfelt talk . 
It is impossible to go back to the same conversation , to talk of trifles is awkward , and yet the desire to speak is there and silence seems like affectation . 
They went silently to table . 
The footmen drew back the chairs and pushed them up again . 
Pierre unfolded his cold table napkin and , resolving to break the silence , looked at Natasha and at Princess Mary . 
They had evidently both formed the same resolution ; the eyes of both shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life also has joy . 
`` Do you take vodka , Count ? '' 
asked Princess Mary , and those words suddenly banished the shadows of the past . 
`` Now tell us about yourself , '' said she . 
`` One hears such improbable wonders about you . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual to him . 
`` They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of ! 
Mary Abramovna invited me to her house and kept telling me what had happened , or ought to have happened , to me . 
Stepan Stepanych also instructed me how I ought to tell of my experiences . 
In general I have noticed that it is very easy to be an interesting man -LRB- I am an interesting man now -RRB- ; people invite me out and tell me all about myself . '' 
Natasha smiled and was on the point of speaking . 
`` We have been told , '' Princess Mary interrupted her , `` that you lost two millions in Moscow . 
Is that true ? '' 
`` But I am three times as rich as before , '' returned Pierre . 
Though the position was now altered by his decision to pay his wife 's debts and to rebuild his houses , Pierre still maintained that he had become three times as rich as before . 
`` What I have certainly gained is freedom , '' he began seriously , but did not continue , noticing that this theme was too egotistic . 
`` And are you building ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Savelich says I must ! '' 
`` Tell me , you did not know of the countess ' death when you decided to remain in Moscow ? '' 
asked Princess Mary and immediately blushed , noticing that her question , following his mention of freedom , ascribed to his words a meaning he had perhaps not intended . 
`` No , '' answered Pierre , evidently not considering awkward the meaning Princess Mary had given to his words . 
`` I heard of it in Orel and you can not imagine how it shocked me . 
