Around the wounded stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive faces , whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from the spot . 
Disregarding the officers ' orders , the soldiers stood leaning against their stretchers and gazing intently , as if trying to comprehend the difficult problem of what was taking place before them . 
From the tents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans . 
Occasionally dressers ran out to fetch water , or to point out those who were to be brought in next . 
The wounded men awaiting their turn outside the tents groaned , sighed , wept , screamed , swore , or asked for vodka . 
Some were delirious . 
Prince Andrew 's bearers , stepping over the wounded who had not yet been bandaged , took him , as a regimental commander , close up to one of the tents and there stopped , awaiting instructions . 
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and for a long time could not make out what was going on around him . 
He remembered the meadow , the wormwood , the field , the whirling black ball , and his sudden rush of passionate love of life . 
Two steps from him , leaning against a branch and talking loudly and attracting general attention , stood a tall , handsome , black-haired noncommissioned officer with a bandaged head . 
He had been wounded in the head and leg by bullets . 
Around him , eagerly listening to his talk , a crowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was gathered . 
`` We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything , we grabbed the King himself ! '' 
cried he , looking around him with eyes that glittered with fever . 
`` If only reserves had come up just then , lads , there would n't have been nothing left of him ! 
I tell you surely ... '' Like all the others near the speaker , Prince Andrew looked at him with shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort . 
`` But is n't it all the same now ? '' 
thought he . 
`` And what will be there , and what has there been here ? 
Why was I so reluctant to part with life ? 
There was something in this life I did not and do not understand . '' 
One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron , holding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his small bloodstained hands , so as not to smear it . 
He raised his head and looked about him , but above the level of the wounded men . 
He evidently wanted a little respite . 
After turning his head from right to left for some time , he sighed and looked down . 
`` All right , immediately , '' he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince Andrew out to him , and he told them to carry him into the tent . 
Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting . 
`` It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have a chance ! '' 
remarked one . 
Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been cleared and which a dresser was washing down . 
Prince Andrew could not make out distinctly what was in that tent . 
The pitiful groans from all sides and the torturing pain in his thigh , stomach , and back distracted him . 
All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked , bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent , as a few weeks previously , on that hot August day , such bodies had filled the dirty pond beside the Smolensk road . 
Yes , it was the same flesh , the same chair a canon , the sight of which had even then filled him with horror , as by a presentiment . 
There were three operating tables in the tent . 
Two were occupied , and on the third they placed Prince Andrew . 
For a little while he was left alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other two tables . 
On the nearest one sat a Tartar , probably a Cossack , judging by the uniform thrown down beside him . 
Four soldiers were holding him , and a spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back . 
`` Ooh , ooh , ooh ! '' 
grunted the Tartar , and suddenly lifting up his swarthy snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones , and baring his white teeth , he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing , ringing , and prolonged yells . 
On the other table , round which many people were crowding , a tall well-fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back . 
His curly hair , its color , and the shape of his head seemed strangely familiar to Prince Andrew . 
Several dressers were pressing on his chest to hold him down . 
One large , white , plump leg twitched rapidly all the time with a feverish tremor . 
The man was sobbing and choking convulsively . 
Two doctors -- one of whom was pale and trembling -- were silently doing something to this man 's other , gory leg . 
When he had finished with the Tartar , whom they covered with an overcoat , the spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew , wiping his hands . 
He glanced at Prince Andrew 's face and quickly turned away . 
`` Undress him ! 
What are you waiting for ? '' 
he cried angrily to the dressers . 
His very first , remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince Andrew 's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily to undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him . 
The doctor bent down over the wound , felt it , and sighed deeply . 
Then he made a sign to someone , and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to lose consciousness . 
When he came to himself the splintered portions of his thighbone had been extracted , the torn flesh cut away , and the wound bandaged . 
Water was being sprinkled on his face . 
As soon as Prince Andrew opened his eyes , the doctor bent over , kissed him silently on the lips , and hurried away . 
After the sufferings he had been enduring , Prince Andrew enjoyed a blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time . 
All the best and happiest moments of his life -- especially his earliest childhood , when he used to be undressed and put to bed , and when leaning over him his nurse sang him to sleep and he , burying his head in the pillow , felt happy in the mere consciousness of life - returned to his memory , not merely as something past but as something present . 
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew : they were lifting him up and trying to quiet him . 
`` Show it to me ... . 
Oh , ooh ... Oh ! 
Oh , ooh ! '' 
his frightened moans could be heard , subdued by suffering and broken by sobs . 
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep . 
Whether because he was dying without glory , or because he was sorry to part with life , or because of those memories of a childhood that could not return , or because he was suffering and others were suffering and that man near him was groaning so piteously -- he felt like weeping childlike , kindly , and almost happy tears . 
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood and with the boot still on . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh , ooh ! '' 
he sobbed , like a woman . 
The doctor who had been standing beside him , preventing Prince Andrew from seeing his face , moved away . 
`` My God ! 
What is this ? 
Why is he here ? '' 
said Prince Andrew to himself . 
In the miserable , sobbing , enfeebled man whose leg had just been amputated , he recognized Anatole Kuragin . 
Men were supporting him in their arms and offering him a glass of water , but his trembling , swollen lips could not grasp its rim . 
Anatole was sobbing painfully . 
`` Yes , it is he ! 
Yes , that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me , '' thought Prince Andrew , not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him . 
`` What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life ? '' 
he asked himself without finding an answer . 
And suddenly a new unexpected memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to him . 
He remembered Natasha as he had seen her for the first time at the ball in 1810 , with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happy face ready for rapture , and love and tenderness for her , stronger and more vivid than ever , awoke in his soul . 
He now remembered the connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes . 
He remembered everything , and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy heart . 
Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving tears for his fellow men , for himself , and for his own and their errors . 
`` Compassion , love of our brothers , for those who love us and for those who hate us , love of our enemies ; yes , that love which God preached on earth and which Princess Mary taught me and I did not understand -- that is what made me sorry to part with life , that is what remained for me had I lived . 
But now it is too late . 
I know it ! '' 
The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded , together with the heaviness of his head and the news that some twenty generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded , and the consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm , produced an unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at the killed and wounded , thereby , he considered , testing his strength of mind . 
This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame that strength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and his greatness . 
He rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to the Shevardino knoll , where he sat on his campstool , his sallow face swollen and heavy , his eyes dim , his nose red , and his voice hoarse , involuntarily listening , with downcast eyes , to the sounds of firing . 
With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action , in which he regarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest . 
A personal , human feeling for a brief moment got the better of the artificial phantasm of life he had served so long . 
He felt in his own person the sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield . 
The heaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility of suffering and death for himself . 
At that moment he did not desire Moscow , or victory , or glory -LRB- what need had he for any more glory ? -RRB- . 
The one thing he wished for was rest , tranquillity , and freedom . 
