The enemy is advancing to destroy Russia , to desecrate the tombs of our fathers , to carry off our wives and children . '' 
The nobleman smote his breast . 
`` We will all arise , every one of us will go , for our father the Tsar ! '' 
he shouted , rolling his bloodshot eyes . 
Several approving voices were heard in the crowd . 
`` We are Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense of our faith , the throne , and the Fatherland ! 
We must cease raving if we are sons of our Fatherland ! 
We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense of Russia ! '' 
Pierre wished to reply , but could not get in a word . 
He felt that his words , apart from what meaning they conveyed , were less audible than the sound of his opponent 's voice . 
Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval ; several persons , briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of a phrase , said : `` That 's right , quite right ! 
Just so ! '' 
Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money , his serfs , or himself , only one ought to know the state of affairs in order to be able to improve it , but he was unable to speak . 
Many voices shouted and talked at the same time , so that Count Rostov had not time to signify his approval of them all , and the group increased , dispersed , re-formed , and then moved with a hum of talk into the largest hall and to the big table . 
Not only was Pierre 's attempt to speak unsuccessful , but he was rudely interrupted , pushed aside , and people turned away from him as from a common enemy . 
This happened not because they were displeased by the substance of his speech , which had even been forgotten after the many subsequent speeches , but to animate it the crowd needed a tangible object to love and a tangible object to hate . 
Pierre became the latter . 
Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman , and all in the same tone . 
Many spoke eloquently and with originality . 
Glinka , the editor of the Russian Messenger , who was recognized -LRB- cries of `` author ! 
author ! '' 
were heard in the crowd -RRB- , said that `` hell must be repulsed by hell , '' and that he had seen a child smiling at lightning flashes and thunderclaps , but `` we will not be that child . '' 
`` Yes , yes , at thunderclaps ! '' 
was repeated approvingly in the back rows of the crowd . 
The crowd drew up to the large table , at which sat gray-haired or bald seventy-year-old magnates , uniformed and besashed almost all of whom Pierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons , or playing boston at the clubs . 
With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advanced to the table . 
Pressed by the throng against the high backs of the chairs , the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two together . 
Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened to supply it . 
Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to find some thought and hastened to utter it . 
The old magnates , whom Pierre knew , sat and turned to look first at one and then at another , and their faces for the most part only expressed the fact that they found it very hot . 
Pierre , however , felt excited , and the general desire to show that they were ready to go to all lengths -- which found expression in the tones and looks more than in the substance of the speeches -- infected him too . 
He did not renounce his opinions , but felt himself in some way to blame and wished to justify himself . 
`` I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrifices when we know what is needed ! '' 
said he , trying to be heard above the other voices . 
One of the old men nearest to him looked round , but his attention was immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table . 
`` Yes , Moscow will be surrendered ! 
She will be our expiation ! '' 
shouted one man . 
`` He is the enemy of mankind ! '' 
cried another . 
`` Allow me to speak ... '' `` Gentlemen , you are crushing me ! 
... '' At that moment Count Rostopchin with his protruding chin and alert eyes , wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder , entered the room , stepping briskly to the front of the crowd of gentry . 
`` Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment , '' said Rostopchin . 
`` I am straight from the palace . 
Seeing the position we are in , I think there is little need for discussion . 
The Emperor has deigned to summon us and the merchants . 
Millions will pour forth from there '' -- he pointed to the merchants ' hall -- `` but our business is to supply men and not spare ourselves ... That is the least we can do ! '' 
A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table . 
The whole consultation passed more than quietly . 
After all the preceding noise the sound of their old voices saying one after another , `` I agree , '' or for variety , `` I too am of that opinion , '' and so on had even a mournful effect . 
The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow nobility and gentry , that they would furnish ten men , fully equipped , out of every thousand serfs , as the Smolensk gentry had done . 
Their chairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had conferred rose with apparent relief , and began walking up and down , arm in arm , to stretch their legs and converse in couples . 
`` The Emperor ! 
The Emperor ! '' 
a sudden cry resounded through the halls and the whole throng hurried to the entrance . 
The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of nobles . 
Every face expressed respectful , awe-struck curiosity . 
Pierre stood rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said . 
From what he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the danger threatening the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow nobility . 
He was answered by a voice which informed him of the resolution just arrived at . 
`` Gentlemen ! '' 
said the Emperor with a quivering voice . 
There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided , so that Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor saying with emotion : `` I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles , but today it has surpassed my expectations . 
I thank you in the name of the Fatherland ! 
Gentlemen , let us act ! 
Time is most precious ... '' The Emperor ceased speaking , the crowd began pressing round him , and rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides . 
`` Yes , most precious ... a royal word , '' said Count Rostov , with a sob . 
He stood at the back , and , though he had heard hardly anything , understood everything in his own way . 
From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants . 
There he remained about ten minutes . 
Pierre was among those who saw him come out from the merchants ' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes . 
As became known later , he had scarcely begun to address the merchants before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling voice . 
When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by two merchants , one of whom Pierre knew , a fat otkupshchik . 
The other was the mayor , a man with a thin sallow face and narrow beard . 
Both were weeping . 
Tears filled the thin man 's eyes , and the fat otkupshchik sobbed outright like a child and kept repeating : `` Our lives and property -- take them , Your Majesty ! '' 
Pierre 's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was ready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything . 
He now felt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and sought an opportunity of effacing it . 
Having heard that Count Mamonov was furnishing a regiment , Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchin that he would give a thousand men and their maintenance . 
Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears , and at once consented to Petya 's request and went himself to enter his name . 
Next day the Emperor left Moscow . 
The assembled nobles all took off their uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs , and not without some groans gave orders to their stewards about the enrollment , feeling amazed themselves at what they had done . 
Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going to Dresden , could not help having his head turned by the homage he received , could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the stimulating influence of a June morning , and could not refrain from bursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev . 
Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be personally insulted . 
Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best way , because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great commander . 
Rostov charged the French because he could not restrain his wish for a gallop across a level field ; and in the same way the innumerable people who took part in the war acted in accord with their personal characteristics , habits , circumstances , and aims . 
They were moved by fear or vanity , rejoiced or were indignant , reasoned , imagining that they knew what they were doing and did it of their own free will , but they all were involuntary tools of history , carrying on a work concealed from them but comprehensible to us . 
Such is the inevitable fate of men of action , and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy the less are they free . 
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage , their personal interests have vanished leaving no trace , and nothing remains of that time but its historic results . 
Providence compelled all these men , striving to attain personal aims , to further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all expected -- neither Napoleon , nor Alexander , nor still less any of those who did the actual fighting . 
The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us now . 
No one will deny that that cause was , on the one hand , its advance into the heart of Russia late in the season without any preparation for a winter campaign and , on the other , the character given to the war by the burning of Russian towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused among the Russian people . 
But no one at the time foresaw -LRB- what now seems so evident -RRB- that this was the only way an army of eight hundred thousand men -- the best in the world and led by the best general -- could be destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength , and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was . 
Not only did no one see this , but on the Russian side every effort was made to hinder the only thing that could save Russia , while on the French side , despite Napoleon 's experience and so-called military genius , every effort was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer , that is , to doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction . 
In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line , that he sought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk , and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the campaign was even then understood . 
Russian authors are still fonder of telling us that from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian war plan was adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia , and this plan some of them attribute to Pfuel , others to a certain Frenchman , others to Toll , and others again to Alexander himself - pointing to notes , projects , and letters which contain hints of such a line of action . 
But all these hints at what happened , both from the French side and the Russian , are advanced only because they fit in with the event . 
Had that event not occurred these hints would have been forgotten , as we have forgotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the contrary which were current then but have now been forgotten because the event falsified them . 
There are always so many conjectures as to the issue of any event that however it may end there will always be people to say : `` I said then that it would be so , '' quite forgetting that amid their innumerable conjectures many were to quite the contrary effect . 
Conjectures as to Napoleon 's awareness of the danger of extending his line , and -LRB- on the Russian side -RRB- as to luring the enemy into the depths of Russia , are evidently of that kind , and only by much straining can historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals , or such plans to the Russian commanders . 
