While still in the anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato laugh -- a laugh such as one hears on the stage . 
Someone -- it sounded like Speranski -- was distinctly ejaculating ha-ha-ha . 
Prince Andrew had never before heard Speranski 's famous laugh , and this ringing , high pitched laughter from a statesman made a strange impression on him . 
He entered the dining room . 
The whole company were standing between two windows at a small table laid with hors-d'oeuvres . 
Speranski , wearing a gray swallow-tail coat with a star on the breast , and evidently still the same waistcoat and high white stock he had worn at the meeting of the Council of State , stood at the table with a beaming countenance . 
His guests surrounded him . 
Magnitski , addressing himself to Speranski , was relating an anecdote , and Speranski was laughing in advance at what Magnitski was going to say . 
When Prince Andrew entered the room Magnitski 's words were again crowned by laughter . 
Stolypin gave a deep bass guffaw as he munched a piece of bread and cheese . 
Gervais laughed softly with a hissing chuckle , and Speranski in a high-pitched staccato manner . 
Still laughing , Speranski held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew . 
`` Very pleased to see you , Prince , '' he said . 
`` One moment ... '' he went on , turning to Magnitski and interrupting his story . 
`` We have agreed that this is a dinner for recreation , with not a word about business ! '' 
and turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh . 
Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speranski with astonishment , regret , and disillusionment . 
It seemed to him that this was not Speranski but someone else . 
Everything that had formerly appeared mysterious and fascinating in Speranski suddenly became plain and unattractive . 
At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemed to consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes . 
Before Magnitski had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something still funnier . 
Most of the anecdotes , if not relating to the state service , related to people in the service . 
It seemed that in this company the insignificance of those people was so definitely accepted that the only possible attitude toward them was one of good humored ridicule . 
Speranski related how at the Council that morning a deaf dignitary , when asked his opinion , replied that he thought so too . 
Gervais gave a long account of an official revision , remarkable for the stupidity of everybody concerned . 
Stolypin , stuttering , broke into the conversation and began excitedly talking of the abuses that existed under the former order of things -- threatening to give a serious turn to the conversation . 
Magnitski starting quizzing Stolypin about his vehemence . 
Gervais intervened with a joke , and the talk reverted to its former lively tone . 
Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement in a circle of friends , and his guests , understanding his wish , tried to enliven him and amuse themselves . 
But their gaiety seemed to Prince Andrew mirthless and tiresome . 
Speranski 's high-pitched voice struck him unpleasantly , and the incessant laughter grated on him like a false note . 
Prince Andrew did not laugh and feared that he would be a damper on the spirits of the company , but no one took any notice of his being out of harmony with the general mood . 
They all seemed very gay . 
He tried several times to join in the conversation , but his remarks were tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water , and he could not jest with them . 
There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said , it was witty and might have been funny , but it lacked just that something which is the salt of mirth , and they were not even aware that such a thing existed . 
After dinner Speranski 's daughter and her governess rose . 
He patted the little girl with his white hand and kissed her . 
And that gesture , too , seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew . 
The men remained at table over their port -- English fashion . 
In the midst of a conversation that was started about Napoleon 's Spanish affairs , which they all agreed in approving , Prince Andrew began to express a contrary opinion . 
Speranski smiled and , with an evident wish to prevent the conversation from taking an unpleasant course , told a story that had no connection with the previous conversation . 
For a few moments all were silent . 
Having sat some time at table , Speranski corked a bottle of wine and , remarking , `` Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair , '' passed it to the servant and got up . 
All rose and continuing to talk loudly went into the drawing room . 
Two letters brought by a courier were handed to Speranski and he took them to his study . 
As soon as he had left the room the general merriment stopped and the guests began to converse sensibly and quietly with one another . 
`` Now for the recitation ! '' 
said Speranski on returning from his study . 
`` A wonderful talent ! '' 
he said to Prince Andrew , and Magnitski immediately assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous verses in French which he had composed about various well-known Petersburg people . 
He was interrupted several times by applause . 
When the verses were finished Prince Andrew went up to Speranski and took his leave . 
`` Where are you off to so early ? '' 
asked Speranski . 
`` I promised to go to a reception . '' 
They said no more . 
Prince Andrew looked closely into those mirrorlike , impenetrable eyes , and felt that it had been ridiculous of him to have expected anything from Speranski and from any of his own activities connected with him , or ever to have attributed importance to what Speranski was doing . 
That precise , mirthless laughter rang in Prince Andrew 's ears long after he had left the house . 
When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in Petersburg during those last four months as if it were something new . 
He recalled his exertions and solicitations , and the history of his project of army reform , which had been accepted for consideration and which they were trying to pass over in silence simply because another , a very poor one , had already been prepared and submitted to the Emperor . 
He thought of the meetings of a committee of which Berg was a member . 
He remembered how carefully and at what length everything relating to form and procedure was discussed at those meetings , and how sedulously and promptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded . 
He recalled his labors on the Legal Code , and how painstakingly he had translated the articles of the Roman and French codes into Russian , and he felt ashamed of himself . 
Then he vividly pictured to himself Bogucharovo , his occupations in the country , his journey to Ryazan ; he remembered the peasants and Dron the village elder , and mentally applying to them the Personal Rights he had divided into paragraphs , he felt astonished that he could have spent so much time on such useless work . 
Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before , and among them at the Rostovs ' with whom he had renewed acquaintance at the ball . 
Apart from considerations of politeness which demanded the call , he wanted to see that original , eager girl who had left such a pleasant impression on his mind , in her own home . 
Natasha was one of the first to meet him . 
She was wearing a dark-blue house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than in her ball dress . 
She and all the Rostov family welcomed him as an old friend , simply and cordially . 
The whole family , whom he had formerly judged severely , now seemed to him to consist of excellent , simple , and kindly people . 
The old count 's hospitality and good nature , which struck one especially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise , were such that Prince Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner . 
`` Yes , '' he thought , `` they are capital people , who of course have not the slightest idea what a treasure they possess in Natasha ; but they are kindly folk and form the best possible setting for this strikingly poetic , charming girl , overflowing with life ! '' 
In Natasha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completely alien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him , a different world , that in the Otradnoe avenue and at the window that moonlight night had already begun to disconcert him . 
Now this world disconcerted him no longer and was no longer alien to him , but he himself having entered it found in it a new enjoyment . 
After dinner Natasha , at Prince Andrew 's request , went to the clavichord and began singing . 
Prince Andrew stood by a window talking to the ladies and listened to her . 
In the midst of a phrase he ceased speaking and suddenly felt tears choking him , a thing he had thought impossible for him . 
He looked at Natasha as she sang , and something new and joyful stirred in his soul . 
He felt happy and at the same time sad . 
He had absolutely nothing to weep about yet he was ready to weep . 
What about ? 
His former love ? 
The little princess ? 
His disillusionments ? 
... His hopes for the future ? 
... Yes and no . 
The chief reason was a sudden , vivid sense of the terrible contrast between something infinitely great and illimitable within him and that limited and material something that he , and even she , was . 
This contrast weighed on and yet cheered him while she sang . 
As soon as Natasha had finished she went up to him and asked how he liked her voice . 
She asked this and then became confused , feeling that she ought not to have asked it . 
He smiled , looking at her , and said he liked her singing as he liked everything she did . 
Prince Andrew left the Rostovs ' late in the evening . 
He went to bed from habit , but soon realized that he could not sleep . 
Having lit his candle he sat up in bed , then got up , then lay down again not at all troubled by his sleeplessness : his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he had stepped out of a stuffy room into God 's own fresh air . 
It did not enter his head that he was in love with Natasha ; he was not thinking about her , but only picturing her to himself , and in consequence all life appeared in a new light . 
`` Why do I strive , why do I toil in this narrow , confined frame , when life , all life with all its joys , is open to me ? '' 
said he to himself . 
And for the first time for a very long while he began making happy plans for the future . 
He decided that he must attend to his son 's education by finding a tutor and putting the boy in his charge , then he ought to retire from the service and go abroad , and see England , Switzerland and Italy . 
`` I must use my freedom while I feel so much strength and youth in me , '' he said to himself . 
