And I am he ... '' and that was unanswerable . 
It was more than true . 
During that fortnight of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby for comfort so often , and fussed over him so much , that she overfed him and he fell ill . 
She was terrified by his illness , and yet that was just what she needed . 
While attending to him she bore the anxiety about her husband more easily . 
She was nursing her boy when the sound of Pierre 's sleigh was heard at the front door , and the old nurse -- knowing how to please her mistress -- entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beaming face . 
`` Has he come ? '' 
Natasha asked quickly in a whisper , afraid to move lest she should rouse the dozing baby . 
`` He 's come , ma'am , '' whispered the nurse . 
The blood rushed to Natasha 's face and her feet involuntarily moved , but she could not jump up and run out . 
The baby again opened his eyes and looked at her . 
`` You 're here ? '' 
he seemed to be saying , and again lazily smacked his lips . 
Cautiously withdrawing her breast , Natasha rocked him a little , handed him to the nurse , and went with rapid steps toward the door . 
But at the door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for having in her joy left the child too soon , and she glanced round . 
The nurse with raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot . 
`` Go , ma'am ! 
Do n't worry , go ! '' 
she whispered , smiling , with the kind of familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress . 
Natasha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom . 
Denisov , who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his pipe , now for the first time recognized the old Natasha . 
A flood of brilliant , joyful light poured from her transfigured face . 
`` He 's come ! '' 
she exclaimed as she ran past , and Denisov felt that he too was delighted that Pierre , whom he did not much care for , had returned . 
On reaching the vestibule Natasha saw a tall figure in a fur coat unwinding his scarf . 
`` It 's he ! 
It 's really he ! 
He has come ! '' 
she said to herself , and rushing at him embraced him , pressed his head to her breast , and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy , happy face , covered with hoarfrost . 
`` Yes , it is he , happy and contented ... '' Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she had experienced for the last fortnight , and the joy that had lit up her face vanished ; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent of reproaches and angry words . 
`` Yes , it 's all very well for you . 
You are pleased , you 've had a good time ... . 
But what about me ? 
You might at least have shown consideration for the children . 
I am nursing and my milk was spoiled ... . 
Petya was at death 's door . 
But you were enjoying yourself . 
Yes , enjoying ... '' Pierre knew he was not to blame , for he could not have come sooner ; he knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two ; above all he knew that he himself was bright and happy . 
He wanted to smile but dared not even think of doing so . 
He made a piteous , frightened face and bent down . 
`` I could not , on my honor . 
But how is Petya ? '' 
`` All right now . 
Come along ! 
I wonder you 're not ashamed ! 
If only you could see what I was like without you , how I suffered ! '' 
`` You are well ? '' 
`` Come , come ! '' 
she said , not letting go of his arm . 
And they went to their rooms . 
When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in the nursery holding his baby son , who was again awake , on his huge right palm and dandling him . 
A blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby 's broad face with its toothless open mouth . 
The storm was long since over and there was bright , joyous sunshine on Natasha 's face as she gazed tenderly at her husband and child . 
`` And have you talked everything well over with Prince Theodore ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Yes , capitally . '' 
`` You see , he holds it up . '' 
-LRB- She meant the baby 's head . -RRB- 
`` But how he did frighten me ... You 've seen the princess ? 
Is it true she 's in love with that ... '' `` Yes , just fancy ... '' At that moment Nicholas and Countess Mary came in . 
Pierre with the baby on his hand stooped , kissed them , and replied to their inquiries . 
But in spite of much that was interesting and had to be discussed , the baby with the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed all his attention . 
`` How sweet ! '' 
said Countess Mary , looking at and playing with the baby . 
`` Now , Nicholas , '' she added , turning to her husband , `` I ca n't understand how it is you do n't see the charm of these delicious marvels . '' 
`` I do n't and ca n't , '' replied Nicholas , looking coldly at the baby . 
`` A lump of flesh . 
Come along , Pierre ! '' 
`` And yet he 's such an affectionate father , '' said Countess Mary , vindicating her husband , `` but only after they are a year old or so ... '' `` Now , Pierre nurses them splendidly , '' said Natasha . 
`` He says his hand is just made for a baby 's seat . 
Just look ! '' 
`` Only not for this ... '' Pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh , and shifting the baby he gave him to the nurse . 
As in every large household , there were at Bald Hills several perfectly distinct worlds which merged into one harmonious whole , though each retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others . 
Every event , joyful or sad , that took place in that house was important to all these worlds , but each had its own special reasons to rejoice or grieve over that occurrence independently of the others . 
For instance , Pierre 's return was a joyful and important event and they all felt it to be so . 
The servants -- the most reliable judges of their masters because they judge not by their conversation or expressions of feeling but by their acts and way of life -- were glad of Pierre 's return because they knew that when he was there Count Nicholas would cease going every day to attend to the estate , and would be in better spirits and temper , and also because they would all receive handsome presents for the holidays . 
The children and their governesses were glad of Pierre 's return because no one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did . 
He alone could play on the clavichord that ecossaise -LRB- his only piece -RRB- to which , as he said , all possible dances could be danced , and they felt sure he had brought presents for them all . 
Young Nicholas , now a slim lad of fifteen , delicate and intelligent , with curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes , was delighted because Uncle Pierre as he called him was the object of his rapturous and passionate affection . 
No one had instilled into him this love for Pierre whom he saw only occasionally . 
Countess Mary who had brought him up had done her utmost to make him love her husband as she loved him , and little Nicholas did love his uncle , but loved him with just a shade of contempt . 
Pierre , however , he adored . 
He did not want to be an hussar or a Knight of St. George like his uncle Nicholas ; he wanted to be learned , wise , and kind like Pierre . 
In Pierre 's presence his face always shone with pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when Pierre spoke to him . 
He did not miss a single word he uttered , and would afterwards , with Dessalles or by himself , recall and reconsider the meaning of everything Pierre had said . 
Pierre 's past life and his unhappiness prior to 1812 -LRB- of which young Nicholas had formed a vague poetic picture from some words he had overheard -RRB- , his adventures in Moscow , his captivity , Platon Karataev -LRB- of whom he had heard from Pierre -RRB- , his love for Natasha -LRB- of whom the lad was also particularly fond -RRB- , and especially Pierre 's friendship with the father whom Nicholas could not remember -- all this made Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint . 
From broken remarks about Natasha and his father , from the emotion with which Pierre spoke of that dead father , and from the careful , reverent tenderness with which Natasha spoke of him , the boy , who was only just beginning to guess what love is , derived the notion that his father had loved Natasha and when dying had left her to his friend . 
But the father whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not be pictured , and of whom he never thought without a swelling heart and tears of sadness and rapture . 
So the boy also was happy that Pierre had arrived . 
The guests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven and unite any company he was in . 
The grown-up members of the family , not to mention his wife , were pleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run more smoothly and peacefully . 
The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them , and especially that Natasha would now be herself again . 
Pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds and made haste to satisfy all their expectations . 
Though the most absent-minded and forgetful of men , Pierre , with the aid of a list his wife drew up , had now bought everything , not forgetting his mother -- and brother-in-law 's commissions , nor the dress material for a present to Belova , nor toys for his wife 's nephews . 
In the early days of his marriage it had seemed strange to him that his wife should expect him not to forget to procure all the things he undertook to buy , and he had been taken aback by her serious annoyance when on his first trip he forgot everything . 
But in time he grew used to this demand . 
Knowing that Natasha asked nothing for herself , and gave him commissions for others only when he himself had offered to undertake them , he now found an unexpected and childlike pleasure in this purchase of presents for everyone in the house , and never forgot anything . 
If he now incurred Natasha 's censure it was only for buying too many and too expensive things . 
To her other defects -LRB- as most people thought them , but which to Pierre were qualities -RRB- of untidiness and neglect of herself , she now added stinginess . 
From the time that Pierre began life as a family man on a footing entailing heavy expenditure , he had noticed to his surprise that he spent only half as much as before , and that his affairs -- which had been in disorder of late , chiefly because of his first wife 's debts - had begun to improve . 
