Fleeing from Moscow the soldiers took with them everything they had stolen . 
Napoleon , too , carried away his own personal tresor , but on seeing the baggage trains that impeded the army , he was -LRB- Thiers says -RRB- horror-struck . 
And yet with his experience of war he did not order all the superfluous vehicles to be burned , as he had done with those of a certain marshal when approaching Moscow . 
He gazed at the caleches and carriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked that it was a very good thing , as those vehicles could be used to carry provisions , the sick , and the wounded . 
The plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal which feels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing . 
To study the skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time it entered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studying the dying leaps and shudders of a mortally wounded animal . 
Very often a wounded animal , hearing a rustle , rushes straight at the hunter 's gun , runs forward and back again , and hastens its own end . 
Napoleon , under pressure from his whole army , did the same thing . 
The rustle of the battle of Tarutino frightened the beast , and it rushed forward onto the hunter 's gun , reached him , turned back , and finally -- like any wild beast -- ran back along the most disadvantageous and dangerous path , where the old scent was familiar . 
During the whole of that period Napoleon , who seems to us to have been the leader of all these movements -- as the figurehead of a ship may seem to a savage to guide the vessel -- acted like a child who , holding a couple of strings inside a carriage , thinks he is driving it . 
Early in the morning of the sixth of October Pierre went out of the shed , and on returning stopped by the door to play with a little blue-gray dog , with a long body and short bandy legs , that jumped about him . 
This little dog lived in their shed , sleeping beside Karataev at night ; it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned again . 
Probably it had never had an owner , and it still belonged to nobody and had no name . 
The French called it Azor ; the soldier who told stories called it Femgalka ; Karataev and others called it Gray , or sometimes Flabby . 
Its lack of a master , a name , or even of a breed or any definite color did not seem to trouble the blue-gray dog in the least . 
Its furry tail stood up firm and round as a plume , its bandy legs served it so well that it would often gracefully lift a hind leg and run very easily and quickly on three legs , as if disdaining to use all four . 
Everything pleased it . 
Now it would roll on its back , yelping with delight , now bask in the sun with a thoughtful air of importance , and now frolic about playing with a chip of wood or a straw . 
Pierre 's attire by now consisted of a dirty torn shirt -LRB- the only remnant of his former clothing -RRB- , a pair of soldier 's trousers which by Karataev 's advice he tied with string round the ankles for warmth , and a peasant coat and cap . 
Physically he had changed much during this time . 
He no longer seemed stout , though he still had the appearance of solidity and strength hereditary in his family . 
A beard and mustache covered the lower part of his face , and a tangle of hair , infested with lice , curled round his head like a cap . 
The look of his eyes was resolute , calm , and animatedly alert , as never before . 
The former slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by an energetic readiness for action and resistance . 
His feet were bare . 
Pierre first looked down the field across which vehicles and horsemen were passing that morning , then into the distance across the river , then at the dog who was pretending to be in earnest about biting him , and then at his bare feet which he placed with pleasure in various positions , moving his dirty thick big toes . 
Every time he looked at his bare feet a smile of animated self-satisfaction flitted across his face . 
The sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned during these weeks and this recollection was pleasant to him . 
For some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts in the mornings -- what is called an `` old wives ' summer . '' 
In the sunshine the air was warm , and that warmth was particularly pleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still in the air . 
On everything -- far and near -- lay the magic crystal glitter seen only at that time autumn . 
The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance , with the village , the church , and the large white house . 
The bare trees , the sand , the bricks and roofs of the houses , the green church spire , and the corners of the white house in the distance , all stood out in the transparent air in most delicate outline and with unnatural clearness . 
Near by could be seen the familiar ruins of a half-burned mansion occupied by the French , with lilac bushes still showing dark green beside the fence . 
And even that ruined and befouled house -- which in dull weather was repulsively ugly -- seemed quietly beautiful now , in the clear , motionless brilliance . 
A French corporal , with coat unbuttoned in a homely way , a skullcap on his head , and a short pipe in his mouth , came from behind a corner of the shed and approached Pierre with a friendly wink . 
`` What sunshine , Monsieur Kiril ! '' 
-LRB- Their name for Pierre . -RRB- 
`` Eh ? 
Just like spring ! '' 
And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre his pipe , though whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it . 
`` To be on the march in such weather ... '' he began . 
Pierre inquired what was being said about leaving , and the corporal told him that nearly all the troops were starting and there ought to be an order about the prisoners that day . 
Sokolov , one of the soldiers in the shed with Pierre , was dying , and Pierre told the corporal that something should be done about him . 
The corporal replied that Pierre need not worry about that as they had an ambulance and a permanent hospital and arrangements would be made for the sick , and that in general everything that could happen had been foreseen by the authorities . 
`` Besides , Monsieur Kiril , you have only to say a word to the captain , you know . 
He is a man who never forgets anything . 
Speak to the captain when he makes his round , he will do anything for you . '' 
-LRB- The captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats with Pierre and showed him all sorts of favors . -RRB- '' 
` You see , St. Thomas , ' he said to me the other day . 
` Monsieur Kiril is a man of education , who speaks French . 
He is a Russian seigneur who has had misfortunes , but he is a man . 
He knows what 's what ... . 
If he wants anything and asks me , he wo n't get a refusal . 
When one has studied , you see , one likes education and well-bred people . ' 
It is for your sake I mention it , Monsieur Kiril . 
The other day if it had not been for you that affair would have ended ill . '' 
And after chatting a while longer , the corporal went away . 
-LRB- The affair he had alluded to had happened a few days before -- a fight between the prisoners and the French soldiers , in which Pierre had succeeded in pacifying his comrades . -RRB- 
Some of the prisoners who had heard Pierre talking to the corporal immediately asked what the Frenchman had said . 
While Pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leaving Moscow , a thin , sallow , tattered French soldier came up to the door of the shed . 
Rapidly and timidly raising his fingers to his forehead by way of greeting , he asked Pierre whether the soldier Platoche to whom he had given a shirt to sew was in that shed . 
A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued to them , which they had given out to the prisoners to make up into boots and shirts for them . 
`` Ready , ready , dear fellow ! '' 
said Karataev , coming out with a neatly folded shirt . 
Karataev , on account of the warm weather and for convenience at work , was wearing only trousers and a tattered shirt as black as soot . 
His hair was bound round , workman fashion , with a wisp of lime-tree bast , and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever . 
`` A promise is own brother to performance ! 
I said Friday and here it is , ready , '' said Platon , smiling and unfolding the shirt he had sewn . 
The Frenchman glanced around uneasily and then , as if overcoming his hesitation , rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt . 
He had a long , greasy , flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow , thin bare body , but no shirt . 
He was evidently afraid the prisoners looking on would laugh at him , and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly . 
None of the prisoners said a word . 
`` See , it fits well ! '' 
Platon kept repeating , pulling the shirt straight . 
The Frenchman , having pushed his head and hands through , without raising his eyes , looked down at the shirt and examined the seams . 
`` You see , dear man , this is not a sewing shop , and I had no proper tools ; and , as they say , one needs a tool even to kill a louse , '' said Platon with one of his round smiles , obviously pleased with his work . 
`` It 's good , quite good , thank you , '' said the Frenchman , in French , `` but there must be some linen left over . 
`` It will fit better still when it sets to your body , '' said Karataev , still admiring his handiwork . 
`` You 'll be nice and comfortable ... '' `` Thanks , thanks , old fellow ... . 
But the bits left over ? '' 
said the Frenchman again and smiled . 
He took out an assignation ruble note and gave it to Karataev . 
`` But give me the pieces that are over . '' 
Pierre saw that Platon did not want to understand what the Frenchman was saying , and he looked on without interfering . 
Karataev thanked the Frenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work . 
The Frenchman insisted on having the pieces returned that were left over and asked Pierre to translate what he said . 
`` What does he want the bits for ? '' 
said Karataev . 
`` They 'd make fine leg bands for us . 
Well , never mind . '' 
And Karataev , with a suddenly changed and saddened expression , took a small bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and gave it to the Frenchman without looking at him . 
`` Oh dear ! '' 
muttered Karataev and went away . 
The Frenchman looked at the linen , considered for a moment , then looked inquiringly at Pierre and , as if Pierre 's look had told him something , suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice : `` Platoche ! 
Eh , Platoche ! 
Keep them yourself ! '' 
And handing back the odd bits he turned and went out . 
`` There , look at that , '' said Karataev , swaying his head . 
`` People said they were not Christians , but they too have souls . 
