The lunatic 's solemn , gloomy face was thin and yellow , with its beard growing in uneven tufts . 
His black , agate pupils with saffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids . 
`` Stop ! 
Pull up , I tell you ! '' 
he cried in a piercing voice , and again shouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures . 
Coming abreast of the caleche he ran beside it . 
`` Thrice have they slain me , thrice have I risen from the dead . 
They stoned me , crucified me ... I shall rise ... shall rise ... shall rise . 
They have torn my body . 
The kingdom of God will be overthrown ... Thrice will I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it ! '' 
he cried , raising his voice higher and higher . 
Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closed in on Vereshchagin . 
He turned away . 
`` Go fas ... faster ! '' 
he cried in a trembling voice to his coachman . 
The caleche flew over the ground as fast as the horses could draw it , but for a long time Count Rostopchin still heard the insane despairing screams growing fainter in the distance , while his eyes saw nothing but the astonished , frightened , bloodstained face of `` the traitor '' in the fur-lined coat . 
Recent as that mental picture was , Rostopchin already felt that it had cut deep into his heart and drawn blood . 
Even now he felt clearly that the gory trace of that recollection would not pass with time , but that the terrible memory would , on the contrary , dwell in his heart ever more cruelly and painfully to the end of his life . 
He seemed still to hear the sound of his own words : `` Cut him down ! 
I command it ... '' `` Why did I utter those words ? 
It was by some accident I said them ... . 
I need not have said them , '' he thought . 
`` And then nothing would have happened . '' 
He saw the frightened and then infuriated face of the dragoon who dealt the blow , the look of silent , timid reproach that boy in the fur-lined coat had turned upon him . 
`` But I did not do it for my own sake . 
I was bound to act that way ... . 
The mob , the traitor ... the public welfare , '' thought he . 
Troops were still crowding at the Yauza bridge . 
It was hot . 
Kutuzov , dejected and frowning , sat on a bench by the bridge toying with his whip in the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily . 
A man in a general 's uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutuzov and said something in French . 
It was Count Rostopchin . 
He told Kutuzov that he had come because Moscow , the capital , was no more and only the army remained . 
`` Things would have been different if your Serene Highness had not told me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle ; all this would not have happened , '' he said . 
Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if , not grasping what was said to him , he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment on the face of the man addressing him . 
Rostopchin grew confused and became silent . 
Kutuzov slightly shook his head and not taking his penetrating gaze from Rostopchin 's face muttered softly : `` No ! 
I shall not give up Moscow without a battle ! '' 
Whether Kutuzov was thinking of something entirely different when he spoke those words , or uttered them purposely , knowing them to be meaningless , at any rate Rostopchin made no reply and hastily left him . 
And strange to say , the Governor of Moscow , the proud Count Rostopchin , took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where he began with shouts to drive on the carts that blocked the way . 
Toward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat 's troops were entering Moscow . 
In front rode a detachment of Wurttemberg hussars and behind them rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite . 
About the middle of the Arbat Street , near the Church of the Miraculous Icon of St. Nicholas , Murat halted to await news from the advanced detachment as to the condition in which they had found the citadel , le Kremlin . 
Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow . 
They all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange , long-haired commander dressed up in feathers and gold . 
`` Is that their Tsar himself ? 
He 's not bad ! '' 
low voices could be heard saying . 
An interpreter rode up to the group . 
`` Take off your cap ... your caps ! '' 
These words went from one to another in the crowd . 
The interpreter addressed an old porter and asked if it was far to the Kremlin . 
The porter , listening in perplexity to the unfamiliar Polish accent and not realizing that the interpreter was speaking Russian , did not understand what was being said to him and slipped behind the others . 
Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the Russian army was . 
One of the Russians understood what was asked and several voices at once began answering the interpreter . 
A French officer , returning from the advanced detachment , rode up to Murat and reported that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there was probably an ambuscade there . 
`` Good ! '' 
said Murat and , turning to one of the gentlemen in his suite , ordered four light guns to be moved forward to fire at the gates . 
The guns emerged at a trot from the column following Murat and advanced up the Arbat . 
When they reached the end of the Vozdvizhenka Street they halted and drew in the Square . 
Several French officers superintended the placing of the guns and looked at the Kremlin through field glasses . 
The bells in the Kremlin were ringing for vespers , and this sound troubled the French . 
They imagined it to be a call to arms . 
A few infantrymen ran to the Kutafyev Gate . 
Beams and wooden screens had been put there , and two musket shots rang out from under the gate as soon as an officer and men began to run toward it . 
A general who was standing by the guns shouted some words of command to the officer , and the latter ran back again with his men . 
The sound of three more shots came from the gate . 
One shot struck a French soldier 's foot , and from behind the screens came the strange sound of a few voices shouting . 
Instantly as at a word of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of the French general , officers , and men changed to one of determined concentrated readiness for strife and suffering . 
To all of them from the marshal to the least soldier , that place was not the Vozdvizhenka , Mokhavaya , or Kutafyev Street , nor the Troitsa Gate -LRB- places familiar in Moscow -RRB- , but a new battlefield which would probably prove sanguinary . 
And all made ready for that battle . 
The cries from the gates ceased . 
The guns were advanced , the artillerymen blew the ash off their linstocks , and an officer gave the word `` Fire ! '' 
This was followed by two whistling sounds of canister shot , one after another . 
The shot rattled against the stone of the gate and upon the wooden beams and screens , and two wavering clouds of smoke rose over the Square . 
A few instants after the echo of the reports resounding over the stone-built Kremlin had died away the French heard a strange sound above their head . 
Thousands of crows rose above the walls and circled in the air , cawing and noisily flapping their wings . 
Together with that sound came a solitary human cry from the gateway and amid the smoke appeared the figure of a bareheaded man in a peasant 's coat . 
He grasped a musket and took aim at the French . 
`` Fire ! '' 
repeated the officer once more , and the reports of a musket and of two cannon shots were heard simultaneously . 
The gate again hidden by smoke . 
Nothing more stirred behind the screens and the French infantry soldiers and officers advanced to the gate . 
In the gateway lay three wounded and four dead . 
Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot of the wall , toward the Znamenka . 
`` Clear that away ! '' 
said the officer , pointing to the beams and the corpses , and the French soldiers , after dispatching the wounded , threw the corpses over the parapet . 
Who these men were nobody knew . 
`` Clear that away ! '' 
was all that was said of them , and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on that they might not stink . 
Thiers alone dedicates a few eloquent lines to their memory : `` These wretches had occupied the sacred citadel , having supplied themselves with guns from the arsenal , and fired '' -LRB- the wretches -RRB- `` at the French . 
Some of them were sabered and the Kremlin was purged of their presence . '' 
Murat was informed that the way had been cleared . 
The French entered the gates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square . 
Out of the windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the Square for fuel and kindled fires there . 
Other detachments passed through the Kremlin and encamped along the Moroseyka , the Lubyanka , and Pokrovka Streets . 
Others quartered themselves along the Vozdvizhenka , the Nikolski , and the Tverskoy Streets . 
No masters of the houses being found anywhere , the French were not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in it as in a camp . 
Though tattered , hungry , worn out , and reduced to a third of their original number , the French entered Moscow in good marching order . 
It was a weary and famished , but still a fighting and menacing army . 
