This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritated Prince Andrew , he knew not why . 
He was unpleasantly struck , too , by the excessive contempt for others that he observed in Speranski , and by the diversity of lines of argument he used to support his opinions . 
He made use of every kind of mental device , except analogy , and passed too boldly , it seemed to Prince Andrew , from one to another . 
Now he would take up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers ; now that of a satirist , and laugh ironically at his opponents ; now grow severely logical , or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics . 
-LRB- This last resource was one he very frequently employed . -RRB- 
He would transfer a question to metaphysical heights , pass on to definitions of space , time , and thought , and , having deduced the refutation he needed , would again descend to the level of the original discussion . 
In general the trait of Speranski 's mentality which struck Prince Andrew most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and authority of reason . 
It was evident that the thought could never occur to him which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural , namely , that it is after all impossible to express all one thinks ; and that he had never felt the doubt , `` Is not all I think and believe nonsense ? '' 
And it was just this peculiarity of Speranski 's mind that particularly attracted Prince Andrew . 
During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt a passionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt for Bonaparte . 
The fact that Speranski was the son of a village priest , and that stupid people might meanly despise him on account of his humble origin -LRB- as in fact many did -RRB- , caused Prince Andrew to cherish his sentiment for him the more , and unconsciously to strengthen it . 
On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him , having mentioned the Commission for the Revision of the Code of Laws , Speranski told him sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty years , had cost millions , and had done nothing except that Rosenkampf had stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of the different codes . 
`` And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent , '' said he . 
`` We want to give the Senate new juridical powers , but we have no laws . 
That is why it is a sin for men like you , Prince , not to serve in these times ! '' 
Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence was needed which he did not possess . 
`` But nobody possesses it , so what would you have ? 
It is a vicious circle from which we must break a way out . '' 
A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army Regulations and -- what he had not at all expected -- was chairman of a section of the committee for the revision of the laws . 
At Speranski 's request he took the first part of the Civil Code that was being drawn up and , with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the Institutes of Justinian , he worked at formulating the section on Personal Rights . 
Nearly two years before this , in 1808 , Pierre on returning to Petersburg after visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading position among the Petersburg Freemasons . 
He arranged dining and funeral lodge meetings , enrolled new members , and busied himself uniting various lodges and acquiring authentic charters . 
He gave money for the erection of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms , in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular . 
He supported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in Petersburg . 
His life meanwhile continued as before , with the same infatuations and dissipations . 
He liked to dine and drink well , and though he considered it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the bachelor circles in which he moved . 
Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions , however , Pierre at the end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried to rest upon it , the more Masonic ground on which he stood gave way under him . 
At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him the closer bound he involuntarily became to the order . 
When he had joined the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidently steps onto the smooth surface of a bog . 
When he put his foot down it sank in . 
To make quite sure of the firmness the ground , he put his other foot down and sank deeper still , became stuck in it , and involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog . 
Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg -- he had of late stood aside from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges , and lived almost entirely in Moscow . 
All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew in ordinary life , and it was difficult for him to regard them merely as Brothers in Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D. , whom he knew in society mostly as weak and insignificant men . 
Under the Masonic aprons and insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in ordinary life . 
Often after collecting alms , and reckoning up twenty to thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a dozen members , of whom half were as well able to pay as himself , Pierre remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote all his belongings to his neighbor , and doubts on which he tried not to dwell arose in his soul . 
He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories . 
In the first he put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodges or in human affairs , but were exclusively occupied with the mystical science of the order : with questions of the threefold designation of God , the three primordial elements -- sulphur , mercury , and salt -- or the meaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple of Solomon . 
Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones chiefly belonged , including , Pierre thought , Joseph Alexeevich himself , but he did not share their interests . 
His heart was not in the mystical aspect of Freemasonry . 
In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like him , seeking and vacillating , who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straight and comprehensible path , but hoped to do so . 
In the third category he included those Brothers -LRB- the majority -RRB- who saw nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies , and prized the strict performance of these forms without troubling about their purport or significance . 
Such were Willarski and even the Grand Master of the principal lodge . 
Finally , to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged , particularly those who had lately joined . 
These according to Pierre 's observations were men who had no belief in anything , nor desire for anything , but joined the Freemasons merely to associate with the wealthy young Brothers who were influential through their connections or rank , and of whom there were very many in the lodge . 
Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing . 
Freemasonry , at any rate as he saw it here , sometimes seemed to him based merely on externals . 
He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself , but suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated from its original principles . 
And so toward the end of the year he went abroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of the order . 
In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg . 
Our Freemasons knew from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtained the confidence of many highly placed persons , had been initiated into many mysteries , had been raised to a higher grade , and was bringing back with him much that might conduce to the advantage of the Masonic cause in Russia . 
The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him , tried to ingratiate themselves with him , and it seemed to them all that he was preparing something for them and concealing it . 
A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened , at which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what he had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order . 
The meeting was a full one . 
After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and began his address . 
`` Dear Brothers , '' he began , blushing and stammering , with a written speech in his hand , `` it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries in the seclusion of our lodge -- we must act -- act ! 
We are drowsing , but we must act . '' 
Pierre raised his notebook and began to read . 
`` For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph of virtue , '' he read , `` we must cleanse men from prejudice , diffuse principles in harmony with the spirit of the times , undertake the education of the young , unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the wisest men , boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions , infidelity , and folly , and form of those devoted to us a body linked together by unity of purpose and possessed of authority and power . 
`` To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may , even in this world , receive a lasting reward for his virtue . 
But in these great endeavors we are gravely hampered by the political institutions of today . 
What is to be done in these circumstances ? 
To favor revolutions , overthrow everything , repel force by force ? 
... No ! 
We are very far from that . 
Every violent reform deserves censure , for it quite fails to remedy evil while men remain what they are , and also because wisdom needs no violence . 
`` The whole plan of our order should be based on the idea of preparing men of firmness and virtue bound together by unity of conviction -- aiming at the punishment of vice and folly , and patronizing talent and virtue : raising worthy men from the dust and attaching them to our Brotherhood . 
Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands of the protectors of disorder and to control them without their being aware of it . 
In a word , we must found a form of government holding universal sway , which should be diffused over the whole world without destroying the bonds of citizenship , and beside which all other governments can continue in their customary course and do everything except what impedes the great aim of our order , which is to obtain for virtue the victory over vice . 
This aim was that of Christianity itself . 
It taught men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to follow the example and instruction of the best and wisest men . 
`` At that time , when everything was plunged in darkness , preaching alone was of course sufficient . 
The novelty of Truth endowed her with special strength , but now we need much more powerful methods . 
It is now necessary that man , governed by his senses , should find in virtue a charm palpable to those senses . 
It is impossible to eradicate the passions ; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim , and it is therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions within the limits of virtue . 
Our order should provide means to that end . 
`` As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state , each of them again training two others and all being closely united , everything will be possible for our order , which has already in secret accomplished much for the welfare of mankind . '' 
This speech not only made a strong impression , but created excitement in the lodge . 
The majority of the Brothers , seeing in it dangerous designs of Illuminism , * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre . 
The Grand Master began answering him , and Pierre began developing his views with more and more warmth . 
It was long since there had been so stormy a meeting . 
Parties were formed , some accusing Pierre of Illuminism , others supporting him . 
At that meeting he was struck for the first time by the endless variety of men 's minds , which prevents a truth from ever presenting itself identically to two persons . 
Even those members who seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with limitations and alterations he could not agree to , as what he always wanted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himself understood it . 
* The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for monarchical institutions . 
At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-will reproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue alone , but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute . 
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would be accepted . 
He was told that it would not , and without waiting for the usual formalities he left the lodge and went home . 
Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded . 
For three days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa at home receiving no one and going nowhere . 
It was just then that he received a letter from his wife , who implored him to see her , telling him how grieved she was about him and how she wished to devote her whole life to him . 
At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would return to Petersburg from abroad . 
Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected less than the others forced his way in to see him and , turning the conversation upon Pierre 's matrimonial affairs , by way of fraternal advice expressed the opinion that his severity to his wife was wrong and that he was neglecting one of the first rules of Freemasonry by not forgiving the penitent . 
At the same time his mother-in-law , Prince Vasili 's wife , sent to him imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most important matter . 
Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy against him and that they wanted to reunite him with his wife , and in the mood he then was , this was not even unpleasant to him . 
Nothing mattered to him . 
Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance , and under the influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife . 
`` No one is right and no one is to blame ; so she too is not to blame , '' he thought . 
If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife , it was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take any step . 
Had his wife come to him , he would not have turned her away . 
Compared to what preoccupied him , was it not a matter of indifference whether he lived with his wife or not ? 
