`` That 's where one crosses the Kolocha . 
You see down there where the rows of hay are lying in the hollow , there 's the bridge . 
That 's our center . 
Our right flank is over there '' -- he pointed sharply to the right , far away in the broken ground -- `` That 's where the Moskva River is , and we have thrown up three redoubts there , very strong ones . 
The left flank ... '' here the officer paused . 
`` Well , you see , that 's difficult to explain ... . 
Yesterday our left flank was there at Shevardino , you see , where the oak is , but now we have withdrawn our left wing -- now it is over there , do you see that village and the smoke ? 
That 's Semenovsk , yes , there , '' he pointed to Raevski 's knoll . 
`` But the battle will hardly be there . 
His having moved his troops there is only a ruse ; he will probably pass round to the right of the Moskva . 
But wherever it may be , many a man will be missing tomorrow ! '' 
he remarked . 
An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking , but at this point , evidently not liking the officer 's remark , interrupted him . 
`` Gabions must be sent for , '' said he sternly . 
The officer appeared abashed , as though he understood that one might think of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speak to speak of it . 
`` Well , send number three company again , '' the officer replied hurriedly . 
`` And you , are you one of the doctors ? '' 
`` No , I 've come on my own , '' answered Pierre , and he went down the hill again , passing the militiamen . 
`` Oh , those damned fellows ! '' 
muttered the officer who followed him , holding his nose as he ran past the men at work . 
`` There they are ... bringing her , coming ... There they are ... They 'll be here in a minute ... '' voices were suddenly heard saying ; and officers , soldiers , and militiamen began running forward along the road . 
A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodino . 
First along the dusty road came the infantry in ranks , bareheaded and with arms reversed . 
From behind them came the sound of church singing . 
Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward the procession . 
`` They are bringing her , our Protectress ! 
... The Iberian Mother of God ! '' 
someone cried . 
`` The Smolensk Mother of God , '' another corrected him . 
The militiamen , both those who had been in the village and those who had been at work on the battery , threw down their spades and ran to meet the church procession . 
Following the battalion that marched along the dusty road came priests in their vestments -- one little old man in a hood with attendants and singers . 
Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large , dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover . 
This was the icon that had been brought from and had since accompanied the army . 
Behind , before , and on both sides , crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked , ran , and bowed to the ground . 
At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon ; the men who had been holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved by others , the chanters relit their censers , and service began . 
The hot rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decorating the icon . 
The singing did not sound loud under the open sky . 
An immense crowd of bareheaded officers , soldiers , and militiamen surrounded the icon . 
Behind the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities on a spot reserved for them . 
A bald general with general with a St. George 's Cross on his neck stood just behind the priest 's back , and without crossing himself -LRB- he was evidently a German -RRB- patiently awaited the end of the service , which he considered it necessary to hear to the end , probably to arouse the patriotism of the Russian people . 
Another general stood in a martial pose , crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest while looking about him . 
Standing among the crowd of peasants , Pierre recognized several acquaintances among these notables , but did not look at them -- his whole attention was absorbed in watching the serious expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were all gazing eagerly at the icon . 
As soon as the tired chanters , who were singing the service for the twentieth time that day , began lazily and mechanically to sing : `` Save from calamity Thy servants , O Mother of God , '' and the priest and deacon chimed in : `` For to Thee under God we all flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection , '' there again kindled in all those faces the same expression of consciousness of the solemnity of the impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the foot of the hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had met that morning ; and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back , and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard . 
The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre . 
Someone , a very important personage judging by the haste with which way was made for him , was approaching the icon . 
It was Kutuzov , who had been riding round the position and on his way back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held . 
Pierre recognized him at once by his peculiar figure , which distinguished him from everybody else . 
With a long overcoat on his his exceedingly stout , round-shouldered body , with uncovered white head and puffy face showing the white ball of the eye he had lost , Kutuzov walked with plunging , swaying gait into the crowd and stopped behind the priest . 
He crossed himself with an accustomed movement , bent till he touched the ground with his hand , and bowed his white head with a deep sigh . 
Behind Kutuzov was Bennigsen and the suite . 
Despite the presence of the commander in chief , who attracted the attention of all the superior officers , the militiamen and soldiers continued their prayers without looking at him . 
When the service was over , Kutuzov stepped up to the icon , sank heavily to his knees , bowed to the ground , and for a long time tried vainly to rise , but could not do so on account of his weakness and weight . 
His white head twitched with the effort . 
At last he rose , kissed the icon as a child does with naively pouting lips , and again bowed till he touched the ground with his hand . 
The other generals followed his example , then the officers , and after them with excited faces , pressing on one another , crowding , panting , and pushing , scrambled the soldiers and militiamen . 
Staggering amid the crush , Pierre looked about him . 
`` Count Peter Kirilovich ! 
How did you get here ? '' 
said a voice . 
Pierre looked round . 
Boris Drubetskoy , brushing his knees with his hand -LRB- he had probably soiled them when he , too , had knelt before the icon -RRB- , came up to him smiling . 
Boris was elegantly dressed , with a slightly martial touch appropriate to a campaign . 
He wore a long coat and like Kutuzov had a whip slung across his shoulder . 
Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himself in the shade of the nearest house , on a bench which one Cossack had run to fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug . 
An immense and brilliant suite surrounded him . 
The icon was carried further , accompanied by the throng . 
Pierre stopped some thirty paces from Kutuzov , talking to Boris . 
He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the position . 
`` This is what you must do , '' said Boris . 
`` I will do the honors of the camp to you . 
You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsen will be . 
I am in attendance on him , you know ; I 'll mention it to him . 
But if you want to ride round the position , come along with us . 
We are just going to the left flank . 
Then when we get back , do spend the night with me and we 'll arrange a game of cards . 
Of course you know Dmitri Sergeevich ? 
Those are his quarters , '' and he pointed to the third house in the village of Gorki . 
`` But I should like to see the right flank . 
They say it 's very strong , '' said Pierre . 
`` I should like to start from the Moskva River and ride round the whole position . '' 
`` Well , you can do that later , but the chief thing is the left flank . '' 
`` Yes , yes . 
But where is Prince Bolkonski 's regiment ? 
Can you point it out to me ? '' 
`` Prince Andrew 's ? 
We shall pass it and I 'll take you to him . '' 
`` What about the left flank ? '' 
asked Pierre `` To tell you the truth , between ourselves , God only knows what state our left flank is in , '' said Boris confidentially lowering his voice . 
`` It is not at all what Count Bennigsen intended . 
He meant to fortify that knoll quite differently , but ... '' Boris shrugged his shoulders , `` his Serene Highness would not have it , or someone persuaded him . 
You see ... '' but Boris did not finish , for at that moment Kaysarov , Kutuzov 's adjutant , came up to Pierre . 
`` Ah , Kaysarov ! '' 
said Boris , addressing him with an unembarrassed smile , `` I was just trying to explain our position to the count . 
It is amazing how his Serene Highness could so the intentions of the French ! '' 
`` You mean the left flank ? '' 
asked Kaysarov . 
`` Yes , exactly ; the left flank is now extremely strong . '' 
Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff , Boris had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes . 
He had established himself with Count Bennigsen , who , like all on whom Boris had been in attendance , considered young Prince Drubetskoy an invaluable man . 
In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties : Kutuzov 's party and that of Bennigsen , the chief of staff . 
