`` Yes , yes ! 
There they are , those false images that agitated , enraptured , and tormented me , '' said he to himself , passing in review the principal pictures of the magic lantern of life and regarding them now in the cold white daylight of his clear perception of death . 
`` There they are , those rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious . 
Glory , the good of society , love of a woman , the Fatherland itself -- how important these pictures appeared to me , with what profound meaning they seemed to be filled ! 
And it is all so simple , pale , and crude in the cold white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me . '' 
The three great sorrows of his life held his attention in particular : his love for a woman , his father 's death , and the French invasion which had overrun half Russia . 
`` Love ... that little girl who seemed to me brimming over with mystic forces ! 
Yes , indeed , I loved her . 
I made romantic plans of love and happiness with her ! 
Oh , what a boy I was ! '' 
he said aloud bitterly . 
`` Ah me ! 
I believed in some ideal love which was to keep her faithful to me for the whole year of my absence ! 
Like the gentle dove in the fable she was to pine apart from me ... . 
But it was much simpler really ... . 
It was all very simple and horrible . '' 
`` When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his : his land , his air , his peasants . 
But Napoleon came and swept him aside , unconscious of his existence , as he might brush a chip from his path , and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces . 
Princess Mary says it is a trial sent from above . 
What is the trial for , when he is not here and will never return ? 
He is not here ! 
For whom then is the trial intended ? 
The Fatherland , the destruction of Moscow ! 
And tomorrow I shall be killed , perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our own men , by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear as one of them did yesterday , and the French will come and take me by head and heels and fling me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses , and new conditions of life will arise , which will seem quite ordinary to others and about which I shall know nothing . 
I shall not exist ... '' He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine , with their motionless green and yellow foliage and white bark . 
`` To die ... to be killed tomorrow ... That I should not exist ... That all this should still be , but no me ... '' And the birches with their light and shade , the curly clouds , the smoke of the campfires , and all that was around him changed and seemed terrible and menacing . 
A cold shiver ran down his spine . 
He rose quickly , went out of the shed , and began to walk about . 
After he had returned , voices were heard outside the shed . 
`` Who 's that ? '' 
he cried . 
The red-nosed Captain Timokhin , formerly Dolokhov 's squadron commander , but now from lack of officers a battalion commander , shyly entered the shed followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster . 
Prince Andrew rose hastily , listened to the business they had come about , gave them some further instructions , and was about to dismiss them when he heard a familiar , lisping , voice behind the shed . 
`` Devil take it ! '' 
said the voice of a man stumbling over something . 
Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre , who had tripped over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen , coming his way . 
It was unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general , and Pierre especially , for he reminded him of all the painful moments of his last visit to Moscow . 
`` You ? 
What a surprise ! '' 
said he . 
`` What brings you here ? 
This is unexpected ! '' 
As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness -- they expressed hostility , which Pierre noticed at once . 
He had approached the shed full of animation , but on seeing Prince Andrew 's face he felt constrained and ill at ease . 
`` I have come ... simply ... you know ... come ... it interests me , '' said Pierre , who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word `` interesting . '' 
`` I wish to see the battle . '' 
`` Oh yes , and what do the Masonic brothers say about war ? 
How would they stop it ? '' 
said Prince Andrew sarcastically . 
`` Well , and how 's Moscow ? 
And my people ? 
Have they reached Moscow at last ? '' 
he asked seriously . 
`` Yes , they have . 
Julie Drubetskaya told me so . 
I went to see them , but missed them . 
They have gone to your estate near Moscow . '' 
The officers were about to take leave , but Prince Andrew , apparently reluctant to be left alone with his friend , asked them to stay and have tea . 
Seats were brought in and so was the tea . 
The officers gazed with surprise at Pierre 's huge stout figure and listened to his talk of Moscow and the position of our army , round which he had ridden . 
Prince Andrew remained silent , and his expression was so forbidding that Pierre addressed his remarks chiefly to the good-natured battalion commander . 
`` So you understand the whole position of our troops ? '' 
Prince Andrew interrupted him . 
`` Yes -- that is , how do you mean ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` Not being a military man I ca n't say I have understood it fully , but I understand the general position . '' 
`` Well , then , you know more than anyone else , be it who it may , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Oh ! '' 
said Pierre , looking over his spectacles in perplexity at Prince Andrew . 
`` Well , and what do think of Kutuzov 's appointment ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I was very glad of his appointment , that 's all I know , '' replied Prince Andrew . 
`` And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly . 
In Moscow they are saying heaven knows what about him ... . 
What do you think of him ? '' 
`` Ask them , '' replied Prince Andrew , indicating the officers . 
Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer . 
`` We see light again , since his Serenity has been appointed , your excellency , '' said Timokhin timidly , and continually turning to glance at his colonel . 
`` Why so ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Well , to mention only firewood and fodder , let me inform you . 
Why , when we were retreating from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick or a wisp of hay or anything . 
You see , we were going away , so he would get it all ; was n't it so , your excellency ? '' 
and again Timokhin turned to the prince . 
`` But we dare n't . 
In our regiment two officers were court-martialed for that kind of thing . 
But when his Serenity took command everything became straight forward . 
Now we see light ... '' `` Then why was it forbidden ? '' 
Timokhin looked about in confusion , not knowing what or how to answer such a question . 
Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew . 
`` Why , so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to the enemy , '' said Prince Andrew with venomous irony . 
`` It is very sound : one ca n't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops to marauding . 
At Smolensk too he judged correctly that the French might outflank us , as they had larger forces . 
But he could not understand this , '' cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape him involuntarily : `` he could not understand that there , for the first time , we were fighting for Russian soil , and that there was a spirit in the men such as I had never seen before , that we had held the French for two days , and that that success had increased our strength tenfold . 
He ordered us to retreat , and all our efforts and losses went for nothing . 
He had no thought of betraying us , he tried to do the best he could , he thought out everything , and that is why he is unsuitable . 
He is unsuitable now , just because he plans out everything very thoroughly and accurately as every German has to . 
How can I explain ? 
... Well , say your father has a German valet , and he is a splendid valet and satisfies your father 's requirements better than you could , then it 's all right to let him serve . 
But if your father is mortally sick you 'll send the valet away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed , awkward hands , and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could . 
