In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandee who occupied one of the highest posts in the Empire . 
In Vilna she had formed an intimacy with a young foreign prince . 
When she returned to Petersburg both the magnate and the prince were there , and both claimed their rights . 
Helene was faced by a new problem -- how to preserve her intimacy with both without offending either . 
What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman did not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova , who evidently deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman . 
Had she attempted concealment , or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position by cunning , she would have spoiled her case by acknowledging herself guilty . 
But Helene , like a really great man who can do whatever he pleases , at once assumed her own position to be correct , as she sincerely believed it to be , and that everyone else was to blame . 
The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach her , she lifted her beautiful head and , half turning to him , said firmly : `` That 's just like a man -- selfish and cruel ! 
I expected nothing else . 
A woman sacrifices herself for you , she suffers , and this is her reward ! 
What right have you , monseigneur , to demand an account of my attachments and friendships ? 
He is a man who has been more than a father to me ! '' 
The prince was about to say something , but Helene interrupted him . 
`` Well , yes , '' said she , `` it may be that he has other sentiments for me than those of a father , but that is not a reason for me to shut my door on him . 
I am not a man , that I should repay kindness with ingratitude ! 
Know , monseigneur , that in all that relates to my intimate feelings I render account only to God and to my conscience , '' she concluded , laying her hand on her beautiful , fully expanded bosom and looking up to heaven . 
`` But for heaven 's sake listen to me ! '' 
`` Marry me , and I will be your slave ! '' 
`` But that 's impossible . '' 
`` You wo n't deign to demean yourself by marrying me , you ... '' said Helene , beginning to cry . 
The prince tried to comfort her , but Helene , as if quite distraught , said through her tears that there was nothing to prevent her marrying , that there were precedents -LRB- there were up to that time very few , but she mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages -RRB- , that she had never been her husband 's wife , and that she had been sacrificed . 
`` But the law , religion ... '' said the prince , already yielding . 
`` The law , religion ... What have they been invented for if they ca n't arrange that ? '' 
said Helene . 
The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him , and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus , with whom he was on intimate terms . 
A few days later at one of those enchanting fetes which Helene gave at her country house on the Stone Island , the charming Monsieur de Jobert , a man no longer young , with snow white hair and brilliant black eyes , a Jesuit a robe courte * was presented to her , and in the garden by the light of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for a long time of the love of God , of Christ , of the Sacred Heart , and of the consolations the one true Catholic religion affords in this world and the next . 
Helene was touched , and more than once tears rose to her eyes and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled . 
A dance , for which her partner came to seek her , put an end to her discourse with her future directeur de conscience , but the next evening Monsieur de Jobert came to see Helene when she was alone , and after that often came again . 
* Lay member of the Society of Jesus . 
One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church , where she knelt down before the altar to which she was led . 
The enchanting , middle-aged Frenchman laid his hands on her head and , as she herself afterward described it , she felt something like a fresh breeze wafted into her soul . 
It was explained to her that this was la grace . 
After that a long-frocked abbe was brought to her . 
She confessed to him , and he absolved her from her sins . 
Next day she received a box containing the Sacred Host , which was left at her house for her to partake of . 
A few days later Helene learned with pleasure that she had now been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days the Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document . 
All that was done around her and to her at this time , all the attention devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such pleasant , refined ways , and the state of dove-like purity she was now in -LRB- she wore only white dresses and white ribbons all that time -RRB- gave her pleasure , but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to forget her aim . 
And as it always happens in contests of cunning that a stupid person gets the better of cleverer ones , Helene - having realized that the main object of all these words and all this trouble was , after converting her to Catholicism , to obtain money from her for Jesuit institutions -LRB- as to which she received indications -RRB- - before parting with her money insisted that the various operations necessary to free her from her husband should be performed . 
In her view the aim of every religion was merely to preserve certain proprieties while affording satisfaction to human desires . 
And with this aim , in one of her talks with her Father Confessor , she insisted on an answer to the question , in how far was she bound by her marriage ? 
They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room . 
The scent of flowers came in at the window . 
Helene was wearing a white dress , transparent over her shoulders and bosom . 
The abbe , a well-fed man with a plump , clean-shaven chin , a pleasant firm mouth , and white hands meekly folded on his knees , sat close to Helene and , with a subtle smile on his lips and a peaceful look of delight at her beauty , occasionally glanced at her face as he explained his opinion on the subject . 
Helene with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and his plump , clean-shaven , blackish cheeks and every moment expected the conversation to take a fresh turn . 
But the abbe , though he evidently enjoyed the beauty of his companion , was absorbed in his mastery of the matter . 
The course of the Father Confessor 's arguments ran as follows : `` Ignorant of the import of what you were undertaking , you made a vow of conjugal fidelity to a man who on his part , by entering the married state without faith in the religious significance of marriage , committed an act of sacrilege . 
That marriage lacked the dual significance it should have had . 
Yet in spite of this your vow was binding . 
You swerved from it . 
What did you commit by so acting ? 
A venial , or a mortal , sin ? 
A venial sin , for you acted without evil intention . 
If now you married again with the object of bearing children , your sin might be forgiven . 
But the question is again a twofold one : firstly ... '' But suddenly Helene , who was getting bored , said with one of her bewitching smiles : `` But I think that having espoused the true religion I can not be bound by what a false religion laid upon me . '' 
The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus ' egg . 
He was delighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil 's progress , but could not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed . 
`` Let us understand one another , Countess , '' said he with a smile , and began refuting his spiritual daughter 's arguments . 
Helene understood that the question was very simple and easy from the ecclesiastical point of view , and that her directors were making difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter would be regarded by the secular authorities . 
So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society . 
She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him what she had told her other suitor ; that is , she put the matter so that the only way for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her . 
The elderly magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage with a woman whose husband was alive , as the younger man had been , but Helene 's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as marrying a maiden had its effect on him too . 
Had Helene herself shown the least sign of hesitation , shame , or secrecy , her cause would certainly have been lost ; but not only did she show no signs of secrecy or shame , on the contrary , with good-natured naivete she told her intimate friends -LRB- and these were all Petersburg -RRB- that both the prince and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was afraid of grieving either . 
A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg , not that Helene wanted to be divorced from her husband -LRB- had such a report spread many would have opposed so illegal an intention -RRB- but simply that the unfortunate and interesting Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry . 
The question was no longer whether this was possible , but only which was the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court . 
There were , it is true , some rigid individuals unable to rise to the height of such a question , who saw in the project a desecration of the sacrament of marriage , but there were not many such and they remained silent , while the majority were interested in Helene 's good fortune and in the question which match would be the more advantageous . 
Whether it was right or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did not discuss , for that question had evidently been settled by people `` wiser than you or me , '' as they said , and to doubt the correctness of that decision would be to risk exposing one 's stupidity and incapacity to live in society . 
Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova , had come to Petersburg that summer to see one of her sons , allowed herself plainly to express an opinion contrary to the general one . 
Meeting Helene at a ball she stopped her in the middle of the room and , amid general silence , said in her gruff voice : `` So wives of living men have started marrying again ! 
Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty ? 
You have been forestalled , my dear ! 
It was thought of long ago . 
It is done in all the brothels , '' and with these words Marya Dmitrievna , turning up her wide sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round , moved across the room . 
Though people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was regarded in Petersburg as a buffoon , and so of what she had said they only noticed , and repeated in a whisper , the one coarse word she had used , supposing the whole sting of her remark to lie in that word . 
Prince Vasili , who of late very often forgot what he had said and repeated one and the same thing a hundred times , remarked to his daughter whenever he chanced to see her : `` Helene , I have a word to say to you , '' and he would lead her aside , drawing her hand downward . 
`` I have heard of certain projects concerning ... you know . 
Well my dear child , you know how your father 's heart rejoices to know that you ... You have suffered so much ... . 
But , my dear child , consult only your own heart . 
That is all I have to say , '' and concealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheek against his daughter 's and move away . 
Bilibin , who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly clever man , and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman as Helene always has -- men friends who can never change into lovers -- once gave her his view of the matter at a small and intimate gathering . 
`` Listen , Bilibin , '' said Helene -LRB- she always called friends of that sort by their surnames -RRB- , and she touched his coat sleeve with her white , beringed fingers . 
`` Tell me , as you would a sister , what I ought to do . 
Which of the two ? '' 
Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered , with a smile on his lips . 
`` You are not taking me unawares , you know , '' said he . 
`` As a true friend , I have thought and thought again about your affair . 
You see , if you marry the prince '' -- he meant the younger man -- and he crooked one finger , `` you forever lose the chance of marrying the other , and you will displease the court besides . 
-LRB- You know there is some kind of connection . -RRB- 
But if you marry the old count you will make his last days happy , and as widow of the Grand ... the prince would no longer be making a mesalliance by marrying you , '' and Bilibin smoothed out his forehead . 
`` That 's a true friend ! '' 
said Helene beaming , and again touching Bilibin 's sleeve . 
`` But I love them , you know , and do n't want to distress either of them . 
I would give my life for the happiness of them both . '' 
Bilibin shrugged his shoulders , as much as to say that not even he could help in that difficulty . 
`` Une maitresse-femme ! 
* That 's what is called putting things squarely . 
She would like to be married to all three at the same time , '' thought he . 
* A masterly woman . 
`` But tell me , how will your husband look at the matter ? '' 
Bilibin asked , his reputation being so well established that he did not fear to ask so naive a question . 
