`` Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure vessel and judge of its purity ? 
Only by the inner purification of myself can I retain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive . '' 
`` Yes , yes , that is so , '' said Pierre joyfully . 
`` The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone , not on those worldly sciences of physics , history , chemistry , and the like , into which intellectual knowledge is divided . 
The highest wisdom is one . 
The highest wisdom has but one science -- the science of the whole - the science explaining the whole creation and man 's place in it . 
To receive that science it is necessary to purify and renew one 's inner self , and so before one can know , it is necessary to believe and to perfect one 's self . 
And to attain this end , we have the light called conscience that God has implanted in our souls . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' assented Pierre . 
`` Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit , and ask thyself whether thou art content with thyself . 
What hast thou attained relying on reason only ? 
What art thou ? 
You are young , you are rich , you are clever , you are well educated . 
And what have you done with all these good gifts ? 
Are you content with yourself and with your life ? '' 
`` No , I hate my life , '' Pierre muttered , wincing . 
`` Thou hatest it . 
Then change it , purify thyself ; and as thou art purified , thou wilt gain wisdom . 
Look at your life , my dear sir . 
How have you spent it ? 
In riotous orgies and debauchery , receiving everything from society and giving nothing in return . 
You have become the possessor of wealth . 
How have you used it ? 
What have you done for your neighbor ? 
Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands of slaves ? 
Have you helped them physically and morally ? 
No ! 
You have profited by their toil to lead a profligate life . 
That is what you have done . 
Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your neighbor ? 
No ! 
You have spent your life in idleness . 
Then you married , my dear sir -- took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a young woman ; and what have you done ? 
You have not helped her to find the way of truth , my dear sir , but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and misery . 
A man offended you and you shot him , and you say you do not know God and hate your life . 
There is nothing strange in that , my dear sir ! '' 
After these words , the Mason , as if tired by his long discourse , again leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes . 
Pierre looked at that aged , stern , motionless , almost lifeless face and moved his lips without uttering a sound . 
He wished to say , `` Yes , a vile , idle , vicious life ! '' 
but dared not break the silence . 
The Mason cleared his throat huskily , as old men do , and called his servant . 
`` How about the horses ? '' 
he asked , without looking at Pierre . 
`` The exchange horses have just come , '' answered the servant . 
`` Will you not rest here ? '' 
`` No , tell them to harness . '' 
`` Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told me all , and without promising to help me ? '' 
thought Pierre , rising with downcast head ; and he began to pace the room , glancing occasionally at the Mason . 
`` Yes , I never thought of it , but I have led a contemptible and profligate life , though I did not like it and did not want to , '' thought Pierre . 
`` But this man knows the truth and , if he wished to , could disclose it to me . '' 
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason , but did not dare to . 
The traveler , having packed his things with his practiced hands , began fastening his coat . 
When he had finished , he turned to Bezukhov , and said in a tone of indifferent politeness : `` Where are you going to now , my dear sir ? '' 
`` I ? 
... I 'm going to Petersburg , '' answered Pierre , in a childlike , hesitating voice . 
`` I thank you . 
I agree with all you have said . 
But do not suppose me to be so bad . 
With my whole soul I wish to be what you would have me be , but I have never had help from anyone ... . 
But it is I , above all , who am to blame for everything . 
Help me , teach me , and perhaps I may ... '' Pierre could not go on . 
He gulped and turned away . 
The Mason remained silent for a long time , evidently considering . 
`` Help comes from God alone , '' he said , `` but such measure of help as our Order can bestow it will render you , my dear sir . 
You are going to Petersburg . 
Hand this to Count Willarski '' -LRB- he took out his notebook and wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four -RRB- . 
`` Allow me to give you a piece of advice . 
When you reach the capital , first of all devote some time to solitude and self-examination and do not resume your former way of life . 
And now I wish you a good journey , my dear sir , '' he added , seeing that his servant had entered ... `` and success . '' 
The traveler was Joseph Alexeevich Bazdeev , as Pierre saw from the postmaster 's book . 
Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasons and Martinists , even in Novikov 's time . 
For a long while after he had gone , Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up and down the room , pondering over his vicious past , and with a rapturous sense of beginning anew pictured to himself the blissful , irreproachable , virtuous future that seemed to him so easy . 
It seemed to him that he had been vicious only because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to be virtuous . 
Not a trace of his former doubts remained in his soul . 
He firmly believed in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in the aim of supporting one another in the path of virtue , and that is how Freemasonry presented itself to him . 
On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival , he went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas a Kempis , whose book had been sent him by someone unknown . 
One thing he continually realized as he read that book : the joy , hitherto unknown to him , of believing in the possibility of attaining perfection , and in the possibility of active brotherly love among men , which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to him . 
A week after his arrival , the young Polish count , Willarski , whom Pierre had known slightly in Petersburg society , came into his room one evening in the official and ceremonious manner in which Dolokhov 's second had called on him , and , having closed the door behind him and satisfied himself that there was nobody else in the room , addressed Pierre . 
`` I have come to you with a message and an offer , Count , '' he said without sitting down . 
`` A person of very high standing in our Brotherhood has made application for you to be received into our Order before the usual term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor . 
I consider it a sacred duty to fulfill that person 's wishes . 
Do you wish to enter the Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship ? '' 
The cold , austere tone of this man , whom he had almost always before met at balls , amiably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women , surprised Pierre . 
`` Yes , I do wish it , '' said he . 
Willarski bowed his head . 
`` One more question , Count , '' he said , `` which beg you to answer in all sincerity -- not as a future Mason but as an honest man : have you renounced your former convictions -- do you believe in God ? '' 
Pierre considered . 
`` Yes ... yes , I believe in God , '' he said . 
`` In that case ... '' began Willarski , but Pierre interrupted him . 
`` Yes , I do believe in God , '' he repeated . 
`` In that case we can go , '' said Willarski . 
`` My carriage is at your service . '' 
Willarski was silent throughout the drive . 
To Pierre 's inquiries as to what he must do and how he should answer , Willarski only replied that brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to tell the truth . 
Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had its headquarters , and having ascended a dark staircase , they entered a small well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of a servant . 
From there they passed into another room . 
A man in strange attire appeared at the door . 
Willarski , stepping toward him , said something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen before . 
Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard , Willarski bound Pierre 's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind , catching some hairs painfully in the knot . 
Then he drew his face down , kissed him , and taking him by the hand led him forward . 
