On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June , Count Zhilinski arranged a supper for his French friends . 
The guest of honor was an aide-de-camp of Napoleon 's , there were also several French officers of the Guard , and a page of Napoleon 's , a young lad of an old aristocratic French family . 
That same day , Rostov , profiting by the darkness to avoid being recognized in civilian dress , came to Tilsit and went to the lodging occupied by Boris and Zhilinski . 
Rostov , in common with the whole army from which he came , was far from having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the French -- who from being foes had suddenly become friends -- that had taken place at headquarters and in Boris . 
In the army , Bonaparte and the French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger , contempt , and fear . 
Only recently , talking with one of Platov 's Cossack officers , Rostov had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be treated not as a sovereign , but as a criminal . 
Quite lately , happening to meet a wounded French colonel on the road , Rostov had maintained with heat that peace was impossible between a legitimate sovereign and the criminal Bonaparte . 
Rostov was therefore unpleasantly struck by the presence of French officers in Boris ' lodging , dressed in uniforms he had been accustomed to see from quite a different point of view from the outposts of the flank . 
As soon as he noticed a French officer , who thrust his head out of the door , that warlike feeling of hostility which he always experienced at the sight of the enemy suddenly seized him . 
He stopped at the threshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetskoy lived there . 
Boris , hearing a strange voice in the anteroom , came out to meet him . 
An expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face on first recognizing Rostov . 
`` Ah , it 's you ? 
Very glad , very glad to see you , '' he said , however , coming toward him with a smile . 
But Rostov had noticed his first impulse . 
`` I 've come at a bad time I think . 
I should not have come , but I have business , '' he said coldly . 
`` No , I only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment . 
Dans un moment je suis a vous , '' * he said , answering someone who called him . 
* `` In a minute I shall be at your disposal . '' 
`` I see I 'm intruding , '' Rostov repeated . 
The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris ' face : having evidently reflected and decided how to act , he very quietly took both Rostov 's hands and led him into the next room . 
His eyes , looking serenely and steadily at Rostov , seemed to be veiled by something , as if screened by blue spectacles of conventionality . 
So it seemed to Rostov . 
`` Oh , come now ! 
As if you could come at a wrong time ! '' 
said Boris , and he led him into the room where the supper table was laid and introduced him to his guests , explaining that he was not a civilian , but an hussar officer , and an old friend of his . 
`` Count Zhilinski -- le Comte N. N. -- le Capitaine S. S. , '' said he , naming his guests . 
Rostov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen , bowed reluctantly , and remained silent . 
Zhilinski evidently did not receive this new Russian person very willingly into his circle and did not speak to Rostov . 
Boris did not appear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and , with the same pleasant composure and the same veiled look in his eyes with which he had met Rostov , tried to enliven the conversation . 
One of the Frenchmen , with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen , addressed the obstinately taciturn Rostov , saying that the latter had probably come to Tilsit to see the Emperor . 
`` No , I came on business , '' replied Rostov , briefly . 
Rostov had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the look of dissatisfaction on Boris ' face , and as always happens to those in a bad humor , it seemed to him that everyone regarded him with aversion and that he was in everybody 's way . 
He really was in their way , for he alone took no part in the conversation which again became general . 
The looks the visitors cast on him seemed to say : `` And what is he sitting here for ? '' 
He rose and went up to Boris . 
`` Anyhow , I 'm in your way , '' he said in a low tone . 
`` Come and talk over my business and I 'll go away . '' 
`` Oh , no , not at all , '' said Boris . 
`` But if you are tired , come and lie down in my room and have a rest . '' 
`` Yes , really ... '' They went into the little room where Boris slept . 
Rostov , without sitting down , began at once , irritably -LRB- as if Boris were to blame in some way -RRB- telling him about Denisov 's affair , asking him whether , through his general , he could and would intercede with the Emperor on Denisov 's behalf and get Denisov 's petition handed in . 
When he and Boris were alone , Rostov felt for the first time that he could not look Boris in the face without a sense of awkwardness . 
Boris , with one leg crossed over the other and stroking his left hand with the slender fingers of his right , listened to Rostov as a general listens to the report of a subordinate , now looking aside and now gazing straight into Rostov 's eyes with the same veiled look . 
Each time this happened Rostov felt uncomfortable and cast down his eyes . 
`` I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe in such affairs . 
I think it would be best not to bring it before the Emperor , but to apply to the commander of the corps ... . 
But in general , I think ... '' `` So you do n't want to do anything ? 
Well then , say so ! '' 
Rostov almost shouted , not looking Boris in the face . 
Boris smiled . 
`` On the contrary , I will do what I can . 
Only I thought ... '' At that moment Zhilinski 's voice was heard calling Boris . 
`` Well then , go , go , go ... '' said Rostov , and refusing supper and remaining alone in the little room , he walked up and down for a long time , hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room . 
Rostov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition on Denisov 's behalf . 
He could not himself go to the general in attendance as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do so , and Boris , even had he wished to , could not have done so on the following day . 
On that day , June 27 , the preliminaries of peace were signed . 
The Emperors exchanged decorations : Alexander received the Cross of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the First Degree , and a dinner had been arranged for the evening , given by a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhensk battalion . 
The Emperors were to be present at that banquet . 
Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris that , when the latter looked in after supper , he pretended to be asleep , and early next morning went away , avoiding Boris . 
In his civilian clothes and a round hat , he wandered about the town , staring at the French and their uniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and French Emperors were staying . 
In a square he saw tables being set up and preparations made for the dinner ; he saw the Russian and French colors draped from side to side of the streets , with hugh monograms A and N . 
In the windows of the houses also flags and bunting were displayed . 
`` Boris does n't want to help me and I do n't want to ask him . 
That 's settled , '' thought Nicholas . 
`` All is over between us , but I wo n't leave here without having done all I can for Denisov and certainly not without getting his letter to the Emperor . 
The Emperor ! 
... He is here ! '' 
thought Rostov , who had unconsciously returned to the house where Alexander lodged . 
Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite were assembling , evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out . 
`` I may see him at any moment , '' thought Rostov . 
`` If only I were to hand the letter direct to him and tell him all ... could they really arrest me for my civilian clothes ? 
Surely not ! 
He would understand on whose side justice lies . 
He understands everything , knows everything . 
Who can be more just , more magnanimous than he ? 
And even if they did arrest me for being here , what would it matter ? '' 
thought he , looking at an officer who was entering the house the Emperor occupied . 
`` After all , people do go in ... . 
It 's all nonsense ! 
I 'll go in and hand the letter to the Emperor myself so much the worse for Drubetskoy who drives me to it ! '' 
And suddenly with a determination he himself did not expect , Rostov felt for the letter in his pocket and went straight to the house . 
`` No , I wo n't miss my opportunity now , as I did after Austerlitz , '' he thought , expecting every moment to meet the monarch , and conscious of the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought . 
`` I will fall at his feet and beseech him . 
He will lift me up , will listen , and will even thank me . ' 
I am happy when I can do good , but to remedy injustice is the greatest happiness , ' '' Rostov fancied the sovereign saying . 
And passing people who looked after him with curiosity , he entered the porch of the Emperor 's house . 
A broad staircase led straight up from the entry , and to the right he saw a closed door . 
Below , under the staircase , was a door leading to the lower floor . 
`` Whom do you want ? '' 
someone inquired . 
`` To hand in a letter , a petition , to His Majesty , '' said Nicholas , with a tremor in his voice . 
`` A petition ? 
This way , to the officer on duty '' -LRB- he was shown the door leading downstairs -RRB- , `` only it wo n't be accepted . '' 
On hearing this indifferent voice , Rostov grew frightened at what he was doing ; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was so fascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run away , but the official who had questioned him opened the door , and Rostov entered . 
A short stout man of about thirty , in white breeches and high boots and a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on , standing in that room , and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches a new pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that , for some reason , attracted Rostov 's attention . 
This man was was speaking to someone in the adjoining room . 
`` A good figure and in her first bloom , '' he was saying , but on seeing Rostov , he stopped short and frowned . 
`` What is it ? 
