Princess Mary , pale and with quivering chin , came out from that room and taking Natasha by the arm said something to her . 
Natasha neither saw nor heard her . 
She went in with rapid steps , pausing at the door for an instant as if struggling with herself , and then ran to her mother . 
The countess was lying in an armchair in a strange and awkward position , stretching out and beating her head against the wall . 
Sonya and the maids were holding her arms . 
`` Natasha ! 
Natasha ! 
... '' cried the countess . 
`` It 's not true ... it 's not true ... He 's lying ... Natasha ! '' 
she shrieked , pushing those around her away . 
`` Go away , all of you ; it 's not true ! 
Killed ! 
... ha , ha , ha ! 
... It 's not true ! '' 
Natasha put one knee on the armchair , stooped over her mother , embraced her , and with unexpected strength raised her , turned her face toward herself , and clung to her . 
`` Mummy ! 
... darling ! 
... I am here , my dearest Mummy , '' she kept on whispering , not pausing an instant . 
She did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her , demanded a pillow and hot water , and unfastened and tore open her mother 's dress . 
`` My dearest darling ... Mummy , my precious ! 
... '' she whispered incessantly , kissing her head , her hands , her face , and feeling her own irrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks . 
The countess pressed her daughter 's hand , closed her eyes , and became quiet for a moment . 
Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness , glanced vacantly around her , and seeing Natasha began to press her daughter 's head with all her strength . 
Then she turned toward her daughter 's face which was wincing with pain and gazed long at it . 
`` Natasha , you love me ? '' 
she said in a soft trustful whisper . 
`` Natasha , you would not deceive me ? 
You 'll tell me the whole truth ? '' 
Natasha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there was nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness . 
`` My darling Mummy ! '' 
she repeated , straining all the power of her love to find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed her mother . 
And again in a futile struggle with reality her mother , refusing to believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloom of life , escaped from reality into a world of delirium . 
Natasha did not remember how that day passed nor that night , nor the next day and night . 
She did not sleep and did not leave her mother . 
Her persevering and patient love seemed completely to surround the countess every moment , not explaining or consoling , but recalling her to life . 
During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes , and Natasha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes , but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak . 
The countess was sitting up in bed and speaking softly . 
`` How glad I am you have come . 
You are tired . 
Wo n't you have some tea ? '' 
Natasha went up to her . 
`` You have improved in looks and grown more manly , '' continued the countess , taking her daughter 's hand . 
`` Mamma ! 
What are you saying ... '' `` Natasha , he is no more , no more ! '' 
And embracing her daughter , the countess began to weep for the first time . 
Princess Mary postponed her departure . 
Sonya and the count tried to replace Natasha but could not . 
They saw that she alone was able to restrain her mother from unreasoning despair . 
For three weeks Natasha remained constantly at her mother 's side , sleeping on a lounge chair in her room , making her eat and drink , and talking to her incessantly because the mere sound of her tender , caressing tones soothed her mother . 
The mother 's wounded spirit could not heal . 
Petya 's death had torn from her half her life . 
When the news of Petya 's death had come she had been a fresh and vigorous woman of fifty , but a month later she left her room a listless old woman taking no interest in life . 
But the same blow that almost killed the countess , this second blow , restored Natasha to life . 
A spiritual wound produced by a rending of the spiritual body is like a physical wound and , strange as it may seem , just as a deep wound may heal and its edges join , physical and spiritual wounds alike can yet heal completely only as the result of a vital force from within . 
Natasha 's wound healed in that way . 
She thought her life was ended , but her love for her mother unexpectedly showed her that the essence of life -- love -- was still active within her . 
Love awoke and so did life . 
Prince Andrew 's last days had bound Princess Mary and Natasha together ; this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another . 
Princess Mary put off her departure , and for three weeks looked after Natasha as if she had been a sick child . 
The last weeks passed in her mother 's bedroom had strained Natasha 's physical strength . 
One afternoon noticing Natasha shivering with fever , Princess Mary took her to her own room and made her lie down on the bed . 
Natasha lay down , but when Princess Mary had drawn the blinds and was going away she called her back . 
`` I do n't want to sleep , Mary , sit by me a little . '' 
`` You are tired -- try to sleep . '' 
`` No , no . 
Why did you bring me away ? 
She will be asking for me . '' 
`` She is much better . 
She spoke so well today , '' said Princess Mary . 
Natasha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scanned Princess Mary 's face . 
`` Is she like him ? '' 
thought Natasha . 
`` Yes , like and yet not like . 
But she is quite original , strange , new , and unknown . 
And she loves me . 
What is in her heart ? 
All that is good . 
But how ? 
What is her mind like ? 
What does she think about me ? 
Yes , she is splendid ! '' 
`` Mary , '' she said timidly , drawing Princess Mary 's hand to herself , `` Mary , you must n't think me wicked . 
No ? 
Mary darling , how I love you ! 
Let us be quite , quite friends . '' 
And Natasha , embracing her , began kissing her face and hands , making Princess Mary feel shy but happy by this demonstration of her feelings . 
From that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists only between women was established between Princess Mary and Natasha . 
They were continually kissing and saying tender things to one another and spent most of their time together . 
When one went out the other became restless and hastened to rejoin her . 
Together they felt more in harmony with one another than either of them felt with herself when alone . 
A feeling stronger than friendship sprang up between them ; an exclusive feeling of life being possible only in each other 's presence . 
Sometimes they were silent for hours ; sometimes after they were already in bed they would begin talking and go on till morning . 
They spoke most of what was long past . 
Princess Mary spoke of her childhood , of her mother , her father , and her daydreams ; and Natasha , who with a passive lack of understanding had formerly turned away from that life of devotion , submission , and the poetry of Christian self-sacrifice , now feeling herself bound to Princess Mary by affection , learned to love her past too and to understand a side of life previously incomprehensible to her . 
She did not think of applying submission and self-abnegation to her own life , for she was accustomed to seek other joys , but she understood and loved in another those previously incomprehensible virtues . 
For Princess Mary , listening to Natasha 's tales of childhood and early youth , there also opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side of life : belief in life and its enjoyment . 
Just as before , they never mentioned him so as not to lower -LRB- as they thought -RRB- their exalted feelings by words ; but this silence about him had the effect of making them gradually begin to forget him without being conscious of it . 
Natasha had grown thin and pale and physically so weak that they all talked about her health , and this pleased her . 
But sometimes she was suddenly overcome by fear not only of death but of sickness , weakness , and loss of good looks , and involuntarily she examined her bare arm carefully , surprised at its thinness , and in the morning noticed her drawn and , as it seemed to her , piteous face in her glass . 
It seemed to her that things must be so , and yet it was dreadfully sad . 
