So it has been with Barclay . 
While Russia was well , a foreigner could serve her and be a splendid minister ; but as soon as she is in danger she needs one of her own kin . 
But in your Club they have been making him out a traitor ! 
They slander him as a traitor , and the only result will be that afterwards , ashamed of their false accusations , they will make him out a hero or a genius instead of a traitor , and that will be still more unjust . 
He is an honest and very punctilious German . '' 
`` And they say he 's a skillful commander , '' rejoined Pierre . 
`` I do n't understand what is meant by ' a skillful commander , ' '' replied Prince Andrew ironically . 
`` A skillful commander ? '' 
replied Pierre . 
`` Why , one who foresees all contingencies ... and foresees the adversary 's intentions . '' 
`` But that 's impossible , '' said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter settled long ago . 
Pierre looked at him in surprise . 
`` And yet they say that war is like a game of chess ? '' 
he remarked . 
`` Yes , '' replied Prince Andrew , `` but with this little difference , that in chess you may think over each move as long as you please and are not limited for time , and with this difference too , that a knight is always stronger than a pawn , and two pawns are always stronger than one , while in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division and sometimes weaker than a company . 
The relative strength of bodies of troops can never be known to anyone . 
Believe me , '' he went on , `` if things depended on arrangements made by the staff , I should be there making arrangements , but instead of that I have the honor to serve here in the regiment with these gentlemen , and I consider that on us tomorrow 's battle will depend and not on those others ... . 
Success never depends , and never will depend , on position , or equipment , or even on numbers , and least of all on position . '' 
`` But on what then ? '' 
`` On the feeling that is in me and in him , '' he pointed to Timokhin , `` and in each soldier . '' 
Prince Andrew glanced at Timokhin , who looked at his commander in alarm and bewilderment . 
In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity Prince Andrew now seemed excited . 
He could apparently not refrain from expressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him . 
`` A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it ! 
Why did we lose the battle at Austerlitz ? 
The French losses were almost equal to ours , but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle , and we did lose it . 
And we said so because we had nothing to fight for there , we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon as we could . 
` We 've lost , so let us run , ' and we ran . 
If we had not said that till the evening , heaven knows what might not have happened . 
But tomorrow we sha n't say it ! 
You talk about our position , the left flank weak and the right flank too extended , '' he went on . 
`` That 's all nonsense , there 's nothing of the kind . 
But what awaits us tomorrow ? 
A hundred million most diverse chances which will be decided on the instant by the fact that our men or theirs run or do not run , and that this man or that man is killed , but all that is being done at present is only play . 
The fact is that those men with whom you have ridden round the position not only do not help matters , but hinder . 
They are only concerned with their own petty interests . '' 
`` At such a moment ? '' 
said Pierre reproachfully . 
`` At such a moment ! '' 
Prince Andrew repeated . 
`` To them it is only a moment affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross or ribbon . 
For me tomorrow means this : a Russian army of a hundred thousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fight , and the thing is that these two hundred thousand men will fight and the side that fights more fiercely and spares itself least will win . 
And if you like I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles those at the top may make , we shall win tomorrow 's battle . 
Tomorrow , happen what may , we shall win ! '' 
`` There now , your excellency ! 
That 's the truth , the real truth , '' said Timokhin . 
`` Who would spare himself now ? 
The soldiers in my battalion , believe me , would n't drink their vodka ! 
` It 's not the day for that ! ' 
they say . '' 
All were silent . 
The officers rose . 
Prince Andrew went out of the shed with them , giving final orders to the adjutant . 
After they had gone Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation when they heard the clatter of three horses ' hoofs on the road not far from the shed , and looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognized Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack . 
They rode close by continuing to converse , and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these words : `` Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden . 
Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug Preis geben , '' * said one of them . 
* `` The war must be extended widely . 
I can not sufficiently commend that view . '' 
`` Oh , ja , '' said the other , `` der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwachen , so kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtung nehmen . '' 
* * `` Oh , yes , the only aim is to weaken the enemy , so of course one can not take into account the loss of private individuals . '' 
`` Oh , no , '' agreed the other . 
`` Extend widely ! '' 
said Prince Andrew with an angry snort , when they had ridden past . 
`` In that ` extend ' were my father , son , and sister , at Bald Hills . 
That 's all the same to him ! 
That 's what I was saying to you -- those German gentlemen wo n't win the battle tomorrow but will only make all the mess they can , because they have nothing in their German heads but theories not worth an empty eggshell and have n't in their hearts the one thing needed tomorrow -- that which Timokhin has . 
They have yielded up all Europe to him , and have now come to teach us . 
Fine teachers ! '' 
and again his voice grew shrill . 
`` So you think we shall win tomorrow 's battle ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Yes , yes , '' answered Prince Andrew absently . 
`` One thing I would do if I had the power , '' he began again , `` I would not take prisoners . 
Why take prisoners ? 
It 's chivalry ! 
The French have destroyed my home and are on their way to destroy Moscow , they have outraged and are outraging me every moment . 
They are my enemies . 
In my opinion they are all criminals . 
And so thinks Timokhin and the whole army . 
They should be executed ! 
Since they are my foes they can not be my friends , whatever may have been said at Tilsit . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' muttered Pierre , looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew . 
`` I quite agree with you ! '' 
The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and all that day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved . 
He now understood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of the impending battle . 
All he had seen that day , all the significant and stern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing , were lit up for him by a new light . 
He understood that latent heat -LRB- as they say in physics -RRB- of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen , and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly , and as it were lightheartedly . 
`` Not take prisoners , '' Prince Andrew continued : `` That by itself would quite change the whole war and make it less cruel . 
As it is we have played at war -- that 's what 's vile ! 
We play at magnanimity and all that stuff . 
Such magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity and sensibility of a lady who faints when she sees a calf being killed : she is so kind-hearted that she ca n't look at blood , but enjoys eating the calf served up with sauce . 
They talk to us of the rules of war , of chivalry , of flags of truce , of mercy to the unfortunate and so on . 
It 's all rubbish ! 
I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805 ; they humbugged us and we humbugged them . 
They plunder other people 's houses , issue false paper money , and worst of all they kill my children and my father , and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes ! 
Take no prisoners , but kill and be killed ! 
He who has come to this as I have through the same sufferings ... '' Prince Andrew , who had thought it was all the same to him whether or not Moscow was taken as Smolensk had been , was suddenly checked in his speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat . 
He paced up and down a few times in silence , but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips quivered as he began speaking . 
`` If there was none of this magnanimity in war , we should go to war only when it was worth while going to certain death , as now . 
Then there would not be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michael Ivanovich . 
