`` Then you have nobody in Moscow ? '' 
she was saying . 
`` You would be more comfortable somewhere in a house ... in ours , for instance ... the family are leaving . '' 
`` I do n't know if it would be allowed , '' replied the officer in a weak voice . 
`` Here is our commanding officer ... ask him , '' and he pointed to a stout major who was walking back along the street past the row of carts . 
Natasha glanced with frightened eyes at the face of the wounded officer and at once went to meet the major . 
`` May the wounded men stay in our house ? '' 
she asked . 
The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile . 
`` Which one do you want , Ma'am ` selle ? '' 
said he , screwing up his eyes and smiling . 
Natasha quietly repeated her question , and her face and whole manner were so serious , though she was still holding the ends of her handkerchief , that the major ceased smiling and after some reflection - as if considering in how far the thing was possible -- replied in the affirmative . 
`` Oh yes , why not ? 
They may , '' he said . 
With a slight inclination of her head , Natasha stepped back quickly to Mavra Kuzminichna , who stood talking compassionately to the officer . 
`` They may . 
He says they may ! '' 
whispered Natasha . 
The cart in which the officer lay was turned into the Rostovs ' yard , and dozens of carts with wounded men began at the invitation of the townsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances of the houses in Povarskaya Street . 
Natasha was evidently pleased to be dealing with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life . 
She and Mavra Kuzminichna tried to get as many of the wounded as possible into their yard . 
`` Your Papa must be told , though , '' said Mavra Kuzminichna . 
`` Never mind , never mind , what does it matter ? 
For one day we can move into the drawing room . 
They can have all our half of the house . '' 
`` There now , young lady , you do take things into your head ! 
Even if we put them into the wing , the men 's room , or the nurse 's room , we must ask permission . '' 
`` Well , I 'll ask . '' 
Natasha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through the half-open door into the sitting room , where there was a smell of vinegar and Hoffman 's drops . 
`` Are you asleep , Mamma ? '' 
`` Oh , what sleep - ? '' 
said the countess , waking up just as she was dropping into a doze . 
`` Mamma darling ! '' 
said Natasha , kneeling by her mother and bringing her face close to her mother 's , `` I am sorry , forgive me , I 'll never do it again ; I woke you up ! 
Mavra Kuzminichna has sent me : they have brought some wounded here -- officers . 
Will you let them come ? 
They have nowhere to go . 
I knew you 'd let them come ! '' 
she said quickly all in one breath . 
`` What officers ? 
Whom have they brought ? 
I do n't understand anything about it , '' said the countess . 
Natasha laughed , and the countess too smiled slightly . 
`` I knew you 'd give permission ... so I 'll tell them , '' and , having kissed her mother , Natasha got up and went to the door . 
In the hall she met her father , who had returned with bad news . 
`` We 've stayed too long ! '' 
said the count with involuntary vexation . 
`` The Club is closed and the police are leaving . '' 
`` Papa , is it all right -- I 've invited some of the wounded into the house ? '' 
said Natasha . 
`` Of course it is , '' he answered absently . 
`` That 's not the point . 
I beg you not to indulge in trifles now , but to help to pack , and tomorrow we must go , go , go ! 
... '' And the count gave a similar order to the major-domo and the servants . 
At dinner Petya having returned home told them the news he had heard . 
He said the people had been getting arms in the Kremlin , and that though Rostopchin 's broadsheet had said that he would sound a call two or three days in advance , the order had certainly already been given for everyone to go armed to the Three Hills tomorrow , and that there would be a big battle there . 
The countess looked with timid horror at her son 's eager , excited face as he said this . 
She realized that if she said a word about his not going to the battle -LRB- she knew he enjoyed the thought of the impending engagement -RRB- he would say something about men , honor , and the fatherland -- something senseless , masculine , and obstinate which there would be no contradicting , and her plans would be spoiled ; and so , hoping to arrange to leave before then and take Petya with her as their protector and defender , she did not answer him , but after dinner called the count aside and implored him with tears to take her away quickly , that very night if possible . 
With a woman 's involuntary loving cunning she , who till then had not shown any alarm , said that she would die of fright if they did not leave that very night . 
Without any pretense she was now afraid of everything . 
Madame Schoss , who had been out to visit her daughter , increased the countess ' fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spirit dealer 's in Myasnitski Street . 
When returning by that street she had been unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of the shop . 
She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and the cabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels at the drink store , having received orders to do so . 
After dinner the whole Rostov household set to work with enthusiastic haste packing their belongings and preparing for their departure . 
The old count , suddenly setting to work , kept passing from the yard to the house and back again , shouting confused instructions to the hurrying people , and flurrying them still more . 
Petya directed things in the yard . 
Sonya , owing to the count 's contradictory orders , lost her head and did not know what to do . 
The servants ran noisily about the house and yard , shouting and disputing . 
Natasha , with the ardor characteristic of all she did suddenly set to work too . 
At first her intervention in the business of packing was received skeptically . 
Everybody expected some prank from her and did not wish to obey her ; but she resolutely and passionately demanded obedience , grew angry and nearly cried because they did not heed her , and at last succeeded in making them believe her . 
Her first exploit , which cost her immense effort and established her authority , was the packing of the carpets . 
The count had valuable Gobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house . 
When Natasha set to work two cases were standing open in the ballroom , one almost full up with crockery , the other with carpets . 
There was also much china standing on the tables , and still more was being brought in from the storeroom . 
A third case was needed and servants had gone to fetch it . 
`` Sonya , wait a bit -- we 'll pack everything into these , '' said Natasha . 
`` You ca n't , Miss , we have tried to , '' said the butler 's assistant . 
`` No , wait a minute , please . '' 
And Natasha began rapidly taking out of the case dishes and plates wrapped in paper . 
`` The dishes must go in here among the carpets , '' said she . 
`` Why , it 's a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into three cases , '' said the butler 's assistant . 
`` Oh , wait , please ! '' 
And Natasha began rapidly and deftly sorting out the things . 
`` These are n't needed , '' said she , putting aside some plates of Kiev ware . 
`` These -- yes , these must go among the carpets , '' she said , referring to the Saxony china dishes . 
`` Do n't , Natasha ! 
Leave it alone ! 
We 'll get it all packed , '' urged Sonya reproachfully . 
`` What a young lady she is ! '' 
remarked the major-domo . 
But Natasha would not give in . 
She turned everything out and began quickly repacking , deciding that the inferior Russian carpets and unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all . 
When everything had been taken out of the cases , they recommenced packing , and it turned out that when the cheaper things not worth taking had nearly all been rejected , the valuable ones really did all go into the two cases . 
Only the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down . 
A few more things might have been taken out , but Natasha insisted on having her own way . 
She packed , repacked , pressed , made the butler 's assistant and Petya -- whom she had drawn into the business of packing -- press on the lid , and made desperate efforts herself . 
`` That 's enough , Natasha , '' said Sonya . 
`` I see you were right , but just take out the top one . '' 
`` I wo n't ! '' 
