`` How are you now ? '' 
said Princess Mary , herself surprised at what she was saying . 
`` That , my dear , you must ask the doctor , '' he replied , and again making an evident effort to be affectionate , he said with his lips only -LRB- his words clearly did not correspond to his thoughts -RRB- : `` Merci , chere amie , d'etre venue . '' 
* * `` Thank you for coming , my dear . '' 
Princess Mary pressed his hand . 
The pressure made him wince just perceptibly . 
He was silent , and she did not know what to say . 
She now understood what had happened to him two days before . 
In his words , his tone , and especially in that calm , almost antagonistic look could be felt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world , terrible in one who is alive . 
Evidently only with an effort did he understand anything living ; but it was obvious that he failed to understand , not because he lacked the power to do so but because he understood something else -- something the living did not and could not understand -- and which wholly occupied his mind . 
`` There , you see how strangely fate has brought us together , '' said he , breaking the silence and pointing to Natasha . 
`` She looks after me all the time . '' 
Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a thing . 
He , the sensitive , tender Prince Andrew , how could he say that , before her whom he loved and who loved him ? 
Had he expected to live he could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone . 
If he had not known that he was dying , how could he have failed to pity her and how could he speak like that in her presence ? 
The only explanation was that he was indifferent , because something else , much more important , had been revealed to him . 
The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off . 
`` Mary came by way of Ryazan , '' said Natasha . 
Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary , and only after calling her so in his presence did Natasha notice it herself . 
`` Really ? '' 
he asked . 
`` They told her that all Moscow has been burned down , and that ... '' Natasha stopped . 
It was impossible to talk . 
It was plain that he was making an effort to listen , but could not do so . 
`` Yes , they say it 's burned , '' he said . 
`` It 's a great pity , '' and he gazed straight before him , absently stroking his mustache with his fingers . 
`` And so you have met Count Nicholas , Mary ? '' 
Prince Andrew suddenly said , evidently wishing to speak pleasantly to them . 
`` He wrote here that he took a great liking to you , '' he went on simply and calmly , evidently unable to understand all the complex significance his words had for living people . 
`` If you liked him too , it would be a good thing for you to get married , '' he added rather more quickly , as if pleased at having found words he had long been seeking . 
Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her , except as a proof of how far away he now was from everything living . 
`` Why talk of me ? '' 
she said quietly and glanced at Natasha . 
Natasha , who felt her glance , did not look at her . 
All three were again silent . 
`` Andrew , would you like ... '' Princess Mary suddenly said in a trembling voice , `` would you like to see little Nicholas ? 
He is always talking about you ! '' 
Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time , but Princess Mary , who knew his face so well , saw with horror that he did not smile with pleasure or affection for his son , but with quiet , gentle irony because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the last means of arousing him . 
`` Yes , I shall be very glad to see him . 
Is he quite well ? '' 
When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew 's room he looked at his father with frightened eyes , but did not cry , because no one else was crying . 
Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to say to him . 
When Nicholas had been led away , Princess Mary again went up to her brother , kissed him , and unable to restrain her tears any longer began to cry . 
He looked at her attentively . 
`` Is it about Nicholas ? '' 
he asked . 
Princess Mary nodded her head , weeping . 
`` Mary , you know the Gosp ... '' but he broke off . 
`` What did you say ? '' 
`` Nothing . 
You must n't cry here , '' he said , looking at her with the same cold expression . 
When Princess Mary began to cry , he understood that she was crying at the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father . 
With a great effort he tried to return to life and to see things from their point of view . 
`` Yes , to them it must seem sad ! '' 
he thought . 
`` But how simple it is . 
`` The fowls of the air sow not , neither do they reap , yet your Father feedeth them , '' he said to himself and wished to say to Princess Mary ; `` but no , they will take it their own way , they wo n't understand ! 
They ca n't understand that all those feelings they prize so -- all our feelings , all those ideas that seem so important to us , are unnecessary . 
We can not understand one another , '' and he remained silent . 
Prince Andrew 's little son was seven . 
He could scarcely read , and knew nothing . 
After that day he lived through many things , gaining knowledge , observation , and experience , but had he possessed all the faculties he afterwards acquired , he could not have had a better or more profound understanding of the meaning of the scene he had witnessed between his father , Mary , and Natasha , than he had then . 
He understood it completely , and , leaving the room without crying , went silently up to Natasha who had come out with him and looked shyly at her with his beautiful , thoughtful eyes , then his uplifted , rosy upper lip trembled and leaning his head against her he began to cry . 
After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him and either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary , or to Natasha of whom he seemed even fonder than of his aunt , and clung to them quietly and shyly . 
When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what Natasha 's face had told her . 
She did not speak any more to Natasha of hopes of saving his life . 
She took turns with her beside his sofa , and did not cry any more , but prayed continually , turning in soul to that Eternal and Unfathomable , whose presence above the dying man was now so evident . 
Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die , but he felt that he was dying and was already half dead . 
He was conscious of an aloofness from everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence . 
Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming . 
That inexorable , eternal , distant , and unknown the presence of which he had felt continually all his life -- was now near to him and , by the strange lightness he experienced , almost comprehensible and palpable ... Formerly he had feared the end . 
He had twice experienced that terribly tormenting fear of death -- the end -- but now he no longer understood that fear . 
He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top before him , and he looked at the fallow field , the bushes , and the sky , and knew that he was face to face with death . 
When he came to himself after being wounded and the flower of eternal , unfettered love had instantly unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondage of life that had restrained it , he no longer feared death and ceased to think about it . 
During the hours of solitude , suffering , and partial delirium he spent after he was wounded , the more deeply he penetrated into the new principle of eternal love revealed to him , the more he unconsciously detached himself from earthly life . 
To love everything and everybody and always to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone , not to live this earthly life . 
And the more imbued he became with that principle of love , the more he renounced life and the more completely he destroyed that dreadful barrier which -- in the absence of such love -- stands between life and death . 
When during those first days he remembered that he would have to die , he said to himself : `` Well , what of it ? 
So much the better ! '' 
But after the night in Mytishchi when , half delirious , he had seen her for whom he longed appear before him and , having pressed her hand to his lips , had shed gentle , happy tears , love for a particular woman again crept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life . 
And joyful and agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind . 
Recalling the moment at the ambulance station when he had seen Kuragin , he could not now regain the feeling he then had , but was tormented by the question whether Kuragin was alive . 
And he dared not inquire . 
His illness pursued its normal physical course , but what Natasha referred to when she said : `` This suddenly happened , '' had occurred two days before Princess Mary arrived . 
It was the last spiritual struggle between life and death , in which death gained the victory . 
It was the unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life as presented to him in the form of his love for Natasha , and a last , though ultimately vanquished , attack of terror before the unknown . 
It was evening . 
As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish , and his thoughts were preternaturally clear . 
Sonya was sitting by the table . 
He began to doze . 
Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him . 
`` Ah , she has come ! '' 
thought he . 
And so it was : in Sonya 's place sat Natasha who had just come in noiselessly . 
Since she had begun looking after him , he had always experienced this physical consciousness of her nearness . 
She was sitting in an armchair placed sideways , screening the light of the candle from him , and was knitting a stocking . 
She had learned to knit stockings since Prince Andrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as old nurses who knit stockings , and that there is something soothing in the knitting of stockings . 
The needles clicked lightly in her slender , rapidly moving hands , and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile of her drooping face . 
She moved , and the ball rolled off her knees . 
