`` At Saint-Lazare . '' 
`` Well ! 
And my sisters ? '' 
`` At the Madelonettes . '' 
The lad scratched his head behind his ear , stared at Ma'am Bougon , and said : -- `` Ah ! '' 
Then he executed a pirouette on his heel ; a moment later , the old woman , who had remained on the door-step , heard him singing in his clear , young voice , as he plunged under the black elm-trees , in the wintry wind : -- `` Le roi Coupdesabot -LSB- 31 -RSB- S'en allait a la chasse , A la chasse aux corbeaux , Monte sur deux echasses . 
Quand on passait dessous , On lui payait deux sous . '' 
-LSB- 31 -RSB- King Bootkick went a-hunting after crows , mounted on two stilts . 
When one passed beneath them , one paid him two sous . 
-LSB- The end of Volume III . 
`` Marius '' -RSB- SAINT-DENIS . 
THE IDYL IN THE RUE PLUMET AND THE EPIC IN THE RUE SAINT-DENIS BOOK FIRST . 
-- A FEW PAGES OF HISTORY WELL CUT 1831 and 1832 , the two years which are immediately connected with the Revolution of July , form one of the most peculiar and striking moments of history . 
These two years rise like two mountains midway between those which precede and those which follow them . 
They have a revolutionary grandeur . 
Precipices are to be distinguished there . 
The social masses , the very assizes of civilization , the solid group of superposed and adhering interests , the century-old profiles of the ancient French formation , appear and disappear in them every instant , athwart the storm clouds of systems , of passions , and of theories . 
These appearances and disappearances have been designated as movement and resistance . 
At intervals , truth , that daylight of the human soul , can be descried shining there . 
This remarkable epoch is decidedly circumscribed and is beginning to be sufficiently distant from us to allow of our grasping the principal lines even at the present day . 
We shall make the attempt . 
The Restoration had been one of those intermediate phases , hard to define , in which there is fatigue , buzzing , murmurs , sleep , tumult , and which are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at a halting-place . 
These epochs are peculiar and mislead the politicians who desire to convert them to profit . 
In the beginning , the nation asks nothing but repose ; it thirsts for but one thing , peace ; it has but one ambition , to be small . 
Which is the translation of remaining tranquil . 
Of great events , great hazards , great adventures , great men , thank God , we have seen enough , we have them heaped higher than our heads . 
We would exchange Caesar for Prusias , and Napoleon for the King of Yvetot . 
`` What a good little king was he ! '' 
We have marched since daybreak , we have reached the evening of a long and toilsome day ; we have made our first change with Mirabeau , the second with Robespierre , the third with Bonaparte ; we are worn out . 
Each one demands a bed . 
Devotion which is weary , heroism which has grown old , ambitions which are sated , fortunes which are made , seek , demand , implore , solicit , what ? 
A shelter . 
They have it . 
They take possession of peace , of tranquillity , of leisure ; behold , they are content . 
But , at the same time certain facts arise , compel recognition , and knock at the door in their turn . 
These facts are the products of revolutions and wars , they are , they exist , they have the right to install themselves in society , and they do install themselves therein ; and most of the time , facts are the stewards of the household and fouriers -LSB- 32 -RSB- who do nothing but prepare lodgings for principles . 
-LSB- 32 -RSB- In olden times , fouriers were the officials who preceded the Court and allotted the lodgings . 
This , then , is what appears to philosophical politicians : -- At the same time that weary men demand repose , accomplished facts demand guarantees . 
Guarantees are the same to facts that repose is to men . 
This is what England demanded of the Stuarts after the Protector ; this is what France demanded of the Bourbons after the Empire . 
These guarantees are a necessity of the times . 
They must be accorded . 
Princes `` grant '' them , but in reality , it is the force of things which gives them . 
A profound truth , and one useful to know , which the Stuarts did not suspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a glimpse of in 1814 . 
The predestined family , which returned to France when Napoleon fell , had the fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed , and that what it had bestowed it could take back again ; that the House of Bourbon possessed the right divine , that France possessed nothing , and that the political right conceded in the charter of Louis XVIII . 
was merely a branch of the right divine , was detached by the House of Bourbon and graciously given to the people until such day as it should please the King to reassume it . 
Still , the House of Bourbon should have felt , from the displeasure created by the gift , that it did not come from it . 
This house was churlish to the nineteenth century . 
It put on an ill-tempered look at every development of the nation . 
To make use of a trivial word , that is to say , of a popular and a true word , it looked glum . 
The people saw this . 
It thought it possessed strength because the Empire had been carried away before it like a theatrical stage-setting . 
It did not perceive that it had , itself , been brought in in the same fashion . 
It did not perceive that it also lay in that hand which had removed Napoleon . 
It thought that it had roots , because it was the past . 
It was mistaken ; it formed a part of the past , but the whole past was France . 
The roots of French society were not fixed in the Bourbons , but in the nations . 
These obscure and lively roots constituted , not the right of a family , but the history of a people . 
They were everywhere , except under the throne . 
The House of Bourbon was to France the illustrious and bleeding knot in her history , but was no longer the principal element of her destiny , and the necessary base of her politics . 
She could get along without the Bourbons ; she had done without them for two and twenty years ; there had been a break of continuity ; they did not suspect the fact . 
And how should they have suspected it , they who fancied that Louis XVII . 
reigned on the 9th of Thermidor , and that Louis XVIII . 
was reigning at the battle of Marengo ? 
Never , since the origin of history , had princes been so blind in the presence of facts and the portion of divine authority which facts contain and promulgate . 
Never had that pretension here below which is called the right of kings denied to such a point the right from on high . 
A capital error which led this family to lay its hand once more on the guarantees `` granted '' in 1814 , on the concessions , as it termed them . 
Sad . 
A sad thing ! 
What it termed its concessions were our conquests ; what it termed our encroachments were our rights . 
When the hour seemed to it to have come , the Restoration , supposing itself victorious over Bonaparte and well-rooted in the country , that is to say , believing itself to be strong and deep , abruptly decided on its plan of action , and risked its stroke . 
One morning it drew itself up before the face of France , and , elevating its voice , it contested the collective title and the individual right of the nation to sovereignty , of the citizen to liberty . 
In other words , it denied to the nation that which made it a nation , and to the citizen that which made him a citizen . 
This is the foundation of those famous acts which are called the ordinances of July . 
The Restoration fell . 
It fell justly . 
But , we admit , it had not been absolutely hostile to all forms of progress . 
Great things had been accomplished , with it alongside . 
Under the Restoration , the nation had grown accustomed to calm discussion , which had been lacking under the Republic , and to grandeur in peace , which had been wanting under the Empire . 
France free and strong had offered an encouraging spectacle to the other peoples of Europe . 
The Revolution had had the word under Robespierre ; the cannon had had the word under Bonaparte ; it was under Louis XVIII . 
and Charles X. that it was the turn of intelligence to have the word . 
The wind ceased , the torch was lighted once more . 
On the lofty heights , the pure light of mind could be seen flickering . 
A magnificent , useful , and charming spectacle . 
For a space of fifteen years , those great principles which are so old for the thinker , so new for the statesman , could be seen at work in perfect peace , on the public square ; equality before the law , liberty of conscience , liberty of speech , liberty of the press , the accessibility of all aptitudes to all functions . 
Thus it proceeded until 1830 . 
The Bourbons were an instrument of civilization which broke in the hands of Providence . 
The fall of the Bourbons was full of grandeur , not on their side , but on the side of the nation . 
They quitted the throne with gravity , but without authority ; their descent into the night was not one of those solemn disappearances which leave a sombre emotion in history ; it was neither the spectral calm of Charles I. , nor the eagle scream of Napoleon . 
They departed , that is all . 
They laid down the crown , and retained no aureole . 
They were worthy , but they were not august . 
They lacked , in a certain measure , the majesty of their misfortune . 
Charles X. during the voyage from Cherbourg , causing a round table to be cut over into a square table , appeared to be more anxious about imperilled etiquette than about the crumbling monarchy . 
This diminution saddened devoted men who loved their persons , and serious men who honored their race . 
The populace was admirable . 
The nation , attacked one morning with weapons , by a sort of royal insurrection , felt itself in the possession of so much force that it did not go into a rage . 
It defended itself , restrained itself , restored things to their places , the government to law , the Bourbons to exile , alas ! 
and then halted ! 
