The magistrate had thought it advisable not to put one of these men of the band of Patron Minette in close confinement , in the hope that he would chatter . 
This man was Brujon , the long-haired man of the Rue du Petit-Banquier . 
He had been let loose in the Charlemagne courtyard , and the eyes of the watchers were fixed on him . 
This name of Brujon is one of the souvenirs of La Force . 
In that hideous courtyard , called the court of the Batiment-Neuf -LRB- New Building -RRB- , which the administration called the court Saint-Bernard , and which the robbers called the Fosseaux-Lions -LRB- The Lion 's Ditch -RRB- , on that wall covered with scales and leprosy , which rose on the left to a level with the roofs , near an old door of rusty iron which led to the ancient chapel of the ducal residence of La Force , then turned in a dormitory for ruffians , there could still be seen , twelve years ago , a sort of fortress roughly carved in the stone with a nail , and beneath it this signature : -- BRUJON , 1811 . 
The Brujon of 1811 was the father of the Brujon of 1832 . 
The latter , of whom the reader caught but a glimpse at the Gorbeau house , was a very cunning and very adroit young spark , with a bewildered and plaintive air . 
It was in consequence of this plaintive air that the magistrate had released him , thinking him more useful in the Charlemagne yard than in close confinement . 
Robbers do not interrupt their profession because they are in the hands of justice . 
They do not let themselves be put out by such a trifle as that . 
To be in prison for one crime is no reason for not beginning on another crime . 
They are artists , who have one picture in the salon , and who toil , none the less , on a new work in their studios . 
Brujon seemed to be stupefied by prison . 
He could sometimes be seen standing by the hour together in front of the sutler 's window in the Charlemagne yard , staring like an idiot at the sordid list of prices which began with : garlic , 62 centimes , and ended with : cigar , 5 centimes . 
Or he passed his time in trembling , chattering his teeth , saying that he had a fever , and inquiring whether one of the eight and twenty beds in the fever ward was vacant . 
All at once , towards the end of February , 1832 , it was discovered that Brujon , that somnolent fellow , had had three different commissions executed by the errand-men of the establishment , not under his own name , but in the name of three of his comrades ; and they had cost him in all fifty sous , an exorbitant outlay which attracted the attention of the prison corporal . 
Inquiries were instituted , and on consulting the tariff of commissions posted in the convict 's parlor , it was learned that the fifty sous could be analyzed as follows : three commissions ; one to the Pantheon , ten sous ; one to Val-de-Grace , fifteen sous ; and one to the Barriere de Grenelle , twenty-five sous . 
This last was the dearest of the whole tariff . 
Now , at the Pantheon , at the Val-de-Grace , and at the Barriere de Grenelle were situated the domiciles of the three very redoubtable prowlers of the barriers , Kruideniers , alias Bizarre , Glorieux , an ex-convict , and Barre-Carosse , upon whom the attention of the police was directed by this incident . 
It was thought that these men were members of Patron Minette ; two of those leaders , Babet and Gueulemer , had been captured . 
It was supposed that the messages , which had been addressed , not to houses , but to people who were waiting for them in the street , must have contained information with regard to some crime that had been plotted . 
They were in possession of other indications ; they laid hand on the three prowlers , and supposed that they had circumvented some one or other of Brujon 's machinations . 
About a week after these measures had been taken , one night , as the superintendent of the watch , who had been inspecting the lower dormitory in the Batiment-Neuf , was about to drop his chestnut in the box -- this was the means adopted to make sure that the watchmen performed their duties punctually ; every hour a chestnut must be dropped into all the boxes nailed to the doors of the dormitories -- a watchman looked through the peep-hole of the dormitory and beheld Brujon sitting on his bed and writing something by the light of the hall-lamp . 
The guardian entered , Brujon was put in a solitary cell for a month , but they were not able to seize what he had written . 
The police learned nothing further about it . 
What is certain is , that on the following morning , a `` postilion '' was flung from the Charlemagne yard into the Lions ' Ditch , over the five-story building which separated the two court-yards . 
What prisoners call a `` postilion '' is a pallet of bread artistically moulded , which is sent into Ireland , that is to say , over the roofs of a prison , from one courtyard to another . 
Etymology : over England ; from one land to another ; into Ireland . 
This little pellet falls in the yard . 
The man who picks it up opens it and finds in it a note addressed to some prisoner in that yard . 
If it is a prisoner who finds the treasure , he forwards the note to its destination ; if it is a keeper , or one of the prisoners secretly sold who are called sheep in prisons and foxes in the galleys , the note is taken to the office and handed over to the police . 
On this occasion , the postilion reached its address , although the person to whom it was addressed was , at that moment , in solitary confinement . 
This person was no other than Babet , one of the four heads of Patron Minette . 
The postilion contained a roll of paper on which only these two lines were written : -- `` Babet . 
There is an affair in the Rue Plumet . 
A gate on a garden . '' 
This is what Brujon had written the night before . 
In spite of male and female searchers , Babet managed to pass the note on from La Force to the Salpetriere , to a `` good friend '' whom he had and who was shut up there . 
This woman in turn transmitted the note to another woman of her acquaintance , a certain Magnon , who was strongly suspected by the police , though not yet arrested . 
This Magnon , whose name the reader has already seen , had relations with the Thenardier , which will be described in detail later on , and she could , by going to see Eponine , serve as a bridge between the Salpetriere and Les Madelonettes . 
It happened , that at precisely that moment , as proofs were wanting in the investigation directed against Thenardier in the matter of his daughters , Eponine and Azelma were released . 
When Eponine came out , Magnon , who was watching the gate of the Madelonettes , handed her Brujon 's note to Babet , charging her to look into the matter . 
Eponine went to the Rue Plumet , recognized the gate and the garden , observed the house , spied , lurked , and , a few days later , brought to Magnon , who delivers in the Rue Clocheperce , a biscuit , which Magnon transmitted to Babet 's mistress in the Salpetriere . 
A biscuit , in the shady symbolism of prisons , signifies : Nothing to be done . 
So that in less than a week from that time , as Brujon and Babet met in the circle of La Force , the one on his way to the examination , the other on his way from it : -- `` Well ? '' 
asked Brujon , `` the Rue P. ? '' 
`` Biscuit , '' replied Babet . 
Thus did the foetus of crime engendered by Brujon in La Force miscarry . 
This miscarriage had its consequences , however , which were perfectly distinct from Brujon 's programme . 
The reader will see what they were . 
Often when we think we are knotting one thread , we are tying quite another . 
APPARITION TO FATHER MABEUF Marius no longer went to see any one , but he sometimes encountered Father Mabeuf by chance . 
While Marius was slowly descending those melancholy steps which may be called the cellar stairs , and which lead to places without light , where the happy can be heard walking overhead , M. Mabeuf was descending on his side . 
The Flora of Cauteretz no longer sold at all . 
The experiments on indigo had not been successful in the little garden of Austerlitz , which had a bad exposure . 
M. Mabeuf could cultivate there only a few plants which love shade and dampness . 
Nevertheless , he did not become discouraged . 
He had obtained a corner in the Jardin des Plantes , with a good exposure , to make his trials with indigo `` at his own expense . '' 
For this purpose he had pawned his copperplates of the Flora . 
He had reduced his breakfast to two eggs , and he left one of these for his old servant , to whom he had paid no wages for the last fifteen months . 
And often his breakfast was his only meal . 
He no longer smiled with his infantile smile , he had grown morose and no longer received visitors . 
Marius did well not to dream of going thither . 
Sometimes , at the hour when M. Mabeuf was on his way to the Jardin des Plantes , the old man and the young man passed each other on the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
They did not speak , and only exchanged a melancholy sign of the head . 
A heart-breaking thing it is that there comes a moment when misery looses bonds ! 
Two men who have been friends become two chance passers-by . 
Royal the bookseller was dead . 
M. Mabeuf no longer knew his books , his garden , or his indigo : these were the three forms which happiness , pleasure , and hope had assumed for him . 
This sufficed him for his living . 
He said to himself : `` When I shall have made my balls of blueing , I shall be rich , I will withdraw my copperplates from the pawn-shop , I will put my Flora in vogue again with trickery , plenty of money and advertisements in the newspapers and I will buy , I know well where , a copy of Pierre de Medine 's Art de Naviguer , with wood-cuts , edition of 1655 . '' 
In the meantime , he toiled all day over his plot of indigo , and at night he returned home to water his garden , and to read his books . 
At that epoch , M. Mabeuf was nearly eighty years of age . 
One evening he had a singular apparition . 
He had returned home while it was still broad daylight . 
Mother Plutarque , whose health was declining , was ill and in bed . 
He had dined on a bone , on which a little meat lingered , and a bit of bread that he had found on the kitchen table , and had seated himself on an overturned stone post , which took the place of a bench in his garden . 
Near this bench there rose , after the fashion in orchard-gardens , a sort of large chest , of beams and planks , much dilapidated , a rabbit-hutch on the ground floor , a fruit-closet on the first . 
There was nothing in the hutch , but there were a few apples in the fruit-closet , -- the remains of the winter 's provision . 
M. Mabeuf had set himself to turning over and reading , with the aid of his glasses , two books of which he was passionately fond and in which , a serious thing at his age , he was interested . 
His natural timidity rendered him accessible to the acceptance of superstitions in a certain degree . 
The first of these books was the famous treatise of President Delancre , De l'inconstance des Demons ; the other was a quarto by Mutor de la Rubaudiere , Sur les Diables de Vauvert et les Gobelins de la Bievre . 
This last-mentioned old volume interested him all the more , because his garden had been one of the spots haunted by goblins in former times . 
The twilight had begun to whiten what was on high and to blacken all below . 
As he read , over the top of the book which he held in his hand , Father Mabeuf was surveying his plants , and among others a magnificent rhododendron which was one of his consolations ; four days of heat , wind , and sun without a drop of rain , had passed ; the stalks were bending , the buds drooping , the leaves falling ; all this needed water , the rhododendron was particularly sad . 
Father Mabeuf was one of those persons for whom plants have souls . 
The old man had toiled all day over his indigo plot , he was worn out with fatigue , but he rose , laid his books on the bench , and walked , all bent over and with tottering footsteps , to the well , but when he had grasped the chain , he could not even draw it sufficiently to unhook it . 
Then he turned round and cast a glance of anguish toward heaven which was becoming studded with stars . 
The evening had that serenity which overwhelms the troubles of man beneath an indescribably mournful and eternal joy . 
The night promised to be as arid as the day had been . 
`` Stars everywhere ! '' 
thought the old man ; `` not the tiniest cloud ! 
Not a drop of water ! '' 
And his head , which had been upraised for a moment , fell back upon his breast . 
He raised it again , and once more looked at the sky , murmuring : -- `` A tear of dew ! 
A little pity ! '' 
He tried again to unhook the chain of the well , and could not . 
At that moment , he heard a voice saying : -- `` Father Mabeuf , would you like to have me water your garden for you ? '' 
At the same time , a noise as of a wild animal passing became audible in the hedge , and he beheld emerging from the shrubbery a sort of tall , slender girl , who drew herself up in front of him and stared boldly at him . 
She had less the air of a human being than of a form which had just blossomed forth from the twilight . 
