Then , as he was in heaven , it was quite natural that he should forget earth . 
Both bore languidly the indefinable burden of immaterial pleasures . 
Thus lived these somnambulists who are called lovers . 
Alas ! 
Who is there who has not felt all these things ? 
Why does there come an hour when one emerges from this azure , and why does life go on afterwards ? 
Loving almost takes the place of thinking . 
Love is an ardent forgetfulness of all the rest . 
Then ask logic of passion if you will . 
There is no more absolute logical sequence in the human heart than there is a perfect geometrical figure in the celestial mechanism . 
For Cosette and Marius nothing existed except Marius and Cosette . 
The universe around them had fallen into a hole . 
They lived in a golden minute . 
There was nothing before them , nothing behind . 
It hardly occurred to Marius that Cosette had a father . 
His brain was dazzled and obliterated . 
Of what did these lovers talk then ? 
We have seen , of the flowers , and the swallows , the setting sun and the rising moon , and all sorts of important things . 
They had told each other everything except everything . 
The everything of lovers is nothing . 
But the father , the realities , that lair , the ruffians , that adventure , to what purpose ? 
And was he very sure that this nightmare had actually existed ? 
They were two , and they adored each other , and beyond that there was nothing . 
Nothing else existed . 
It is probable that this vanishing of hell in our rear is inherent to the arrival of paradise . 
Have we beheld demons ? 
Are there any ? 
Have we trembled ? 
Have we suffered ? 
We no longer know . 
A rosy cloud hangs over it . 
So these two beings lived in this manner , high aloft , with all that improbability which is in nature ; neither at the nadir nor at the zenith , between man and seraphim , above the mire , below the ether , in the clouds ; hardly flesh and blood , soul and ecstasy from head to foot ; already too sublime to walk the earth , still too heavily charged with humanity to disappear in the blue , suspended like atoms which are waiting to be precipitated ; apparently beyond the bounds of destiny ; ignorant of that rut ; yesterday , to-day , to-morrow ; amazed , rapturous , floating , soaring ; at times so light that they could take their flight out into the infinite ; almost prepared to soar away to all eternity . 
They slept wide-awake , thus sweetly lulled . 
Oh ! 
splendid lethargy of the real overwhelmed by the ideal . 
Sometimes , beautiful as Cosette was , Marius shut his eyes in her presence . 
The best way to look at the soul is through closed eyes . 
Marius and Cosette never asked themselves whither this was to lead them . 
They considered that they had already arrived . 
It is a strange claim on man 's part to wish that love should lead to something . 
THE BEGINNING OF SHADOW Jean Valjean suspected nothing . 
Cosette , who was rather less dreamy than Marius , was gay , and that sufficed for Jean Valjean 's happiness . 
The thoughts which Cosette cherished , her tender preoccupations , Marius ' image which filled her heart , took away nothing from the incomparable purity of her beautiful , chaste , and smiling brow . 
She was at the age when the virgin bears her love as the angel his lily . 
So Jean Valjean was at ease . 
And then , when two lovers have come to an understanding , things always go well ; the third party who might disturb their love is kept in a state of perfect blindness by a restricted number of precautions which are always the same in the case of all lovers . 
Thus , Cosette never objected to any of Jean Valjean 's proposals . 
Did she want to take a walk ? 
`` Yes , dear little father . '' 
Did she want to stay at home ? 
Very good . 
Did he wish to pass the evening with Cosette ? 
She was delighted . 
As he always went to bed at ten o'clock , Marius did not come to the garden on such occasions until after that hour , when , from the street , he heard Cosette open the long glass door on the veranda . 
Of course , no one ever met Marius in the daytime . 
Jean Valjean never even dreamed any longer that Marius was in existence . 
Only once , one morning , he chanced to say to Cosette : `` Why , you have whitewash on your back ! '' 
On the previous evening , Marius , in a transport , had pushed Cosette against the wall . 
Old Toussaint , who retired early , thought of nothing but her sleep , and was as ignorant of the whole matter as Jean Valjean . 
Marius never set foot in the house . 
When he was with Cosette , they hid themselves in a recess near the steps , in order that they might neither be seen nor heard from the street , and there they sat , frequently contenting themselves , by way of conversation , with pressing each other 's hands twenty times a minute as they gazed at the branches of the trees . 
At such times , a thunderbolt might have fallen thirty paces from them , and they would not have noticed it , so deeply was the revery of the one absorbed and sunk in the revery of the other . 
Limpid purity . 
Hours wholly white ; almost all alike . 
This sort of love is a recollection of lily petals and the plumage of the dove . 
The whole extent of the garden lay between them and the street . 
Every time that Marius entered and left , he carefully adjusted the bar of the gate in such a manner that no displacement was visible . 
He usually went away about midnight , and returned to Courfeyrac 's lodgings . 
Courfeyrac said to Bahorel : -- `` Would you believe it ? 
Marius comes home nowadays at one o'clock in the morning . '' 
Bahorel replied : -- `` What do you expect ? 
There 's always a petard in a seminary fellow . '' 
At times , Courfeyrac folded his arms , assumed a serious air , and said to Marius : -- `` You are getting irregular in your habits , young man . '' 
Courfeyrac , being a practical man , did not take in good part this reflection of an invisible paradise upon Marius ; he was not much in the habit of concealed passions ; it made him impatient , and now and then he called upon Marius to come back to reality . 
One morning , he threw him this admonition : -- `` My dear fellow , you produce upon me the effect of being located in the moon , the realm of dreams , the province of illusions , capital , soap-bubble . 
Come , be a good boy , what 's her name ? '' 
But nothing could induce Marius `` to talk . '' 
They might have torn out his nails before one of the two sacred syllables of which that ineffable name , Cosette , was composed . 
True love is as luminous as the dawn and as silent as the tomb . 
Only , Courfeyrac saw this change in Marius , that his taciturnity was of the beaming order . 
During this sweet month of May , Marius and Cosette learned to know these immense delights . 
To dispute and to say you for thou , simply that they might say thou the better afterwards . 
To talk at great length with very minute details , of persons in whom they took not the slightest interest in the world ; another proof that in that ravishing opera called love , the libretto counts for almost nothing ; For Marius , to listen to Cosette discussing finery ; For Cosette , to listen to Marius talk in politics ; To listen , knee pressed to knee , to the carriages rolling along the Rue de Babylone ; To gaze upon the same planet in space , or at the same glowworm gleaming in the grass ; To hold their peace together ; a still greater delight than conversation ; Etc. , etc. . 
In the meantime , divers complications were approaching . 
One evening , Marius was on his way to the rendezvous , by way of the Boulevard des Invalides . 
He habitually walked with drooping head . 
As he was on the point of turning the corner of the Rue Plumet , he heard some one quite close to him say : -- `` Good evening , Monsieur Marius . '' 
He raised his head and recognized Eponine . 
This produced a singular effect upon him . 
He had not thought of that girl a single time since the day when she had conducted him to the Rue Plumet , he had not seen her again , and she had gone completely out of his mind . 
He had no reasons for anything but gratitude towards her , he owed her his happiness , and yet , it was embarrassing to him to meet her . 
It is an error to think that passion , when it is pure and happy , leads man to a state of perfection ; it simply leads him , as we have noted , to a state of oblivion . 
In this situation , man forgets to be bad , but he also forgets to be good . 
Gratitude , duty , matters essential and important to be remembered , vanish . 
At any other time , Marius would have behaved quite differently to Eponine . 
Absorbed in Cosette , he had not even clearly put it to himself that this Eponine was named Eponine Thenardier , and that she bore the name inscribed in his father 's will , that name , for which , but a few months before , he would have so ardently sacrificed himself . 
We show Marius as he was . 
His father himself was fading out of his soul to some extent , under the splendor of his love . 
He replied with some embarrassment : -- `` Ah ! 
so it 's you , Eponine ? '' 
