`` But that is impossible ! '' 
`` Bah ! 
Impossible to take a hammer and drive some nails in a plank ? '' 
What seemed unprecedented to Fauchelevent was , we repeat , a simple matter to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had been in worse straits than this . 
Any man who has been a prisoner understands how to contract himself to fit the diameter of the escape . 
The prisoner is subject to flight as the sick man is subject to a crisis which saves or kills him . 
An escape is a cure . 
What does not a man undergo for the sake of a cure ? 
To have himself nailed up in a case and carried off like a bale of goods , to live for a long time in a box , to find air where there is none , to economize his breath for hours , to know how to stifle without dying -- this was one of Jean Valjean 's gloomy talents . 
Moreover , a coffin containing a living being , -- that convict 's expedient , -- is also an imperial expedient . 
If we are to credit the monk Austin Castillejo , this was the means employed by Charles the Fifth , desirous of seeing the Plombes for the last time after his abdication . 
He had her brought into and carried out of the monastery of Saint-Yuste in this manner . 
Fauchelevent , who had recovered himself a little , exclaimed : -- `` But how will you manage to breathe ? '' 
`` I will breathe . '' 
`` In that box ! 
The mere thought of it suffocates me . '' 
`` You surely must have a gimlet , you will make a few holes here and there , around my mouth , and you will nail the top plank on loosely . '' 
`` Good ! 
And what if you should happen to cough or to sneeze ? '' 
`` A man who is making his escape does not cough or sneeze . '' 
And Jean Valjean added : -- `` Father Fauchelevent , we must come to a decision : I must either be caught here , or accept this escape through the hearse . '' 
Every one has noticed the taste which cats have for pausing and lounging between the two leaves of a half-shut door . 
Who is there who has not said to a cat , `` Do come in ! '' 
There are men who , when an incident stands half-open before them , have the same tendency to halt in indecision between two resolutions , at the risk of getting crushed through the abrupt closing of the adventure by fate . 
The over-prudent , cats as they are , and because they are cats , sometimes incur more danger than the audacious . 
Fauchelevent was of this hesitating nature . 
But Jean Valjean 's coolness prevailed over him in spite of himself . 
He grumbled : -- `` Well , since there is no other means . '' 
Jean Valjean resumed : -- `` The only thing which troubles me is what will take place at the cemetery . '' 
`` That is the very point that is not troublesome , '' exclaimed Fauchelevent . 
`` If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right , I am sure of getting you out of the grave . 
The grave-digger is a drunkard , and a friend of mine . 
He is Father Mestienne . 
An old fellow of the old school . 
The grave-digger puts the corpses in the grave , and I put the grave-digger in my pocket . 
I will tell you what will take place . 
They will arrive a little before dusk , three-quarters of an hour before the gates of the cemetery are closed . 
The hearse will drive directly up to the grave . 
I shall follow ; that is my business . 
I shall have a hammer , a chisel , and some pincers in my pocket . 
The hearse halts , the undertaker 's men knot a rope around your coffin and lower you down . 
The priest says the prayers , makes the sign of the cross , sprinkles the holy water , and takes his departure . 
I am left alone with Father Mestienne . 
He is my friend , I tell you . 
One of two things will happen , he will either be sober , or he will not be sober . 
If he is not drunk , I shall say to him : ` Come and drink a bout while the Bon Coing -LSB- the Good Quince -RSB- is open . ' 
I carry him off , I get him drunk , -- it does not take long to make Father Mestienne drunk , he always has the beginning of it about him , -- I lay him under the table , I take his card , so that I can get into the cemetery again , and I return without him . 
Then you have no longer any one but me to deal with . 
If he is drunk , I shall say to him : ` Be off ; I will do your work for you . ' 
Off he goes , and I drag you out of the hole . '' 
Jean Valjean held out his hand , and Fauchelevent precipitated himself upon it with the touching effusion of a peasant . 
`` That is settled , Father Fauchelevent . 
All will go well . '' 
`` Provided nothing goes wrong , '' thought Fauchelevent . 
`` In that case , it would be terrible . '' 
IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO BE DRUNK IN ORDER TO BE IMMORTAL On the following day , as the sun was declining , the very rare passers-by on the Boulevard du Maine pulled off their hats to an old-fashioned hearse , ornamented with skulls , cross-bones , and tears . 
This hearse contained a coffin covered with a white cloth over which spread a large black cross , like a huge corpse with drooping arms . 
A mourning-coach , in which could be seen a priest in his surplice , and a choir boy in his red cap , followed . 
Two undertaker 's men in gray uniforms trimmed with black walked on the right and the left of the hearse . 
Behind it came an old man in the garments of a laborer , who limped along . 
The procession was going in the direction of the Vaugirard cemetery . 
The handle of a hammer , the blade of a cold chisel , and the antennae of a pair of pincers were visible , protruding from the man 's pocket . 
The Vaugirard cemetery formed an exception among the cemeteries of Paris . 
It had its peculiar usages , just as it had its carriage entrance and its house door , which old people in the quarter , who clung tenaciously to ancient words , still called the porte cavaliere and the porte pietonne . 
-LSB- 16 -RSB- The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Rue Petit-Picpus had obtained permission , as we have already stated , to be buried there in a corner apart , and at night , the plot of land having formerly belonged to their community . 
The grave-diggers being thus bound to service in the evening in summer and at night in winter , in this cemetery , they were subjected to a special discipline . 
The gates of the Paris cemeteries closed , at that epoch , at sundown , and this being a municipal regulation , the Vaugirard cemetery was bound by it like the rest . 
The carriage gate and the house door were two contiguous grated gates , adjoining a pavilion built by the architect Perronet , and inhabited by the door-keeper of the cemetery . 
These gates , therefore , swung inexorably on their hinges at the instant when the sun disappeared behind the dome of the Invalides . 
If any grave-digger were delayed after that moment in the cemetery , there was but one way for him to get out -- his grave-digger 's card furnished by the department of public funerals . 
A sort of letter-box was constructed in the porter 's window . 
The grave-digger dropped his card into this box , the porter heard it fall , pulled the rope , and the small door opened . 
If the man had not his card , he mentioned his name , the porter , who was sometimes in bed and asleep , rose , came out and identified the man , and opened the gate with his key ; the grave-digger stepped out , but had to pay a fine of fifteen francs . 
-LSB- 16 -RSB- Instead of porte cochere and porte batarde . 
This cemetery , with its peculiarities outside the regulations , embarrassed the symmetry of the administration . 
It was suppressed a little later than 1830 . 
The cemetery of Mont-Parnasse , called the Eastern cemetery , succeeded to it , and inherited that famous dram-shop next to the Vaugirard cemetery , which was surmounted by a quince painted on a board , and which formed an angle , one side on the drinkers ' tables , and the other on the tombs , with this sign : Au Bon Coing . 
The Vaugirard cemetery was what may be called a faded cemetery . 
It was falling into disuse . 
Dampness was invading it , the flowers were deserting it . 
The bourgeois did not care much about being buried in the Vaugirard ; it hinted at poverty . 
Pere-Lachaise if you please ! 
to be buried in Pere-Lachaise is equivalent to having furniture of mahogany . 
It is recognized as elegant . 
The Vaugirard cemetery was a venerable enclosure , planted like an old-fashioned French garden . 
Straight alleys , box , thuya-trees , holly , ancient tombs beneath aged cypress-trees , and very tall grass . 
In the evening it was tragic there . 
There were very lugubrious lines about it . 
The sun had not yet set when the hearse with the white pall and the black cross entered the avenue of the Vaugirard cemetery . 
The lame man who followed it was no other than Fauchelevent . 
The interment of Mother Crucifixion in the vault under the altar , the exit of Cosette , the introduction of Jean Valjean to the dead-room , -- all had been executed without difficulty , and there had been no hitch . 
Let us remark in passing , that the burial of Mother Crucifixion under the altar of the convent is a perfectly venial offence in our sight . 
It is one of the faults which resemble a duty . 
The nuns had committed it , not only without difficulty , but even with the applause of their own consciences . 
In the cloister , what is called the `` government '' is only an intermeddling with authority , an interference which is always questionable . 
In the first place , the rule ; as for the code , we shall see . 
Make as many laws as you please , men ; but keep them for yourselves . 
The tribute to Caesar is never anything but the remnants of the tribute to God . 
A prince is nothing in the presence of a principle . 
