THE TWO OLD MEN DO EVERYTHING , EACH ONE AFTER HIS OWN FASHION , TO RENDER COSETTE HAPPY Everything was made ready for the wedding . 
The doctor , on being consulted , declared that it might take place in February . 
It was then December . 
A few ravishing weeks of perfect happiness passed . 
The grandfather was not the least happy of them all . 
He remained for a quarter of an hour at a time gazing at Cosette . 
`` The wonderful , beautiful girl ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` And she has so sweet and good an air ! 
she is , without exception , the most charming girl that I have ever seen in my life . 
Later on , she 'll have virtues with an odor of violets . 
How graceful ! 
one can not live otherwise than nobly with such a creature . 
Marius , my boy , you are a Baron , you are rich , do n't go to pettifogging , I beg of you . '' 
Cosette and Marius had passed abruptly from the sepulchre to paradise . 
The transition had not been softened , and they would have been stunned , had they not been dazzled by it . 
`` Do you understand anything about it ? '' 
said Marius to Cosette . 
`` No , '' replied Cosette , `` but it seems to me that the good God is caring for us . '' 
Jean Valjean did everything , smoothed away every difficulty , arranged everything , made everything easy . 
He hastened towards Cosette 's happiness with as much ardor , and , apparently with as much joy , as Cosette herself . 
As he had been a mayor , he understood how to solve that delicate problem , with the secret of which he alone was acquainted , Cosette 's civil status . 
If he were to announce her origin bluntly , it might prevent the marriage , who knows ? 
He extricated Cosette from all difficulties . 
He concocted for her a family of dead people , a sure means of not encountering any objections . 
Cosette was the only scion of an extinct family ; Cosette was not his own daughter , but the daughter of the other Fauchelevent . 
Two brothers Fauchelevent had been gardeners to the convent of the Petit-Picpus . 
Inquiry was made at that convent ; the very best information and the most respectable references abounded ; the good nuns , not very apt and but little inclined to fathom questions of paternity , and not attaching any importance to the matter , had never understood exactly of which of the two Fauchelevents Cosette was the daughter . 
They said what was wanted and they said it with zeal . 
An acte de notoriete was drawn up . 
Cosette became in the eyes of the law , Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent . 
She was declared an orphan , both father and mother being dead . 
Jean Valjean so arranged it that he was appointed , under the name of Fauchelevent , as Cosette 's guardian , with M. Gillenormand as supervising guardian over him . 
As for the five hundred and eighty thousand francs , they constituted a legacy bequeathed to Cosette by a dead person , who desired to remain unknown . 
The original legacy had consisted of five hundred and ninety-four thousand francs ; but ten thousand francs had been expended on the education of Mademoiselle Euphrasie , five thousand francs of that amount having been paid to the convent . 
This legacy , deposited in the hands of a third party , was to be turned over to Cosette at her majority , or at the date of her marriage . 
This , taken as a whole , was very acceptable , as the reader will perceive , especially when the sum due was half a million . 
There were some peculiarities here and there , it is true , but they were not noticed ; one of the interested parties had his eyes blindfolded by love , the others by the six hundred thousand francs . 
Cosette learned that she was not the daughter of that old man whom she had so long called father . 
He was merely a kinsman ; another Fauchelevent was her real father . 
At any other time this would have broken her heart . 
But at the ineffable moment which she was then passing through , it cast but a slight shadow , a faint cloud , and she was so full of joy that the cloud did not last long . 
She had Marius . 
The young man arrived , the old man was effaced ; such is life . 
And then , Cosette had , for long years , been habituated to seeing enigmas around her ; every being who has had a mysterious childhood is always prepared for certain renunciations . 
Nevertheless , she continued to call Jean Valjean : Father . 
Cosette , happy as the angels , was enthusiastic over Father Gillenormand . 
It is true that he overwhelmed her with gallant compliments and presents . 
While Jean Valjean was building up for Cosette a normal situation in society and an unassailable status , M. Gillenormand was superintending the basket of wedding gifts . 
Nothing so amused him as being magnificent . 
He had given to Cosette a robe of Binche guipure which had descended to him from his own grandmother . 
`` These fashions come up again , '' said he , `` ancient things are the rage , and the young women of my old age dress like the old women of my childhood . '' 
He rifled his respectable chests of drawers in Coromandel lacquer , with swelling fronts , which had not been opened for years . 
-- `` Let us hear the confession of these dowagers , '' he said , `` let us see what they have in their paunches . '' 
He noisily violated the pot-bellied drawers of all his wives , of all his mistresses and of all his grandmothers . 
Pekins , damasks , lampas , painted moires , robes of shot gros de Tours , India kerchiefs embroidered in gold that could be washed , dauphines without a right or wrong side , in the piece , Genoa and Alencon point lace , parures in antique goldsmith 's work , ivory bon-bon boxes ornamented with microscopic battles , gewgaws and ribbons -- he lavished everything on Cosette . 
Cosette , amazed , desperately in love with Marius , and wild with gratitude towards M. Gillenormand , dreamed of a happiness without limit clothed in satin and velvet . 
Her wedding basket seemed to her to be upheld by seraphim . 
Her soul flew out into the azure depths , with wings of Mechlin lace . 
The intoxication of the lovers was only equalled , as we have already said , by the ecstasy of the grandfather . 
A sort of flourish of trumpets went on in the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
Every morning , a fresh offering of bric-a-brac from the grandfather to Cosette . 
All possible knickknacks glittered around her . 
One day Marius , who was fond of talking gravely in the midst of his bliss , said , apropos of I know not what incident : `` The men of the revolution are so great , that they have the prestige of the ages , like Cato and like Phocion , and each one of them seems to me an antique memory . '' 
`` Moire antique ! '' 
exclaimed the old gentleman . 
`` Thanks , Marius . 
That is precisely the idea of which I was in search . '' 
And on the following day , a magnificent dress of tea-rose colored moire antique was added to Cosette 's wedding presents . 
From these fripperies , the grandfather extracted a bit of wisdom . 
`` Love is all very well ; but there must be something else to go with it . 
The useless must be mingled with happiness . 
Happiness is only the necessary . 
Season that enormously with the superfluous for me . 
A palace and her heart . 
Her heart and the Louvre . 
Her heart and the grand waterworks of Versailles . 
Give me my shepherdess and try to make her a duchess . 
Fetch me Phyllis crowned with corn-flowers , and add a hundred thousand francs income . 
Open for me a bucolic perspective as far as you can see , beneath a marble colonnade . 
I consent to the bucolic and also to the fairy spectacle of marble and gold . 
Dry happiness resembles dry bread . 
One eats , but one does not dine . 
I want the superfluous , the useless , the extravagant , excess , that which serves no purpose . 
I remember to have seen , in the Cathedral of Strasburg , a clock , as tall as a three-story house which marked the hours , which had the kindness to indicate the hour , but which had not the air of being made for that ; and which , after having struck midday , or midnight , -- midday , the hour of the sun , or midnight , the hour of love , -- or any other hour that you like , gave you the moon and the stars , the earth and the sea , birds and fishes , Phoebus and Phoebe , and a host of things which emerged from a niche , and the twelve apostles , and the Emperor Charles the Fifth , and Eponine , and Sabinus , and a throng of little gilded goodmen , who played on the trumpet to boot . 
Without reckoning delicious chimes which it sprinkled through the air , on every occasion , without any one 's knowing why . 
Is a petty bald clock-face which merely tells the hour equal to that ? 
For my part , I am of the opinion of the big clock of Strasburg , and I prefer it to the cuckoo clock from the Black Forest . '' 
M. Gillenormand talked nonsense in connection with the wedding , and all the fripperies of the eighteenth century passed pell-mell through his dithyrambs . 
`` You are ignorant of the art of festivals . 
You do not know how to organize a day of enjoyment in this age , '' he exclaimed . 
`` Your nineteenth century is weak . 
It lacks excess . 
It ignores the rich , it ignores the noble . 
In everything it is clean-shaven . 
Your third estate is insipid , colorless , odorless , and shapeless . 
The dreams of your bourgeois who set up , as they express it : a pretty boudoir freshly decorated , violet , ebony and calico . 
Make way ! 
Make way ! 
the Sieur Curmudgeon is marrying Mademoiselle Clutch-penny . 
