The writing had been printed off on the blotter . 
The mirror reflected the writing . 
The result was , what is called in geometry , the symmetrical image ; so that the writing , reversed on the blotter , was righted in the mirror and presented its natural appearance ; and Jean Valjean had beneath his eyes the letter written by Cosette to Marius on the preceding evening . 
It was simple and withering . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to the mirror . 
He read the four lines again , but he did not believe them . 
They produced on him the effect of appearing in a flash of lightning . 
It was a hallucination , it was impossible . 
It was not so . 
Little by little , his perceptions became more precise ; he looked at Cosette 's blotting-book , and the consciousness of the reality returned to him . 
He caught up the blotter and said : `` It comes from there . '' 
He feverishly examined the four lines imprinted on the blotter , the reversal of the letters converted into an odd scrawl , and he saw no sense in it . 
Then he said to himself : `` But this signifies nothing ; there is nothing written here . '' 
And he drew a long breath with inexpressible relief . 
Who has not experienced those foolish joys in horrible instants ? 
The soul does not surrender to despair until it has exhausted all illusions . 
He held the blotter in his hand and contemplated it in stupid delight , almost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been the dupe . 
All at once his eyes fell upon the mirror again , and again he beheld the vision . 
There were the four lines outlined with inexorable clearness . 
This time it was no mirage . 
The recurrence of a vision is a reality ; it was palpable , it was the writing restored in the mirror . 
He understood . 
Jean Valjean tottered , dropped the blotter , and fell into the old arm-chair beside the buffet , with drooping head , and glassy eyes , in utter bewilderment . 
He told himself that it was plain , that the light of the world had been eclipsed forever , and that Cosette had written that to some one . 
Then he heard his soul , which had become terrible once more , give vent to a dull roar in the gloom . 
Try then the effect of taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage ! 
Strange and sad to say , at that very moment , Marius had not yet received Cosette 's letter ; chance had treacherously carried it to Jean Valjean before delivering it to Marius . 
Up to that day , Jean Valjean had not been vanquished by trial . 
He had been subjected to fearful proofs ; no violence of bad fortune had been spared him ; the ferocity of fate , armed with all vindictiveness and all social scorn , had taken him for her prey and had raged against him . 
He had accepted every extremity when it had been necessary ; he had sacrificed his inviolability as a reformed man , had yielded up his liberty , risked his head , lost everything , suffered everything , and he had remained disinterested and stoical to such a point that he might have been thought to be absent from himself like a martyr . 
His conscience inured to every assault of destiny , might have appeared to be forever impregnable . 
Well , any one who had beheld his spiritual self would have been obliged to concede that it weakened at that moment . 
It was because , of all the tortures which he had undergone in the course of this long inquisition to which destiny had doomed him , this was the most terrible . 
Never had such pincers seized him hitherto . 
He felt the mysterious stirring of all his latent sensibilities . 
He felt the plucking at the strange chord . 
Alas ! 
the supreme trial , let us say rather , the only trial , is the loss of the beloved being . 
Poor old Jean Valjean certainly did not love Cosette otherwise than as a father ; but we have already remarked , above , that into this paternity the widowhood of his life had introduced all the shades of love ; he loved Cosette as his daughter , and he loved her as his mother , and he loved her as his sister ; and , as he had never had either a woman to love or a wife , as nature is a creditor who accepts no protest , that sentiment also , the most impossible to lose , was mingled with the rest , vague , ignorant , pure with the purity of blindness , unconscious , celestial , angelic , divine ; less like a sentiment than like an instinct , less like an instinct than like an imperceptible and invisible but real attraction ; and love , properly speaking , was , in his immense tenderness for Cosette , like the thread of gold in the mountain , concealed and virgin . 
Let the reader recall the situation of heart which we have already indicated . 
No marriage was possible between them ; not even that of souls ; and yet , it is certain that their destinies were wedded . 
With the exception of Cosette , that is to say , with the exception of a childhood , Jean Valjean had never , in the whole of his long life , known anything of that which may be loved . 
The passions and loves which succeed each other had not produced in him those successive green growths , tender green or dark green , which can be seen in foliage which passes through the winter and in men who pass fifty . 
In short , and we have insisted on it more than once , all this interior fusion , all this whole , of which the sum total was a lofty virtue , ended in rendering Jean Valjean a father to Cosette . 
A strange father , forged from the grandfather , the son , the brother , and the husband , that existed in Jean Valjean ; a father in whom there was included even a mother ; a father who loved Cosette and adored her , and who held that child as his light , his home , his family , his country , his paradise . 
Thus when he saw that the end had absolutely come , that she was escaping from him , that she was slipping from his hands , that she was gliding from him , like a cloud , like water , when he had before his eyes this crushing proof : `` another is the goal of her heart , another is the wish of her life ; there is a dearest one , I am no longer anything but her father , I no longer exist '' ; when he could no longer doubt , when he said to himself : `` She is going away from me ! '' 
the grief which he felt surpassed the bounds of possibility . 
To have done all that he had done for the purpose of ending like this ! 
And the very idea of being nothing ! 
Then , as we have just said , a quiver of revolt ran through him from head to foot . 
He felt , even in the very roots of his hair , the immense reawakening of egotism , and the I in this man 's abyss howled . 
There is such a thing as the sudden giving way of the inward subsoil . 
A despairing certainty does not make its way into a man without thrusting aside and breaking certain profound elements which , in some cases , are the very man himself . 
Grief , when it attains this shape , is a headlong flight of all the forces of the conscience . 
These are fatal crises . 
Few among us emerge from them still like ourselves and firm in duty . 
When the limit of endurance is overstepped , the most imperturbable virtue is disconcerted . 
Jean Valjean took the blotter again , and convinced himself afresh ; he remained bowed and as though petrified and with staring eyes , over those four unobjectionable lines ; and there arose within him such a cloud that one might have thought that everything in this soul was crumbling away . 
He examined this revelation , athwart the exaggerations of revery , with an apparent and terrifying calmness , for it is a fearful thing when a man 's calmness reaches the coldness of the statue . 
He measured the terrible step which his destiny had taken without his having a suspicion of the fact ; he recalled his fears of the preceding summer , so foolishly dissipated ; he recognized the precipice , it was still the same ; only , Jean Valjean was no longer on the brink , he was at the bottom of it . 
The unprecedented and heart-rending thing about it was that he had fallen without perceiving it . 
All the light of his life had departed , while he still fancied that he beheld the sun . 
His instinct did not hesitate . 
He put together certain circumstances , certain dates , certain blushes and certain pallors on Cosette 's part , and he said to himself : `` It is he . '' 
The divination of despair is a sort of mysterious bow which never misses its aim . 
He struck Marius with his first conjecture . 
He did not know the name , but he found the man instantly . 
He distinctly perceived , in the background of the implacable conjuration of his memories , the unknown prowler of the Luxembourg , that wretched seeker of love adventures , that idler of romance , that idiot , that coward , for it is cowardly to come and make eyes at young girls who have beside them a father who loves them . 
After he had thoroughly verified the fact that this young man was at the bottom of this situation , and that everything proceeded from that quarter , he , Jean Valjean , the regenerated man , the man who had so labored over his soul , the man who had made so many efforts to resolve all life , all misery , and all unhappiness into love , looked into his own breast and there beheld a spectre , Hate . 
Great griefs contain something of dejection . 
They discourage one with existence . 
The man into whom they enter feels something within him withdraw from him . 
In his youth , their visits are lugubrious ; later on they are sinister . 
Alas , if despair is a fearful thing when the blood is hot , when the hair is black , when the head is erect on the body like the flame on the torch , when the roll of destiny still retains its full thickness , when the heart , full of desirable love , still possesses beats which can be returned to it , when one has time for redress , when all women and all smiles and all the future and all the horizon are before one , when the force of life is complete , what is it in old age , when the years hasten on , growing ever paler , to that twilight hour when one begins to behold the stars of the tomb ? 
While he was meditating , Toussaint entered . 
Jean Valjean rose and asked her : -- `` In what quarter is it ? 
Do you know ? '' 
Toussaint was struck dumb , and could only answer him : -- `` What is it , sir ? '' 
Jean Valjean began again : `` Did you not tell me that just now that there is fighting going on ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , sir , '' replied Toussaint . 
`` It is in the direction of Saint-Merry . '' 
There is a mechanical movement which comes to us , unconsciously , from the most profound depths of our thought . 
It was , no doubt , under the impulse of a movement of this sort , and of which he was hardly conscious , that Jean Valjean , five minutes later , found himself in the street . 
Bareheaded , he sat upon the stone post at the door of his house . 
He seemed to be listening . 
Night had come . 
THE STREET URCHIN AN ENEMY OF LIGHT How long did he remain thus ? 
What was the ebb and flow of this tragic meditation ? 
Did he straighten up ? 
Did he remain bowed ? 
Had he been bent to breaking ? 
Could he still rise and regain his footing in his conscience upon something solid ? 
He probably would not have been able to tell himself . 
The street was deserted . 
A few uneasy bourgeois , who were rapidly returning home , hardly saw him . 
Each one for himself in times of peril . 
The lamp-lighter came as usual to light the lantern which was situated precisely opposite the door of No. 7 , and then went away . 
Jean Valjean would not have appeared like a living man to any one who had examined him in that shadow . 
He sat there on the post of his door , motionless as a form of ice . 
