-- Alas , the poor child had done nothing ; there had been but one culprit , the wind ; but Marius , in whom quivered the Bartholo who exists in Cherubin , was determined to be vexed , and was jealous of his own shadow . 
It is thus , in fact , that the harsh and capricious jealousy of the flesh awakens in the human heart , and takes possession of it , even without any right . 
Moreover , setting aside even that jealousy , the sight of that charming leg had contained nothing agreeable for him ; the white stocking of the first woman he chanced to meet would have afforded him more pleasure . 
When `` his Ursule , '' after having reached the end of the walk , retraced her steps with M. Leblanc , and passed in front of the bench on which Marius had seated himself once more , Marius darted a sullen and ferocious glance at her . 
The young girl gave way to that slight straightening up with a backward movement , accompanied by a raising of the eyelids , which signifies : `` Well , what is the matter ? '' 
This was `` their first quarrel . '' 
Marius had hardly made this scene at her with his eyes , when some one crossed the walk . 
It was a veteran , very much bent , extremely wrinkled , and pale , in a uniform of the Louis XV . 
pattern , bearing on his breast the little oval plaque of red cloth , with the crossed swords , the soldier 's cross of Saint-Louis , and adorned , in addition , with a coat-sleeve , which had no arm within it , with a silver chin and a wooden leg . 
Marius thought he perceived that this man had an extremely well satisfied air . 
It even struck him that the aged cynic , as he hobbled along past him , addressed to him a very fraternal and very merry wink , as though some chance had created an understanding between them , and as though they had shared some piece of good luck together . 
What did that relic of Mars mean by being so contented ? 
What had passed between that wooden leg and the other ? 
Marius reached a paroxysm of jealousy . 
-- `` Perhaps he was there ! '' 
he said to himself ; `` perhaps he saw ! '' 
-- And he felt a desire to exterminate the veteran . 
With the aid of time , all points grow dull . 
Marius ' wrath against `` Ursule , '' just and legitimate as it was , passed off . 
He finally pardoned her ; but this cost him a great effort ; he sulked for three days . 
Nevertheless , in spite of all this , and because of all this , his passion augmented and grew to madness . 
ECLIPSE The reader has just seen how Marius discovered , or thought that he discovered , that She was named Ursule . 
Appetite grows with loving . 
To know that her name was Ursule was a great deal ; it was very little . 
In three or four weeks , Marius had devoured this bliss . 
He wanted another . 
He wanted to know where she lived . 
He had committed his first blunder , by falling into the ambush of the bench by the Gladiator . 
He had committed a second , by not remaining at the Luxembourg when M. Leblanc came thither alone . 
He now committed a third , and an immense one . 
He followed `` Ursule . '' 
She lived in the Rue de l'Ouest , in the most unfrequented spot , in a new , three-story house , of modest appearance . 
From that moment forth , Marius added to his happiness of seeing her at the Luxembourg the happiness of following her home . 
His hunger was increasing . 
He knew her first name , at least , a charming name , a genuine woman 's name ; he knew where she lived ; he wanted to know who she was . 
One evening , after he had followed them to their dwelling , and had seen them disappear through the carriage gate , he entered in their train and said boldly to the porter : -- `` Is that the gentleman who lives on the first floor , who has just come in ? '' 
`` No , '' replied the porter . 
`` He is the gentleman on the third floor . '' 
Another step gained . 
This success emboldened Marius . 
`` On the front ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
said the porter , `` the house is only built on the street . '' 
`` And what is that gentleman 's business ? '' 
began Marius again . 
`` He is a gentleman of property , sir . 
A very kind man who does good to the unfortunate , though not rich himself . '' 
`` What is his name ? '' 
resumed Marius . 
The porter raised his head and said : -- `` Are you a police spy , sir ? '' 
Marius went off quite abashed , but delighted . 
He was getting on . 
`` Good , '' thought he , `` I know that her name is Ursule , that she is the daughter of a gentleman who lives on his income , and that she lives there , on the third floor , in the Rue de l'Ouest . '' 
On the following day , M. Leblanc and his daughter made only a very brief stay in the Luxembourg ; they went away while it was still broad daylight . 
Marius followed them to the Rue de l'Ouest , as he had taken up the habit of doing . 
On arriving at the carriage entrance M. Leblanc made his daughter pass in first , then paused , before crossing the threshold , and stared intently at Marius . 
On the next day they did not come to the Luxembourg . 
Marius waited for them all day in vain . 
At nightfall , he went to the Rue de l'Ouest , and saw a light in the windows of the third story . 
He walked about beneath the windows until the light was extinguished . 
The next day , no one at the Luxembourg . 
Marius waited all day , then went and did sentinel duty under their windows . 
This carried him on to ten o'clock in the evening . 
His dinner took care of itself . 
Fever nourishes the sick man , and love the lover . 
He spent a week in this manner . 
M. Leblanc no longer appeared at the Luxembourg . 
Marius indulged in melancholy conjectures ; he dared not watch the porte cochere during the day ; he contented himself with going at night to gaze upon the red light of the windows . 
At times he saw shadows flit across them , and his heart began to beat . 
On the eighth day , when he arrived under the windows , there was no light in them . 
`` Hello ! '' 
he said , `` the lamp is not lighted yet . 
But it is dark . 
Can they have gone out ? '' 
He waited until ten o'clock . 
Until midnight . 
Until one in the morning . 
Not a light appeared in the windows of the third story , and no one entered the house . 
He went away in a very gloomy frame of mind . 
On the morrow , -- for he only existed from morrow to morrow , there was , so to speak , no to-day for him , -- on the morrow , he found no one at the Luxembourg ; he had expected this . 
At dusk , he went to the house . 
No light in the windows ; the shades were drawn ; the third floor was totally dark . 
Marius rapped at the porte cochere , entered , and said to the porter : -- `` The gentleman on the third floor ? '' 
`` Has moved away , '' replied the porter . 
Marius reeled and said feebly : -- `` How long ago ? '' 
`` Yesterday . '' 
`` Where is he living now ? '' 
`` I do n't know anything about it . '' 
`` So he has not left his new address ? '' 
`` No . '' 
And the porter , raising his eyes , recognized Marius . 
`` Come ! 
So it 's you ! '' 
said he ; `` but you are decidedly a spy then ? '' 
BOOK SEVENTH . 
-- PATRON MINETTE MINES AND MINERS Human societies all have what is called in theatrical parlance , a third lower floor . 
The social soil is everywhere undermined , sometimes for good , sometimes for evil . 
These works are superposed one upon the other . 
There are superior mines and inferior mines . 
