Jean Valjean lay there pallid and motionless . 
Fauchelevent murmured in a voice as faint as a sigh : -- `` He is dead ! '' 
And , drawing himself up , and folding his arms with such violence that his clenched fists came in contact with his shoulders , he cried : -- `` And this is the way I save his life ! '' 
Then the poor man fell to sobbing . 
He soliloquized the while , for it is an error to suppose that the soliloquy is unnatural . 
Powerful emotion often talks aloud . 
`` It is Father Mestienne 's fault . 
Why did that fool die ? 
What need was there for him to give up the ghost at the very moment when no one was expecting it ? 
It is he who has killed M. Madeleine . 
Father Madeleine ! 
He is in the coffin . 
It is quite handy . 
All is over . 
Now , is there any sense in these things ? 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
he is dead ! 
Well ! 
and his little girl , what am I to do with her ? 
What will the fruit-seller say ? 
The idea of its being possible for a man like that to die like this ! 
When I think how he put himself under that cart ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
Pardine ! 
He was suffocated , I said so . 
He would n't believe me . 
Well ! 
Here 's a pretty trick to play ! 
He is dead , that good man , the very best man out of all the good God 's good folks ! 
And his little girl ! 
Ah ! 
In the first place , I wo n't go back there myself . 
I shall stay here . 
After having done such a thing as that ! 
What 's the use of being two old men , if we are two old fools ! 
But , in the first place , how did he manage to enter the convent ? 
That was the beginning of it all . 
One should not do such things . 
Father Madeleine ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
Madeleine ! 
Monsieur Madeleine ! 
Monsieur le Maire ! 
He does not hear me . 
Now get out of this scrape if you can ! '' 
And he tore his hair . 
A grating sound became audible through the trees in the distance . 
It was the cemetery gate closing . 
Fauchelevent bent over Jean Valjean , and all at once he bounded back and recoiled so far as the limits of a grave permit . 
Jean Valjean 's eyes were open and gazing at him . 
To see a corpse is alarming , to behold a resurrection is almost as much so . 
Fauchelevent became like stone , pale , haggard , overwhelmed by all these excesses of emotion , not knowing whether he had to do with a living man or a dead one , and staring at Jean Valjean , who was gazing at him . 
`` I fell asleep , '' said Jean Valjean . 
And he raised himself to a sitting posture . 
Fauchelevent fell on his knees . 
`` Just , good Virgin ! 
How you frightened me ! '' 
Then he sprang to his feet and cried : -- `` Thanks , Father Madeleine ! '' 
Jean Valjean had merely fainted . 
The fresh air had revived him . 
Joy is the ebb of terror . 
Fauchelevent found almost as much difficulty in recovering himself as Jean Valjean had . 
`` So you are not dead ! 
Oh ! 
How wise you are ! 
I called you so much that you came back . 
When I saw your eyes shut , I said : ` Good ! 
there he is , stifled , ' I should have gone raving mad , mad enough for a strait jacket . 
They would have put me in Bicetre . 
What do you suppose I should have done if you had been dead ? 
And your little girl ? 
There 's that fruit-seller , -- she would never have understood it ! 
The child is thrust into your arms , and then -- the grandfather is dead ! 
What a story ! 
good saints of paradise , what a tale ! 
Ah ! 
you are alive , that 's the best of it ! '' 
`` I am cold , '' said Jean Valjean . 
This remark recalled Fauchelevent thoroughly to reality , and there was pressing need of it . 
The souls of these two men were troubled even when they had recovered themselves , although they did not realize it , and there was about them something uncanny , which was the sinister bewilderment inspired by the place . 
`` Let us get out of here quickly , '' exclaimed Fauchelevent . 
He fumbled in his pocket , and pulled out a gourd with which he had provided himself . 
`` But first , take a drop , '' said he . 
The flask finished what the fresh air had begun , Jean Valjean swallowed a mouthful of brandy , and regained full possession of his faculties . 
He got out of the coffin , and helped Fauchelevent to nail on the lid again . 
Three minutes later they were out of the grave . 
Moreover , Fauchelevent was perfectly composed . 
He took his time . 
The cemetery was closed . 
The arrival of the grave-digger Gribier was not to be apprehended . 
That `` conscript '' was at home busily engaged in looking for his card , and at some difficulty in finding it in his lodgings , since it was in Fauchelevent 's pocket . 
Without a card , he could not get back into the cemetery . 
Fauchelevent took the shovel , and Jean Valjean the pick-axe , and together they buried the empty coffin . 
When the grave was full , Fauchelevent said to Jean Valjean : -- `` Let us go . 
I will keep the shovel ; do you carry off the mattock . '' 
Night was falling . 
Jean Valjean experienced rome difficulty in moving and in walking . 
