They are giving themselves a sad malady ; they are inoculating themselves with the past . 
There is but one way of rejecting To-morrow , and that is to die . 
Now , no death , that of the body as late as possible , that of the soul never , -- this is what we desire . 
Yes , the enigma will utter its word , the sphinx will speak , the problem will be solved . 
Yes , the people , sketched out by the eighteenth century , will be finished by the nineteenth . 
He who doubts this is an idiot ! 
The future blossoming , the near blossoming forth of universal well-being , is a divinely fatal phenomenon . 
Immense combined propulsions direct human affairs and conduct them within a given time to a logical state , that is to say , to a state of equilibrium ; that is to say , to equity . 
A force composed of earth and heaven results from humanity and governs it ; this force is a worker of miracles ; marvellous issues are no more difficult to it than extraordinary vicissitudes . 
Aided by science , which comes from one man , and by the event , which comes from another , it is not greatly alarmed by these contradictions in the attitude of problems , which seem impossibilities to the vulgar herd . 
It is no less skilful at causing a solution to spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas , than a lesson from the reconciliation of facts , and we may expect anything from that mysterious power of progress , which brought the Orient and the Occident face to face one fine day , in the depths of a sepulchre , and made the imaums converse with Bonaparte in the interior of the Great Pyramid . 
In the meantime , let there be no halt , no hesitation , no pause in the grandiose onward march of minds . 
Social philosophy consists essentially in science and peace . 
Its object is , and its result must be , to dissolve wrath by the study of antagonisms . 
It examines , it scrutinizes , it analyzes ; then it puts together once more , it proceeds by means of reduction , discarding all hatred . 
More than once , a society has been seen to give way before the wind which is let loose upon mankind ; history is full of the shipwrecks of nations and empires ; manners , customs , laws , religions , -- and some fine day that unknown force , the hurricane , passes by and bears them all away . 
The civilizations of India , of Chaldea , of Persia , of Syria , of Egypt , have disappeared one after the other . 
Why ? 
We know not . 
What are the causes of these disasters ? 
We do not know . 
Could these societies have been saved ? 
Was it their fault ? 
Did they persist in the fatal vice which destroyed them ? 
What is the amount of suicide in these terrible deaths of a nation and a race ? 
Questions to which there exists no reply . 
Darkness enwraps condemned civilizations . 
They sprung a leak , then they sank . 
We have nothing more to say ; and it is with a sort of terror that we look on , at the bottom of that sea which is called the past , behind those colossal waves , at the shipwreck of those immense vessels , Babylon , Nineveh , Tarsus , Thebes , Rome , beneath the fearful gusts which emerge from all the mouths of the shadows . 
But shadows are there , and light is here . 
We are not acquainted with the maladies of these ancient civilizations , we do not know the infirmities of our own . 
Everywhere upon it we have the right of light , we contemplate its beauties , we lay bare its defects . 
Where it is ill , we probe ; and the sickness once diagnosed , the study of the cause leads to the discovery of the remedy . 
Our civilization , the work of twenty centuries , is its law and its prodigy ; it is worth the trouble of saving . 
It will be saved . 
It is already much to have solaced it ; its enlightenment is yet another point . 
All the labors of modern social philosophies must converge towards this point . 
The thinker of to-day has a great duty -- to auscultate civilization . 
We repeat , that this auscultation brings encouragement ; it is by this persistence in encouragement that we wish to conclude these pages , an austere interlude in a mournful drama . 
Beneath the social mortality , we feel human imperishableness . 
The globe does not perish , because it has these wounds , craters , eruptions , sulphur pits , here and there , nor because of a volcano which ejects its pus . 
The maladies of the people do not kill man . 
And yet , any one who follows the course of social clinics shakes his head at times . 
The strongest , the tenderest , the most logical have their hours of weakness . 
Will the future arrive ? 
It seems as though we might almost put this question , when we behold so much terrible darkness . 
Melancholy face-to-face encounter of selfish and wretched . 
On the part of the selfish , the prejudices , shadows of costly education , appetite increasing through intoxication , a giddiness of prosperity which dulls , a fear of suffering which , in some , goes as far as an aversion for the suffering , an implacable satisfaction , the I so swollen that it bars the soul ; on the side of the wretched covetousness , envy , hatred of seeing others enjoy , the profound impulses of the human beast towards assuaging its desires , hearts full of mist , sadness , need , fatality , impure and simple ignorance . 
Shall we continue to raise our eyes to heaven ? 
is the luminous point which we distinguish there one of those which vanish ? 
The ideal is frightful to behold , thus lost in the depths , small , isolated , imperceptible , brilliant , but surrounded by those great , black menaces , monstrously heaped around it ; yet no more in danger than a star in the maw of the clouds . 
FULL LIGHT The reader has probably understood that Eponine , having recognized through the gate , the inhabitant of that Rue Plumet whither Magnon had sent her , had begun by keeping the ruffians away from the Rue Plumet , and had then conducted Marius thither , and that , after many days spent in ecstasy before that gate , Marius , drawn on by that force which draws the iron to the magnet and a lover towards the stones of which is built the house of her whom he loves , had finally entered Cosette 's garden as Romeo entered the garden of Juliet . 
This had even proved easier for him than for Romeo ; Romeo was obliged to scale a wall , Marius had only to use a little force on one of the bars of the decrepit gate which vacillated in its rusty recess , after the fashion of old people 's teeth . 
Marius was slender and readily passed through . 
As there was never any one in the street , and as Marius never entered the garden except at night , he ran no risk of being seen . 
Beginning with that blessed and holy hour when a kiss betrothed these two souls , Marius was there every evening . 
If , at that period of her existence , Cosette had fallen in love with a man in the least unscrupulous or debauched , she would have been lost ; for there are generous natures which yield themselves , and Cosette was one of them . 
One of woman 's magnanimities is to yield . 
Love , at the height where it is absolute , is complicated with some indescribably celestial blindness of modesty . 
But what dangers you run , O noble souls ! 
Often you give the heart , and we take the body . 
Your heart remains with you , you gaze upon it in the gloom with a shudder . 
Love has no middle course ; it either ruins or it saves . 
All human destiny lies in this dilemma . 
This dilemma , ruin , or safety , is set forth no more inexorably by any fatality than by love . 
Love is life , if it is not death . 
Cradle ; also coffin . 
The same sentiment says `` yes '' and `` no '' in the human heart . 
Of all the things that God has made , the human heart is the one which sheds the most light , alas ! 
and the most darkness . 
God willed that Cosette 's love should encounter one of the loves which save . 
Throughout the whole of the month of May of that year 1832 , there were there , in every night , in that poor , neglected garden , beneath that thicket which grew thicker and more fragrant day by day , two beings composed of all chastity , all innocence , overflowing with all the felicity of heaven , nearer to the archangels than to mankind , pure , honest , intoxicated , radiant , who shone for each other amid the shadows . 
It seemed to Cosette that Marius had a crown , and to Marius that Cosette had a nimbus . 
They touched each other , they gazed at each other , they clasped each other 's hands , they pressed close to each other ; but there was a distance which they did not pass . 
Not that they respected it ; they did not know of its existence . 
Marius was conscious of a barrier , Cosette 's innocence ; and Cosette of a support , Marius ' loyalty . 
The first kiss had also been the last . 
Marius , since that time , had not gone further than to touch Cosette 's hand , or her kerchief , or a lock of her hair , with his lips . 
For him , Cosette was a perfume and not a woman . 
He inhaled her . 
She refused nothing , and he asked nothing . 
Cosette was happy , and Marius was satisfied . 
They lived in this ecstatic state which can be described as the dazzling of one soul by another soul . 
It was the ineffable first embrace of two maiden souls in the ideal . 
Two swans meeting on the Jungfrau . 
At that hour of love , an hour when voluptuousness is absolutely mute , beneath the omnipotence of ecstasy , Marius , the pure and seraphic Marius , would rather have gone to a woman of the town than have raised Cosette 's robe to the height of her ankle . 
Once , in the moonlight , Cosette stooped to pick up something on the ground , her bodice fell apart and permitted a glimpse of the beginning of her throat . 
Marius turned away his eyes . 
What took place between these two beings ? 
Nothing . 
They adored each other . 
At night , when they were there , that garden seemed a living and a sacred spot . 
All flowers unfolded around them and sent them incense ; and they opened their souls and scattered them over the flowers . 
The wanton and vigorous vegetation quivered , full of strength and intoxication , around these two innocents , and they uttered words of love which set the trees to trembling . 
What words were these ? 
Breaths . 
Nothing more . 
These breaths sufficed to trouble and to touch all nature round about . 
Magic power which we should find it difficult to understand were we to read in a book these conversations which are made to be borne away and dispersed like smoke wreaths by the breeze beneath the leaves . 
Take from those murmurs of two lovers that melody which proceeds from the soul and which accompanies them like a lyre , and what remains is nothing more than a shade ; you say : `` What ! 
