`` Go away , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' resumed the child , `` give me back my money . '' 
Jean Valjean dropped his head , and made no reply . 
The child began again , `` My money , sir . '' 
Jean Valjean 's eyes remained fixed on the earth . 
`` My piece of money ! '' 
cried the child , `` my white piece ! 
my silver ! '' 
It seemed as though Jean Valjean did not hear him . 
The child grasped him by the collar of his blouse and shook him . 
At the same time he made an effort to displace the big iron-shod shoe which rested on his treasure . 
`` I want my piece of money ! 
my piece of forty sous ! '' 
The child wept . 
Jean Valjean raised his head . 
He still remained seated . 
His eyes were troubled . 
He gazed at the child , in a sort of amazement , then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a terrible voice , `` Who 's there ? '' 
`` I , sir , '' replied the child . 
`` Little Gervais ! 
I ! 
Give me back my forty sous , if you please ! 
Take your foot away , sir , if you please ! '' 
Then irritated , though he was so small , and becoming almost menacing : -- `` Come now , will you take your foot away ? 
Take your foot away , or we 'll see ! '' 
`` Ah ! 
It 's still you ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , and rising abruptly to his feet , his foot still resting on the silver piece , he added : -- `` Will you take yourself off ! '' 
The frightened child looked at him , then began to tremble from head to foot , and after a few moments of stupor he set out , running at the top of his speed , without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry . 
Nevertheless , lack of breath forced him to halt after a certain distance , and Jean Valjean heard him sobbing , in the midst of his own revery . 
At the end of a few moments the child had disappeared . 
The sun had set . 
The shadows were descending around Jean Valjean . 
He had eaten nothing all day ; it is probable that he was feverish . 
He had remained standing and had not changed his attitude after the child 's flight . 
The breath heaved his chest at long and irregular intervals . 
His gaze , fixed ten or twelve paces in front of him , seemed to be scrutinizing with profound attention the shape of an ancient fragment of blue earthenware which had fallen in the grass . 
All at once he shivered ; he had just begun to feel the chill of evening . 
He settled his cap more firmly on his brow , sought mechanically to cross and button his blouse , advanced a step and stopped to pick up his cudgel . 
At that moment he caught sight of the forty-sou piece , which his foot had half ground into the earth , and which was shining among the pebbles . 
It was as though he had received a galvanic shock . 
`` What is this ? '' 
he muttered between his teeth . 
He recoiled three paces , then halted , without being able to detach his gaze from the spot which his foot had trodden but an instant before , as though the thing which lay glittering there in the gloom had been an open eye riveted upon him . 
At the expiration of a few moments he darted convulsively towards the silver coin , seized it , and straightened himself up again and began to gaze afar off over the plain , at the same time casting his eyes towards all points of the horizon , as he stood there erect and shivering , like a terrified wild animal which is seeking refuge . 
He saw nothing . 
Night was falling , the plain was cold and vague , great banks of violet haze were rising in the gleam of the twilight . 
He said , `` Ah ! '' 
and set out rapidly in the direction in which the child had disappeared . 
After about thirty paces he paused , looked about him and saw nothing . 
Then he shouted with all his might : -- `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
He paused and waited . 
There was no reply . 
The landscape was gloomy and deserted . 
He was encompassed by space . 
There was nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze was lost , and a silence which engulfed his voice . 
An icy north wind was blowing , and imparted to things around him a sort of lugubrious life . 
The bushes shook their thin little arms with incredible fury . 
One would have said that they were threatening and pursuing some one . 
He set out on his march again , then he began to run ; and from time to time he halted and shouted into that solitude , with a voice which was the most formidable and the most disconsolate that it was possible to hear , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
Assuredly , if the child had heard him , he would have been alarmed and would have taken good care not to show himself . 
But the child was no doubt already far away . 
He encountered a priest on horseback . 
He stepped up to him and said : -- `` Monsieur le Cure , have you seen a child pass ? '' 
`` No , '' said the priest . 
`` One named Little Gervais ? '' 
`` I have seen no one . '' 
He drew two five-franc pieces from his money-bag and handed them to the priest . 
`` Monsieur le Cure , this is for your poor people . 
Monsieur le Cure , he was a little lad , about ten years old , with a marmot , I think , and a hurdy-gurdy . 
One of those Savoyards , you know ? '' 
`` I have not seen him . '' 
`` Little Gervais ? 
There are no villages here ? 
Can you tell me ? '' 
`` If he is like what you say , my friend , he is a little stranger . 
Such persons pass through these parts . 
We know nothing of them . '' 
Jean Valjean seized two more coins of five francs each with violence , and gave them to the priest . 
`` For your poor , '' he said . 
Then he added , wildly : -- `` Monsieur l'Abbe , have me arrested . 
I am a thief . '' 
The priest put spurs to his horse and fled in haste , much alarmed . 
Jean Valjean set out on a run , in the direction which he had first taken . 
In this way he traversed a tolerably long distance , gazing , calling , shouting , but he met no one . 
Two or three times he ran across the plain towards something which conveyed to him the effect of a human being reclining or crouching down ; it turned out to be nothing but brushwood or rocks nearly on a level with the earth . 
At length , at a spot where three paths intersected each other , he stopped . 
The moon had risen . 
He sent his gaze into the distance and shouted for the last time , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
His shout died away in the mist , without even awakening an echo . 
He murmured yet once more , `` Little Gervais ! '' 
but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice . 
It was his last effort ; his legs gave way abruptly under him , as though an invisible power had suddenly overwhelmed him with the weight of his evil conscience ; he fell exhausted , on a large stone , his fists clenched in his hair and his face on his knees , and he cried , `` I am a wretch ! '' 
Then his heart burst , and he began to cry . 
It was the first time that he had wept in nineteen years . 
When Jean Valjean left the Bishop 's house , he was , as we have seen , quite thrown out of everything that had been his thought hitherto . 
