This is a theft . 
`` Seventhly : for a broken thread ten sous are withheld in the weaving shop ; this is an abuse of the contractor , since the cloth is none the worse for it . 
`` Eighthly : it is annoying for visitors to La Force to be obliged to traverse the boys ' court in order to reach the parlor of Sainte-Marie-l'Egyptienne . 
`` Ninthly : it is a fact that any day gendarmes can be overheard relating in the court-yard of the prefecture the interrogations put by the magistrates to prisoners . 
For a gendarme , who should be sworn to secrecy , to repeat what he has heard in the examination room is a grave disorder . 
`` Tenthly : Mme. Henry is an honest woman ; her canteen is very neat ; but it is bad to have a woman keep the wicket to the mouse-trap of the secret cells . 
This is unworthy of the Conciergerie of a great civilization . '' 
Javert wrote these lines in his calmest and most correct chirography , not omitting a single comma , and making the paper screech under his pen . 
Below the last line he signed : `` JAVERT , `` Inspector of the 1st class . 
`` The Post of the Place du Chatelet . 
`` June 7th , 1832 , about one o'clock in the morning . '' 
Javert dried the fresh ink on the paper , folded it like a letter , sealed it , wrote on the back : Note for the administration , left it on the table , and quitted the post . 
The glazed and grated door fell to behind him . 
Again he traversed the Place du Chatelet diagonally , regained the quay , and returned with automatic precision to the very point which he had abandoned a quarter of an hour previously , leaned on his elbows and found himself again in the same attitude on the same paving-stone of the parapet . 
He did not appear to have stirred . 
The darkness was complete . 
It was the sepulchral moment which follows midnight . 
A ceiling of clouds concealed the stars . 
Not a single light burned in the houses of the city ; no one was passing ; all of the streets and quays which could be seen were deserted ; Notre-Dame and the towers of the Court-House seemed features of the night . 
A street lantern reddened the margin of the quay . 
The outlines of the bridges lay shapeless in the mist one behind the other . 
Recent rains had swollen the river . 
The spot where Javert was leaning was , it will be remembered , situated precisely over the rapids of the Seine , perpendicularly above that formidable spiral of whirlpools which loose and knot themselves again like an endless screw . 
Javert bent his head and gazed . 
All was black . 
Nothing was to be distinguished . 
A sound of foam was audible ; but the river could not be seen . 
At moments , in that dizzy depth , a gleam of light appeared , and undulated vaguely , water possessing the power of taking light , no one knows whence , and converting it into a snake . 
The light vanished , and all became indistinct once more . 
Immensity seemed thrown open there . 
What lay below was not water , it was a gulf . 
The wall of the quay , abrupt , confused , mingled with the vapors , instantly concealed from sight , produced the effect of an escarpment of the infinite . 
Nothing was to be seen , but the hostile chill of the water and the stale odor of the wet stones could be felt . 
A fierce breath rose from this abyss . 
The flood in the river , divined rather than perceived , the tragic whispering of the waves , the melancholy vastness of the arches of the bridge , the imaginable fall into that gloomy void , into all that shadow was full of horror . 
Javert remained motionless for several minutes , gazing at this opening of shadow ; he considered the invisible with a fixity that resembled attention . 
The water roared . 
All at once he took off his hat and placed it on the edge of the quay . 
A moment later , a tall black figure , which a belated passer-by in the distance might have taken for a phantom , appeared erect upon the parapet of the quay , bent over towards the Seine , then drew itself up again , and fell straight down into the shadows ; a dull splash followed ; and the shadow alone was in the secret of the convulsions of that obscure form which had disappeared beneath the water . 
IN WHICH THE TREE WITH THE ZINC PLASTER APPEARS AGAIN Some time after the events which we have just recorded , Sieur Boulatruelle experienced a lively emotion . 
Sieur Boulatruelle was that road-mender of Montfermeil whom the reader has already seen in the gloomy parts of this book . 
Boulatruelle , as the reader may , perchance , recall , was a man who was occupied with divers and troublesome matters . 
He broke stones and damaged travellers on the highway . 
Road-mender and thief as he was , he cherished one dream ; he believed in the treasures buried in the forest of Montfermeil . 
He hoped some day to find the money in the earth at the foot of a tree ; in the meanwhile , he lived to search the pockets of passers-by . 
Nevertheless , for an instant , he was prudent . 
He had just escaped neatly . 
He had been , as the reader is aware , picked up in Jondrette 's garret in company with the other ruffians . 
Utility of a vice : his drunkenness had been his salvation . 
The authorities had never been able to make out whether he had been there in the quality of a robber or a man who had been robbed . 
An order of nolle prosequi , founded on his well authenticated state of intoxication on the evening of the ambush , had set him at liberty . 
He had taken to his heels . 
He had returned to his road from Gagny to Lagny , to make , under administrative supervision , broken stone for the good of the state , with downcast mien , in a very pensive mood , his ardor for theft somewhat cooled ; but he was addicted none the less tenderly to the wine which had recently saved him . 
As for the lively emotion which he had experienced a short time after his return to his road-mender 's turf-thatched cot , here it is : One morning , Boulatruelle , while on his way as was his wont , to his work , and possibly also to his ambush , a little before daybreak caught sight , through the branches of the trees , of a man , whose back alone he saw , but the shape of whose shoulders , as it seemed to him at that distance and in the early dusk , was not entirely unfamiliar to him . 
Boulatruelle , although intoxicated , had a correct and lucid memory , a defensive arm that is indispensable to any one who is at all in conflict with legal order . 
`` Where the deuce have I seen something like that man yonder ? '' 
he said to himself . 
But he could make himself no answer , except that the man resembled some one of whom his memory preserved a confused trace . 
However , apart from the identity which he could not manage to catch , Boulatruelle put things together and made calculations . 
This man did not belong in the country-side . 
He had just arrived there . 
On foot , evidently . 
No public conveyance passes through Montfermeil at that hour . 
He had walked all night . 
Whence came he ? 
Not from a very great distance ; for he had neither haversack , nor bundle . 
From Paris , no doubt . 
Why was he in these woods ? 
why was he there at such an hour ? 
what had he come there for ? 
Boulatruelle thought of the treasure . 
By dint of ransacking his memory , he recalled in a vague way that he had already , many years before , had a similar alarm in connection with a man who produced on him the effect that he might well be this very individual . 
`` By the deuce , '' said Boulatruelle , `` I 'll find him again . 
I 'll discover the parish of that parishioner . 
This prowler of Patron-Minette has a reason , and I 'll know it . 
People ca n't have secrets in my forest if I do n't have a finger in the pie . '' 
He took his pick-axe which was very sharply pointed . 
`` There now , '' he grumbled , `` is something that will search the earth and a man . '' 
And , as one knots one thread to another thread , he took up the line of march at his best pace in the direction which the man must follow , and set out across the thickets . 
When he had compassed a hundred strides , the day , which was already beginning to break , came to his assistance . 
Footprints stamped in the sand , weeds trodden down here and there , heather crushed , young branches in the brushwood bent and in the act of straightening themselves up again with the graceful deliberation of the arms of a pretty woman who stretches herself when she wakes , pointed out to him a sort of track . 
He followed it , then lost it . 
Time was flying . 
He plunged deeper into the woods and came to a sort of eminence . 
An early huntsman who was passing in the distance along a path , whistling the air of Guillery , suggested to him the idea of climbing a tree . 
Old as he was , he was agile . 
There stood close at hand a beech-tree of great size , worthy of Tityrus and of Boulatruelle . 
Boulatruelle ascended the beech as high as he was able . 
The idea was a good one . 
On scrutinizing the solitary waste on the side where the forest is thoroughly entangled and wild , Boulatruelle suddenly caught sight of his man . 
Hardly had he got his eye upon him when he lost sight of him . 
The man entered , or rather , glided into , an open glade , at a considerable distance , masked by large trees , but with which Boulatruelle was perfectly familiar , on account of having noticed , near a large pile of porous stones , an ailing chestnut-tree bandaged with a sheet of zinc nailed directly upon the bark . 
This glade was the one which was formerly called the Blaru-bottom . 
The heap of stones , destined for no one knows what employment , which was visible there thirty years ago , is doubtless still there . 
Nothing equals a heap of stones in longevity , unless it is a board fence . 
They are temporary expedients . 
What a reason for lasting ! 
Boulatruelle , with the rapidity of joy , dropped rather than descended from the tree . 
The lair was unearthed , the question now was to seize the beast . 
That famous treasure of his dreams was probably there . 
