The question was about Olympus , whose part was taken by Jean Prouvaire , out of pure romanticism . 
Jean Prouvaire was timid only in repose . 
Once excited , he burst forth , a sort of mirth accentuated his enthusiasm , and he was at once both laughing and lyric . 
`` Let us not insult the gods , '' said he . 
`` The gods may not have taken their departure . 
Jupiter does not impress me as dead . 
The gods are dreams , you say . 
Well , even in nature , such as it is to-day , after the flight of these dreams , we still find all the grand old pagan myths . 
Such and such a mountain with the profile of a citadel , like the Vignemale , for example , is still to me the headdress of Cybele ; it has not been proved to me that Pan does not come at night to breathe into the hollow trunks of the willows , stopping up the holes in turn with his fingers , and I have always believed that Io had something to do with the cascade of Pissevache . '' 
In the last corner , they were talking politics . 
The Charter which had been granted was getting roughly handled . 
Combeferre was upholding it weakly . 
Courfeyrac was energetically making a breach in it . 
On the table lay an unfortunate copy of the famous Touquet Charter . 
Courfeyrac had seized it , and was brandishing it , mingling with his arguments the rattling of this sheet of paper . 
`` In the first place , I wo n't have any kings ; if it were only from an economical point of view , I do n't want any ; a king is a parasite . 
One does not have kings gratis . 
Listen to this : the dearness of kings . 
At the death of Francois I. , the national debt of France amounted to an income of thirty thousand livres ; at the death of Louis XIV . 
it was two milliards , six hundred millions , at twenty-eight livres the mark , which was equivalent in 1760 , according to Desmarets , to four milliards , five hundred millions , which would to-day be equivalent to twelve milliards . 
In the second place , and no offence to Combeferre , a charter granted is but a poor expedient of civilization . 
To save the transition , to soften the passage , to deaden the shock , to cause the nation to pass insensibly from the monarchy to democracy by the practice of constitutional fictions , -- what detestable reasons all those are ! 
No ! 
no ! 
let us never enlighten the people with false daylight . 
Principles dwindle and pale in your constitutional cellar . 
No illegitimacy , no compromise , no grant from the king to the people . 
In all such grants there is an Article 14 . 
By the side of the hand which gives there is the claw which snatches back . 
I refuse your charter point-blank . 
A charter is a mask ; the lie lurks beneath it . 
A people which accepts a charter abdicates . 
The law is only the law when entire . 
No ! 
no charter ! '' 
It was winter ; a couple of fagots were crackling in the fireplace . 
This was tempting , and Courfeyrac could not resist . 
He crumpled the poor Touquet Charter in his fist , and flung it in the fire . 
The paper flashed up . 
Combeferre watched the masterpiece of Louis XVIII . 
burn philosophically , and contented himself with saying : -- `` The charter metamorphosed into flame . '' 
And sarcasms , sallies , jests , that French thing which is called entrain , and that English thing which is called humor , good and bad taste , good and bad reasons , all the wild pyrotechnics of dialogue , mounting together and crossing from all points of the room , produced a sort of merry bombardment over their heads . 
ENLARGEMENT OF HORIZON The shocks of youthful minds among themselves have this admirable property , that one can never foresee the spark , nor divine the lightning flash . 
What will dart out presently ? 
No one knows . 
The burst of laughter starts from a tender feeling . 
At the moment of jest , the serious makes its entry . 
Impulses depend on the first chance word . 
The spirit of each is sovereign , jest suffices to open the field to the unexpected . 
These are conversations with abrupt turns , in which the perspective changes suddenly . 
Chance is the stage-manager of such conversations . 
A severe thought , starting oddly from a clash of words , suddenly traversed the conflict of quips in which Grantaire , Bahorel , Prouvaire , Bossuet , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac were confusedly fencing . 
How does a phrase crop up in a dialogue ? 
Whence comes it that it suddenly impresses itself on the attention of those who hear it ? 
We have just said , that no one knows anything about it . 
In the midst of the uproar , Bossuet all at once terminated some apostrophe to Combeferre , with this date : -- `` June 18th , 1815 , Waterloo . '' 
At this name of Waterloo , Marius , who was leaning his elbows on a table , beside a glass of water , removed his wrist from beneath his chin , and began to gaze fixedly at the audience . 
`` Pardieu ! '' 
exclaimed Courfeyrac -LRB- `` Parbleu '' was falling into disuse at this period -RRB- , `` that number 18 is strange and strikes me . 
It is Bonaparte 's fatal number . 
Place Louis in front and Brumaire behind , you have the whole destiny of the man , with this significant peculiarity , that the end treads close on the heels of the commencement . '' 
Enjolras , who had remained mute up to that point , broke the silence and addressed this remark to Combeferre : -- `` You mean to say , the crime and the expiation . '' 
This word crime overpassed the measure of what Marius , who was already greatly agitated by the abrupt evocation of Waterloo , could accept . 
He rose , walked slowly to the map of France spread out on the wall , and at whose base an island was visible in a separate compartment , laid his finger on this compartment and said : -- `` Corsica , a little island which has rendered France very great . '' 
This was like a breath of icy air . 
All ceased talking . 
They felt that something was on the point of occurring . 
Bahorel , replying to Bossuet , was just assuming an attitude of the torso to which he was addicted . 
He gave it up to listen . 
Enjolras , whose blue eye was not fixed on any one , and who seemed to be gazing at space , replied , without glancing at Marius : -- `` France needs no Corsica to be great . 
France is great because she is France . 
Quia nomina leo . '' 
Marius felt no desire to retreat ; he turned towards Enjolras , and his voice burst forth with a vibration which came from a quiver of his very being : -- `` God forbid that I should diminish France ! 
But amalgamating Napoleon with her is not diminishing her . 
Come ! 
let us argue the question . 
I am a new comer among you , but I will confess that you amaze me . 
Where do we stand ? 
Who are we ? 
Who are you ? 
Who am I ? 
Let us come to an explanation about the Emperor . 
I hear you say Buonaparte , accenting the u like the Royalists . 
I warn you that my grandfather does better still ; he says Buonaparte ' . 
I thought you were young men . 
Where , then , is your enthusiasm ? 
And what are you doing with it ? 
Whom do you admire , if you do not admire the Emperor ? 
And what more do you want ? 
If you will have none of that great man , what great men would you like ? 
He had everything . 
He was complete . 
He had in his brain the sum of human faculties . 
He made codes like Justinian , he dictated like Caesar , his conversation was mingled with the lightning-flash of Pascal , with the thunderclap of Tacitus , he made history and he wrote it , his bulletins are Iliads , he combined the cipher of Newton with the metaphor of Mahomet , he left behind him in the East words as great as the pyramids , at Tilsit he taught Emperors majesty , at the Academy of Sciences he replied to Laplace , in the Council of State be held his own against Merlin , he gave a soul to the geometry of the first , and to the chicanery of the last , he was a legist with the attorneys and sidereal with the astronomers ; like Cromwell blowing out one of two candles , he went to the Temple to bargain for a curtain tassel ; he saw everything ; he knew everything ; which did not prevent him from laughing good-naturedly beside the cradle of his little child ; and all at once , frightened Europe lent an ear , armies put themselves in motion , parks of artillery rumbled , pontoons stretched over the rivers , clouds of cavalry galloped in the storm , cries , trumpets , a trembling of thrones in every direction , the frontiers of kingdoms oscillated on the map , the sound of a superhuman sword was heard , as it was drawn from its sheath ; they beheld him , him , rise erect on the horizon with a blazing brand in his hand , and a glow in his eyes , unfolding amid the thunder , his two wings , the grand army and the old guard , and he was the archangel of war ! '' 
All held their peace , and Enjolras bowed his head . 
Silence always produces somewhat the effect of acquiescence , of the enemy being driven to the wall . 
Marius continued with increased enthusiasm , and almost without pausing for breath : -- `` Let us be just , my friends ! 
What a splendid destiny for a nation to be the Empire of such an Emperor , when that nation is France and when it adds its own genius to the genius of that man ! 
To appear and to reign , to march and to triumph , to have for halting-places all capitals , to take his grenadiers and to make kings of them , to decree the falls of dynasties , and to transfigure Europe at the pace of a charge ; to make you feel that when you threaten you lay your hand on the hilt of the sword of God ; to follow in a single man , Hannibal , Caesar , Charlemagne ; to be the people of some one who mingles with your dawns the startling announcement of a battle won , to have the cannon of the Invalides to rouse you in the morning , to hurl into abysses of light prodigious words which flame forever , Marengo , Arcola , Austerlitz , Jena , Wagram ! 
To cause constellations of victories to flash forth at each instant from the zenith of the centuries , to make the French Empire a pendant to the Roman Empire , to be the great nation and to give birth to the grand army , to make its legions fly forth over all the earth , as a mountain sends out its eagles on all sides to conquer , to dominate , to strike with lightning , to be in Europe a sort of nation gilded through glory , to sound athwart the centuries a trumpet-blast of Titans , to conquer the world twice , by conquest and by dazzling , that is sublime ; and what greater thing is there ? '' 
