`` Cosette ! '' 
screamed the Thenardier . 
`` In the meantime , '' pursued the man , `` I will pay you what I owe you . 
How much is it ? '' 
He cast a glance on the bill , and could not restrain a start of surprise : -- `` Twenty-three francs ! '' 
He looked at the landlady , and repeated : -- `` Twenty-three francs ? '' 
There was in the enunciation of these words , thus repeated , an accent between an exclamation and an interrogation point . 
The Thenardier had had time to prepare herself for the shock . 
She replied , with assurance : -- `` Good gracious , yes , sir , it is twenty-three francs . '' 
The stranger laid five five-franc pieces on the table . 
`` Go and get the child , '' said he . 
At that moment Thenardier advanced to the middle of the room , and said : -- `` Monsieur owes twenty-six sous . '' 
`` Twenty-six sous ! '' 
exclaimed his wife . 
`` Twenty sous for the chamber , '' resumed Thenardier , coldly , `` and six sous for his supper . 
As for the child , I must discuss that matter a little with the gentleman . 
Leave us , wife . '' 
Madame Thenardier was dazzled as with the shock caused by unexpected lightning flashes of talent . 
She was conscious that a great actor was making his entrance on the stage , uttered not a word in reply , and left the room . 
As soon as they were alone , Thenardier offered the traveller a chair . 
The traveller seated himself ; Thenardier remained standing , and his face assumed a singular expression of good-fellowship and simplicity . 
`` Sir , '' said he , `` what I have to say to you is this , that I adore that child . '' 
The stranger gazed intently at him . 
`` What child ? '' 
Thenardier continued : -- `` How strange it is , one grows attached . 
What money is that ? 
Take back your hundred-sou piece . 
I adore the child . '' 
`` Whom do you mean ? '' 
demanded the stranger . 
`` Eh ! 
our little Cosette ! 
Are you not intending to take her away from us ? 
Well , I speak frankly ; as true as you are an honest man , I will not consent to it . 
I shall miss that child . 
I saw her first when she was a tiny thing . 
It is true that she costs us money ; it is true that she has her faults ; it is true that we are not rich ; it is true that I have paid out over four hundred francs for drugs for just one of her illnesses ! 
But one must do something for the good God 's sake . 
She has neither father nor mother . 
I have brought her up . 
I have bread enough for her and for myself . 
In truth , I think a great deal of that child . 
You understand , one conceives an affection for a person ; I am a good sort of a beast , I am ; I do not reason ; I love that little girl ; my wife is quick-tempered , but she loves her also . 
You see , she is just the same as our own child . 
I want to keep her to babble about the house . '' 
The stranger kept his eye intently fixed on Thenardier . 
The latter continued : -- `` Excuse me , sir , but one does not give away one 's child to a passer-by , like that . 
I am right , am I not ? 
Still , I do n't say -- you are rich ; you have the air of a very good man , -- if it were for her happiness . 
But one must find out that . 
You understand : suppose that I were to let her go and to sacrifice myself , I should like to know what becomes of her ; I should not wish to lose sight of her ; I should like to know with whom she is living , so that I could go to see her from time to time ; so that she may know that her good foster-father is alive , that he is watching over her . 
In short , there are things which are not possible . 
I do not even know your name . 
If you were to take her away , I should say : ` Well , and the Lark , what has become of her ? ' 
One must , at least , see some petty scrap of paper , some trifle in the way of a passport , you know ! '' 
The stranger , still surveying him with that gaze which penetrates , as the saying goes , to the very depths of the conscience , replied in a grave , firm voice : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier , one does not require a passport to travel five leagues from Paris . 
If I take Cosette away , I shall take her away , and that is the end of the matter . 
You will not know my name , you will not know my residence , you will not know where she is ; and my intention is that she shall never set eyes on you again so long as she lives . 
I break the thread which binds her foot , and she departs . 
Does that suit you ? 
Yes or no ? '' 
Since geniuses , like demons , recognize the presence of a superior God by certain signs , Thenardier comprehended that he had to deal with a very strong person . 
It was like an intuition ; he comprehended it with his clear and sagacious promptitude . 
While drinking with the carters , smoking , and singing coarse songs on the preceding evening , he had devoted the whole of the time to observing the stranger , watching him like a cat , and studying him like a mathematician . 
He had watched him , both on his own account , for the pleasure of the thing , and through instinct , and had spied upon him as though he had been paid for so doing . 
Not a movement , not a gesture , on the part of the man in the yellow great-coat had escaped him . 
Even before the stranger had so clearly manifested his interest in Cosette , Thenardier had divined his purpose . 
He had caught the old man 's deep glances returning constantly to the child . 
Who was this man ? 
Why this interest ? 
Why this hideous costume , when he had so much money in his purse ? 
Questions which he put to himself without being able to solve them , and which irritated him . 
He had pondered it all night long . 
He could not be Cosette 's father . 
Was he her grandfather ? 
Then why not make himself known at once ? 
When one has a right , one asserts it . 
This man evidently had no right over Cosette . 
What was it , then ? 
Thenardier lost himself in conjectures . 
He caught glimpses of everything , but he saw nothing . 
Be that as it may , on entering into conversation with the man , sure that there was some secret in the case , that the latter had some interest in remaining in the shadow , he felt himself strong ; when he perceived from the stranger 's clear and firm retort , that this mysterious personage was mysterious in so simple a way , he became conscious that he was weak . 
He had expected nothing of the sort . 
His conjectures were put to the rout . 
He rallied his ideas . 
He weighed everything in the space of a second . 
Thenardier was one of those men who take in a situation at a glance . 
He decided that the moment had arrived for proceeding straightforward , and quickly at that . 
He did as great leaders do at the decisive moment , which they know that they alone recognize ; he abruptly unmasked his batteries . 
`` Sir , '' said he , `` I am in need of fifteen hundred francs . '' 
The stranger took from his side pocket an old pocketbook of black leather , opened it , drew out three bank-bills , which he laid on the table . 
Then he placed his large thumb on the notes and said to the inn-keeper : -- `` Go and fetch Cosette . '' 
While this was taking place , what had Cosette been doing ? 
On waking up , Cosette had run to get her shoe . 
In it she had found the gold piece . 
It was not a Napoleon ; it was one of those perfectly new twenty-franc pieces of the Restoration , on whose effigy the little Prussian queue had replaced the laurel wreath . 
Cosette was dazzled . 
Her destiny began to intoxicate her . 
She did not know what a gold piece was ; she had never seen one ; she hid it quickly in her pocket , as though she had stolen it . 
Still , she felt that it really was hers ; she guessed whence her gift had come , but the joy which she experienced was full of fear . 
