And she felt a slight twinge at her heart , but she hardly perceived it , being immediately diverted by a kiss from Marius . 
On the following day he did not come . 
Cosette paid no heed to this , passed her evening and slept well that night , as usual , and thought of it only when she woke . 
She was so happy ! 
She speedily despatched Nicolette to M. Jean 's house to inquire whether he were ill , and why he had not come on the previous evening . 
Nicolette brought back the reply of M. Jean that he was not ill . 
He was busy . 
He would come soon . 
As soon as he was able . 
Moreover , he was on the point of taking a little journey . 
Madame must remember that it was his custom to take trips from time to time . 
They were not to worry about him . 
They were not to think of him . 
Nicolette on entering M. Jean 's had repeated to him her mistress ' very words . 
That Madame had sent her to inquire why M. Jean bad not come on the preceding evening . '' 
-- It is two days since I have been there , '' said Jean Valjean gently . 
But the remark passed unnoticed by Nicolette , who did not report it to Cosette . 
ATTRACTION AND EXTINCTION During the last months of spring and the first months of summer in 1833 , the rare passersby in the Marais , the petty shopkeepers , the loungers on thresholds , noticed an old man neatly clad in black , who emerged every day at the same hour , towards nightfall , from the Rue de l'Homme Arme , on the side of the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie , passed in front of the Blancs Manteaux , gained the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine , and , on arriving at the Rue de l'Echarpe , turned to the left , and entered the Rue Saint-Louis . 
There he walked at a slow pace , with his head strained forward , seeing nothing , hearing nothing , his eye immovably fixed on a point which seemed to be a star to him , which never varied , and which was no other than the corner of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
The nearer he approached the corner of the street the more his eye lighted up ; a sort of joy illuminated his pupils like an inward aurora , he had a fascinated and much affected air , his lips indulged in obscure movements , as though he were talking to some one whom he did not see , he smiled vaguely and advanced as slowly as possible . 
One would have said that , while desirous of reaching his destination , he feared the moment when he should be close at hand . 
When only a few houses remained between him and that street which appeared to attract him his pace slackened , to such a degree that , at times , one might have thought that he was no longer advancing at all . 
The vacillation of his head and the fixity of his eyeballs suggested the thought of the magnetic needle seeking the pole . 
Whatever time he spent on arriving , he was obliged to arrive at last ; he reached the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; then he halted , he trembled , he thrust his head with a sort of melancholy timidity round the corner of the last house , and gazed into that street , and there was in that tragic look something which resembled the dazzling light of the impossible , and the reflection from a paradise that was closed to him . 
Then a tear , which had slowly gathered in the corner of his lids , and had become large enough to fall , trickled down his cheek , and sometimes stopped at his mouth . 
The old man tasted its bitter flavor . 
Thus he remained for several minutes as though made of stone , then he returned by the same road and with the same step , and , in proportion as he retreated , his glance died out . 
Little by little , this old man ceased to go as far as the corner of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; he halted half way in the Rue Saint-Louis ; sometimes a little further off , sometimes a little nearer . 
One day he stopped at the corner of the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine and looked at the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire from a distance . 
Then he shook his head slowly from right to left , as though refusing himself something , and retraced his steps . 
Soon he no longer came as far as the Rue Saint-Louis . 
He got as far as the Rue Pavee , shook his head and turned back ; then he went no further than the Rue des Trois-Pavillons ; then he did not overstep the Blancs-Manteaux . 
One would have said that he was a pendulum which was no longer wound up , and whose oscillations were growing shorter before ceasing altogether . 
Every day he emerged from his house at the same hour , he undertook the same trip , but he no longer completed it , and , perhaps without himself being aware of the fact , he constantly shortened it . 
His whole countenance expressed this single idea : What is the use ? 
-- His eye was dim ; no more radiance . 
His tears were also exhausted ; they no longer collected in the corner of his eye-lid ; that thoughtful eye was dry . 
The old man 's head was still craned forward ; his chin moved at times ; the folds in his gaunt neck were painful to behold . 
Sometimes , when the weather was bad , he had an umbrella under his arm , but he never opened it . 
The good women of the quarter said : `` He is an innocent . '' 
The children followed him and laughed . 
BOOK NINTH . 
-- SUPREME SHADOW , SUPREME DAWN PITY FOR THE UNHAPPY , BUT INDULGENCE FOR THE HAPPY It is a terrible thing to be happy ! 
How content one is ! 
How all-sufficient one finds it ! 
How , being in possession of the false object of life , happiness , one forgets the true object , duty ! 
Let us say , however , that the reader would do wrong were he to blame Marius . 
Marius , as we have explained , before his marriage , had put no questions to M. Fauchelevent , and , since that time , he had feared to put any to Jean Valjean . 
He had regretted the promise into which he had allowed himself to be drawn . 
He had often said to himself that he had done wrong in making that concession to despair . 
He had confined himself to gradually estranging Jean Valjean from his house and to effacing him , as much as possible , from Cosette 's mind . 
He had , in a manner , always placed himself between Cosette and Jean Valjean , sure that , in this way , she would not perceive nor think of the latter . 
It was more than effacement , it was an eclipse . 
Marius did what he considered necessary and just . 
He thought that he had serious reasons which the reader has already seen , and others which will be seen later on , for getting rid of Jean Valjean without harshness , but without weakness . 
Chance having ordained that he should encounter , in a case which he had argued , a former employee of the Laffitte establishment , he had acquired mysterious information , without seeking it , which he had not been able , it is true , to probe , out of respect for the secret which he had promised to guard , and out of consideration for Jean Valjean 's perilous position . 
He believed at that moment that he had a grave duty to perform : the restitution of the six hundred thousand francs to some one whom he sought with all possible discretion . 
In the meanwhile , he abstained from touching that money . 
As for Cosette , she had not been initiated into any of these secrets ; but it would be harsh to condemn her also . 
There existed between Marius and her an all-powerful magnetism , which caused her to do , instinctively and almost mechanically , what Marius wished . 
She was conscious of Marius ' will in the direction of `` Monsieur Jean , '' she conformed to it . 
Her husband had not been obliged to say anything to her ; she yielded to the vague but clear pressure of his tacit intentions , and obeyed blindly . 
Her obedience in this instance consisted in not remembering what Marius forgot . 
She was not obliged to make any effort to accomplish this . 
Without her knowing why herself , and without his having any cause to accuse her of it , her soul had become so wholly her husband 's that that which was shrouded in gloom in Marius ' mind became overcast in hers . 
Let us not go too far , however ; in what concerns Jean Valjean , this forgetfulness and obliteration were merely superficial . 
She was rather heedless than forgetful . 
At bottom , she was sincerely attached to the man whom she had so long called her father ; but she loved her husband still more dearly . 
This was what had somewhat disturbed the balance of her heart , which leaned to one side only . 
It sometimes happened that Cosette spoke of Jean Valjean and expressed her surprise . 
Then Marius calmed her : `` He is absent , I think . 
Did not he say that he was setting out on a journey ? '' 
-- `` That is true , '' thought Cosette . 
`` He had a habit of disappearing in this fashion . 
But not for so long . '' 
Two or three times she despatched Nicolette to inquire in the Rue de l'Homme Arme whether M. Jean had returned from his journey . 
Jean Valjean caused the answer `` no '' to be given . 
Cosette asked nothing more , since she had but one need on earth , Marius . 
Let us also say that , on their side , Cosette and Marius had also been absent . 
They had been to Vernon . 
Marius had taken Cosette to his father 's grave . 
Marius gradually won Cosette away from Jean Valjean . 
Cosette allowed it . 
Moreover that which is called , far too harshly in certain cases , the ingratitude of children , is not always a thing so deserving of reproach as it is supposed . 
It is the ingratitude of nature . 
Nature , as we have elsewhere said , `` looks before her . '' 
Nature divides living beings into those who are arriving and those who are departing . 
Those who are departing are turned towards the shadows , those who are arriving towards the light . 
Hence a gulf which is fatal on the part of the old , and involuntary on the part of the young . 
This breach , at first insensible , increases slowly , like all separations of branches . 
The boughs , without becoming detached from the trunk , grow away from it . 
It is no fault of theirs . 
Youth goes where there is joy , festivals , vivid lights , love . 
Old age goes towards the end . 
They do not lose sight of each other , but there is no longer a close connection . 
Young people feel the cooling off of life ; old people , that of the tomb . 
Let us not blame these poor children . 
LAST FLICKERINGS OF A LAMP WITHOUT OIL One day , Jean Valjean descended his staircase , took three steps in the street , seated himself on a post , on that same stone post where Gavroche had found him meditating on the night between the 5th and the 6th of June ; he remained there a few moments , then went up stairs again . 
This was the last oscillation of the pendulum . 
On the following day he did not leave his apartment . 
