From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderate amount of pleasure . 
The most `` interesting thing '' they found were some unintelligible pages about the sins of young boys . 
They played in an alley of the garden bordered with a few shabby fruit-trees . 
In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity of the punishments administered , when the wind had shaken the trees , they sometimes succeeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled apricot or an inhabited pear on the sly . 
I will now cede the privilege of speech to a letter which lies before me , a letter written five and twenty years ago by an old pupil , now Madame la Duchesse de -- one of the most elegant women in Paris . 
I quote literally : `` One hides one 's pear or one 's apple as best one may . 
When one goes up stairs to put the veil on the bed before supper , one stuffs them under one 's pillow and at night one eats them in bed , and when one can not do that , one eats them in the closet . '' 
That was one of their greatest luxuries . 
Once -- it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to the convent -- one of the young girls , Mademoiselle Bouchard , who was connected with the Montmorency family , laid a wager that she would ask for a day 's leave of absence -- an enormity in so austere a community . 
The wager was accepted , but not one of those who bet believed that she would do it . 
When the moment came , as the archbishop was passing in front of the pupils , Mademoiselle Bouchard , to the indescribable terror of her companions , stepped out of the ranks , and said , `` Monseigneur , a day 's leave of absence . '' 
Mademoiselle Bouchard was tall , blooming , with the prettiest little rosy face in the world . 
M. de Quelen smiled and said , `` What , my dear child , a day 's leave of absence ! 
Three days if you like . 
I grant you three days . '' 
The prioress could do nothing ; the archbishop had spoken . 
Horror of the convent , but joy of the pupil . 
The effect may be imagined . 
This stern cloister was not so well walled off , however , but that the life of the passions of the outside world , drama , and even romance , did not make their way in . 
To prove this , we will confine ourselves to recording here and to briefly mentioning a real and incontestable fact , which , however , bears no reference in itself to , and is not connected by any thread whatever with the story which we are relating . 
We mention the fact for the sake of completing the physiognomy of the convent in the reader 's mind . 
About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person who was not a nun , who was treated with great respect , and who was addressed as Madame Albertine . 
Nothing was known about her , save that she was mad , and that in the world she passed for dead . 
Beneath this history it was said there lay the arrangements of fortune necessary for a great marriage . 
This woman , hardly thirty years of age , of dark complexion and tolerably pretty , had a vague look in her large black eyes . 
Could she see ? 
There was some doubt about this . 
She glided rather than walked , she never spoke ; it was not quite known whether she breathed . 
Her nostrils were livid and pinched as after yielding up their last sigh . 
To touch her hand was like touching snow . 
She possessed a strange spectral grace . 
Wherever she entered , people felt cold . 
One day a sister , on seeing her pass , said to another sister , `` She passes for a dead woman . '' 
`` Perhaps she is one , '' replied the other . 
A hundred tales were told of Madame Albertine . 
This arose from the eternal curiosity of the pupils . 
In the chapel there was a gallery called L'OEil de Boeuf . 
It was in this gallery , which had only a circular bay , an oeil de boeuf , that Madame Albertine listened to the offices . 
She always occupied it alone because this gallery , being on the level of the first story , the preacher or the officiating priest could be seen , which was interdicted to the nuns . 
One day the pulpit was occupied by a young priest of high rank , M. Le Duc de Rohan , peer of France , officer of the Red Musketeers in 1815 when he was Prince de Leon , and who died afterward , in 1830 , as cardinal and Archbishop of Besancon . 
It was the first time that M. de Rohan had preached at the Petit-Picpus convent . 
Madame Albertine usually preserved perfect calmness and complete immobility during the sermons and services . 
That day , as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan , she half rose , and said , in a loud voice , amid the silence of the chapel , `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
The whole community turned their heads in amazement , the preacher raised his eyes , but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility . 
A breath from the outer world , a flash of life , had passed for an instant across that cold and lifeless face and had then vanished , and the mad woman had become a corpse again . 
Those two words , however , had set every one in the convent who had the privilege of speech to chattering . 
How many things were contained in that `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
what revelations ! 
M. de Rohan 's name really was Auguste . 
It was evident that Madame Albertine belonged to the very highest society , since she knew M. de Rohan , and that her own rank there was of the highest , since she spoke thus familiarly of so great a lord , and that there existed between them some connection , of relationship , perhaps , but a very close one in any case , since she knew his `` pet name . '' 
Two very severe duchesses , Mesdames de Choiseul and de Serent , often visited the community , whither they penetrated , no doubt , in virtue of the privilege Magnates mulieres , and caused great consternation in the boarding-school . 
When these two old ladies passed by , all the poor young girls trembled and dropped their eyes . 
Moreover , M. de Rohan , quite unknown to himself , was an object of attention to the school-girls . 
At that epoch he had just been made , while waiting for the episcopate , vicar-general of the Archbishop of Paris . 
It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate the offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus . 
Not one of the young recluses could see him , because of the serge curtain , but he had a sweet and rather shrill voice , which they had come to know and to distinguish . 
He had been a mousquetaire , and then , he was said to be very coquettish , that his handsome brown hair was very well dressed in a roll around his head , and that he had a broad girdle of magnificent moire , and that his black cassock was of the most elegant cut in the world . 
He held a great place in all these imaginations of sixteen years . 
Not a sound from without made its way into the convent . 
But there was one year when the sound of a flute penetrated thither . 
This was an event , and the girls who were at school there at the time still recall it . 
It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood . 
This flute always played the same air , an air which is very far away nowadays , -- `` My Zetulbe , come reign o'er my soul , '' -- and it was heard two or three times a day . 
The young girls passed hours in listening to it , the vocal mothers were upset by it , brains were busy , punishments descended in showers . 
This lasted for several months . 
The girls were all more or less in love with the unknown musician . 
Each one dreamed that she was Zetulbe . 
The sound of the flute proceeded from the direction of the Rue Droit-Mur ; and they would have given anything , compromised everything , attempted anything for the sake of seeing , of catching a glance , if only for a second , of the `` young man '' who played that flute so deliciously , and who , no doubt , played on all these souls at the same time . 
There were some who made their escape by a back door , and ascended to the third story on the Rue Droit-Mur side , in order to attempt to catch a glimpse through the gaps . 
Impossible ! 
One even went so far as to thrust her arm through the grating , and to wave her white handkerchief . 
Two were still bolder . 
They found means to climb on a roof , and risked their lives there , and succeeded at last in seeing `` the young man . '' 
He was an old emigre gentleman , blind and penniless , who was playing his flute in his attic , in order to pass the time . 
THE LITTLE CONVENT In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectly distinct buildings , -- the Great Convent , inhabited by the nuns , the Boarding-school , where the scholars were lodged ; and lastly , what was called the Little Convent . 
It was a building with a garden , in which lived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders , the relics of cloisters destroyed in the Revolution ; a reunion of all the black , gray , and white medleys of all communities and all possible varieties ; what might be called , if such a coupling of words is permissible , a sort of harlequin convent . 
When the Empire was established , all these poor old dispersed and exiled women had been accorded permission to come and take shelter under the wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines . 
The government paid them a small pension , the ladies of the Petit-Picpus received them cordially . 
It was a singular pell-mell . 
Each followed her own rule , Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were allowed , as a great recreation , to pay them a visit ; the result is , that all those young memories have retained among other souvenirs that of Mother Sainte-Bazile , Mother Sainte-Scolastique , and Mother Jacob . 
One of these refugees found herself almost at home . 
She was a nun of Sainte-Aure , the only one of her order who had survived . 
The ancient convent of the ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied , at the beginning of the eighteenth century , this very house of the Petit-Picpus , which belonged later to the Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
This holy woman , too poor to wear the magnificent habit of her order , which was a white robe with a scarlet scapulary , had piously put it on a little manikin , which she exhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at her death . 
In 1824 , only one nun of this order remained ; to-day , there remains only a doll . 
In addition to these worthy mothers , some old society women had obtained permission of the prioress , like Madame Albertine , to retire into the Little Convent . 
Among the number were Madame Beaufort d'Hautpoul and Marquise Dufresne . 
Another was never known in the convent except by the formidable noise which she made when she blew her nose . 
The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini -LRB- hubbub -RRB- . 
About 1820 or 1821 , Madame de Genlis , who was at that time editing a little periodical publication called l'Intrepide , asked to be allowed to enter the convent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident . 
The Duc d'Orleans recommended her . 
Uproar in the hive ; the vocal-mothers were all in a flutter ; Madame de Genlis had made romances . 
But she declared that she was the first to detest them , and then , she had reached her fierce stage of devotion . 
With the aid of God , and of the Prince , she entered . 
She departed at the end of six or eight months , alleging as a reason , that there was no shade in the garden . 
The nuns were delighted . 
Although very old , she still played the harp , and did it very well . 
When she went away she left her mark in her cell . 
