Their great stature and their vast fists rendered them no less alarming than did their sinister stride through the darkness . 
One would have pronounced them four spectres disguised as bourgeois . 
They halted in the middle of the space and formed a group , like men in consultation . 
They had an air of indecision . 
The one who appeared to be their leader turned round and pointed hastily with his right hand in the direction which Jean Valjean had taken ; another seemed to indicate the contrary direction with considerable obstinacy . 
At the moment when the first man wheeled round , the moon fell full in his face . 
Jean Valjean recognized Javert perfectly . 
IT IS LUCKY THAT THE PONT D'AUSTERLITZ BEARS CARRIAGES Uncertainty was at an end for Jean Valjean : fortunately it still lasted for the men . 
He took advantage of their hesitation . 
It was time lost for them , but gained for him . 
He slipped from under the gate where he had concealed himself , and went down the Rue des Postes , towards the region of the Jardin des Plantes . 
Cosette was beginning to be tired . 
He took her in his arms and carried her . 
There were no passers-by , and the street lanterns had not been lighted on account of there being a moon . 
He redoubled his pace . 
In a few strides he had reached the Goblet potteries , on the front of which the moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancient inscription : -- De Goblet fils c'est ici la fabrique ; -LSB- 14 -RSB- Venez choisir des cruches et des broos , Des pots a fleurs , des tuyaux , de la brique . 
A tout venant le Coeur vend des Carreaux . 
-LSB- 14 -RSB- This is the factory of Goblet Junior : Come choose your jugs and crocks , Flower-pots , pipes , bricks . 
The Heart sells Diamonds to every comer . 
He left behind him the Rue de la Clef , then the Fountain Saint-Victor , skirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets , and reached the quay . 
There he turned round . 
The quay was deserted . 
The streets were deserted . 
There was no one behind him . 
He drew a long breath . 
He gained the Pont d'Austerlitz . 
Tolls were still collected there at that epoch . 
He presented himself at the toll office and handed over a sou . 
`` It is two sous , '' said the old soldier in charge of the bridge . 
`` You are carrying a child who can walk . 
Pay for two . '' 
He paid , vexed that his passage should have aroused remark . 
Every flight should be an imperceptible slipping away . 
A heavy cart was crossing the Seine at the same time as himself , and on its way , like him , to the right bank . 
This was of use to him . 
He could traverse the bridge in the shadow of the cart . 
Towards the middle of the Bridge , Cosette , whose feet were benumbed , wanted to walk . 
He set her on the ground and took her hand again . 
The bridge once crossed , he perceived some timber-yards on his right . 
He directed his course thither . 
In order to reach them , it was necessary to risk himself in a tolerably large unsheltered and illuminated space . 
He did not hesitate . 
Those who were on his track had evidently lost the scent , and Jean Valjean believed himself to be out of danger . 
Hunted , yes ; followed , no . 
A little street , the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine , opened out between two timber-yards enclosed in walls . 
This street was dark and narrow and seemed made expressly for him . 
Before entering it he cast a glance behind him , From the point where he stood he could see the whole extent of the Pont d'Austerlitz . 
Four shadows were just entering on the bridge . 
These shadows had their backs turned to the Jardin des Plantes and were on their way to the right bank . 
These four shadows were the four men . 
Jean Valjean shuddered like the wild beast which is recaptured . 
One hope remained to him ; it was , that the men had not , perhaps , stepped on the bridge , and had not caught sight of him while he was crossing the large illuminated space , holding Cosette by the hand . 
In that case , by plunging into the little street before him , he might escape , if he could reach the timber-yards , the marshes , the market-gardens , the uninhabited ground which was not built upon . 
It seemed to him that he might commit himself to that silent little street . 
He entered it . 
TO WIT , THE PLAN OF PARIS IN 1727 Three hundred paces further on , he arrived at a point where the street forked . 
It separated into two streets , which ran in a slanting line , one to the right , and the other to the left . 
Jean Valjean had before him what resembled the two branches of a Y. Which should he choose ? 
He did not hesitate , but took the one on the right . 
Why ? 
Because that to the left ran towards a suburb , that is to say , towards inhabited regions , and the right branch towards the open country , that is to say , towards deserted regions . 
However , they no longer walked very fast . 
Cosette 's pace retarded Jean Valjean 's . 
He took her up and carried her again . 
Cosette laid her head on the shoulder of the good man and said not a word . 
He turned round from time to time and looked behind him . 
He took care to keep always on the dark side of the street . 
The street was straight in his rear . 
The first two or three times that he turned round he saw nothing ; the silence was profound , and he continued his march somewhat reassured . 
All at once , on turning round , he thought he perceived in the portion of the street which he had just passed through , far off in the obscurity , something which was moving . 
He rushed forward precipitately rather than walked , hoping to find some side-street , to make his escape through it , and thus to break his scent once more . 
He arrived at a wall . 
This wall , however , did not absolutely prevent further progress ; it was a wall which bordered a transverse street , in which the one he had taken ended . 
Here again , he was obliged to come to a decision ; should he go to the right or to the left . 
He glanced to the right . 
The fragmentary lane was prolonged between buildings which were either sheds or barns , then ended at a blind alley . 
The extremity of the cul-de-sac was distinctly visible , -- a lofty white wall . 
He glanced to the left . 
On that side the lane was open , and about two hundred paces further on , ran into a street of which it was the affluent . 
On that side lay safety . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean was meditating a turn to the left , in an effort to reach the street which he saw at the end of the lane , he perceived a sort of motionless , black statue at the corner of the lane and the street towards which he was on the point of directing his steps . 
It was some one , a man , who had evidently just been posted there , and who was barring the passage and waiting . 
Jean Valjean recoiled . 
The point of Paris where Jean Valjean found himself , situated between the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and la Rapee , is one of those which recent improvements have transformed from top to bottom , -- resulting in disfigurement according to some , and in a transfiguration according to others . 
The market-gardens , the timber-yards , and the old buildings have been effaced . 
To-day , there are brand-new , wide streets , arenas , circuses , hippodromes , railway stations , and a prison , Mazas , there ; progress , as the reader sees , with its antidote . 
Half a century ago , in that ordinary , popular tongue , which is all compounded of traditions , which persists in calling the Institut les Quatre-Nations , and the Opera-Comique Feydeau , the precise spot whither Jean Valjean had arrived was called le Petit Picpus . 
The Porte Saint-Jacques , the Porte Paris , the Barriere des Sergents , the Porcherons , la Galiote , les Celestins , les Capucins , le Mail , la Bourbe , l'Arbre de Cracovie , la Petite-Pologne -- these are the names of old Paris which survive amid the new . 
The memory of the populace hovers over these relics of the past . 
Le Petit-Picpus , which , moreover , hardly ever had any existence , and never was more than the outline of a quarter , had nearly the monkish aspect of a Spanish town . 
The roads were not much paved ; the streets were not much built up . 
With the exception of the two or three streets , of which we shall presently speak , all was wall and solitude there . 
Not a shop , not a vehicle , hardly a candle lighted here and there in the windows ; all lights extinguished after ten o'clock . 
Gardens , convents , timber-yards , marshes ; occasional lowly dwellings and great walls as high as the houses . 
Such was this quarter in the last century . 
The Revolution snubbed it soundly . 
The republican government demolished and cut through it . 
Rubbish shoots were established there . 
Thirty years ago , this quarter was disappearing under the erasing process of new buildings . 
To-day , it has been utterly blotted out . 
