He had just viewed the malice of men and the misery of society under a new aspect -- incomplete aspects , which unfortunately only exhibited one side of the truth , the fate of woman as summed up in Fantine , and public authority as personified in Javert . 
He had returned to prison , this time for having done right ; he had quaffed fresh bitterness ; disgust and lassitude were overpowering him ; even the memory of the Bishop probably suffered a temporary eclipse , though sure to reappear later on luminous and triumphant ; but , after all , that sacred memory was growing dim . 
Who knows whether Jean Valjean had not been on the eve of growing discouraged and of falling once more ? 
He loved and grew strong again . 
Alas ! 
he walked with no less indecision than Cosette . 
He protected her , and she strengthened him . 
Thanks to him , she could walk through life ; thanks to her , he could continue in virtue . 
He was that child 's stay , and she was his prop . 
Oh , unfathomable and divine mystery of the balances of destiny ! 
THE REMARKS OF THE PRINCIPAL TENANT Jean Valjean was prudent enough never to go out by day . 
Every evening , at twilight , he walked for an hour or two , sometimes alone , often with Cosette , seeking the most deserted side alleys of the boulevard , and entering churches at nightfall . 
He liked to go to Saint-Medard , which is the nearest church . 
When he did not take Cosette with him , she remained with the old woman ; but the child 's delight was to go out with the good man . 
She preferred an hour with him to all her rapturous tete-a-tetes with Catherine . 
He held her hand as they walked , and said sweet things to her . 
It turned out that Cosette was a very gay little person . 
The old woman attended to the housekeeping and cooking and went to market . 
They lived soberly , always having a little fire , but like people in very moderate circumstances . 
Jean Valjean had made no alterations in the furniture as it was the first day ; he had merely had the glass door leading to Cosette 's dressing-room replaced by a solid door . 
He still wore his yellow coat , his black breeches , and his old hat . 
In the street , he was taken for a poor man . 
It sometimes happened that kind-hearted women turned back to bestow a sou on him . 
Jean Valjean accepted the sou with a deep bow . 
It also happened occasionally that he encountered some poor wretch asking alms ; then he looked behind him to make sure that no one was observing him , stealthily approached the unfortunate man , put a piece of money into his hand , often a silver coin , and walked rapidly away . 
This had its disadvantages . 
He began to be known in the neighborhood under the name of the beggar who gives alms . 
The old principal lodger , a cross-looking creature , who was thoroughly permeated , so far as her neighbors were concerned , with the inquisitiveness peculiar to envious persons , scrutinized Jean Valjean a great deal , without his suspecting the fact . 
She was a little deaf , which rendered her talkative . 
There remained to her from her past , two teeth , -- one above , the other below , -- which she was continually knocking against each other . 
She had questioned Cosette , who had not been able to tell her anything , since she knew nothing herself except that she had come from Montfermeil . 
One morning , this spy saw Jean Valjean , with an air which struck the old gossip as peculiar , entering one of the uninhabited compartments of the hovel . 
She followed him with the step of an old cat , and was able to observe him without being seen , through a crack in the door , which was directly opposite him . 
Jean Valjean had his back turned towards this door , by way of greater security , no doubt . 
The old woman saw him fumble in his pocket and draw thence a case , scissors , and thread ; then he began to rip the lining of one of the skirts of his coat , and from the opening he took a bit of yellowish paper , which he unfolded . 
The old woman recognized , with terror , the fact that it was a bank-bill for a thousand francs . 
It was the second or third only that she had seen in the course of her existence . 
She fled in alarm . 
A moment later , Jean Valjean accosted her , and asked her to go and get this thousand-franc bill changed for him , adding that it was his quarterly income , which he had received the day before . 
`` Where ? '' 
thought the old woman . 
`` He did not go out until six o'clock in the evening , and the government bank certainly is not open at that hour . '' 
The old woman went to get the bill changed , and mentioned her surmises . 
That thousand-franc note , commented on and multiplied , produced a vast amount of terrified discussion among the gossips of the Rue des Vignes Saint-Marcel . 
A few days later , it chanced that Jean Valjean was sawing some wood , in his shirt-sleeves , in the corridor . 
The old woman was in the chamber , putting things in order . 
She was alone . 
Cosette was occupied in admiring the wood as it was sawed . 
The old woman caught sight of the coat hanging on a nail , and examined it . 
The lining had been sewed up again . 
The good woman felt of it carefully , and thought she observed in the skirts and revers thicknesses of paper . 
More thousand-franc bank-bills , no doubt ! 
She also noticed that there were all sorts of things in the pockets . 
Not only the needles , thread , and scissors which she had seen , but a big pocket-book , a very large knife , and -- a suspicious circumstance -- several wigs of various colors . 
Each pocket of this coat had the air of being in a manner provided against unexpected accidents . 
Thus the inhabitants of the house reached the last days of winter . 
A FIVE-FRANC PIECE FALLS ON THE GROUND AND PRODUCES A TUMULT Near Saint-Medard 's church there was a poor man who was in the habit of crouching on the brink of a public well which had been condemned , and on whom Jean Valjean was fond of bestowing charity . 
He never passed this man without giving him a few sous . 
Sometimes he spoke to him . 
Those who envied this mendicant said that he belonged to the police . 
He was an ex-beadle of seventy-five , who was constantly mumbling his prayers . 
One evening , as Jean Valjean was passing by , when he had not Cosette with him , he saw the beggar in his usual place , beneath the lantern which had just been lighted . 
The man seemed engaged in prayer , according to his custom , and was much bent over . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to him and placed his customary alms in his hand . 
The mendicant raised his eyes suddenly , stared intently at Jean Valjean , then dropped his head quickly . 
This movement was like a flash of lightning . 
Jean Valjean was seized with a shudder . 
It seemed to him that he had just caught sight , by the light of the street lantern , not of the placid and beaming visage of the old beadle , but of a well-known and startling face . 
He experienced the same impression that one would have on finding one 's self , all of a sudden , face to face , in the dark , with a tiger . 
He recoiled , terrified , petrified , daring neither to breathe , to speak , to remain , nor to flee , staring at the beggar who had dropped his head , which was enveloped in a rag , and no longer appeared to know that he was there . 
At this strange moment , an instinct -- possibly the mysterious instinct of self-preservation , -- restrained Jean Valjean from uttering a word . 
The beggar had the same figure , the same rags , the same appearance as he had every day . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , `` I am mad ! 
I am dreaming ! 
Impossible ! '' 
And he returned profoundly troubled . 
He hardly dared to confess , even to himself , that the face which he thought he had seen was the face of Javert . 
That night , on thinking the matter over , he regretted not having questioned the man , in order to force him to raise his head a second time . 
On the following day , at nightfall , he went back . 
The beggar was at his post . 
`` Good day , my good man , '' said Jean Valjean , resolutely , handing him a sou . 
The beggar raised his head , and replied in a whining voice , `` Thanks , my good sir . '' 
It was unmistakably the ex-beadle . 
Jean Valjean felt completely reassured . 
He began to laugh . 
`` How the deuce could I have thought that I saw Javert there ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Am I going to lose my eyesight now ? '' 
And he thought no more about it . 
A few days afterwards , -- it might have been at eight o'clock in the evening , -- he was in his room , and engaged in making Cosette spell aloud , when he heard the house door open and then shut again . 
This struck him as singular . 
The old woman , who was the only inhabitant of the house except himself , always went to bed at nightfall , so that she might not burn out her candles . 
Jean Valjean made a sign to Cosette to be quiet . 
He heard some one ascending the stairs . 
It might possibly be the old woman , who might have fallen ill and have been out to the apothecary 's . 
Jean Valjean listened . 
The step was heavy , and sounded like that of a man ; but the old woman wore stout shoes , and there is nothing which so strongly resembles the step of a man as that of an old woman . 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean blew out his candle . 
He had sent Cosette to bed , saying to her in a low voice , `` Get into bed very softly '' ; and as he kissed her brow , the steps paused . 
