There was in Tholomyes a district attorney , and in Courfeyrac a paladin . 
Enjolras was the chief , Combeferre was the guide , Courfeyrac was the centre . 
The others gave more light , he shed more warmth ; the truth is , that he possessed all the qualities of a centre , roundness and radiance . 
Bahorel had figured in the bloody tumult of June , 1822 , on the occasion of the burial of young Lallemand . 
Bahorel was a good-natured mortal , who kept bad company , brave , a spendthrift , prodigal , and to the verge of generosity , talkative , and at times eloquent , bold to the verge of effrontery ; the best fellow possible ; he had daring waistcoats , and scarlet opinions ; a wholesale blusterer , that is to say , loving nothing so much as a quarrel , unless it were an uprising ; and nothing so much as an uprising , unless it were a revolution ; always ready to smash a window-pane , then to tear up the pavement , then to demolish a government , just to see the effect of it ; a student in his eleventh year . 
He had nosed about the law , but did not practise it . 
He had taken for his device : `` Never a lawyer , '' and for his armorial bearings a nightstand in which was visible a square cap . 
Every time that he passed the law-school , which rarely happened , he buttoned up his frock-coat , -- the paletot had not yet been invented , -- and took hygienic precautions . 
Of the school porter he said : `` What a fine old man ! '' 
and of the dean , M. Delvincourt : `` What a monument ! '' 
In his lectures he espied subjects for ballads , and in his professors occasions for caricature . 
He wasted a tolerably large allowance , something like three thousand francs a year , in doing nothing . 
He had peasant parents whom he had contrived to imbue with respect for their son . 
He said of them : `` They are peasants and not bourgeois ; that is the reason they are intelligent . '' 
Bahorel , a man of caprice , was scattered over numerous cafes ; the others had habits , he had none . 
He sauntered . 
To stray is human . 
To saunter is Parisian . 
In reality , he had a penetrating mind and was more of a thinker than appeared to view . 
He served as a connecting link between the Friends of the A B C and other still unorganized groups , which were destined to take form later on . 
In this conclave of young heads , there was one bald member . 
The Marquis d'Avaray , whom Louis XVIII . 
made a duke for having assisted him to enter a hackney-coach on the day when he emigrated , was wont to relate , that in 1814 , on his return to France , as the King was disembarking at Calais , a man handed him a petition . 
`` What is your request ? '' 
said the King . 
`` Sire , a post-office . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` L'Aigle . '' 
The King frowned , glanced at the signature of the petition and beheld the name written thus : LESGLE . 
This non-Bonoparte orthography touched the King and he began to smile . 
`` Sire , '' resumed the man with the petition , `` I had for ancestor a keeper of the hounds surnamed Lesgueules . 
This surname furnished my name . 
I am called Lesgueules , by contraction Lesgle , and by corruption l'Aigle . '' 
This caused the King to smile broadly . 
Later on he gave the man the posting office of Meaux , either intentionally or accidentally . 
The bald member of the group was the son of this Lesgle , or Legle , and he signed himself , Legle -LSB- de Meaux -RSB- . 
As an abbreviation , his companions called him Bossuet . 
Bossuet was a gay but unlucky fellow . 
His specialty was not to succeed in anything . 
As an offset , he laughed at everything . 
At five and twenty he was bald . 
His father had ended by owning a house and a field ; but he , the son , had made haste to lose that house and field in a bad speculation . 
He had nothing left . 
He possessed knowledge and wit , but all he did miscarried . 
Everything failed him and everybody deceived him ; what he was building tumbled down on top of him . 
If he were splitting wood , he cut off a finger . 
If he had a mistress , he speedily discovered that he had a friend also . 
Some misfortune happened to him every moment , hence his joviality . 
He said : `` I live under falling tiles . '' 
He was not easily astonished , because , for him , an accident was what he had foreseen , he took his bad luck serenely , and smiled at the teasing of fate , like a person who is listening to pleasantries . 
He was poor , but his fund of good humor was inexhaustible . 
He soon reached his last sou , never his last burst of laughter . 
When adversity entered his doors , he saluted this old acquaintance cordially , he tapped all catastrophes on the stomach ; he was familiar with fatality to the point of calling it by its nickname : `` Good day , Guignon , '' he said to it . 
These persecutions of fate had rendered him inventive . 
He was full of resources . 
He had no money , but he found means , when it seemed good to him , to indulge in `` unbridled extravagance . '' 
One night , he went so far as to eat a `` hundred francs '' in a supper with a wench , which inspired him to make this memorable remark in the midst of the orgy : `` Pull off my boots , you five-louis jade . '' 
Bossuet was slowly directing his steps towards the profession of a lawyer ; he was pursuing his law studies after the manner of Bahorel . 
Bossuet had not much domicile , sometimes none at all . 
He lodged now with one , now with another , most often with Joly . 
Joly was studying medicine . 
He was two years younger than Bossuet . 
Joly was the `` malade imaginaire '' junior . 
What he had won in medicine was to be more of an invalid than a doctor . 
At three and twenty he thought himself a valetudinarian , and passed his life in inspecting his tongue in the mirror . 
He affirmed that man becomes magnetic like a needle , and in his chamber he placed his bed with its head to the south , and the foot to the north , so that , at night , the circulation of his blood might not be interfered with by the great electric current of the globe . 
During thunder storms , he felt his pulse . 
Otherwise , he was the gayest of them all . 
All these young , maniacal , puny , merry incoherences lived in harmony together , and the result was an eccentric and agreeable being whom his comrades , who were prodigal of winged consonants , called Jolllly . 
`` You may fly away on the four L 's , '' Jean Prouvaire said to him . 
-LSB- 23 -RSB- -LSB- 23 -RSB- L'Aile , wing . 
Joly had a trick of touching his nose with the tip of his cane , which is an indication of a sagacious mind . 
All these young men who differed so greatly , and who , on the whole , can only be discussed seriously , held the same religion : Progress . 
All were the direct sons of the French Revolution . 
The most giddy of them became solemn when they pronounced that date : ' 89 . 
Their fathers in the flesh had been , either royalists , doctrinaires , it matters not what ; this confusion anterior to themselves , who were young , did not concern them at all ; the pure blood of principle ran in their veins . 
They attached themselves , without intermediate shades , to incorruptible right and absolute duty . 
Affiliated and initiated , they sketched out the ideal underground . 
Among all these glowing hearts and thoroughly convinced minds , there was one sceptic . 
How came he there ? 
By juxtaposition . 
This sceptic 's name was Grantaire , and he was in the habit of signing himself with this rebus : R. Grantaire was a man who took good care not to believe in anything . 
Moreover , he was one of the students who had learned the most during their course at Paris ; he knew that the best coffee was to be had at the Cafe Lemblin , and the best billiards at the Cafe Voltaire , that good cakes and lasses were to be found at the Ermitage , on the Boulevard du Maine , spatchcocked chickens at Mother Sauget 's , excellent matelotes at the Barriere de la Cunette , and a certain thin white wine at the Barriere du Com pat . 
He knew the best place for everything ; in addition , boxing and foot-fencing and some dances ; and he was a thorough single-stick player . 
He was a tremendous drinker to boot . 
He was inordinately homely : the prettiest boot-stitcher of that day , Irma Boissy , enraged with his homeliness , pronounced sentence on him as follows : `` Grantaire is impossible '' ; but Grantaire 's fatuity was not to be disconcerted . 
He stared tenderly and fixedly at all women , with the air of saying to them all : `` If I only chose ! '' 
and of trying to make his comrades believe that he was in general demand . 
All those words : rights of the people , rights of man , the social contract , the French Revolution , the Republic , democracy , humanity , civilization , religion , progress , came very near to signifying nothing whatever to Grantaire . 
He smiled at them . 
Scepticism , that caries of the intelligence , had not left him a single whole idea . 
He lived with irony . 
This was his axiom : `` There is but one certainty , my full glass . '' 
He sneered at all devotion in all parties , the father as well as the brother , Robespierre junior as well as Loizerolles . 
`` They are greatly in advance to be dead , '' he exclaimed . 
He said of the crucifix : `` There is a gibbet which has been a success . '' 
A rover , a gambler , a libertine , often drunk , he displeased these young dreamers by humming incessantly : `` J'aimons les filles , et j' aimons le bon vin . '' 
Air : Vive Henri IV . 
However , this sceptic had one fanaticism . 
This fanaticism was neither a dogma , nor an idea , nor an art , nor a science ; it was a man : Enjolras . 
