There is a top and a bottom in this obscure sub-soil , which sometimes gives way beneath civilization , and which our indifference and heedlessness trample under foot . 
The Encyclopedia , in the last century , was a mine that was almost open to the sky . 
The shades , those sombre hatchers of primitive Christianity , only awaited an opportunity to bring about an explosion under the Caesars and to inundate the human race with light . 
For in the sacred shadows there lies latent light . 
Volcanoes are full of a shadow that is capable of flashing forth . 
Every form begins by being night . 
The catacombs , in which the first mass was said , were not alone the cellar of Rome , they were the vaults of the world . 
Beneath the social construction , that complicated marvel of a structure , there are excavations of all sorts . 
There is the religious mine , the philosophical mine , the economic mine , the revolutionary mine . 
Such and such a pick-axe with the idea , such a pick with ciphers . 
Such another with wrath . 
People hail and answer each other from one catacomb to another . 
Utopias travel about underground , in the pipes . 
There they branch out in every direction . 
They sometimes meet , and fraternize there . 
Jean-Jacques lends his pick to Diogenes , who lends him his lantern . 
Sometimes they enter into combat there . 
Calvin seizes Socinius by the hair . 
But nothing arrests nor interrupts the tension of all these energies toward the goal , and the vast , simultaneous activity , which goes and comes , mounts , descends , and mounts again in these obscurities , and which immense unknown swarming slowly transforms the top and the bottom and the inside and the outside . 
Society hardly even suspects this digging which leaves its surface intact and changes its bowels . 
There are as many different subterranean stages as there are varying works , as there are extractions . 
What emerges from these deep excavations ? 
The future . 
The deeper one goes , the more mysterious are the toilers . 
The work is good , up to a degree which the social philosophies are able to recognize ; beyond that degree it is doubtful and mixed ; lower down , it becomes terrible . 
At a certain depth , the excavations are no longer penetrable by the spirit of civilization , the limit breathable by man has been passed ; a beginning of monsters is possible . 
The descending scale is a strange one ; and each one of the rungs of this ladder corresponds to a stage where philosophy can find foothold , and where one encounters one of these workmen , sometimes divine , sometimes misshapen . 
Below John Huss , there is Luther ; below Luther , there is Descartes ; below Descartes , there is Voltaire ; below Voltaire , there is Condorcet ; below Condorcet , there is Robespierre ; below Robespierre , there is Marat ; below Marat there is Babeuf . 
And so it goes on . 
Lower down , confusedly , at the limit which separates the indistinct from the invisible , one perceives other gloomy men , who perhaps do not exist as yet . 
The men of yesterday are spectres ; those of to-morrow are forms . 
The eye of the spirit distinguishes them but obscurely . 
The embryonic work of the future is one of the visions of philosophy . 
A world in limbo , in the state of foetus , what an unheard-of spectre ! 
Saint-Simon , Owen , Fourier , are there also , in lateral galleries . 
Surely , although a divine and invisible chain unknown to themselves , binds together all these subterranean pioneers who , almost always , think themselves isolated , and who are not so , their works vary greatly , and the light of some contrasts with the blaze of others . 
The first are paradisiacal , the last are tragic . 
Nevertheless , whatever may be the contrast , all these toilers , from the highest to the most nocturnal , from the wisest to the most foolish , possess one likeness , and this is it : disinterestedness . 
Marat forgets himself like Jesus . 
They throw themselves on one side , they omit themselves , they think not of themselves . 
They have a glance , and that glance seeks the absolute . 
The first has the whole heavens in his eyes ; the last , enigmatical though he may be , has still , beneath his eyelids , the pale beam of the infinite . 
Venerate the man , whoever he may be , who has this sign -- the starry eye . 
The shadowy eye is the other sign . 
With it , evil commences . 
Reflect and tremble in the presence of any one who has no glance at all . 
The social order has its black miners . 
There is a point where depth is tantamount to burial , and where light becomes extinct . 
Below all these mines which we have just mentioned , below all these galleries , below this whole immense , subterranean , venous system of progress and utopia , much further on in the earth , much lower than Marat , lower than Babeuf , lower , much lower , and without any connection with the upper levels , there lies the last mine . 
A formidable spot . 
This is what we have designated as the le troisieme dessous . 
It is the grave of shadows . 
It is the cellar of the blind . 
Inferi . 
This communicates with the abyss . 
THE LOWEST DEPTHS There disinterestedness vanishes . 
The demon is vaguely outlined ; each one is for himself . 
The I in the eyes howls , seeks , fumbles , and gnaws . 
The social Ugolino is in this gulf . 
The wild spectres who roam in this grave , almost beasts , almost phantoms , are not occupied with universal progress ; they are ignorant both of the idea and of the word ; they take no thought for anything but the satisfaction of their individual desires . 
They are almost unconscious , and there exists within them a sort of terrible obliteration . 
They have two mothers , both step-mothers , ignorance and misery . 
They have a guide , necessity ; and for all forms of satisfaction , appetite . 
They are brutally voracious , that is to say , ferocious , not after the fashion of the tyrant , but after the fashion of the tiger . 
From suffering these spectres pass to crime ; fatal affiliation , dizzy creation , logic of darkness . 
That which crawls in the social third lower level is no longer complaint stifled by the absolute ; it is the protest of matter . 
Man there becomes a dragon . 
To be hungry , to be thirsty -- that is the point of departure ; to be Satan -- that is the point reached . 
From that vault Lacenaire emerges . 
We have just seen , in Book Fourth , one of the compartments of the upper mine , of the great political , revolutionary , and philosophical excavation . 
There , as we have just said , all is pure , noble , dignified , honest . 
There , assuredly , one might be misled ; but error is worthy of veneration there , so thoroughly does it imply heroism . 
The work there effected , taken as a whole has a name : Progress . 
The moment has now come when we must take a look at other depths , hideous depths . 
There exists beneath society , we insist upon this point , and there will exist , until that day when ignorance shall be dissipated , the great cavern of evil . 
This cavern is below all , and is the foe of all . 
It is hatred , without exception . 
This cavern knows no philosophers ; its dagger has never cut a pen . 
Its blackness has no connection with the sublime blackness of the inkstand . 
Never have the fingers of night which contract beneath this stifling ceiling , turned the leaves of a book nor unfolded a newspaper . 
Babeuf is a speculator to Cartouche ; Marat is an aristocrat to Schinderhannes . 
This cavern has for its object the destruction of everything . 
Of everything . 
Including the upper superior mines , which it execrates . 
It not only undermines , in its hideous swarming , the actual social order ; it undermines philosophy , it undermines human thought , it undermines civilization , it undermines revolution , it undermines progress . 
Its name is simply theft , prostitution , murder , assassination . 
It is darkness , and it desires chaos . 
Its vault is formed of ignorance . 
All the others , those above it , have but one object -- to suppress it . 
It is to this point that philosophy and progress tend , with all their organs simultaneously , by their amelioration of the real , as well as by their contemplation of the absolute . 
Destroy the cavern Ignorance and you destroy the lair Crime . 
Let us condense , in a few words , a part of what we have just written . 
The only social peril is darkness . 
Humanity is identity . 
All men are made of the same clay . 
There is no difference , here below , at least , in predestination . 
The same shadow in front , the same flesh in the present , the same ashes afterwards . 
But ignorance , mingled with the human paste , blackens it . 
This incurable blackness takes possession of the interior of a man and is there converted into evil . 
BABET , GUEULEMER , CLAQUESOUS , AND MONTPARNASSE A quartette of ruffians , Claquesous , Gueulemer , Babet , and Montparnasse governed the third lower floor of Paris , from 1830 to 1835 . 
