Have pity on my misery . 
I will not ask you much for it . 
How much do you think it is worth ? '' 
`` Well , '' said M. Leblanc , looking Jondrette full in the eye , and with the manner of a man who is on his guard , `` it is some signboard for a tavern , and is worth about three francs . '' 
Jondrette replied sweetly : -- `` Have you your pocket-book with you ? 
I should be satisfied with a thousand crowns . '' 
M. Leblanc sprang up , placed his back against the wall , and cast a rapid glance around the room . 
He had Jondrette on his left , on the side next the window , and the Jondrette woman and the four men on his right , on the side next the door . 
The four men did not stir , and did not even seem to be looking on . 
Jondrette had again begun to speak in a plaintive tone , with so vague an eye , and so lamentable an intonation , that M. Leblanc might have supposed that what he had before him was a man who had simply gone mad with misery . 
`` If you do not buy my picture , my dear benefactor , '' said Jondrette , `` I shall be left without resources ; there will be nothing left for me but to throw myself into the river . 
When I think that I wanted to have my two girls taught the middle-class paper-box trade , the making of boxes for New Year 's gifts ! 
Well ! 
A table with a board at the end to keep the glasses from falling off is required , then a special stove is needed , a pot with three compartments for the different degrees of strength of the paste , according as it is to be used for wood , paper , or stuff , a paring-knife to cut the cardboard , a mould to adjust it , a hammer to nail the steels , pincers , how the devil do I know what all ? 
And all that in order to earn four sous a day ! 
And you have to work fourteen hours a day ! 
And each box passes through the workwoman 's hands thirteen times ! 
And you ca n't wet the paper ! 
And you must n't spot anything ! 
And you must keep the paste hot . 
The devil , I tell you ! 
Four sous a day ! 
How do you suppose a man is to live ? '' 
As he spoke , Jondrette did not look at M. Leblanc , who was observing him . 
M. Leblanc 's eye was fixed on Jondrette , and Jondrette 's eye was fixed on the door . 
Marius ' eager attention was transferred from one to the other . 
M. Leblanc seemed to be asking himself : `` Is this man an idiot ? '' 
Jondrette repeated two or three distinct times , with all manner of varying inflections of the whining and supplicating order : `` There is nothing left for me but to throw myself into the river ! 
I went down three steps at the side of the bridge of Austerlitz the other day for that purpose . '' 
All at once his dull eyes lighted up with a hideous flash ; the little man drew himself up and became terrible , took a step toward M. Leblanc and cried in a voice of thunder : `` That has nothing to do with the question ! 
Do you know me ? '' 
THE TRAP The door of the garret had just opened abruptly , and allowed a view of three men clad in blue linen blouses , and masked with masks of black paper . 
The first was thin , and had a long , iron-tipped cudgel ; the second , who was a sort of colossus , carried , by the middle of the handle , with the blade downward , a butcher 's pole-axe for slaughtering cattle . 
The third , a man with thick-set shoulders , not so slender as the first , held in his hand an enormous key stolen from the door of some prison . 
It appeared that the arrival of these men was what Jondrette had been waiting for . 
A rapid dialogue ensued between him and the man with the cudgel , the thin one . 
`` Is everything ready ? '' 
said Jondrette . 
`` Yes , '' replied the thin man . 
`` Where is Montparnasse ? '' 
`` The young principal actor stopped to chat with your girl . '' 
`` Which ? '' 
`` The eldest . '' 
`` Is there a carriage at the door ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Is the team harnessed ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` With two good horses ? '' 
`` Excellent . '' 
`` Is it waiting where I ordered ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Good , '' said Jondrette . 
M. Leblanc was very pale . 
He was scrutinizing everything around him in the den , like a man who understands what he has fallen into , and his head , directed in turn toward all the heads which surrounded him , moved on his neck with an astonished and attentive slowness , but there was nothing in his air which resembled fear . 
He had improvised an intrenchment out of the table ; and the man , who but an instant previously , had borne merely the appearance of a kindly old man , had suddenly become a sort of athlete , and placed his robust fist on the back of his chair , with a formidable and surprising gesture . 
This old man , who was so firm and so brave in the presence of such a danger , seemed to possess one of those natures which are as courageous as they are kind , both easily and simply . 
The father of a woman whom we love is never a stranger to us . 
Marius felt proud of that unknown man . 
Three of the men , of whom Jondrette had said : `` They are chimney-builders , '' had armed themselves from the pile of old iron , one with a heavy pair of shears , the second with weighing-tongs , the third with a hammer , and had placed themselves across the entrance without uttering a syllable . 
The old man had remained on the bed , and had merely opened his eyes . 
The Jondrette woman had seated herself beside him . 
Marius decided that in a few seconds more the moment for intervention would arrive , and he raised his right hand towards the ceiling , in the direction of the corridor , in readiness to discharge his pistol . 
Jondrette having terminated his colloquy with the man with the cudgel , turned once more to M. Leblanc , and repeated his question , accompanying it with that low , repressed , and terrible laugh which was peculiar to him : -- `` So you do not recognize me ? '' 
M. Leblanc looked him full in the face , and replied : -- `` No . '' 
Then Jondrette advanced to the table . 
He leaned across the candle , crossing his arms , putting his angular and ferocious jaw close to M. Leblanc 's calm face , and advancing as far as possible without forcing M. Leblanc to retreat , and , in this posture of a wild beast who is about to bite , he exclaimed : -- `` My name is not Fabantou , my name is not Jondrette , my name is Thenardier . 
I am the inn-keeper of Montfermeil ! 
Do you understand ? 
Thenardier ! 
Now do you know me ? '' 
An almost imperceptible flush crossed M. Leblanc 's brow , and he replied with a voice which neither trembled nor rose above its ordinary level , with his accustomed placidity : -- `` No more than before . '' 
Marius did not hear this reply . 
Any one who had seen him at that moment through the darkness would have perceived that he was haggard , stupid , thunder-struck . 
At the moment when Jondrette said : `` My name is Thenardier , '' Marius had trembled in every limb , and had leaned against the wall , as though he felt the cold of a steel blade through his heart . 
Then his right arm , all ready to discharge the signal shot , dropped slowly , and at the moment when Jondrette repeated , `` Thenardier , do you understand ? '' 
Marius 's faltering fingers had come near letting the pistol fall . 
Jondrette , by revealing his identity , had not moved M. Leblanc , but he had quite upset Marius . 
That name of Thenardier , with which M. Leblanc did not seem to be acquainted , Marius knew well . 
Let the reader recall what that name meant to him ! 
That name he had worn on his heart , inscribed in his father 's testament ! 
He bore it at the bottom of his mind , in the depths of his memory , in that sacred injunction : `` A certain Thenardier saved my life . 
If my son encounters him , he will do him all the good that lies in his power . '' 
That name , it will be remembered , was one of the pieties of his soul ; he mingled it with the name of his father in his worship . 
What ! 
This man was that Thenardier , that inn-keeper of Montfermeil whom he had so long and so vainly sought ! 
He had found him at last , and how ? 
His father 's saviour was a ruffian ! 
That man , to whose service Marius was burning to devote himself , was a monster ! 
That liberator of Colonel Pontmercy was on the point of committing a crime whose scope Marius did not , as yet , clearly comprehend , but which resembled an assassination ! 
And against whom , great God ! 
what a fatality ! 
What a bitter mockery of fate ! 
His father had commanded him from the depths of his coffin to do all the good in his power to this Thenardier , and for four years Marius had cherished no other thought than to acquit this debt of his father 's , and at the moment when he was on the eve of having a brigand seized in the very act of crime by justice , destiny cried to him : `` This is Thenardier ! '' 
He could at last repay this man for his father 's life , saved amid a hail-storm of grape-shot on the heroic field of Waterloo , and repay it with the scaffold ! 
He had sworn to himself that if ever he found that Thenardier , he would address him only by throwing himself at his feet ; and now he actually had found him , but it was only to deliver him over to the executioner ! 
His father said to him : `` Succor Thenardier ! '' 
And he replied to that adored and sainted voice by crushing Thenardier ! 
He was about to offer to his father in his grave the spectacle of that man who had torn him from death at the peril of his own life , executed on the Place Saint-Jacques through the means of his son , of that Marius to whom he had entrusted that man by his will ! 
And what a mockery to have so long worn on his breast his father 's last commands , written in his own hand , only to act in so horribly contrary a sense ! 
But , on the other hand , now look on that trap and not prevent it ! 
