`` I will make myself intelligible . 
In a certain arrondissement of the Pas de Calais , there was , in 1822 , a man who had fallen out with justice , and who , under the name of M. Madeleine , had regained his status and rehabilitated himself . 
This man had become a just man in the full force of the term . 
In a trade , the manufacture of black glass goods , he made the fortune of an entire city . 
As far as his personal fortune was concerned he made that also , but as a secondary matter , and in some sort , by accident . 
He was the foster-father of the poor . 
He founded hospitals , opened schools , visited the sick , dowered young girls , supported widows , and adopted orphans ; he was like the guardian angel of the country . 
He refused the cross , he was appointed Mayor . 
A liberated convict knew the secret of a penalty incurred by this man in former days ; he denounced him , and had him arrested , and profited by the arrest to come to Paris and cause the banker Laffitte , -- I have the fact from the cashier himself , -- by means of a false signature , to hand over to him the sum of over half a million which belonged to M. Madeleine . 
This convict who robbed M. Madeleine was Jean Valjean . 
As for the other fact , you have nothing to tell me about it either . 
Jean Valjean killed the agent Javert ; he shot him with a pistol . 
I , the person who is speaking to you , was present . '' 
Thenardier cast upon Marius the sovereign glance of a conquered man who lays his hand once more upon the victory , and who has just regained , in one instant , all the ground which he has lost . 
But the smile returned instantly . 
The inferior 's triumph in the presence of his superior must be wheedling . 
Thenardier contented himself with saying to Marius : `` Monsieur le Baron , we are on the wrong track . '' 
And he emphasized this phrase by making his bunch of seals execute an expressive whirl . 
`` What ! '' 
broke forth Marius , `` do you dispute that ? 
These are facts . '' 
`` They are chimeras . 
The confidence with which Monsieur le Baron honors me renders it my duty to tell him so . 
Truth and justice before all things . 
I do not like to see folks accused unjustly . 
Monsieur le Baron , Jean Valjean did not rob M. Madeleine and Jean Valjean did not kill Javert . '' 
`` This is too much ! 
How is this ? '' 
`` For two reasons . '' 
`` What are they ? 
Speak . '' 
`` This is the first : he did not rob M. Madeleine , because it is Jean Valjean himself who was M. Madeleine . '' 
`` What tale are you telling me ? '' 
`` And this is the second : he did not assassinate Javert , because the person who killed Javert was Javert . '' 
`` What do you mean to say ? '' 
`` That Javert committed suicide . '' 
`` Prove it ! 
prove it ! '' 
cried Marius beside himself . 
Thenardier resumed , scanning his phrase after the manner of the ancient Alexandrine measure : `` Police-agent-Ja-vert-was-found-drowned-un-der-a-boat-of-the-Pont-au-Change . '' 
`` But prove it ! '' 
Thenardier drew from his pocket a large envelope of gray paper , which seemed to contain sheets folded in different sizes . 
`` I have my papers , '' he said calmly . 
And he added : `` Monsieur le Baron , in your interests I desired to know Jean Valjean thoroughly . 
I say that Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine are one and the same man , and I say that Javert had no other assassin than Javert . 
If I speak , it is because I have proofs . 
Not manuscript proofs -- writing is suspicious , handwriting is complaisant , -- but printed proofs . '' 
As he spoke , Thenardier extracted from the envelope two copies of newspapers , yellow , faded , and strongly saturated with tobacco . 
One of these two newspapers , broken at every fold and falling into rags , seemed much older than the other . 
`` Two facts , two proofs , '' remarked Thenardier . 
And he offered the two newspapers , unfolded , to Marius , The reader is acquainted with these two papers . 
One , the most ancient , a number of the Drapeau Blanc of the 25th of July , 1823 , the text of which can be seen in the first volume , established the identity of M. Madeleine and Jean Valjean . 
The other , a Moniteur of the 15th of June , 1832 , announced the suicide of Javert , adding that it appeared from a verbal report of Javert to the prefect that , having been taken prisoner in the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , he had owed his life to the magnanimity of an insurgent who , holding him under his pistol , had fired into the air , instead of blowing out his brains . 
Marius read . 
He had evidence , a certain date , irrefragable proof , these two newspapers had not been printed expressly for the purpose of backing up Thenardier 's statements ; the note printed in the Moniteur had been an administrative communication from the Prefecture of Police . 
Marius could not doubt . 
The information of the cashier-clerk had been false , and he himself had been deceived . 
Jean Valjean , who had suddenly grown grand , emerged from his cloud . 
Marius could not repress a cry of joy . 
`` Well , then this unhappy wretch is an admirable man ! 
the whole of that fortune really belonged to him ! 
he is Madeleine , the providence of a whole countryside ! 
he is Jean Valjean , Javert 's savior ! 
he is a hero ! 
he is a saint ! '' 
`` He 's not a saint , and he 's not a hero ! '' 
said Thenardier . 
`` He 's an assassin and a robber . '' 
And he added , in the tone of a man who begins to feel that he possesses some authority : `` Let us be calm . '' 
Robber , assassin -- those words which Marius thought had disappeared and which returned , fell upon him like an ice-cold shower-bath . 
`` Again ! '' 
said he . 
`` Always , '' ejaculated Thenardier . 
`` Jean Valjean did not rob Madeleine , but he is a thief . 
He did not kill Javert , but he is a murderer . '' 
`` Will you speak , '' retorted Marius , `` of that miserable theft , committed forty years ago , and expiated , as your own newspapers prove , by a whole life of repentance , of self-abnegation and of virtue ? '' 
`` I say assassination and theft , Monsieur le Baron , and I repeat that I am speaking of actual facts . 
What I have to reveal to you is absolutely unknown . 
It belongs to unpublished matter . 
And perhaps you will find in it the source of the fortune so skilfully presented to Madame la Baronne by Jean Valjean . 
I say skilfully , because , by a gift of that nature it would not be so very unskilful to slip into an honorable house whose comforts one would then share , and , at the same stroke , to conceal one 's crime , and to enjoy one 's theft , to bury one 's name and to create for oneself a family . '' 
`` I might interrupt you at this point , '' said Marius , `` but go on . '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , I will tell you all , leaving the recompense to your generosity . 
This secret is worth massive gold . 
You will say to me : ` Why do not you apply to Jean Valjean ? ' 
For a very simple reason ; I know that he has stripped himself , and stripped himself in your favor , and I consider the combination ingenious ; but he has no longer a son , he would show me his empty hands , and , since I am in need of some money for my trip to la Joya , I prefer you , you who have it all , to him who has nothing . 
I am a little fatigued , permit me to take a chair . '' 
Marius seated himself and motioned to him to do the same . 
Thenardier installed himself on a tufted chair , picked up his two newspapers , thrust them back into their envelope , and murmured as he pecked at the Drapeau Blanc with his nail : `` It cost me a good deal of trouble to get this one . '' 
That done he crossed his legs and stretched himself out on the back of the chair , an attitude characteristic of people who are sure of what they are saying , then he entered upon his subject gravely , emphasizing his words : `` Monsieur le Baron , on the 6th of June , 1832 , about a year ago , on the day of the insurrection , a man was in the Grand Sewer of Paris , at the point where the sewer enters the Seine , between the Pont des Invalides and the Pont de Jena . '' 
Marius abruptly drew his chair closer to that of Thenardier . 
Thenardier noticed this movement and continued with the deliberation of an orator who holds his interlocutor and who feels his adversary palpitating under his words : `` This man , forced to conceal himself , and for reasons , moreover , which are foreign to politics , had adopted the sewer as his domicile and had a key to it . 
It was , I repeat , on the 6th of June ; it might have been eight o'clock in the evening . 
The man hears a noise in the sewer . 
Greatly surprised , he hides himself and lies in wait . 
It was the sound of footsteps , some one was walking in the dark , and coming in his direction . 
Strange to say , there was another man in the sewer besides himself . 
The grating of the outlet from the sewer was not far off . 
A little light which fell through it permitted him to recognize the newcomer , and to see that the man was carrying something on his back . 
He was walking in a bent attitude . 
