I was liberated four days ago , and am on my way to Pontarlier , which is my destination . 
I have been walking for four days since I left Toulon . 
I have travelled a dozen leagues to-day on foot . 
This evening , when I arrived in these parts , I went to an inn , and they turned me out , because of my yellow passport , which I had shown at the town-hall . 
I had to do it . 
I went to an inn . 
They said to me , ` Be off , ' at both places . 
No one would take me . 
I went to the prison ; the jailer would not admit me . 
I went into a dog 's kennel ; the dog bit me and chased me off , as though he had been a man . 
One would have said that he knew who I was . 
I went into the fields , intending to sleep in the open air , beneath the stars . 
There were no stars . 
I thought it was going to rain , and I re-entered the town , to seek the recess of a doorway . 
Yonder , in the square , I meant to sleep on a stone bench . 
A good woman pointed out your house to me , and said to me , ` Knock there ! ' 
I have knocked . 
What is this place ? 
Do you keep an inn ? 
I have money -- savings . 
One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous , which I earned in the galleys by my labor , in the course of nineteen years . 
I will pay . 
What is that to me ? 
I have money . 
I am very weary ; twelve leagues on foot ; I am very hungry . 
Are you willing that I should remain ? '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` you will set another place . '' 
The man advanced three paces , and approached the lamp which was on the table . 
`` Stop , '' he resumed , as though he had not quite understood ; `` that 's not it . 
Did you hear ? 
I am a galley-slave ; a convict . 
I come from the galleys . '' 
He drew from his pocket a large sheet of yellow paper , which he unfolded . 
`` Here 's my passport . 
Yellow , as you see . 
This serves to expel me from every place where I go . 
Will you read it ? 
I know how to read . 
I learned in the galleys . 
There is a school there for those who choose to learn . 
Hold , this is what they put on this passport : ` Jean Valjean , discharged convict , native of ' -- that is nothing to you -- ` has been nineteen years in the galleys : five years for house-breaking and burglary ; fourteen years for having attempted to escape on four occasions . 
He is a very dangerous man . ' 
There ! 
Every one has cast me out . 
Are you willing to receive me ? 
Is this an inn ? 
Will you give me something to eat and a bed ? 
Have you a stable ? '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` you will put white sheets on the bed in the alcove . '' 
We have already explained the character of the two women 's obedience . 
Madame Magloire retired to execute these orders . 
The Bishop turned to the man . 
`` Sit down , sir , and warm yourself . 
We are going to sup in a few moments , and your bed will be prepared while you are supping . '' 
At this point the man suddenly comprehended . 
The expression of his face , up to that time sombre and harsh , bore the imprint of stupefaction , of doubt , of joy , and became extraordinary . 
He began stammering like a crazy man : -- `` Really ? 
What ! 
You will keep me ? 
You do not drive me forth ? 
A convict ! 
You call me sir ! 
You do not address me as thou ? 
` Get out of here , you dog ! ' 
is what people always say to me . 
I felt sure that you would expel me , so I told you at once who I am . 
Oh , what a good woman that was who directed me hither ! 
I am going to sup ! 
A bed with a mattress and sheets , like the rest of the world ! 
a bed ! 
It is nineteen years since I have slept in a bed ! 
You actually do not want me to go ! 
You are good people . 
Besides , I have money . 
I will pay well . 
Pardon me , monsieur the inn-keeper , but what is your name ? 
I will pay anything you ask . 
You are a fine man . 
You are an inn-keeper , are you not ? '' 
`` I am , '' replied the Bishop , `` a priest who lives here . '' 
`` A priest ! '' 
said the man . 
`` Oh , what a fine priest ! 
Then you are not going to demand any money of me ? 
You are the cure , are you not ? 
the cure of this big church ? 
Well ! 
I am a fool , truly ! 
I had not perceived your skull-cap . '' 
As he spoke , he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner , replaced his passport in his pocket , and seated himself . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine gazed mildly at him . 
He continued : `` You are humane , Monsieur le Cure ; you have not scorned me . 
A good priest is a very good thing . 
Then you do not require me to pay ? '' 
`` No , '' said the Bishop ; `` keep your money . 
How much have you ? 
Did you not tell me one hundred and nine francs ? '' 
`` And fifteen sous , '' added the man . 
`` One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous . 
And how long did it take you to earn that ? '' 
