Stupefied , he turned round . 
Behind him , in the portion of the passage which he had just passed through , at a distance which appeared to him immense , piercing the dense obscurity , flamed a sort of horrible star which had the air of surveying him . 
It was the gloomy star of the police which was rising in the sewer . 
In the rear of that star eight or ten forms were moving about in a confused way , black , upright , indistinct , horrible . 
EXPLANATION On the day of the sixth of June , a battue of the sewers had been ordered . 
It was feared that the vanquished might have taken to them for refuge , and Prefect Gisquet was to search occult Paris while General Bugeaud swept public Paris ; a double and connected operation which exacted a double strategy on the part of the public force , represented above by the army and below by the police . 
Three squads of agents and sewermen explored the subterranean drain of Paris , the first on the right bank , the second on the left bank , the third in the city . 
The agents of police were armed with carabines , with bludgeons , swords and poignards . 
That which was directed at Jean Valjean at that moment , was the lantern of the patrol of the right bank . 
This patrol had just visited the curving gallery and the three blind alleys which lie beneath the Rue du Cadran . 
While they were passing their lantern through the depths of these blind alleys , Jean Valjean had encountered on his path the entrance to the gallery , had perceived that it was narrower than the principal passage and had not penetrated thither . 
He had passed on . 
The police , on emerging from the gallery du Cadran , had fancied that they heard the sound of footsteps in the direction of the belt sewer . 
They were , in fact , the steps of Jean Valjean . 
The sergeant in command of the patrol had raised his lantern , and the squad had begun to gaze into the mist in the direction whence the sound proceeded . 
This was an indescribable moment for Jean Valjean . 
Happily , if he saw the lantern well , the lantern saw him but ill . 
It was light and he was shadow . 
He was very far off , and mingled with the darkness of the place . 
He hugged the wall and halted . 
Moreover , he did not understand what it was that was moving behind him . 
The lack of sleep and food , and his emotions had caused him also to pass into the state of a visionary . 
He beheld a gleam , and around that gleam , forms . 
What was it ? 
He did not comprehend . 
Jean Valjean having paused , the sound ceased . 
The men of the patrol listened , and heard nothing , they looked and saw nothing . 
They held a consultation . 
There existed at that epoch at this point of the Montmartre sewer a sort of cross-roads called de service , which was afterwards suppressed , on account of the little interior lake which formed there , swallowing up the torrent of rain in heavy storms . 
The patrol could form a cluster in this open space . 
Jean Valjean saw these spectres form a sort of circle . 
These bull-dogs ' heads approached each other closely and whispered together . 
The result of this council held by the watch dogs was , that they had been mistaken , that there had been no noise , that it was useless to get entangled in the belt sewer , that it would only be a waste of time , but that they ought to hasten towards Saint-Merry ; that if there was anything to do , and any `` bousingot '' to track out , it was in that quarter . 
From time to time , parties re-sole their old insults . 
In 1832 , the word bousingot formed the interim between the word jacobin , which had become obsolete , and the word demagogue which has since rendered such excellent service . 
The sergeant gave orders to turn to the left , towards the watershed of the Seine . 
If it had occurred to them to separate into two squads , and to go in both directions , Jean Valjean would have been captured . 
All hung on that thread . 
It is probable that the instructions of the prefecture , foreseeing a possibility of combat and insurgents in force , had forbidden the patrol to part company . 
The patrol resumed its march , leaving Jean Valjean behind it . 
Of all this movement , Jean Valjean perceived nothing , except the eclipse of the lantern which suddenly wheeled round . 
Before taking his departure , the Sergeant , in order to acquit his policeman 's conscience , discharged his gun in the direction of Jean Valjean . 
The detonation rolled from echo to echo in the crypt , like the rumbling of that titanic entrail . 
A bit of plaster which fell into the stream and splashed up the water a few paces away from Jean Valjean , warned him that the ball had struck the arch over his head . 
Slow and measured steps resounded for some time on the timber work , gradually dying away as they retreated to a greater distance ; the group of black forms vanished , a glimmer of light oscillated and floated , communicating to the vault a reddish glow which grew fainter , then disappeared ; the silence became profound once more , the obscurity became complete , blindness and deafness resumed possession of the shadows ; and Jean Valjean , not daring to stir as yet , remained for a long time leaning with his back against the wall , with straining ears , and dilated pupils , watching the disappearance of that phantom patrol . 
THE `` SPUN '' MAN This justice must be rendered to the police of that period , that even in the most serious public junctures , it imperturbably fulfilled its duties connected with the sewers and surveillance . 
A revolt was , in its eyes , no pretext for allowing malefactors to take the bit in their own mouths , and for neglecting society for the reason that the government was in peril . 
The ordinary service was performed correctly in company with the extraordinary service , and was not troubled by the latter . 
In the midst of an incalculable political event already begun , under the pressure of a possible revolution , a police agent , `` spun '' a thief without allowing himself to be distracted by insurrection and barricades . 
It was something precisely parallel which took place on the afternoon of the 6th of June on the banks of the Seine , on the slope of the right shore , a little beyond the Pont des Invalides . 
There is no longer any bank there now . 
The aspect of the locality has changed . 
On that bank , two men , separated by a certain distance , seemed to be watching each other while mutually avoiding each other . 
The one who was in advance was trying to get away , the one in the rear was trying to overtake the other . 
It was like a game of checkers played at a distance and in silence . 
Neither seemed to be in any hurry , and both walked slowly , as though each of them feared by too much haste to make his partner redouble his pace . 
One would have said that it was an appetite following its prey , and purposely without wearing the air of doing so . 
The prey was crafty and on its guard . 
The proper relations between the hunted pole-cat and the hunting dog were observed . 
The one who was seeking to escape had an insignificant mien and not an impressive appearance ; the one who was seeking to seize him was rude of aspect , and must have been rude to encounter . 
The first , conscious that he was the more feeble , avoided the second ; but he avoided him in a manner which was deeply furious ; any one who could have observed him would have discerned in his eyes the sombre hostility of flight , and all the menace that fear contains . 
The shore was deserted ; there were no passers-by ; not even a boatman nor a lighter-man was in the skiffs which were moored here and there . 
It was not easy to see these two men , except from the quay opposite , and to any person who had scrutinized them at that distance , the man who was in advance would have appeared like a bristling , tattered , and equivocal being , who was uneasy and trembling beneath a ragged blouse , and the other like a classic and official personage , wearing the frock-coat of authority buttoned to the chin . 
Perchance the reader might recognize these two men , if he were to see them closer at hand . 
What was the object of the second man ? 
Probably to succeed in clothing the first more warmly . 
When a man clothed by the state pursues a man in rags , it is in order to make of him a man who is also clothed by the state . 
Only , the whole question lies in the color . 
To be dressed in blue is glorious ; to be dressed in red is disagreeable . 
There is a purple from below . 
It is probably some unpleasantness and some purple of this sort which the first man is desirous of shirking . 
If the other allowed him to walk on , and had not seized him as yet , it was , judging from all appearances , in the hope of seeing him lead up to some significant meeting-place and to some group worth catching . 
This delicate operation is called `` spinning . '' 
What renders this conjecture entirely probable is that the buttoned-up man , on catching sight from the shore of a hackney-coach on the quay as it was passing along empty , made a sign to the driver ; the driver understood , evidently recognized the person with whom he had to deal , turned about and began to follow the two men at the top of the quay , at a foot-pace . 
This was not observed by the slouching and tattered personage who was in advance . 
The hackney-coach rolled along the trees of the Champs-Elysees . 
The bust of the driver , whip in hand , could be seen moving along above the parapet . 
One of the secret instructions of the police authorities to their agents contains this article : `` Always have on hand a hackney-coach , in case of emergency . '' 
While these two men were manoeuvring , each on his own side , with irreproachable strategy , they approached an inclined plane on the quay which descended to the shore , and which permitted cab-drivers arriving from Passy to come to the river and water their horses . 
This inclined plane was suppressed later on , for the sake of symmetry ; horses may die of thirst , but the eye is gratified . 
It is probable that the man in the blouse had intended to ascend this inclined plane , with a view to making his escape into the Champs-Elysees , a place ornamented with trees , but , in return , much infested with policemen , and where the other could easily exercise violence . 
This point on the quay is not very far distant from the house brought to Paris from Moret in 1824 , by Colonel Brack , and designated as `` the house of Francois I. '' A guard house is situated close at hand . 
To the great surprise of his watcher , the man who was being tracked did not mount by the inclined plane for watering . 
He continued to advance along the quay on the shore . 
His position was visibly becoming critical . 
What was he intending to do , if not to throw himself into the Seine ? 
Henceforth , there existed no means of ascending to the quay ; there was no other inclined plane , no staircase ; and they were near the spot , marked by the bend in the Seine towards the Pont de Jena , where the bank , growing constantly narrower , ended in a slender tongue , and was lost in the water . 
There he would inevitably find himself blocked between the perpendicular wall on his right , the river on his left and in front of him , and the authorities on his heels . 
It is true that this termination of the shore was hidden from sight by a heap of rubbish six or seven feet in height , produced by some demolition or other . 
But did this man hope to conceal himself effectually behind that heap of rubbish , which one need but skirt ? 
The expedient would have been puerile . 
He certainly was not dreaming of such a thing . 
The innocence of thieves does not extend to that point . 
The pile of rubbish formed a sort of projection at the water 's edge , which was prolonged in a promontory as far as the wall of the quay . 
The man who was being followed arrived at this little mound and went round it , so that he ceased to be seen by the other . 
The latter , as he did not see , could not be seen ; he took advantage of this fact to abandon all dissimulation and to walk very rapidly . 
In a few moments , he had reached the rubbish heap and passed round it . 
There he halted in sheer amazement . 
The man whom he had been pursuing was no longer there . 
Total eclipse of the man in the blouse . 
