Still , how had it come to pass that , having fallen in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , he had been picked up by the police-agent on the banks of the Seine , near the Pont des Invalides ? 
Some one had carried him from the Quartier des Halles to the Champs-Elysees . 
And how ? 
Through the sewer . 
Unheard-of devotion ! 
Some one ? 
Who ? 
This was the man for whom Marius was searching . 
Of this man , who was his savior , nothing ; not a trace ; not the faintest indication . 
Marius , although forced to preserve great reserve , in that direction , pushed his inquiries as far as the prefecture of police . 
There , no more than elsewhere , did the information obtained lead to any enlightenment . 
The prefecture knew less about the matter than did the hackney-coachman . 
They had no knowledge of any arrest having been made on the 6th of June at the mouth of the Grand Sewer . 
No report of any agent had been received there upon this matter , which was regarded at the prefecture as a fable . 
The invention of this fable was attributed to the coachman . 
A coachman who wants a gratuity is capable of anything , even of imagination . 
The fact was assured , nevertheless , and Marius could not doubt it , unless he doubted his own identity , as we have just said . 
Everything about this singular enigma was inexplicable . 
What had become of that man , that mysterious man , whom the coachman had seen emerge from the grating of the Grand Sewer bearing upon his back the unconscious Marius , and whom the police-agent on the watch had arrested in the very act of rescuing an insurgent ? 
What had become of the agent himself ? 
Why had this agent preserved silence ? 
Had the man succeeded in making his escape ? 
Had he bribed the agent ? 
Why did this man give no sign of life to Marius , who owed everything to him ? 
His disinterestedness was no less tremendous than his devotion . 
Why had not that man appeared again ? 
Perhaps he was above compensation , but no one is above gratitude . 
Was he dead ? 
Who was the man ? 
What sort of a face had he ? 
No one could tell him this . 
The coachman answered : `` The night was very dark . '' 
Basque and Nicolette , all in a flutter , had looked only at their young master all covered with blood . 
The porter , whose candle had lighted the tragic arrival of Marius , had been the only one to take note of the man in question , and this is the description that he gave : `` That man was terrible . '' 
Marius had the blood-stained clothing which he had worn when he had been brought back to his grandfather preserved , in the hope that it would prove of service in his researches . 
On examining the coat , it was found that one skirt had been torn in a singular way . 
A piece was missing . 
One evening , Marius was speaking in the presence of Cosette and Jean Valjean of the whole of that singular adventure , of the innumerable inquiries which he had made , and of the fruitlessness of his efforts . 
The cold countenance of `` Monsieur Fauchelevent '' angered him . 
He exclaimed , with a vivacity which had something of wrath in it : `` Yes , that man , whoever he may have been , was sublime . 
Do you know what he did , sir ? 
He intervened like an archangel . 
He must have flung himself into the midst of the battle , have stolen me away , have opened the sewer , have dragged me into it and have carried me through it ! 
He must have traversed more than a league and a half in those frightful subterranean galleries , bent over , weighed down , in the dark , in the cess-pool , -- more than a league and a half , sir , with a corpse upon his back ! 
And with what object ? 
With the sole object of saving the corpse . 
And that corpse I was . 
He said to himself : ` There may still be a glimpse of life there , perchance ; I will risk my own existence for that miserable spark ! ' 
And his existence he risked not once but twenty times ! 
And every step was a danger . 
The proof of it is , that on emerging from the sewer , he was arrested . 
Do you know , sir , that that man did all this ? 
And he had no recompense to expect . 
What was I ? 
An insurgent . 
What was I ? 
One of the conquered . 
Oh ! 
if Cosette 's six hundred thousand francs were mine ... '' `` They are yours , '' interrupted Jean Valjean . 
`` Well , '' resumed Marius , `` I would give them all to find that man once more . '' 
Jean Valjean remained silent . 
THE 16TH OF FEBRUARY , 1833 The night of the 16th to the 17th of February , 1833 , was a blessed night . 
Above its shadows heaven stood open . 
It was the wedding night of Marius and Cosette . 
The day had been adorable . 
It had not been the grand festival dreamed by the grandfather , a fairy spectacle , with a confusion of cherubim and Cupids over the heads of the bridal pair , a marriage worthy to form the subject of a painting to be placed over a door ; but it had been sweet and smiling . 
The manner of marriage in 1833 was not the same as it is to-day . 
France had not yet borrowed from England that supreme delicacy of carrying off one 's wife , of fleeing , on coming out of church , of hiding oneself with shame from one 's happiness , and of combining the ways of a bankrupt with the delights of the Song of Songs . 
People had not yet grasped to the full the chastity , exquisiteness , and decency of jolting their paradise in a posting-chaise , of breaking up their mystery with clic-clacs , of taking for a nuptial bed the bed of an inn , and of leaving behind them , in a commonplace chamber , at so much a night , the most sacred of the souvenirs of life mingled pell-mell with the tete-a-tete of the conductor of the diligence and the maid-servant of the inn . 
In this second half of the nineteenth century in which we are now living , the mayor and his scarf , the priest and his chasuble , the law and God no longer suffice ; they must be eked out by the Postilion de Lonjumeau ; a blue waistcoat turned up with red , and with bell buttons , a plaque like a vantbrace , knee-breeches of green leather , oaths to the Norman horses with their tails knotted up , false galloons , varnished hat , long powdered locks , an enormous whip and tall boots . 
France does not yet carry elegance to the length of doing like the English nobility , and raining down on the post-chaise of the bridal pair a hail storm of slippers trodden down at heel and of worn-out shoes , in memory of Churchill , afterwards Marlborough , or Malbrouck , who was assailed on his wedding-day by the wrath of an aunt which brought him good luck . 
Old shoes and slippers do not , as yet , form a part of our nuptial celebrations ; but patience , as good taste continues to spread , we shall come to that . 
In 1833 , a hundred years ago , marriage was not conducted at a full trot . 
Strange to say , at that epoch , people still imagined that a wedding was a private and social festival , that a patriarchal banquet does not spoil a domestic solemnity , that gayety , even in excess , provided it be honest , and decent , does happiness no harm , and that , in short , it is a good and a venerable thing that the fusion of these two destinies whence a family is destined to spring , should begin at home , and that the household should thenceforth have its nuptial chamber as its witness . 
And people were so immodest as to marry in their own homes . 
The marriage took place , therefore , in accordance with this now superannuated fashion , at M. Gillenormand 's house . 
Natural and commonplace as this matter of marrying is , the banns to publish , the papers to be drawn up , the mayoralty , and the church produce some complication . 
They could not get ready before the 16th of February . 
Now , we note this detail , for the pure satisfaction of being exact , it chanced that the 16th fell on Shrove Tuesday . 
Hesitations , scruples , particularly on the part of Aunt Gillenormand . 
`` Shrove Tuesday ! '' 
exclaimed the grandfather , `` so much the better . 
There is a proverb : '' ` Mariage un Mardi gras N'aura point enfants ingrats . ' 
-LSB- 66 -RSB- -LSB- 66 -RSB- `` A Shrove-Tuesday marriage will have no ungrateful children . '' 
Let us proceed . 
Here goes for the 16th ! 
Do you want to delay , Marius ? '' 
`` No , certainly not ! '' 
replied the lover . 
`` Let us marry , then , '' cried the grandfather . 
Accordingly , the marriage took place on the 16th , notwithstanding the public merrymaking . 
It rained that day , but there is always in the sky a tiny scrap of blue at the service of happiness , which lovers see , even when the rest of creation is under an umbrella . 
On the preceding evening , Jean Valjean handed to Marius , in the presence of M. Gillenormand , the five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs . 
As the marriage was taking place under the regime of community of property , the papers had been simple . 
Henceforth , Toussaint was of no use to Jean Valjean ; Cosette inherited her and promoted her to the rank of lady 's maid . 
As for Jean Valjean , a beautiful chamber in the Gillenormand house had been furnished expressly for him , and Cosette had said to him in such an irresistible manner : `` Father , I entreat you , '' that she had almost persuaded him to promise that he would come and occupy it . 
A few days before that fixed on for the marriage , an accident happened to Jean Valjean ; he crushed the thumb of his right hand . 
This was not a serious matter ; and he had not allowed any one to trouble himself about it , nor to dress it , nor even to see his hurt , not even Cosette . 
Nevertheless , this had forced him to swathe his hand in a linen bandage , and to carry his arm in a sling , and had prevented his signing . 
M. Gillenormand , in his capacity of Cosette 's supervising-guardian , had supplied his place . 
