The order of arrest , signed by the district-attorney , was couched in these words : `` Inspector Javert will apprehend the body of the Sieur Madeleine , mayor of M. sur M. , who , in this day 's session of the court , was recognized as the liberated convict , Jean Valjean . '' 
Any one who did not know Javert , and who had chanced to see him at the moment when he penetrated the antechamber of the infirmary , could have divined nothing of what had taken place , and would have thought his air the most ordinary in the world . 
He was cool , calm , grave , his gray hair was perfectly smooth upon his temples , and he had just mounted the stairs with his habitual deliberation . 
Any one who was thoroughly acquainted with him , and who had examined him attentively at the moment , would have shuddered . 
The buckle of his leather stock was under his left ear instead of at the nape of his neck . 
This betrayed unwonted agitation . 
Javert was a complete character , who never had a wrinkle in his duty or in his uniform ; methodical with malefactors , rigid with the buttons of his coat . 
That he should have set the buckle of his stock awry , it was indispensable that there should have taken place in him one of those emotions which may be designated as internal earthquakes . 
He had come in a simple way , had made a requisition on the neighboring post for a corporal and four soldiers , had left the soldiers in the courtyard , had had Fantine 's room pointed out to him by the portress , who was utterly unsuspicious , accustomed as she was to seeing armed men inquiring for the mayor . 
On arriving at Fantine 's chamber , Javert turned the handle , pushed the door open with the gentleness of a sick-nurse or a police spy , and entered . 
Properly speaking , he did not enter . 
He stood erect in the half-open door , his hat on his head and his left hand thrust into his coat , which was buttoned up to the chin . 
In the bend of his elbow the leaden head of his enormous cane , which was hidden behind him , could be seen . 
Thus he remained for nearly a minute , without his presence being perceived . 
All at once Fantine raised her eyes , saw him , and made M. Madeleine turn round . 
The instant that Madeleine 's glance encountered Javert 's glance , Javert , without stirring , without moving from his post , without approaching him , became terrible . 
No human sentiment can be as terrible as joy . 
It was the visage of a demon who has just found his damned soul . 
The satisfaction of at last getting hold of Jean Valjean caused all that was in his soul to appear in his countenance . 
The depths having been stirred up , mounted to the surface . 
The humiliation of having , in some slight degree , lost the scent , and of having indulged , for a few moments , in an error with regard to Champmathieu , was effaced by pride at having so well and accurately divined in the first place , and of having for so long cherished a just instinct . 
Javert 's content shone forth in his sovereign attitude . 
The deformity of triumph overspread that narrow brow . 
All the demonstrations of horror which a satisfied face can afford were there . 
Javert was in heaven at that moment . 
Without putting the thing clearly to himself , but with a confused intuition of the necessity of his presence and of his success , he , Javert , personified justice , light , and truth in their celestial function of crushing out evil . 
Behind him and around him , at an infinite distance , he had authority , reason , the case judged , the legal conscience , the public prosecution , all the stars ; he was protecting order , he was causing the law to yield up its thunders , he was avenging society , he was lending a helping hand to the absolute , he was standing erect in the midst of a glory . 
There existed in his victory a remnant of defiance and of combat . 
Erect , haughty , brilliant , he flaunted abroad in open day the superhuman bestiality of a ferocious archangel . 
The terrible shadow of the action which he was accomplishing caused the vague flash of the social sword to be visible in his clenched fist ; happy and indignant , he held his heel upon crime , vice , rebellion , perdition , hell ; he was radiant , he exterminated , he smiled , and there was an incontestable grandeur in this monstrous Saint Michael . 
Javert , though frightful , had nothing ignoble about him . 
Probity , sincerity , candor , conviction , the sense of duty , are things which may become hideous when wrongly directed ; but which , even when hideous , remain grand : their majesty , the majesty peculiar to the human conscience , clings to them in the midst of horror ; they are virtues which have one vice , -- error . 
The honest , pitiless joy of a fanatic in the full flood of his atrocity preserves a certain lugubriously venerable radiance . 
Without himself suspecting the fact , Javert in his formidable happiness was to be pitied , as is every ignorant man who triumphs . 
Nothing could be so poignant and so terrible as this face , wherein was displayed all that may be designated as the evil of the good . 
AUTHORITY REASSERTS ITS RIGHTS Fantine had not seen Javert since the day on which the mayor had torn her from the man . 
Her ailing brain comprehended nothing , but the only thing which she did not doubt was that he had come to get her . 
She could not endure that terrible face ; she felt her life quitting her ; she hid her face in both hands , and shrieked in her anguish : -- `` Monsieur Madeleine , save me ! '' 
Jean Valjean -- we shall henceforth not speak of him otherwise -- had risen . 
He said to Fantine in the gentlest and calmest of voices : -- `` Be at ease ; it is not for you that he is come . '' 
Then he addressed Javert , and said : -- `` I know what you want . '' 
Javert replied : -- `` Be quick about it ! '' 
There lay in the inflection of voice which accompanied these words something indescribably fierce and frenzied . 
Javert did not say , `` Be quick about it ! '' 
he said `` Bequiabouit . '' 
No orthography can do justice to the accent with which it was uttered : it was no longer a human word : it was a roar . 
He did not proceed according to his custom , he did not enter into the matter , he exhibited no warrant of arrest . 
In his eyes , Jean Valjean was a sort of mysterious combatant , who was not to be laid hands upon , a wrestler in the dark whom he had had in his grasp for the last five years , without being able to throw him . 
This arrest was not a beginning , but an end . 
He confined himself to saying , `` Be quick about it ! '' 
As he spoke thus , he did not advance a single step ; he hurled at Jean Valjean a glance which he threw out like a grappling-hook , and with which he was accustomed to draw wretches violently to him . 
It was this glance which Fantine had felt penetrating to the very marrow of her bones two months previously . 
At Javert 's exclamation , Fantine opened her eyes once more . 
But the mayor was there ; what had she to fear ? 
Javert advanced to the middle of the room , and cried : -- `` See here now ! 
Art thou coming ? '' 
The unhappy woman glanced about her . 
No one was present excepting the nun and the mayor . 
To whom could that abject use of `` thou '' be addressed ? 
To her only . 
She shuddered . 
Then she beheld a most unprecedented thing , a thing so unprecedented that nothing equal to it had appeared to her even in the blackest deliriums of fever . 
She beheld Javert , the police spy , seize the mayor by the collar ; she saw the mayor bow his head . 
It seemed to her that the world was coming to an end . 
Javert had , in fact , grasped Jean Valjean by the collar . 
`` Monsieur le Maire ! '' 
shrieked Fantine . 
Javert burst out laughing with that frightful laugh which displayed all his gums . 
`` There is no longer any Monsieur le Maire here ! '' 
Jean Valjean made no attempt to disengage the hand which grasped the collar of his coat . 
He said : -- `` Javert -- '' Javert interrupted him : `` Call me Mr. Inspector . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I should like to say a word to you in private . '' 
`` Aloud ! 
Say it aloud ! '' 
replied Javert ; `` people are in the habit of talking aloud to me . '' 
Jean Valjean went on in a lower tone : -- `` I have a request to make of you -- '' `` I tell you to speak loud . '' 
`` But you alone should hear it -- '' `` What difference does that make to me ? 
I shall not listen . '' 
Jean Valjean turned towards him and said very rapidly and in a very low voice : -- `` Grant me three days ' grace ! 
three days in which to go and fetch the child of this unhappy woman . 
I will pay whatever is necessary . 
You shall accompany me if you choose . '' 
`` You are making sport of me ! '' 
cried Javert . 
`` Come now , I did not think you such a fool ! 
You ask me to give you three days in which to run away ! 
You say that it is for the purpose of fetching that creature 's child ! 
Ah ! 
Ah ! 
That 's good ! 
That 's really capital ! '' 
Fantine was seized with a fit of trembling . 
`` My child ! '' 
she cried , `` to go and fetch my child ! 
She is not here , then ! 
Answer me , sister ; where is Cosette ? 
I want my child ! 
Monsieur Madeleine ! 
Monsieur le Maire ! '' 
Javert stamped his foot . 
