Gueulemer was a Hercules of no defined position . 
For his lair he had the sewer of the Arche-Marion . 
He was six feet high , his pectoral muscles were of marble , his biceps of brass , his breath was that of a cavern , his torso that of a colossus , his head that of a bird . 
One thought one beheld the Farnese Hercules clad in duck trousers and a cotton velvet waistcoat . 
Gueulemer , built after this sculptural fashion , might have subdued monsters ; he had found it more expeditious to be one . 
A low brow , large temples , less than forty years of age , but with crow 's - feet , harsh , short hair , cheeks like a brush , a beard like that of a wild boar ; the reader can see the man before him . 
His muscles called for work , his stupidity would have none of it . 
He was a great , idle force . 
He was an assassin through coolness . 
He was thought to be a creole . 
He had , probably , somewhat to do with Marshal Brune , having been a porter at Avignon in 1815 . 
After this stage , he had turned ruffian . 
The diaphaneity of Babet contrasted with the grossness of Gueulemer . 
Babet was thin and learned . 
He was transparent but impenetrable . 
Daylight was visible through his bones , but nothing through his eyes . 
He declared that he was a chemist . 
He had been a jack of all trades . 
He had played in vaudeville at Saint-Mihiel . 
He was a man of purpose , a fine talker , who underlined his smiles and accentuated his gestures . 
His occupation consisted in selling , in the open air , plaster busts and portraits of `` the head of the State . '' 
In addition to this , he extracted teeth . 
He had exhibited phenomena at fairs , and he had owned a booth with a trumpet and this poster : `` Babet , Dental Artist , Member of the Academies , makes physical experiments on metals and metalloids , extracts teeth , undertakes stumps abandoned by his brother practitioners . 
Price : one tooth , one franc , fifty centimes ; two teeth , two francs ; three teeth , two francs , fifty . 
Take advantage of this opportunity . '' 
This Take advantage of this opportunity meant : Have as many teeth extracted as possible . 
He had been married and had had children . 
He did not know what had become of his wife and children . 
He had lost them as one loses his handkerchief . 
Babet read the papers , a striking exception in the world to which he belonged . 
One day , at the period when he had his family with him in his booth on wheels , he had read in the Messager , that a woman had just given birth to a child , who was doing well , and had a calf 's muzzle , and he exclaimed : `` There 's a fortune ! 
my wife has not the wit to present me with a child like that ! '' 
Later on he had abandoned everything , in order to `` undertake Paris . '' 
This was his expression . 
Who was Claquesous ? 
He was night . 
He waited until the sky was daubed with black , before he showed himself . 
At nightfall he emerged from the hole whither he returned before daylight . 
Where was this hole ? 
No one knew . 
He only addressed his accomplices in the most absolute darkness , and with his back turned to them . 
Was his name Claquesous ? 
Certainly not . 
If a candle was brought , he put on a mask . 
He was a ventriloquist . 
Babet said : `` Claquesous is a nocturne for two voices . '' 
Claquesous was vague , terrible , and a roamer . 
No one was sure whether he had a name , Claquesous being a sobriquet ; none was sure that he had a voice , as his stomach spoke more frequently than his voice ; no one was sure that he had a face , as he was never seen without his mask . 
He disappeared as though he had vanished into thin air ; when he appeared , it was as though he sprang from the earth . 
A lugubrious being was Montparnasse . 
Montparnasse was a child ; less than twenty years of age , with a handsome face , lips like cherries , charming black hair , the brilliant light of springtime in his eyes ; he had all vices and aspired to all crimes . 
The digestion of evil aroused in him an appetite for worse . 
It was the street boy turned pickpocket , and a pickpocket turned garroter . 
He was genteel , effeminate , graceful , robust , sluggish , ferocious . 
The rim of his hat was curled up on the left side , in order to make room for a tuft of hair , after the style of 1829 . 
He lived by robbery with violence . 
His coat was of the best cut , but threadbare . 
Montparnasse was a fashion-plate in misery and given to the commission of murders . 
The cause of all this youth 's crimes was the desire to be well-dressed . 
The first grisette who had said to him : `` You are handsome ! '' 
had cast the stain of darkness into his heart , and had made a Cain of this Abel . 
Finding that he was handsome , he desired to be elegant : now , the height of elegance is idleness ; idleness in a poor man means crime . 
Few prowlers were so dreaded as Montparnasse . 
At eighteen , he had already numerous corpses in his past . 
More than one passer-by lay with outstretched arms in the presence of this wretch , with his face in a pool of blood . 
Curled , pomaded , with laced waist , the hips of a woman , the bust of a Prussian officer , the murmur of admiration from the boulevard wenches surrounding him , his cravat knowingly tied , a bludgeon in his pocket , a flower in his buttonhole ; such was this dandy of the sepulchre . 
COMPOSITION OF THE TROUPE These four ruffians formed a sort of Proteus , winding like a serpent among the police , and striving to escape Vidocq 's indiscreet glances `` under divers forms , tree , flame , fountain , '' lending each other their names and their traps , hiding in their own shadows , boxes with secret compartments and refuges for each other , stripping off their personalities , as one removes his false nose at a masked ball , sometimes simplifying matters to the point of consisting of but one individual , sometimes multiplying themselves to such a point that Coco-Latour himself took them for a whole throng . 
These four men were not four men ; they were a sort of mysterious robber with four heads , operating on a grand scale on Paris ; they were that monstrous polyp of evil , which inhabits the crypt of society . 
Thanks to their ramifications , and to the network underlying their relations , Babet , Gueulemer , Claquesous , and Montparnasse were charged with the general enterprise of the ambushes of the department of the Seine . 
The inventors of ideas of that nature , men with nocturnal imaginations , applied to them to have their ideas executed . 
They furnished the canvas to the four rascals , and the latter undertook the preparation of the scenery . 
They labored at the stage setting . 
They were always in a condition to lend a force proportioned and suitable to all crimes which demanded a lift of the shoulder , and which were sufficiently lucrative . 
When a crime was in quest of arms , they under-let their accomplices . 
They kept a troupe of actors of the shadows at the disposition of all underground tragedies . 
They were in the habit of assembling at nightfall , the hour when they woke up , on the plains which adjoin the Salpetriere . 
There they held their conferences . 
They had twelve black hours before them ; they regulated their employment accordingly . 
Patron-Minette , -- such was the name which was bestowed in the subterranean circulation on the association of these four men . 
In the fantastic , ancient , popular parlance , which is vanishing day by day , Patron-Minette signifies the morning , the same as entre chien et loup -- between dog and wolf -- signifies the evening . 
This appellation , Patron-Minette , was probably derived from the hour at which their work ended , the dawn being the vanishing moment for phantoms and for the separation of ruffians . 
These four men were known under this title . 
When the President of the Assizes visited Lacenaire in his prison , and questioned him concerning a misdeed which Lacenaire denied , `` Who did it ? '' 
demanded the President . 
Lacenaire made this response , enigmatical so far as the magistrate was concerned , but clear to the police : `` Perhaps it was Patron-Minette . '' 
A piece can sometimes be divined on the enunciation of the personages ; in the same manner a band can almost be judged from the list of ruffians composing it . 
Here are the appellations to which the principal members of Patron-Minette answered , -- for the names have survived in special memoirs . 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille . 
Brujon . 
-LSB- There was a Brujon dynasty ; we can not refrain from interpolating this word . -RSB- 
Boulatruelle , the road-mender already introduced . 
Laveuve . 
Finistere . 
Homere-Hogu , a negro . 
Mardisoir . 
-LRB- Tuesday evening . -RRB- 
Depeche . 
-LRB- Make haste . -RRB- 
Fauntleroy , alias Bouquetiere -LRB- the Flower Girl -RRB- . 
Glorieux , a discharged convict . 
