The New Building contained four dormitories , one above the other , and a top story which was called the Bel-Air -LRB- FineAir -RRB- . 
A large chimney-flue , probably from some ancient kitchen of the Dukes de la Force , started from the groundfloor , traversed all four stories , cut the dormitories , where it figured as a flattened pillar , into two portions , and finally pierced the roof . 
Guelemer and Brujon were in the same dormitory . 
They had been placed , by way of precaution , on the lower story . 
Chance ordained that the heads of their beds should rest against the chimney . 
Thenardier was directly over their heads in the top story known as Fine-Air . 
The pedestrian who halts on the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine , after passing the barracks of the firemen , in front of the porte-cochere of the bathing establishment , beholds a yard full of flowers and shrubs in wooden boxes , at the extremity of which spreads out a little white rotunda with two wings , brightened up with green shutters , the bucolic dream of Jean Jacques . 
Not more than ten years ago , there rose above that rotunda an enormous black , hideous , bare wall by which it was backed up . 
This was the outer wall of La Force . 
This wall , beside that rotunda , was Milton viewed through Berquin . 
Lofty as it was , this wall was overtopped by a still blacker roof , which could be seen beyond . 
This was the roof of the New Building . 
There one could descry four dormer-windows , guarded with bars ; they were the windows of the Fine-Air . 
A chimney pierced the roof ; this was the chimney which traversed the dormitories . 
The Bel-Air , that top story of the New Building , was a sort of large hall , with a Mansard roof , guarded with triple gratings and double doors of sheet iron , which were studded with enormous bolts . 
When one entered from the north end , one had on one 's left the four dormer-windows , on one 's right , facing the windows , at regular intervals , four square , tolerably vast cages , separated by narrow passages , built of masonry to about the height of the elbow , and the rest , up to the roof , of iron bars . 
Thenardier had been in solitary confinement in one of these cages since the night of the 3d of February . 
No one was ever able to discover how , and by what connivance , he succeeded in procuring , and secreting a bottle of wine , invented , so it is said , by Desrues , with which a narcotic is mixed , and which the band of the Endormeurs , or Sleep-compellers , rendered famous . 
There are , in many prisons , treacherous employees , half-jailers , half-thieves , who assist in escapes , who sell to the police an unfaithful service , and who turn a penny whenever they can . 
On that same night , then , when Little Gavroche picked up the two lost children , Brujon and Guelemer , who knew that Babet , who had escaped that morning , was waiting for them in the street as well as Montparnasse , rose softly , and with the nail which Brujon had found , began to pierce the chimney against which their beds stood . 
The rubbish fell on Brujon 's bed , so that they were not heard . 
Showers mingled with thunder shook the doors on their hinges , and created in the prison a terrible and opportune uproar . 
Those of the prisoners who woke , pretended to fall asleep again , and left Guelemer and Brujon to their own devices . 
Brujon was adroit ; Guelemer was vigorous . 
Before any sound had reached the watcher , who was sleeping in the grated cell which opened into the dormitory , the wall had , been pierced , the chimney scaled , the iron grating which barred the upper orifice of the flue forced , and the two redoubtable ruffians were on the roof . 
The wind and rain redoubled , the roof was slippery . 
`` What a good night to leg it ! '' 
said Brujon . 
An abyss six feet broad and eighty feet deep separated them from the surrounding wall . 
At the bottom of this abyss , they could see the musket of a sentinel gleaming through the gloom . 
They fastened one end of the rope which Brujon had spun in his dungeon to the stumps of the iron bars which they had just wrenched off , flung the other over the outer wall , crossed the abyss at one bound , clung to the coping of the wall , got astride of it , let themselves slip , one after the other , along the rope , upon a little roof which touches the bath-house , pulled their rope after them , jumped down into the courtyard of the bath-house , traversed it , pushed open the porter 's wicket , beside which hung his rope , pulled this , opened the porte-cochere , and found themselves in the street . 
Three-quarters of an hour had not elapsed since they had risen in bed in the dark , nail in hand , and their project in their heads . 
A few moments later they had joined Babet and Montparnasse , who were prowling about the neighborhood . 
They had broken their rope in pulling it after them , and a bit of it remained attached to the chimney on the roof . 
They had sustained no other damage , however , than that of scratching nearly all the skin off their hands . 
That night , Thenardier was warned , without any one being able to explain how , and was not asleep . 
Towards one o'clock in the morning , the night being very dark , he saw two shadows pass along the roof , in the rain and squalls , in front of the dormer-window which was opposite his cage . 
One halted at the window , long enough to dart in a glance . 
This was Brujon . 
Thenardier recognized him , and understood . 
This was enough . 
Thenardier , rated as a burglar , and detained as a measure of precaution under the charge of organizing a nocturnal ambush , with armed force , was kept in sight . 
The sentry , who was relieved every two hours , marched up and down in front of his cage with loaded musket . 
The Fine-Air was lighted by a skylight . 
The prisoner had on his feet fetters weighing fifty pounds . 
Every day , at four o'clock in the afternoon , a jailer , escorted by two dogs , -- this was still in vogue at that time , -- entered his cage , deposited beside his bed a loaf of black bread weighing two pounds , a jug of water , a bowl filled with rather thin bouillon , in which swam a few Mayagan beans , inspected his irons and tapped the bars . 
This man and his dogs made two visits during the night . 
Thenardier had obtained permission to keep a sort of iron bolt which he used to spike his bread into a crack in the wall , `` in order to preserve it from the rats , '' as he said . 
As Thenardier was kept in sight , no objection had been made to this spike . 
Still , it was remembered afterwards , that one of the jailers had said : `` It would be better to let him have only a wooden spike . '' 
At two o'clock in the morning , the sentinel , who was an old soldier , was relieved , and replaced by a conscript . 
A few moments later , the man with the dogs paid his visit , and went off without noticing anything , except , possibly , the excessive youth and `` the rustic air '' of the `` raw recruit . '' 
Two hours afterwards , at four o'clock , when they came to relieve the conscript , he was found asleep on the floor , lying like a log near Thenardier 's cage . 
As for Thenardier , he was no longer there . 
There was a hole in the ceiling of his cage , and , above it , another hole in the roof . 
One of the planks of his bed had been wrenched off , and probably carried away with him , as it was not found . 
They also seized in his cell a half-empty bottle which contained the remains of the stupefying wine with which the soldier had been drugged . 
The soldier 's bayonet had disappeared . 
At the moment when this discovery was made , it was assumed that Thenardier was out of reach . 
The truth is , that he was no longer in the New Building , but that he was still in great danger . 
Thenardier , on reaching the roof of the New Building , had found the remains of Brujon 's rope hanging to the bars of the upper trap of the chimney , but , as this broken fragment was much too short , he had not been able to escape by the outer wall , as Brujon and Guelemer had done . 
When one turns from the Rue des Ballets into the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile , one almost immediately encounters a repulsive ruin . 
There stood on that spot , in the last century , a house of which only the back wall now remains , a regular wall of masonry , which rises to the height of the third story between the adjoining buildings . 
This ruin can be recognized by two large square windows which are still to be seen there ; the middle one , that nearest the right gable , is barred with a worm-eaten beam adjusted like a prop . 
Through these windows there was formerly visible a lofty and lugubrious wall , which was a fragment of the outer wall of La Force . 
The empty space on the street left by the demolished house is half-filled by a fence of rotten boards , shored up by five stone posts . 
In this recess lies concealed a little shanty which leans against the portion of the ruin which has remained standing . 
The fence has a gate , which , a few years ago , was fastened only by a latch . 
It was the crest of this ruin that Thenardier had succeeded in reaching , a little after one o'clock in the morning . 
How had he got there ? 
That is what no one has ever been able to explain or understand . 
The lightning must , at the same time , have hindered and helped him . 
Had he made use of the ladders and scaffoldings of the slaters to get from roof to roof , from enclosure to enclosure , from compartment to compartment , to the buildings of the Charlemagne court , then to the buildings of the Saint-Louis court , to the outer wall , and thence to the hut on the Rue du Roi-de-Sicile ? 
But in that itinerary there existed breaks which seemed to render it an impossibility . 
Had he placed the plank from his bed like a bridge from the roof of the Fine-Air to the outer wall , and crawled flat , on his belly on the coping of the outer wall the whole distance round the prison as far as the hut ? 
But the outer wall of La Force formed a crenellated and unequal line ; it mounted and descended , it dropped at the firemen 's barracks , it rose towards the bath-house , it was cut in twain by buildings , it was not even of the same height on the Hotel Lamoignon as on the Rue Pavee ; everywhere occurred falls and right angles ; and then , the sentinels must have espied the dark form of the fugitive ; hence , the route taken by Thenardier still remains rather inexplicable . 
In two manners , flight was impossible . 
Had Thenardier , spurred on by that thirst for liberty which changes precipices into ditches , iron bars into wattles of osier , a legless man into an athlete , a gouty man into a bird , stupidity into instinct , instinct into intelligence , and intelligence into genius , had Thenardier invented a third mode ? 
No one has ever found out . 
The marvels of escape can not always be accounted for . 
The man who makes his escape , we repeat , is inspired ; there is something of the star and of the lightning in the mysterious gleam of flight ; the effort towards deliverance is no less surprising than the flight towards the sublime , and one says of the escaped thief : `` How did he contrive to scale that wall ? '' 
in the same way that one says of Corneille : `` Where did he find the means of dying ? '' 
At all events , dripping with perspiration , drenched with rain , with his clothes hanging in ribbons , his hands flayed , his elbows bleeding , his knees torn , Thenardier had reached what children , in their figurative language , call the edge of the wall of the ruin , there he had stretched himself out at full length , and there his strength had failed him . 
A steep escarpment three stories high separated him from the pavement of the street . 
The rope which he had was too short . 
There he waited , pale , exhausted , desperate with all the despair which he had undergone , still hidden by the night , but telling himself that the day was on the point of dawning , alarmed at the idea of hearing the neighboring clock of Saint-Paul strike four within a few minutes , an hour when the sentinel was relieved and when the latter would be found asleep under the pierced roof , staring in horror at a terrible depth , at the light of the street lanterns , the wet , black pavement , that pavement longed for yet frightful , which meant death , and which meant liberty . 
He asked himself whether his three accomplices in flight had succeeded , if they had heard him , and if they would come to his assistance . 
He listened . 
With the exception of the patrol , no one had passed through the street since he had been there . 
Nearly the whole of the descent of the market-gardeners from Montreuil , from Charonne , from Vincennes , and from Bercy to the markets was accomplished through the Rue Saint-Antoine . 
Four o'clock struck . 
Thenardier shuddered . 
A few moments later , that terrified and confused uproar which follows the discovery of an escape broke forth in the prison . 
The sound of doors opening and shutting , the creaking of gratings on their hinges , a tumult in the guard-house , the hoarse shouts of the turnkeys , the shock of musket-butts on the pavement of the courts , reached his ears . 
Lights ascended and descended past the grated windows of the dormitories , a torch ran along the ridge-pole of the top story of the New Building , the firemen belonging in the barracks on the right had been summoned . 
Their helmets , which the torch lighted up in the rain , went and came along the roofs . 
At the same time , Thenardier perceived in the direction of the Bastille a wan whiteness lighting up the edge of the sky in doleful wise . 
He was on top of a wall ten inches wide , stretched out under the heavy rains , with two gulfs to right and left , unable to stir , subject to the giddiness of a possible fall , and to the horror of a certain arrest , and his thoughts , like the pendulum of a clock , swung from one of these ideas to the other : `` Dead if I fall , caught if I stay . '' 
In the midst of this anguish , he suddenly saw , the street being still dark , a man who was gliding along the walls and coming from the Rue Pavee , halt in the recess above which Thenardier was , as it were , suspended . 
Here this man was joined by a second , who walked with the same caution , then by a third , then by a fourth . 
