This strange battle was like a duel between two raging , wounded men , each of whom , still fighting and still resisting , is expending all his blood . 
Which of the two will be the first to fall ? 
The conflict on the plateau continued . 
What had become of the cuirassiers ? 
No one could have told . 
One thing is certain , that on the day after the battle , a cuirassier and his horse were found dead among the woodwork of the scales for vehicles at Mont-Saint-Jean , at the very point where the four roads from Nivelles , Genappe , La Hulpe , and Brussels meet and intersect each other . 
This horseman had pierced the English lines . 
One of the men who picked up the body still lives at Mont-Saint-Jean . 
His name is Dehaze . 
He was eighteen years old at that time . 
Wellington felt that he was yielding . 
The crisis was at hand . 
The cuirassiers had not succeeded , since the centre was not broken through . 
As every one was in possession of the plateau , no one held it , and in fact it remained , to a great extent , with the English . 
Wellington held the village and the culminating plain ; Ney had only the crest and the slope . 
They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both sides . 
But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable . 
The bleeding of that army was horrible . 
Kempt , on the left wing , demanded reinforcements . 
`` There are none , '' replied Wellington ; `` he must let himself be killed ! '' 
Almost at that same moment , a singular coincidence which paints the exhaustion of the two armies , Ney demanded infantry from Napoleon , and Napoleon exclaimed , `` Infantry ! 
Where does he expect me to get it ? 
Does he think I can make it ? '' 
Nevertheless , the English army was in the worse case of the two . 
The furious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron and breasts of steel had ground the infantry to nothing . 
A few men clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment ; such and such a battalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant ; Alten 's division , already so roughly handled at La Haie-Sainte , was almost destroyed ; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze 's brigade strewed the rye-fields all along the Nivelles road ; hardly anything was left of those Dutch grenadiers , who , intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks in 1811 , fought against Wellington ; and who , in 1815 , rallied to the English standard , fought against Napoleon . 
The loss in officers was considerable . 
Lord Uxbridge , who had his leg buried on the following day , had his knee shattered . 
If , on the French side , in that tussle of the cuirassiers , Delort , l'Heritier , Colbert , Dnop , Travers , and Blancard were disabled , on the side of the English there was Alten wounded , Barne wounded , Delancey killed , Van Meeren killed , Ompteda killed , the whole of Wellington 's staff decimated , and England had the worse of it in that bloody scale . 
The second regiment of foot-guards had lost five lieutenant-colonels , four captains , and three ensigns ; the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200 soldiers ; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded , 18 officers killed , 450 soldiers killed . 
The Hanoverian hussars of Cumberland , a whole regiment , with Colonel Hacke at its head , who was destined to be tried later on and cashiered , had turned bridle in the presence of the fray , and had fled to the forest of Soignes , sowing defeat all the way to Brussels . 
The transports , ammunition-wagons , the baggage-wagons , the wagons filled with wounded , on perceiving that the French were gaining ground and approaching the forest , rushed headlong thither . 
The Dutch , mowed down by the French cavalry , cried , `` Alarm ! '' 
From Vert-Coucou to Groentendael , for a distance of nearly two leagues in the direction of Brussels , according to the testimony of eye-witnesses who are still alive , the roads were encumbered with fugitives . 
This panic was such that it attacked the Prince de Conde at Mechlin , and Louis XVIII . 
at Ghent . 
With the exception of the feeble reserve echelonned behind the ambulance established at the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean , and of Vivian 's and Vandeleur 's brigades , which flanked the left wing , Wellington had no cavalry left . 
A number of batteries lay unhorsed . 
These facts are attested by Siborne ; and Pringle , exaggerating the disaster , goes so far as to say that the Anglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men . 
The Iron Duke remained calm , but his lips blanched . 
Vincent , the Austrian commissioner , Alava , the Spanish commissioner , who were present at the battle in the English staff , thought the Duke lost . 
At five o'clock Wellington drew out his watch , and he was heard to murmur these sinister words , `` Blucher , or night ! '' 
It was at about that moment that a distant line of bayonets gleamed on the heights in the direction of Frischemont . 
Here comes the change of face in this giant drama . 
A BAD GUIDE TO NAPOLEON ; A GOOD GUIDE TO BULOW The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known . 
Grouchy hoped for , Blucher arriving . 
Death instead of life . 
Fate has these turns ; the throne of the world was expected ; it was Saint Helena that was seen . 
If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bulow , Blucher 's lieutenant , had advised him to debouch from the forest above Frischemont , instead of below Plancenoit , the form of the nineteenth century might , perhaps , have been different . 
Napoleon would have won the battle of Waterloo . 
By any other route than that below Plancenoit , the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable for artillery , and Bulow would not have arrived . 
Now the Prussian general , Muffling , declares that one hour 's delay , and Blucher would not have found Wellington on his feet . 
`` The battle was lost . '' 
It was time that Bulow should arrive , as will be seen . 
He had , moreover , been very much delayed . 
He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont , and had set out at daybreak ; but the roads were impassable , and his divisions stuck fast in the mire . 
The ruts were up to the hubs of the cannons . 
Moreover , he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrow bridge of Wavre ; the street leading to the bridge had been fired by the French , so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could not pass between two rows of burning houses , and had been obliged to wait until the conflagration was extinguished . 
It was mid-day before Bulow 's vanguard had been able to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert . 
Had the action been begun two hours earlier , it would have been over at four o'clock , and Blucher would have fallen on the battle won by Napoleon . 
Such are these immense risks proportioned to an infinite which we can not comprehend . 
The Emperor had been the first , as early as mid-day , to descry with his field-glass , on the extreme horizon , something which had attracted his attention . 
He had said , `` I see yonder a cloud , which seems to me to be troops . '' 
Then he asked the Duc de Dalmatie , `` Soult , what do you see in the direction of Chapelle-Saint-Lambert ? '' 
The marshal , levelling his glass , answered , `` Four or five thousand men , Sire ; evidently Grouchy . '' 
But it remained motionless in the mist . 
All the glasses of the staff had studied `` the cloud '' pointed out by the Emperor . 
Some said : `` It is trees . '' 
The truth is , that the cloud did not move . 
The Emperor detached Domon 's division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter . 
Bulow had not moved , in fact . 
His vanguard was very feeble , and could accomplish nothing . 
He was obliged to wait for the body of the army corps , and he had received orders to concentrate his forces before entering into line ; but at five o'clock , perceiving Wellington 's peril , Blucher ordered Bulow to attack , and uttered these remarkable words : `` We must give air to the English army . '' 
A little later , the divisions of Losthin , Hiller , Hacke , and Ryssel deployed before Lobau 's corps , the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia debouched from the forest of Paris , Plancenoit was in flames , and the Prussian cannon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard in reserve behind Napoleon . 
THE GUARD Every one knows the rest , -- the irruption of a third army ; the battle broken to pieces ; eighty-six months of fire thundering simultaneously ; Pirch the first coming up with Bulow ; Zieten 's cavalry led by Blucher in person , the French driven back ; Marcognet swept from the plateau of Ohain ; Durutte dislodged from Papelotte ; Donzelot and Quiot retreating ; Lobau caught on the flank ; a fresh battle precipitating itself on our dismantled regiments at nightfall ; the whole English line resuming the offensive and thrust forward ; the gigantic breach made in the French army ; the English grape-shot and the Prussian grape-shot aiding each other ; the extermination ; disaster in front ; disaster on the flank ; the Guard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all things . 
Conscious that they were about to die , they shouted , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
History records nothing more touching than that agony bursting forth in acclamations . 
The sky had been overcast all day long . 
All of a sudden , at that very moment , -- it was eight o'clock in the evening -- the clouds on the horizon parted , and allowed the grand and sinister glow of the setting sun to pass through , athwart the elms on the Nivelles road . 
They had seen it rise at Austerlitz . 
Each battalion of the Guard was commanded by a general for this final catastrophe . 
Friant , Michel , Roguet , Harlet , Mallet , Poret de Morvan , were there . 
When the tall caps of the grenadiers of the Guard , with their large plaques bearing the eagle appeared , symmetrical , in line , tranquil , in the midst of that combat , the enemy felt a respect for France ; they thought they beheld twenty victories entering the field of battle , with wings outspread , and those who were the conquerors , believing themselves to be vanquished , retreated ; but Wellington shouted , `` Up , Guards , and aim straight ! '' 
The red regiment of English guards , lying flat behind the hedges , sprang up , a cloud of grape-shot riddled the tricolored flag and whistled round our eagles ; all hurled themselves forwards , and the final carnage began . 
In the darkness , the Imperial Guard felt the army losing ground around it , and in the vast shock of the rout it heard the desperate flight which had taken the place of the `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
and , with flight behind it , it continued to advance , more crushed , losing more men at every step that it took . 
There were none who hesitated , no timid men in its ranks . 
The soldier in that troop was as much of a hero as the general . 
Not a man was missing in that suicide . 
Ney , bewildered , great with all the grandeur of accepted death , offered himself to all blows in that tempest . 
He had his fifth horse killed under him there . 
Perspiring , his eyes aflame , foaming at the mouth , with uniform unbuttoned , one of his epaulets half cut off by a sword-stroke from a horseguard , his plaque with the great eagle dented by a bullet ; bleeding , bemired , magnificent , a broken sword in his hand , he said , `` Come and see how a Marshal of France dies on the field of battle ! '' 
But in vain ; he did not die . 
He was haggard and angry . 
At Drouet d'Erlon he hurled this question , `` Are you not going to get yourself killed ? '' 
In the midst of all that artillery engaged in crushing a handful of men , he shouted : `` So there is nothing for me ! 
Oh ! 
I should like to have all these English bullets enter my bowels ! '' 
Unhappy man , thou wert reserved for French bullets ! 
THE CATASTROPHE The rout behind the Guard was melancholy . 
