Jean Valjean remained silent , motionless , with his back towards the door , seated on the chair from which he had not stirred , and holding his breath in the dark . 
After the expiration of a rather long interval , he turned round , as he heard nothing more , and , as he raised his eyes towards the door of his chamber , he saw a light through the keyhole . 
This light formed a sort of sinister star in the blackness of the door and the wall . 
There was evidently some one there , who was holding a candle in his hand and listening . 
Several minutes elapsed thus , and the light retreated . 
But he heard no sound of footsteps , which seemed to indicate that the person who had been listening at the door had removed his shoes . 
Jean Valjean threw himself , all dressed as he was , on his bed , and could not close his eyes all night . 
At daybreak , just as he was falling into a doze through fatigue , he was awakened by the creaking of a door which opened on some attic at the end of the corridor , then he heard the same masculine footstep which had ascended the stairs on the preceding evening . 
The step was approaching . 
He sprang off the bed and applied his eye to the keyhole , which was tolerably large , hoping to see the person who had made his way by night into the house and had listened at his door , as he passed . 
It was a man , in fact , who passed , this time without pausing , in front of Jean Valjean 's chamber . 
The corridor was too dark to allow of the person 's face being distinguished ; but when the man reached the staircase , a ray of light from without made it stand out like a silhouette , and Jean Valjean had a complete view of his back . 
The man was of lofty stature , clad in a long frock-coat , with a cudgel under his arm . 
The formidable neck and shoulders belonged to Javert . 
Jean Valjean might have attempted to catch another glimpse of him through his window opening on the boulevard , but he would have been obliged to open the window : he dared not . 
It was evident that this man had entered with a key , and like himself . 
Who had given him that key ? 
What was the meaning of this ? 
When the old woman came to do the work , at seven o'clock in the morning , Jean Valjean cast a penetrating glance on her , but he did not question her . 
The good woman appeared as usual . 
As she swept up she remarked to him : -- `` Possibly Monsieur may have heard some one come in last night ? '' 
At that age , and on that boulevard , eight o'clock in the evening was the dead of the night . 
`` That is true , by the way , '' he replied , in the most natural tone possible . 
`` Who was it ? '' 
`` It was a new lodger who has come into the house , '' said the old woman . 
`` And what is his name ? '' 
`` I do n't know exactly ; Dumont , or Daumont , or some name of that sort . '' 
`` And who is this Monsieur Dumont ? '' 
The old woman gazed at him with her little polecat eyes , and answered : -- `` A gentleman of property , like yourself . '' 
Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning . 
Jean Valjean thought he perceived one . 
When the old woman had taken her departure , he did up a hundred francs which he had in a cupboard , into a roll , and put it in his pocket . 
In spite of all the precautions which he took in this operation so that he might not be heard rattling silver , a hundred-sou piece escaped from his hands and rolled noisily on the floor . 
When darkness came on , he descended and carefully scrutinized both sides of the boulevard . 
He saw no one . 
The boulevard appeared to be absolutely deserted . 
It is true that a person can conceal himself behind trees . 
He went up stairs again . 
`` Come . '' 
he said to Cosette . 
He took her by the hand , and they both went out . 
THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY An observation here becomes necessary , in view of the pages which the reader is about to peruse , and of others which will be met with further on . 
The author of this book , who regrets the necessity of mentioning himself , has been absent from Paris for many years . 
Paris has been transformed since he quitted it . 
A new city has arisen , which is , after a fashion , unknown to him . 
There is no need for him to say that he loves Paris : Paris is his mind 's natal city . 
In consequence of demolitions and reconstructions , the Paris of his youth , that Paris which he bore away religiously in his memory , is now a Paris of days gone by . 
He must be permitted to speak of that Paris as though it still existed . 
It is possible that when the author conducts his readers to a spot and says , `` In such a street there stands such and such a house , '' neither street nor house will any longer exist in that locality . 
Readers may verify the facts if they care to take the trouble . 
For his own part , he is unacquainted with the new Paris , and he writes with the old Paris before his eyes in an illusion which is precious to him . 
It is a delight to him to dream that there still lingers behind him something of that which he beheld when he was in his own country , and that all has not vanished . 
So long as you go and come in your native land , you imagine that those streets are a matter of indifference to you ; that those windows , those roofs , and those doors are nothing to you ; that those walls are strangers to you ; that those trees are merely the first encountered haphazard ; that those houses , which you do not enter , are useless to you ; that the pavements which you tread are merely stones . 
Later on , when you are no longer there , you perceive that the streets are dear to you ; that you miss those roofs , those doors ; and that those walls are necessary to you , those trees are well beloved by you ; that you entered those houses which you never entered , every day , and that you have left a part of your heart , of your blood , of your soul , in those pavements . 
All those places which you no longer behold , which you may never behold again , perchance , and whose memory you have cherished , take on a melancholy charm , recur to your mind with the melancholy of an apparition , make the holy land visible to you , and are , so to speak , the very form of France , and you love them ; and you call them up as they are , as they were , and you persist in this , and you will submit to no change : for you are attached to the figure of your fatherland as to the face of your mother . 
May we , then , be permitted to speak of the past in the present ? 
That said , we beg the reader to take note of it , and we continue . 
Jean Valjean instantly quitted the boulevard and plunged into the streets , taking the most intricate lines which he could devise , returning on his track at times , to make sure that he was not being followed . 
This manoeuvre is peculiar to the hunted stag . 
On soil where an imprint of the track may be left , this manoeuvre possesses , among other advantages , that of deceiving the huntsmen and the dogs , by throwing them on the wrong scent . 
In venery this is called false re-imbushment . 
The moon was full that night . 
Jean Valjean was not sorry for this . 
The moon , still very close to the horizon , cast great masses of light and shadow in the streets . 
Jean Valjean could glide along close to the houses on the dark side , and yet keep watch on the light side . 
He did not , perhaps , take sufficiently into consideration the fact that the dark side escaped him . 
Still , in the deserted lanes which lie near the Rue Poliveau , he thought he felt certain that no one was following him . 
Cosette walked on without asking any questions . 
The sufferings of the first six years of her life had instilled something passive into her nature . 
Moreover , -- and this is a remark to which we shall frequently have occasion to recur , -- she had grown used , without being herself aware of it , to the peculiarities of this good man and to the freaks of destiny . 
And then she was with him , and she felt safe . 
Jean Valjean knew no more where he was going than did Cosette . 
He trusted in God , as she trusted in him . 
It seemed as though he also were clinging to the hand of some one greater than himself ; he thought he felt a being leading him , though invisible . 
However , he had no settled idea , no plan , no project . 
He was not even absolutely sure that it was Javert , and then it might have been Javert , without Javert knowing that he was Jean Valjean . 
Was not he disguised ? 
Was not he believed to be dead ? 
Still , queer things had been going on for several days . 
He wanted no more of them . 
He was determined not to return to the Gorbeau house . 
Like the wild animal chased from its lair , he was seeking a hole in which he might hide until he could find one where he might dwell . 
Jean Valjean described many and varied labyrinths in the Mouffetard quarter , which was already asleep , as though the discipline of the Middle Ages and the yoke of the curfew still existed ; he combined in various manners , with cunning strategy , the Rue Censier and the Rue Copeau , the Rue du Battoir-Saint-Victor and the Rue du Puits l'Ermite . 
There are lodging houses in this locality , but he did not even enter one , finding nothing which suited him . 
He had no doubt that if any one had chanced to be upon his track , they would have lost it . 
As eleven o'clock struck from Saint-Etienne-du-Mont , he was traversing the Rue de Pontoise , in front of the office of the commissary of police , situated at No. 14 . 
A few moments later , the instinct of which we have spoken above made him turn round . 
At that moment he saw distinctly , thanks to the commissary 's lantern , which betrayed them , three men who were following him closely , pass , one after the other , under that lantern , on the dark side of the street . 
One of the three entered the alley leading to the commissary 's house . 
The one who marched at their head struck him as decidedly suspicious . 
`` Come , child , '' he said to Cosette ; and he made haste to quit the Rue Pontoise . 
He took a circuit , turned into the Passage des Patriarches , which was closed on account of the hour , strode along the Rue de l'Epee-de-Bois and the Rue de l'Arbalete , and plunged into the Rue des Postes . 
At that time there was a square formed by the intersection of streets , where the College Rollin stands to-day , and where the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve turns off . 
It is understood , of course , that the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve is an old street , and that a posting-chaise does not pass through the Rue des Postes once in ten years . 
In the thirteenth century this Rue des Postes was inhabited by potters , and its real name is Rue des Pots . 
The moon cast a livid light into this open space . 
Jean Valjean went into ambush in a doorway , calculating that if the men were still following him , he could not fail to get a good look at them , as they traversed this illuminated space . 
In point of fact , three minutes had not elapsed when the men made their appearance . 
There were four of them now . 
All were tall , dressed in long , brown coats , with round hats , and huge cudgels in their hands . 
