It is probable that she had had with Marius one of those conversations in which the beloved man says what he pleases , explains nothing , and satisfies the beloved woman . 
The curiosity of lovers does not extend very far beyond their own love . 
The lower room had made a little toilet . 
Basque had suppressed the bottles , and Nicolette the spiders . 
All the days which followed brought Jean Valjean at the same hour . 
He came every day , because he had not the strength to take Marius ' words otherwise than literally . 
Marius arranged matters so as to be absent at the hours when Jean Valjean came . 
The house grew accustomed to the novel ways of M. Fauchelevent . 
Toussaint helped in this direction : `` Monsieur has always been like that , '' she repeated . 
The grandfather issued this decree : -- `` He 's an original . '' 
And all was said . 
Moreover , at the age of ninety-six , no bond is any longer possible , all is merely juxtaposition ; a newcomer is in the way . 
There is no longer any room ; all habits are acquired . 
M. Fauchelevent , M. Tranchelevent , Father Gillenormand asked nothing better than to be relieved from `` that gentleman . '' 
He added : -- `` Nothing is more common than those originals . 
They do all sorts of queer things . 
They have no reason . 
The Marquis de Canaples was still worse . 
He bought a palace that he might lodge in the garret . 
These are fantastic appearances that people affect . '' 
No one caught a glimpse of the sinister foundation . 
And moreover , who could have guessed such a thing ? 
There are marshes of this description in India . 
The water seems extraordinary , inexplicable , rippling though there is no wind , and agitated where it should be calm . 
One gazes at the surface of these causeless ebullitions ; one does not perceive the hydra which crawls on the bottom . 
Many men have a secret monster in this same manner , a dragon which gnaws them , a despair which inhabits their night . 
Such a man resembles other men , he goes and comes . 
No one knows that he bears within him a frightful parasitic pain with a thousand teeth , which lives within the unhappy man , and of which he is dying . 
No one knows that this man is a gulf . 
He is stagnant but deep . 
From time to time , a trouble of which the onlooker understands nothing appears on his surface . 
A mysterious wrinkle is formed , then vanishes , then re-appears ; an air-bubble rises and bursts . 
It is the breathing of the unknown beast . 
Certain strange habits : arriving at the hour when other people are taking their leave , keeping in the background when other people are displaying themselves , preserving on all occasions what may be designated as the wall-colored mantle , seeking the solitary walk , preferring the deserted street , avoiding any share in conversation , avoiding crowds and festivals , seeming at one 's ease and living poorly , having one 's key in one 's pocket , and one 's candle at the porter 's lodge , however rich one may be , entering by the side door , ascending the private staircase , -- all these insignificant singularities , fugitive folds on the surface , often proceed from a formidable foundation . 
Many weeks passed in this manner . 
A new life gradually took possession of Cosette : the relations which marriage creates , visits , the care of the house , pleasures , great matters . 
Cosette 's pleasures were not costly , they consisted in one thing : being with Marius . 
The great occupation of her life was to go out with him , to remain with him . 
It was for them a joy that was always fresh , to go out arm in arm , in the face of the sun , in the open street , without hiding themselves , before the whole world , both of them completely alone . 
Cosette had one vexation . 
Toussaint could not get on with Nicolette , the soldering of two elderly maids being impossible , and she went away . 
The grandfather was well ; Marius argued a case here and there ; Aunt Gillenormand peacefully led that life aside which sufficed for her , beside the new household . 
Jean Valjean came every day . 
The address as thou disappeared , the you , the `` Madame , '' the `` Monsieur Jean , '' rendered him another person to Cosette . 
The care which he had himself taken to detach her from him was succeeding . 
She became more and more gay and less and less tender . 
Yet she still loved him sincerely , and he felt it . 
One day she said to him suddenly : `` You used to be my father , you are no longer my father , you were my uncle , you are no longer my uncle , you were Monsieur Fauchelevent , you are Jean . 
Who are you then ? 
I do n't like all this . 
If I did not know how good you are , I should be afraid of you . '' 
He still lived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , because he could not make up his mind to remove to a distance from the quarter where Cosette dwelt . 
At first , he only remained a few minutes with Cosette , and then went away . 
Little by little he acquired the habit of making his visits less brief . 
One would have said that he was taking advantage of the authorization of the days which were lengthening , he arrived earlier and departed later . 
One day Cosette chanced to say `` father '' to him . 
A flash of joy illuminated Jean Valjean 's melancholy old countenance . 
He caught her up : `` Say Jean . '' 
-- `` Ah ! 
truly , '' she replied with a burst of laughter , `` Monsieur Jean . '' 
-- `` That is right , '' said he . 
And he turned aside so that she might not see him wipe his eyes . 
THEY RECALL THE GARDEN OF THE RUE PLUMET This was the last time . 
After that last flash of light , complete extinction ensued . 
No more familiarity , no more good-morning with a kiss , never more that word so profoundly sweet : `` My father ! '' 
He was at his own request and through his own complicity driven out of all his happinesses one after the other ; and he had this sorrow , that after having lost Cosette wholly in one day , he was afterwards obliged to lose her again in detail . 
The eye eventually becomes accustomed to the light of a cellar . 
In short , it sufficed for him to have an apparition of Cosette every day . 
His whole life was concentrated in that one hour . 
He seated himself close to her , he gazed at her in silence , or he talked to her of years gone by , of her childhood , of the convent , of her little friends of those bygone days . 
One afternoon , -- it was on one of those early days in April , already warm and fresh , the moment of the sun 's great gayety , the gardens which surrounded the windows of Marius and Cosette felt the emotion of waking , the hawthorn was on the point of budding , a jewelled garniture of gillyflowers spread over the ancient walls , snapdragons yawned through the crevices of the stones , amid the grass there was a charming beginning of daisies , and buttercups , the white butterflies of the year were making their first appearance , the wind , that minstrel of the eternal wedding , was trying in the trees the first notes of that grand , auroral symphony which the old poets called the springtide , -- Marius said to Cosette : -- `` We said that we would go back to take a look at our garden in the Rue Plumet . 
Let us go thither . 
We must not be ungrateful . '' 
-- And away they flitted , like two swallows towards the spring . 
This garden of the Rue Plumet produced on them the effect of the dawn . 
They already had behind them in life something which was like the springtime of their love . 
The house in the Rue Plumet being held on a lease , still belonged to Cosette . 
They went to that garden and that house . 
There they found themselves again , there they forgot themselves . 
That evening , at the usual hour , Jean Valjean came to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
-- `` Madame went out with Monsieur and has not yet returned , '' Basque said to him . 
He seated himself in silence , and waited an hour . 
Cosette did not return . 
He departed with drooping head . 
Cosette was so intoxicated with her walk to `` their garden , '' and so joyous at having `` lived a whole day in her past , '' that she talked of nothing else on the morrow . 
She did not notice that she had not seen Jean Valjean . 
`` In what way did you go thither ? '' 
Jean Valjean asked her . '' 
`` On foot . '' 
`` And how did you return ? '' 
`` In a hackney carriage . '' 
For some time , Jean Valjean had noticed the economical life led by the young people . 
He was troubled by it . 
Marius ' economy was severe , and that word had its absolute meaning for Jean Valjean . 
He hazarded a query : `` Why do you not have a carriage of your own ? 
A pretty coupe would only cost you five hundred francs a month . 
You are rich . '' 
`` I do n't know , '' replied Cosette . 
`` It is like Toussaint , '' resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` She is gone . 
