Are not chains which are endless above human strength ? 
Who would blame Sisyphus and Jean Valjean for saying : `` It is enough ! '' 
The obedience of matter is limited by friction ; is there no limit to the obedience of the soul ? 
If perpetual motion is impossible , can perpetual self-sacrifice be exacted ? 
The first step is nothing , it is the last which is difficult . 
What was the Champmathieu affair in comparison with Cosette 's marriage and of that which it entailed ? 
What is a re-entrance into the galleys , compared to entrance into the void ? 
Oh , first step that must be descended , how sombre art thou ! 
Oh , second step , how black art thou ! 
How could he refrain from turning aside his head this time ? 
Martyrdom is sublimation , corrosive sublimation . 
It is a torture which consecrates . 
One can consent to it for the first hour ; one seats oneself on the throne of glowing iron , one places on one 's head the crown of hot iron , one accepts the globe of red hot iron , one takes the sceptre of red hot iron , but the mantle of flame still remains to be donned , and comes there not a moment when the miserable flesh revolts and when one abdicates from suffering ? 
At length , Jean Valjean entered into the peace of exhaustion . 
He weighed , he reflected , he considered the alternatives , the mysterious balance of light and darkness . 
Should he impose his galleys on those two dazzling children , or should he consummate his irremediable engulfment by himself ? 
On one side lay the sacrifice of Cosette , on the other that of himself . 
At what solution should he arrive ? 
What decision did he come to ? 
What resolution did he take ? 
What was his own inward definitive response to the unbribable interrogatory of fatality ? 
What door did he decide to open ? 
Which side of his life did he resolve upon closing and condemning ? 
Among all the unfathomable precipices which surrounded him , which was his choice ? 
What extremity did he accept ? 
To which of the gulfs did he nod his head ? 
His dizzy revery lasted all night long . 
He remained there until daylight , in the same attitude , bent double over that bed , prostrate beneath the enormity of fate , crushed , perchance , alas ! 
with clenched fists , with arms outspread at right angles , like a man crucified who has been un-nailed , and flung face down on the earth . 
There he remained for twelve hours , the twelve long hours of a long winter 's night , ice-cold , without once raising his head , and without uttering a word . 
He was as motionless as a corpse , while his thoughts wallowed on the earth and soared , now like the hydra , now like the eagle . 
Any one to behold him thus motionless would have pronounced him dead ; all at once he shuddered convulsively , and his mouth , glued to Cosette 's garments , kissed them ; then it could be seen that he was alive . 
Who could see ? 
Since Jean Valjean was alone , and there was no one there . 
The One who is in the shadows . 
THE SEVENTH CIRCLE AND THE EIGHTH HEAVEN The days that follow weddings are solitary . 
People respect the meditations of the happy pair . 
And also , their tardy slumbers , to some degree . 
The tumult of visits and congratulations only begins later on . 
On the morning of the 17th of February , it was a little past midday when Basque , with napkin and feather-duster under his arm , busy in setting his antechamber to rights , heard a light tap at the door . 
There had been no ring , which was discreet on such a day . 
Basque opened the door , and beheld M. Fauchelevent . 
He introduced him into the drawing-room , still encumbered and topsy-turvy , and which bore the air of a field of battle after the joys of the preceding evening . 
`` Dame , sir , '' remarked Basque , `` we all woke up late . '' 
`` Is your master up ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
`` How is Monsieur 's arm ? '' 
replied Basque . 
`` Better . 
Is your master up ? '' 
`` Which one ? 
the old one or the new one ? '' 
`` Monsieur Pontmercy . '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , '' said Basque , drawing himself up . 
A man is a Baron most of all to his servants . 
He counts for something with them ; they are what a philosopher would call , bespattered with the title , and that flatters them . 
Marius , be it said in passing , a militant republican as he had proved , was now a Baron in spite of himself . 
A small revolution had taken place in the family in connection with this title . 
It was now M. Gillenormand who clung to it , and Marius who detached himself from it . 
But Colonel Pontmercy had written : `` My son will bear my title . '' 
Marius obeyed . 
And then , Cosette , in whom the woman was beginning to dawn , was delighted to be a Baroness . 
`` Monsieur le Baron ? '' 
repeated Basque . 
`` I will go and see . 
I will tell him that M. Fauchelevent is here . '' 
`` No . 
Do not tell him that it is I. Tell him that some one wishes to speak to him in private , and mention no name . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
ejaculated Basque . 
`` I wish to surprise him . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
ejaculated Basque once more , emitting his second `` ah ! '' 
as an explanation of the first . 
And he left the room . 
Jean Valjean remained alone . 
The drawing-room , as we have just said , was in great disorder . 
It seemed as though , by lending an air , one might still hear the vague noise of the wedding . 
On the polished floor lay all sorts of flowers which had fallen from garlands and head-dresses . 
The wax candles , burned to stumps , added stalactites of wax to the crystal drops of the chandeliers . 
Not a single piece of furniture was in its place . 
In the corners , three or four arm-chairs , drawn close together in a circle , had the appearance of continuing a conversation . 
The whole effect was cheerful . 
A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast . 
It has been a happy thing . 
On the chairs in disarray , among those fading flowers , beneath those extinct lights , people have thought of joy . 
The sun had succeeded to the chandelier , and made its way gayly into the drawing-room . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
Jean Valjean stood motionless on the spot where Basque had left him . 
He was very pale . 
His eyes were hollow , and so sunken in his head by sleeplessness that they nearly disappeared in their orbits . 
His black coat bore the weary folds of a garment that has been up all night . 
The elbows were whitened with the down which the friction of cloth against linen leaves behind it . 
Jean Valjean stared at the window outlined on the polished floor at his feet by the sun . 
There came a sound at the door , and he raised his eyes . 
Marius entered , his head well up , his mouth smiling , an indescribable light on his countenance , his brow expanded , his eyes triumphant . 
He had not slept either . 
`` It is you , father ! '' 
he exclaimed , on catching sight of Jean Valjean ; `` that idiot of a Basque had such a mysterious air ! 
But you have come too early . 
