`` With this rope , '' said Babet . 
`` And fasten it , '' continued Brujon . 
`` To the top of the wall , '' went on Babet . 
`` To the cross-bar of the window , '' added Brujon . 
`` And then ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` There ! '' 
said Guelemer . 
The gamin examined the rope , the flue , the wall , the windows , and made that indescribable and disdainful noise with his lips which signifies : -- `` Is that all ! '' 
`` There 's a man up there whom you are to save , '' resumed Montparnasse . 
`` Will you ? '' 
began Brujon again . 
`` Greenhorn ! '' 
replied the lad , as though the question appeared a most unprecedented one to him . 
And he took off his shoes . 
Guelemer seized Gavroche by one arm , set him on the roof of the shanty , whose worm-eaten planks bent beneath the urchin 's weight , and handed him the rope which Brujon had knotted together during Montparnasse 's absence . 
The gamin directed his steps towards the flue , which it was easy to enter , thanks to a large crack which touched the roof . 
At the moment when he was on the point of ascending , Thenardier , who saw life and safety approaching , bent over the edge of the wall ; the first light of dawn struck white upon his brow dripping with sweat , upon his livid cheek-bones , his sharp and savage nose , his bristling gray beard , and Gavroche recognized him . 
`` Hullo ! 
it 's my father ! 
Oh , that wo n't hinder . '' 
And taking the rope in his teeth , he resolutely began the ascent . 
He reached the summit of the hut , bestrode the old wall as though it had been a horse . 
and knotted the rope firmly to the upper cross-bar of the window . 
A moment later , Thenardier was in the street . 
As soon as he touched the pavement , as soon as he found himself out of danger , he was no longer either weary , or chilled or trembling ; the terrible things from which he had escaped vanished like smoke , all that strange and ferocious mind awoke once more , and stood erect and free , ready to march onward . 
These were this man 's first words : -- `` Now , whom are we to eat ? '' 
It is useless to explain the sense of this frightfully transparent remark , which signifies both to kill , to assassinate , and to plunder . 
To eat , true sense : to devour . 
`` Let 's get well into a corner , '' said Brujon . 
`` Let 's settle it in three words , and part at once . 
There was an affair that promised well in the Rue Plumet , a deserted street , an isolated house , an old rotten gate on a garden , and lone women . '' 
`` Well ! 
why not ? '' 
demanded Thenardier . 
`` Your girl , Eponine , went to see about the matter , '' replied Babet . 
`` And she brought a biscuit to Magnon , '' added Guelemer . 
`` Nothing to be made there . '' 
`` The girl 's no fool , '' said Thenardier . 
`` Still , it must be seen to . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' said Brujon , `` it must be looked up . '' 
In the meanwhile , none of the men seemed to see Gavroche , who , during this colloquy , had seated himself on one of the fence-posts ; he waited a few moments , thinking that perhaps his father would turn towards him , then he put on his shoes again , and said : -- `` Is that all ? 
You do n't want any more , my men ? 
Now you 're out of your scrape . 
I 'm off . 
I must go and get my brats out of bed . '' 
And off he went . 
The five men emerged , one after another , from the enclosure . 
When Gavroche had disappeared at the corner of the Rue des Ballets , Babet took Thenardier aside . 
`` Did you take a good look at that young ` un ? '' 
he asked . 
`` What young ` un ? '' 
`` The one who climbed the wall and carried you the rope . '' 
`` Not particularly . '' 
`` Well , I do n't know , but it strikes me that it was your son . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
said Thenardier , `` do you think so ? '' 
BOOK SEVENTH . 
-- SLANG ORIGIN Pigritia is a terrible word . 
It engenders a whole world , la pegre , for which read theft , and a hell , la pegrenne , for which read hunger . 
Thus , idleness is the mother . 
She has a son , theft , and a daughter , hunger . 
Where are we at this moment ? 
In the land of slang . 
What is slang ? 
It is at one and the same time , a nation and a dialect ; it is theft in its two kinds ; people and language . 
When , four and thirty years ago , the narrator of this grave and sombre history introduced into a work written with the same aim as this -LSB- 39 -RSB- a thief who talked argot , there arose amazement and clamor . 
-- `` What ! 
How ! 
Argot ! 
Why , argot is horrible ! 
It is the language of prisons , galleys , convicts , of everything that is most abominable in society ! '' 
etc. , etc. -LSB- 39 -RSB- The Last Day of a Condemned Man . 
We have never understood this sort of objections . 
Since that time , two powerful romancers , one of whom is a profound observer of the human heart , the other an intrepid friend of the people , Balzac and Eugene Sue , having represented their ruffians as talking their natural language , as the author of The Last Day of a Condemned Man did in 1828 , the same objections have been raised . 
People repeated : `` What do authors mean by that revolting dialect ? 
Slang is odious ! 
Slang makes one shudder ! '' 
Who denies that ? 
Of course it does . 
When it is a question of probing a wound , a gulf , a society , since when has it been considered wrong to go too far ? 
to go to the bottom ? 
We have always thought that it was sometimes a courageous act , and , at least , a simple and useful deed , worthy of the sympathetic attention which duty accepted and fulfilled merits . 
Why should one not explore everything , and study everything ? 
Why should one halt on the way ? 
The halt is a matter depending on the sounding-line , and not on the leadsman . 
Certainly , too , it is neither an attractive nor an easy task to undertake an investigation into the lowest depths of the social order , where terra firma comes to an end and where mud begins , to rummage in those vague , murky waves , to follow up , to seize and to fling , still quivering , upon the pavement that abject dialect which is dripping with filth when thus brought to the light , that pustulous vocabulary each word of which seems an unclean ring from a monster of the mire and the shadows . 
Nothing is more lugubrious than the contemplation thus in its nudity , in the broad light of thought , of the horrible swarming of slang . 
It seems , in fact , to be a sort of horrible beast made for the night which has just been torn from its cesspool . 
One thinks one beholds a frightful , living , and bristling thicket which quivers , rustles , wavers , returns to shadow , threatens and glares . 
One word resembles a claw , another an extinguished and bleeding eye , such and such a phrase seems to move like the claw of a crab . 
All this is alive with the hideous vitality of things which have been organized out of disorganization . 
Now , when has horror ever excluded study ? 
Since when has malady banished medicine ? 
Can one imagine a naturalist refusing to study the viper , the bat , the scorpion , the centipede , the tarantula , and one who would cast them back into their darkness , saying : `` Oh ! 
how ugly that is ! '' 
The thinker who should turn aside from slang would resemble a surgeon who should avert his face from an ulcer or a wart . 
He would be like a philologist refusing to examine a fact in language , a philosopher hesitating to scrutinize a fact in humanity . 
For , it must be stated to those who are ignorant of the case , that argot is both a literary phenomenon and a social result . 
What is slang , properly speaking ? 
