found that Andre Chenier embarrassed them somewhat , and they had him guillot ... that is to say , those great men on the 7th of Thermidor , besought Andre Chenier , in the interests of public safety , to be so good as to go ... '' M. Gillenormand , clutched by the throat by his own phrase , could not proceed . 
Being able neither to finish it nor to retract it , while his daughter arranged the pillow behind Marius , who was overwhelmed with so many emotions , the old man rushed headlong , with as much rapidity as his age permitted , from the bed-chamber , shut the door behind him , and , purple , choking and foaming at the mouth , his eyes starting from his head , he found himself nose to nose with honest Basque , who was blacking boots in the anteroom . 
He seized Basque by the collar , and shouted full in his face in fury : -- `` By the hundred thousand Javottes of the devil , those ruffians did assassinate him ! '' 
`` Who , sir ? '' 
`` Andre Chenier ! '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said Basque in alarm . 
MADEMOISELLE GILLENORMAND ENDS BY NO LONGER THINKING IT A BAD THING THAT M. FAUCHELEVENT SHOULD HAVE ENTERED WITH SOMETHING UNDER HIS ARM Cosette and Marius beheld each other once more . 
What that interview was like we decline to say . 
There are things which one must not attempt to depict ; the sun is one of them . 
The entire family , including Basque and Nicolette , were assembled in Marius ' chamber at the moment when Cosette entered it . 
Precisely at that moment , the grandfather was on the point of blowing his nose ; he stopped short , holding his nose in his handkerchief , and gazing over it at Cosette . 
She appeared on the threshold ; it seemed to him that she was surrounded by a glory . 
`` Adorable ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
Then he blew his nose noisily . 
Cosette was intoxicated , delighted , frightened , in heaven . 
She was as thoroughly alarmed as any one can be by happiness . 
She stammered all pale , yet flushed , she wanted to fling herself into Marius ' arms , and dared not . 
Ashamed of loving in the presence of all these people . 
People are pitiless towards happy lovers ; they remain when the latter most desire to be left alone . 
Lovers have no need of any people whatever . 
With Cosette , and behind her , there had entered a man with white hair who was grave yet smiling , though with a vague and heartrending smile . 
It was `` Monsieur Fauchelevent '' ; it was Jean Valjean . 
He was very well dressed , as the porter had said , entirely in black , in perfectly new garments , and with a white cravat . 
The porter was a thousand leagues from recognizing in this correct bourgeois , in this probable notary , the fear-inspiring bearer of the corpse , who had sprung up at his door on the night of the 7th of June , tattered , muddy , hideous , haggard , his face masked in blood and mire , supporting in his arms the fainting Marius ; still , his porter 's scent was aroused . 
When M. Fauchelevent arrived with Cosette , the porter had not been able to refrain from communicating to his wife this aside : `` I do n't know why it is , but I ca n't help fancying that I 've seen that face before . '' 
M. Fauchelevent in Marius ' chamber , remained apart near the door . 
He had under his arm , a package which bore considerable resemblance to an octavo volume enveloped in paper . 
The enveloping paper was of a greenish hue , and appeared to be mouldy . 
`` Does the gentleman always have books like that under his arm ? '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand , who did not like books , demanded in a low tone of Nicolette . 
`` Well , '' retorted M. Gillenormand , who had overheard her , in the same tone , `` he 's a learned man . 
What then ? 
Is that his fault ? 
Monsieur Boulard , one of my acquaintances , never walked out without a book under his arm either , and he always had some old volume hugged to his heart like that . '' 
And , with a bow , he said aloud : `` Monsieur Tranchelevent ... '' Father Gillenormand did not do it intentionally , but inattention to proper names was an aristocratic habit of his . 
`` Monsieur Tranchelevent , I have the honor of asking you , on behalf of my grandson , Baron Marius Pontmercy , for the hand of Mademoiselle . '' 
Monsieur Tranchelevent bowed . 
`` That 's settled , '' said the grandfather . 
And , turning to Marius and Cosette , with both arms extended in blessing , he cried : `` Permission to adore each other ! '' 
They did not require him to repeat it twice . 
So much the worse ! 
the chirping began . 
They talked low . 
Marius , resting on his elbow on his reclining chair , Cosette standing beside him . 
`` Oh , heavens ! '' 
murmured Cosette , `` I see you once again ! 
it is thou ! 
it is you ! 
The idea of going and fighting like that ! 
But why ? 
It is horrible . 
I have been dead for four months . 
Oh ! 
how wicked it was of you to go to that battle ! 
What had I done to you ? 
I pardon you , but you will never do it again . 
A little while ago , when they came to tell us to come to you , I still thought that I was about to die , but it was from joy . 
I was so sad ! 
I have not taken the time to dress myself , I must frighten people with my looks ! 
What will your relatives say to see me in a crumpled collar ? 
Do speak ! 
You let me do all the talking . 
We are still in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
It seems that your shoulder was terrible . 
They told me that you could put your fist in it . 
And then , it seems that they cut your flesh with the scissors . 
That is frightful . 
I have cried till I have no eyes left . 
It is queer that a person can suffer like that . 
Your grandfather has a very kindly air . 
Do n't disturb yourself , do n't rise on your elbow , you will injure yourself . 
Oh ! 
how happy I am ! 
So our unhappiness is over ! 
I am quite foolish . 
I had things to say to you , and I no longer know in the least what they were . 
Do you still love me ? 
We live in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
There is no garden . 
I made lint all the time ; stay , sir , look , it is your fault , I have a callous on my fingers . '' 
`` Angel ! '' 
said Marius . 
Angel is the only word in the language which can not be worn out . 
No other word could resist the merciless use which lovers make of it . 
Then as there were spectators , they paused and said not a word more , contenting themselves with softly touching each other 's hands . 
M. Gillenormand turned towards those who were in the room and cried : `` Talk loud , the rest of you . 
Make a noise , you people behind the scenes . 
Come , a little uproar , the deuce ! 
so that the children can chatter at their ease . '' 
And , approaching Marius and Cosette , he said to them in a very low voice : `` Call each other thou . 
Do n't stand on ceremony . '' 
Aunt Gillenormand looked on in amazement at this irruption of light in her elderly household . 
There was nothing aggressive about this amazement ; it was not the least in the world like the scandalized and envious glance of an owl at two turtle-doves , it was the stupid eye of a poor innocent seven and fifty years of age ; it was a life which had been a failure gazing at that triumph , love . 
`` Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior , '' said her father to her , `` I told you that this is what would happen to you . '' 
He remained silent for a moment , and then added : `` Look at the happiness of others . '' 
Then he turned to Cosette . 
`` How pretty she is ! 
how pretty she is ! 
She 's a Greuze . 
