One was the bearded old woman who swept out his chamber , and caused Courfeyrac to say : `` Seeing that his servant woman wears his beard , Marius does not wear his own beard . '' 
The other was a sort of little girl whom he saw very often , and whom he never looked at . 
For more than a year , Marius had noticed in one of the walks of the Luxembourg , the one which skirts the parapet of the Pepiniere , a man and a very young girl , who were almost always seated side by side on the same bench , at the most solitary end of the alley , on the Rue de l'Ouest side . 
Every time that that chance which meddles with the strolls of persons whose gaze is turned inwards , led Marius to that walk , -- and it was nearly every day , -- he found this couple there . 
The man appeared to be about sixty years of age ; he seemed sad and serious ; his whole person presented the robust and weary aspect peculiar to military men who have retired from the service . 
If he had worn a decoration , Marius would have said : `` He is an ex-officer . '' 
He had a kindly but unapproachable air , and he never let his glance linger on the eyes of any one . 
He wore blue trousers , a blue frock coat and a broad-brimmed hat , which always appeared to be new , a black cravat , a quaker shirt , that is to say , it was dazzlingly white , but of coarse linen . 
A grisette who passed near him one day , said : `` Here 's a very tidy widower . '' 
His hair was very white . 
The first time that the young girl who accompanied him came and seated herself on the bench which they seemed to have adopted , she was a sort of child thirteen or fourteen years of age , so thin as to be almost homely , awkward , insignificant , and with a possible promise of handsome eyes . 
Only , they were always raised with a sort of displeasing assurance . 
Her dress was both aged and childish , like the dress of the scholars in a convent ; it consisted of a badly cut gown of black merino . 
They had the air of being father and daughter . 
Marius scanned this old man , who was not yet aged , and this little girl , who was not yet a person , for a few days , and thereafter paid no attention to them . 
They , on their side , did not appear even to see him . 
They conversed together with a peaceful and indifferent air . 
The girl chattered incessantly and merrily . 
The old man talked but little , and , at times , he fixed on her eyes overflowing with an ineffable paternity . 
Marius had acquired the mechanical habit of strolling in that walk . 
He invariably found them there . 
This is the way things went : -- Marius liked to arrive by the end of the alley which was furthest from their bench ; he walked the whole length of the alley , passed in front of them , then returned to the extremity whence he had come , and began again . 
This he did five or six times in the course of his promenade , and the promenade was taken five or six times a week , without its having occurred to him or to these people to exchange a greeting . 
That personage , and that young girl , although they appeared , -- and perhaps because they appeared , -- to shun all glances , had , naturally , caused some attention on the part of the five or six students who strolled along the Pepiniere from time to time ; the studious after their lectures , the others after their game of billiards . 
Courfeyrac , who was among the last , had observed them several times , but , finding the girl homely , he had speedily and carefully kept out of the way . 
He had fled , discharging at them a sobriquet , like a Parthian dart . 
Impressed solely with the child 's gown and the old man 's hair , he had dubbed the daughter Mademoiselle Lanoire , and the father , Monsieur Leblanc , so that as no one knew them under any other title , this nickname became a law in the default of any other name . 
The students said : `` Ah ! 
Monsieur Leblanc is on his bench . '' 
And Marius , like the rest , had found it convenient to call this unknown gentleman Monsieur Leblanc . 
We shall follow their example , and we shall say M. Leblanc , in order to facilitate this tale . 
So Marius saw them nearly every day , at the same hour , during the first year . 
He found the man to his taste , but the girl insipid . 
LUX FACTA EST During the second year , precisely at the point in this history which the reader has now reached , it chanced that this habit of the Luxembourg was interrupted , without Marius himself being quite aware why , and nearly six months elapsed , during which he did not set foot in the alley . 
One day , at last , he returned thither once more ; it was a serene summer morning , and Marius was in joyous mood , as one is when the weather is fine . 
It seemed to him that he had in his heart all the songs of the birds that he was listening to , and all the bits of blue sky of which he caught glimpses through the leaves of the trees . 
He went straight to `` his alley , '' and when he reached the end of it he perceived , still on the same bench , that well-known couple . 
Only , when he approached , it certainly was the same man ; but it seemed to him that it was no longer the same girl . 
The person whom he now beheld was a tall and beautiful creature , possessed of all the most charming lines of a woman at the precise moment when they are still combined with all the most ingenuous graces of the child ; a pure and fugitive moment , which can be expressed only by these two words , -- `` fifteen years . '' 
She had wonderful brown hair , shaded with threads of gold , a brow that seemed made of marble , cheeks that seemed made of rose-leaf , a pale flush , an agitated whiteness , an exquisite mouth , whence smiles darted like sunbeams , and words like music , a head such as Raphael would have given to Mary , set upon a neck that Jean Goujon would have attributed to a Venus . 
And , in order that nothing might be lacking to this bewitching face , her nose was not handsome -- it was pretty ; neither straight nor curved , neither Italian nor Greek ; it was the Parisian nose , that is to say , spiritual , delicate , irregular , pure , -- which drives painters to despair , and charms poets . 
When Marius passed near her , he could not see her eyes , which were constantly lowered . 
He saw only her long chestnut lashes , permeated with shadow and modesty . 
This did not prevent the beautiful child from smiling as she listened to what the white-haired old man was saying to her , and nothing could be more fascinating than that fresh smile , combined with those drooping eyes . 
For a moment , Marius thought that she was another daughter of the same man , a sister of the former , no doubt . 
But when the invariable habit of his stroll brought him , for the second time , near the bench , and he had examined her attentively , he recognized her as the same . 
In six months the little girl had become a young maiden ; that was all . 
Nothing is more frequent than this phenomenon . 
There is a moment when girls blossom out in the twinkling of an eye , and become roses all at once . 
One left them children but yesterday ; today , one finds them disquieting to the feelings . 
This child had not only grown , she had become idealized . 
As three days in April suffice to cover certain trees with flowers , six months had sufficed to clothe her with beauty . 
Her April had arrived . 
One sometimes sees people , who , poor and mean , seem to wake up , pass suddenly from indigence to luxury , indulge in expenditures of all sorts , and become dazzling , prodigal , magnificent , all of a sudden . 
That is the result of having pocketed an income ; a note fell due yesterday . 
The young girl had received her quarterly income . 
And then , she was no longer the school-girl with her felt hat , her merino gown , her scholar 's shoes , and red hands ; taste had come to her with beauty ; she was a well-dressed person , clad with a sort of rich and simple elegance , and without affectation . 
She wore a dress of black damask , a cape of the same material , and a bonnet of white crape . 
Her white gloves displayed the delicacy of the hand which toyed with the carved , Chinese ivory handle of a parasol , and her silken shoe outlined the smallness of her foot . 
When one passed near her , her whole toilette exhaled a youthful and penetrating perfume . 
As for the man , he was the same as usual . 
The second time that Marius approached her , the young girl raised her eyelids ; her eyes were of a deep , celestial blue , but in that veiled azure , there was , as yet , nothing but the glance of a child . 
She looked at Marius indifferently , as she would have stared at the brat running beneath the sycamores , or the marble vase which cast a shadow on the bench , and Marius , on his side , continued his promenade , and thought about something else . 
He passed near the bench where the young girl sat , five or six times , but without even turning his eyes in her direction . 
On the following days , he returned , as was his wont , to the Luxembourg ; as usual , he found there `` the father and daughter ; '' but he paid no further attention to them . 
He thought no more about the girl now that she was beautiful than he had when she was homely . 
He passed very near the bench where she sat , because such was his habit . 
EFFECT OF THE SPRING One day , the air was warm , the Luxembourg was inundated with light and shade , the sky was as pure as though the angels had washed it that morning , the sparrows were giving vent to little twitters in the depths of the chestnut-trees . 
Marius had thrown open his whole soul to nature , he was not thinking of anything , he simply lived and breathed , he passed near the bench , the young girl raised her eyes to him , the two glances met . 
What was there in the young girl 's glance on this occasion ? 
Marius could not have told . 
There was nothing and there was everything . 
It was a strange flash . 
She dropped her eyes , and he pursued his way . 
What he had just seen was no longer the ingenuous and simple eye of a child ; it was a mysterious gulf which had half opened , then abruptly closed again . 
There comes a day when the young girl glances in this manner . 
Woe to him who chances to be there ! 
That first gaze of a soul which does not , as yet , know itself , is like the dawn in the sky . 
It is the awakening of something radiant and strange . 
Nothing can give any idea of the dangerous charm of that unexpected gleam , which flashes suddenly and vaguely forth from adorable shadows , and which is composed of all the innocence of the present , and of all the passion of the future . 
It is a sort of undecided tenderness which reveals itself by chance , and which waits . 
It is a snare which the innocent maiden sets unknown to herself , and in which she captures hearts without either wishing or knowing it . 
It is a virgin looking like a woman . 
It is rare that a profound revery does not spring from that glance , where it falls . 
All purities and all candors meet in that celestial and fatal gleam which , more than all the best-planned tender glances of coquettes , possesses the magic power of causing the sudden blossoming , in the depths of the soul , of that sombre flower , impregnated with perfume and with poison , which is called love . 
That evening , on his return to his garret , Marius cast his eyes over his garments , and perceived , for the first time , that he had been so slovenly , indecorous , and inconceivably stupid as to go for his walk in the Luxembourg with his `` every-day clothes , '' that is to say , with a hat battered near the band , coarse carter 's boots , black trousers which showed white at the knees , and a black coat which was pale at the elbows . 
BEGINNING OF A GREAT MALADY On the following day , at the accustomed hour , Marius drew from his wardrobe his new coat , his new trousers , his new hat , and his new boots ; he clothed himself in this complete panoply , put on his gloves , a tremendous luxury , and set off for the Luxembourg . 
On the way thither , he encountered Courfeyrac , and pretended not to see him . 
Courfeyrac , on his return home , said to his friends : -- `` I have just met Marius ' new hat and new coat , with Marius inside them . 
He was going to pass an examination , no doubt . 
He looked utterly stupid . '' 
On arriving at the Luxembourg , Marius made the tour of the fountain basin , and stared at the swans ; then he remained for a long time in contemplation before a statue whose head was perfectly black with mould , and one of whose hips was missing . 
Near the basin there was a bourgeois forty years of age , with a prominent stomach , who was holding by the hand a little urchin of five , and saying to him : `` Shun excess , my son , keep at an equal distance from despotism and from anarchy . '' 
Marius listened to this bourgeois . 
Then he made the circuit of the basin once more . 
At last he directed his course towards `` his alley , '' slowly , and as if with regret . 
One would have said that he was both forced to go there and withheld from doing so . 
He did not perceive it himself , and thought that he was doing as he always did . 
On turning into the walk , he saw M. Leblanc and the young girl at the other end , `` on their bench . '' 
He buttoned his coat up to the very top , pulled it down on his body so that there might be no wrinkles , examined , with a certain complaisance , the lustrous gleams of his trousers , and marched on the bench . 
