On the day after that , he did not leave his bed . 
His portress , who prepared his scanty repasts , a few cabbages or potatoes with bacon , glanced at the brown earthenware plate and exclaimed : `` But you ate nothing yesterday , poor , dear man ! '' 
`` Certainly I did , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` The plate is quite full . '' 
`` Look at the water jug . 
It is empty . '' 
`` That proves that you have drunk ; it does not prove that you have eaten . '' 
`` Well , '' said Jean Valjean , `` what if I felt hungry only for water ? '' 
`` That is called thirst , and , when one does not eat at the same time , it is called fever . '' 
`` I will eat to-morrow . '' 
`` Or at Trinity day . 
Why not to-day ? 
Is it the thing to say : ` I will eat to-morrow ' ? 
The idea of leaving my platter without even touching it ! 
My ladyfinger potatoes were so good ! '' 
Jean Valjean took the old woman 's hand : `` I promise you that I will eat them , '' he said , in his benevolent voice . 
`` I am not pleased with you , '' replied the portress . 
Jean Valjean saw no other human creature than this good woman . 
There are streets in Paris through which no one ever passes , and houses to which no one ever comes . 
He was in one of those streets and one of those houses . 
While he still went out , he had purchased of a coppersmith , for a few sous , a little copper crucifix which he had hung up on a nail opposite his bed . 
That gibbet is always good to look at . 
A week passed , and Jean Valjean had not taken a step in his room . 
He still remained in bed . 
The portress said to her husband : -- `` The good man upstairs yonder does not get up , he no longer eats , he will not last long . 
That man has his sorrows , that he has . 
You wo n't get it out of my head that his daughter has made a bad marriage . '' 
The porter replied , with the tone of marital sovereignty : `` If he 's rich , let him have a doctor . 
If he is not rich , let him go without . 
If he has no doctor he will die . '' 
`` And if he has one ? '' 
`` He will die , '' said the porter . 
The portress set to scraping away the grass from what she called her pavement , with an old knife , and , as she tore out the blades , she grumbled : `` It 's a shame . 
Such a neat old man ! 
He 's as white as a chicken . '' 
She caught sight of the doctor of the quarter as he passed the end of the street ; she took it upon herself to request him to come up stairs . 
`` It 's on the second floor , '' said she . 
`` You have only to enter . 
As the good man no longer stirs from his bed , the door is always unlocked . '' 
The doctor saw Jean Valjean and spoke with him . 
When he came down again the portress interrogated him : `` Well , doctor ? '' 
`` Your sick man is very ill indeed . '' 
`` What is the matter with him ? '' 
`` Everything and nothing . 
He is a man who , to all appearances , has lost some person who is dear to him . 
People die of that . '' 
`` What did he say to you ? '' 
`` He told me that he was in good health . '' 
`` Shall you come again , doctor ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the doctor . 
`` But some one else besides must come . '' 
A PEN IS HEAVY TO THE MAN WHO LIFTED THE FAUCHELEVENT 'S CART One evening Jean Valjean found difficulty in raising himself on his elbow ; he felt of his wrist and could not find his pulse ; his breath was short and halted at times ; he recognized the fact that he was weaker than he had ever been before . 
Then , no doubt under the pressure of some supreme preoccupation , he made an effort , drew himself up into a sitting posture and dressed himself . 
He put on his old workingman 's clothes . 
As he no longer went out , he had returned to them and preferred them . 
He was obliged to pause many times while dressing himself ; merely putting his arms through his waistcoat made the perspiration trickle from his forehead . 
Since he had been alone , he had placed his bed in the antechamber , in order to inhabit that deserted apartment as little as possible . 
He opened the valise and drew from it Cosette 's outfit . 
He spread it out on his bed . 
The Bishop 's candlesticks were in their place on the chimney-piece . 
He took from a drawer two wax candles and put them in the candlesticks . 
Then , although it was still broad daylight , -- it was summer , -- he lighted them . 
In the same way candles are to be seen lighted in broad daylight in chambers where there is a corpse . 
Every step that he took in going from one piece of furniture to another exhausted him , and he was obliged to sit down . 
It was not ordinary fatigue which expends the strength only to renew it ; it was the remnant of all movement possible to him , it was life drained which flows away drop by drop in overwhelming efforts and which will never be renewed . 
The chair into which he allowed himself to fall was placed in front of that mirror , so fatal for him , so providential for Marius , in which he had read Cosette 's reversed writing on the blotting book . 
He caught sight of himself in this mirror , and did not recognize himself . 
He was eighty years old ; before Marius ' marriage , he would have hardly been taken for fifty ; that year had counted for thirty . 
What he bore on his brow was no longer the wrinkles of age , it was the mysterious mark of death . 
The hollowing of that pitiless nail could be felt there . 
His cheeks were pendulous ; the skin of his face had the color which would lead one to think that it already had earth upon it ; the corners of his mouth drooped as in the mask which the ancients sculptured on tombs . 
He gazed into space with an air of reproach ; one would have said that he was one of those grand tragic beings who have cause to complain of some one . 
He was in that condition , the last phase of dejection , in which sorrow no longer flows ; it is coagulated , so to speak ; there is something on the soul like a clot of despair . 
Night had come . 
He laboriously dragged a table and the old arm-chair to the fireside , and placed upon the table a pen , some ink and some paper . 
That done , he had a fainting fit . 
When he recovered consciousness , he was thirsty . 
As he could not lift the jug , he tipped it over painfully towards his mouth , and swallowed a draught . 
As neither the pen nor the ink had been used for a long time , the point of the pen had curled up , the ink had dried away , he was forced to rise and put a few drops of water in the ink , which he did not accomplish without pausing and sitting down two or three times , and he was compelled to write with the back of the pen . 
He wiped his brow from time to time . 
Then he turned towards the bed , and , still seated , for he could not stand , he gazed at the little black gown and all those beloved objects . 
These contemplations lasted for hours which seemed minutes . 
All at once he shivered , he felt that a child was taking possession of him ; he rested his elbows on the table , which was illuminated by the Bishop 's candles and took up the pen . 
His hand trembled . 
He wrote slowly the few following lines : `` Cosette , I bless thee . 
I am going to explain to thee . 
Thy husband was right in giving me to understand that I ought to go away ; but there is a little error in what he believed , though he was in the right . 
He is excellent . 
Love him well even after I am dead . 
Monsieur Pontmercy , love my darling child well . 
Cosette , this paper will be found ; this is what I wish to say to thee , thou wilt see the figures , if I have the strength to recall them , listen well , this money is really thine . 
Here is the whole matter : White jet comes from Norway , black jet comes from England , black glass jewellery comes from Germany . 
Jet is the lightest , the most precious , the most costly . 
Imitations can be made in France as well as in Germany . 
What is needed is a little anvil two inches square , and a lamp burning spirits of wine to soften the wax . 
The wax was formerly made with resin and lampblack , and cost four livres the pound . 
I invented a way of making it with gum shellac and turpentine . 
It does not cost more than thirty sous , and is much better . 
Buckles are made with a violet glass which is stuck fast , by means of this wax , to a little framework of black iron . 
The glass must be violet for iron jewellery , and black for gold jewellery . 
