The merchant who had demanded the bucket of water took it to his horse himself . 
Cosette resumed her place under the kitchen table , and her knitting . 
The man , who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he had poured out for himself , observed the child with peculiar attention . 
Cosette was ugly . 
If she had been happy , she might have been pretty . 
We have already given a sketch of that sombre little figure . 
Cosette was thin and pale ; she was nearly eight years old , but she seemed to be hardly six . 
Her large eyes , sunken in a sort of shadow , were almost put out with weeping . 
The corners of her mouth had that curve of habitual anguish which is seen in condemned persons and desperately sick people . 
Her hands were , as her mother had divined , `` ruined with chilblains . '' 
The fire which illuminated her at that moment brought into relief all the angles of her bones , and rendered her thinness frightfully apparent . 
As she was always shivering , she had acquired the habit of pressing her knees one against the other . 
Her entire clothing was but a rag which would have inspired pity in summer , and which inspired horror in winter . 
All she had on was hole-ridden linen , not a scrap of woollen . 
Her skin was visible here and there and everywhere black and blue spots could be descried , which marked the places where the Thenardier woman had touched her . 
Her naked legs were thin and red . 
The hollows in her neck were enough to make one weep . 
This child 's whole person , her mien , her attitude , the sound of her voice , the intervals which she allowed to elapse between one word and the next , her glance , her silence , her slightest gesture , expressed and betrayed one sole idea , -- fear . 
Fear was diffused all over her ; she was covered with it , so to speak ; fear drew her elbows close to her hips , withdrew her heels under her petticoat , made her occupy as little space as possible , allowed her only the breath that was absolutely necessary , and had become what might be called the habit of her body , admitting of no possible variation except an increase . 
In the depths of her eyes there was an astonished nook where terror lurked . 
Her fear was such , that on her arrival , wet as she was , Cosette did not dare to approach the fire and dry herself , but sat silently down to her work again . 
The expression in the glance of that child of eight years was habitually so gloomy , and at times so tragic , that it seemed at certain moments as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a demon . 
As we have stated , she had never known what it is to pray ; she had never set foot in a church . 
`` Have I the time ? '' 
said the Thenardier . 
The man in the yellow coat never took his eyes from Cosette . 
All at once , the Thenardier exclaimed : -- `` By the way , where 's that bread ? '' 
Cosette , according to her custom whenever the Thenardier uplifted her voice , emerged with great haste from beneath the table . 
She had completely forgotten the bread . 
She had recourse to the expedient of children who live in a constant state of fear . 
She lied . 
`` Madame , the baker 's shop was shut . '' 
`` You should have knocked . '' 
`` I did knock , Madame . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He did not open the door . '' 
`` I 'll find out to-morrow whether that is true , '' said the Thenardier ; `` and if you are telling me a lie , I 'll lead you a pretty dance . 
In the meantime , give me back my fifteen-sou piece . '' 
Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron , and turned green . 
The fifteen-sou piece was not there . 
`` Ah , come now , '' said Madame Thenardier , `` did you hear me ? '' 
Cosette turned her pocket inside out ; there was nothing in it . 
What could have become of that money ? 
The unhappy little creature could not find a word to say . 
She was petrified . 
`` Have you lost that fifteen-sou piece ? '' 
screamed the Thenardier , hoarsely , `` or do you want to rob me of it ? '' 
At the same time , she stretched out her arm towards the cat-o ' - nine-tails which hung on a nail in the chimney-corner . 
This formidable gesture restored to Cosette sufficient strength to shriek : -- `` Mercy , Madame , Madame ! 
I will not do so any more ! '' 
The Thenardier took down the whip . 
In the meantime , the man in the yellow coat had been fumbling in the fob of his waistcoat , without any one having noticed his movements . 
Besides , the other travellers were drinking or playing cards , and were not paying attention to anything . 
Cosette contracted herself into a ball , with anguish , within the angle of the chimney , endeavoring to gather up and conceal her poor half-nude limbs . 
The Thenardier raised her arm . 
`` Pardon me , Madame , '' said the man , `` but just now I caught sight of something which had fallen from this little one 's apron pocket , and rolled aside . 
Perhaps this is it . '' 
At the same time he bent down and seemed to be searching on the floor for a moment . 
`` Exactly ; here it is , '' he went on , straightening himself up . 
And he held out a silver coin to the Thenardier . 
`` Yes , that 's it , '' said she . 
It was not it , for it was a twenty-sou piece ; but the Thenardier found it to her advantage . 
She put the coin in her pocket , and confined herself to casting a fierce glance at the child , accompanied with the remark , `` Do n't let this ever happen again ! '' 
Cosette returned to what the Thenardier called `` her kennel , '' and her large eyes , which were riveted on the traveller , began to take on an expression such as they had never worn before . 
Thus far it was only an innocent amazement , but a sort of stupefied confidence was mingled with it . 
`` By the way , would you like some supper ? '' 
the Thenardier inquired of the traveller . 
He made no reply . 
He appeared to be absorbed in thought . 
`` What sort of a man is that ? '' 
she muttered between her teeth . 
`` He 's some frightfully poor wretch . 
He has n't a sou to pay for a supper . 
Will he even pay me for his lodging ? 
It 's very lucky , all the same , that it did not occur to him to steal the money that was on the floor . '' 
In the meantime , a door had opened , and Eponine and Azelma entered . 
They were two really pretty little girls , more bourgeois than peasant in looks , and very charming ; the one with shining chestnut tresses , the other with long black braids hanging down her back , both vivacious , neat , plump , rosy , and healthy , and a delight to the eye . 
They were warmly clad , but with so much maternal art that the thickness of the stuffs did not detract from the coquetry of arrangement . 
There was a hint of winter , though the springtime was not wholly effaced . 
Light emanated from these two little beings . 
Besides this , they were on the throne . 
In their toilettes , in their gayety , in the noise which they made , there was sovereignty . 
When they entered , the Thenardier said to them in a grumbling tone which was full of adoration , `` Ah ! 
there you are , you children ! '' 
Then drawing them , one after the other to her knees , smoothing their hair , tying their ribbons afresh , and then releasing them with that gentle manner of shaking off which is peculiar to mothers , she exclaimed , `` What frights they are ! '' 
They went and seated themselves in the chimney-corner . 
They had a doll , which they turned over and over on their knees with all sorts of joyous chatter . 
From time to time Cosette raised her eyes from her knitting , and watched their play with a melancholy air . 
Eponine and Azelma did not look at Cosette . 
She was the same as a dog to them . 
These three little girls did not yet reckon up four and twenty years between them , but they already represented the whole society of man ; envy on the one side , disdain on the other . 
The doll of the Thenardier sisters was very much faded , very old , and much broken ; but it seemed none the less admirable to Cosette , who had never had a doll in her life , a real doll , to make use of the expression which all children will understand . 
All at once , the Thenardier , who had been going back and forth in the room , perceived that Cosette 's mind was distracted , and that , instead of working , she was paying attention to the little ones at their play . 
`` Ah ! 
I 've caught you at it ! '' 
she cried . 
`` So that 's the way you work ! 
I 'll make you work to the tune of the whip ; that I will . '' 
The stranger turned to the Thenardier , without quitting his chair . 
`` Bah , Madame , '' he said , with an almost timid air , `` let her play ! '' 
