You said to yourself : ` Pardine ! 
I 'll go hunt up that old blockhead , that absurd numskull ! 
What a shame that I 'm not twenty-five ! 
How I 'd treat him to a nice respectful summons ! 
How nicely I 'd get along without him ! 
It 's nothing to me , I 'd say to him : `` You 're only too happy to see me , you old idiot , I want to marry , I desire to wed Mamselle No-matter-whom , daughter of Monsieur No-matter-what , I have no shoes , she has no chemise , that just suits ; I want to throw my career , my future , my youth , my life to the dogs ; I wish to take a plunge into wretchedness with a woman around my neck , that 's an idea , and you must consent to it ! '' 
and the old fossil will consent . ' 
Go , my lad , do as you like , attach your paving-stone , marry your Pousselevent , your Coupelevent -- Never , sir , never ! '' 
`` Father -- '' `` Never ! '' 
At the tone in which that `` never '' was uttered , Marius lost all hope . 
He traversed the chamber with slow steps , with bowed head , tottering and more like a dying man than like one merely taking his departure . 
M. Gillenormand followed him with his eyes , and at the moment when the door opened , and Marius was on the point of going out , he advanced four paces , with the senile vivacity of impetuous and spoiled old gentlemen , seized Marius by the collar , brought him back energetically into the room , flung him into an armchair and said to him : -- `` Tell me all about it ! '' 
`` It was that single word `` father '' which had effected this revolution . 
Marius stared at him in bewilderment . 
M. Gillenormand 's mobile face was no longer expressive of anything but rough and ineffable good-nature . 
The grandsire had given way before the grandfather . 
`` Come , see here , speak , tell me about your love affairs , jabber , tell me everything ! 
Sapristi ! 
how stupid young folks are ! '' 
`` Father -- '' repeated Marius . 
The old man 's entire countenance lighted up with indescribable radiance . 
`` Yes , that 's right , call me father , and you 'll see ! '' 
There was now something so kind , so gentle , so openhearted , and so paternal in this brusqueness , that Marius , in the sudden transition from discouragement to hope , was stunned and intoxicated by it , as it were . 
He was seated near the table , the light from the candles brought out the dilapidation of his costume , which Father Gillenormand regarded with amazement . 
`` Well , father -- '' said Marius . 
`` Ah , by the way , '' interrupted M. Gillenormand , `` you really have not a penny then ? 
You are dressed like a pickpocket . '' 
He rummaged in a drawer , drew forth a purse , which he laid on the table : `` Here are a hundred louis , buy yourself a hat . '' 
`` Father , '' pursued Marius , `` my good father , if you only knew ! 
I love her . 
You can not imagine it ; the first time I saw her was at the Luxembourg , she came there ; in the beginning , I did not pay much heed to her , and then , I do n't know how it came about , I fell in love with her . 
Oh ! 
how unhappy that made me ! 
Now , at last , I see her every day , at her own home , her father does not know it , just fancy , they are going away , it is in the garden that we meet , in the evening , her father means to take her to England , then I said to myself : ` I 'll go and see my grandfather and tell him all about the affair . 
I should go mad first , I should die , I should fall ill , I should throw myself into the water . 
I absolutely must marry her , since I should go mad otherwise . ' 
This is the whole truth , and I do not think that I have omitted anything . 
She lives in a garden with an iron fence , in the Rue Plumet . 
It is in the neighborhood of the Invalides . '' 
Father Gillenormand had seated himself , with a beaming countenance , beside Marius . 
As he listened to him and drank in the sound of his voice , he enjoyed at the same time a protracted pinch of snuff . 
At the words `` Rue Plumet '' he interrupted his inhalation and allowed the remainder of his snuff to fall upon his knees . 
`` The Rue Plumet , the Rue Plumet , did you say ? 
-- Let us see ! 
-- Are there not barracks in that vicinity ? 
-- Why , yes , that 's it . 
Your cousin Theodule has spoken to me about it . 
The lancer , the officer . 
A gay girl , my good friend , a gay girl ! 
-- Pardieu , yes , the Rue Plumet . 
It is what used to be called the Rue Blomet . 
-- It all comes back to me now . 
I have heard of that little girl of the iron railing in the Rue Plumet . 
In a garden , a Pamela . 
Your taste is not bad . 
She is said to be a very tidy creature . 
Between ourselves , I think that simpleton of a lancer has been courting her a bit . 
I do n't know where he did it . 
However , that 's not to the purpose . 
Besides , he is not to be believed . 
He brags , Marius ! 
I think it quite proper that a young man like you should be in love . 
It 's the right thing at your age . 
I like you better as a lover than as a Jacobin . 
I like you better in love with a petticoat , sapristi ! 
with twenty petticoats , than with M. de Robespierre . 
For my part , I will do myself the justice to say , that in the line of sans-culottes , I have never loved any one but women . 
Pretty girls are pretty girls , the deuce ! 
There 's no objection to that . 
As for the little one , she receives you without her father 's knowledge . 
That 's in the established order of things . 
I have had adventures of that same sort myself . 
More than one . 
Do you know what is done then ? 
One does not take the matter ferociously ; one does not precipitate himself into the tragic ; one does not make one 's mind to marriage and M. le Maire with his scarf . 
One simply behaves like a fellow of spirit . 
One shows good sense . 
Slip along , mortals ; do n't marry . 
You come and look up your grandfather , who is a good-natured fellow at bottom , and who always has a few rolls of louis in an old drawer ; you say to him : ` See here , grandfather . ' 
And the grandfather says : ` That 's a simple matter . 
Youth must amuse itself , and old age must wear out . 
I have been young , you will be old . 
Come , my boy , you shall pass it on to your grandson . 
Here are two hundred pistoles . 
Amuse yourself , deuce take it ! ' 
Nothing better ! 
That 's the way the affair should be treated . 
You do n't marry , but that does no harm . 
You understand me ? '' 
Marius , petrified and incapable of uttering a syllable , made a sign with his head that he did not . 
The old man burst out laughing , winked his aged eye , gave him a slap on the knee , stared him full in the face with a mysterious and beaming air , and said to him , with the tenderest of shrugs of the shoulder : -- `` Booby ! 
make her your mistress . '' 
Marius turned pale . 
He had understood nothing of what his grandfather had just said . 
This twaddle about the Rue Blomet , Pamela , the barracks , the lancer , had passed before Marius like a dissolving view . 
Nothing of all that could bear any reference to Cosette , who was a lily . 
The good man was wandering in his mind . 
But this wandering terminated in words which Marius did understand , and which were a mortal insult to Cosette . 
Those words , `` make her your mistress , '' entered the heart of the strict young man like a sword . 
He rose , picked up his hat which lay on the floor , and walked to the door with a firm , assured step . 
