`` Who are you ? '' 
demanded the master of the house . 
The man replied : `` I have just come from Puy-Moisson . 
I have walked all day long . 
I have travelled twelve leagues . 
Can you ? 
-- if I pay ? '' 
`` I would not refuse , '' said the peasant , `` to lodge any respectable man who would pay me . 
But why do you not go to the inn ? '' 
`` There is no room . '' 
`` Bah ! 
Impossible . 
This is neither a fair nor a market day . 
Have you been to Labarre ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
The traveller replied with embarrassment : `` I do not know . 
He did not receive me . '' 
`` Have you been to What 's - his-name 's , in the Rue Chaffaut ? '' 
The stranger 's embarrassment increased ; he stammered , `` He did not receive me either . '' 
The peasant 's countenance assumed an expression of distrust ; he surveyed the newcomer from head to feet , and suddenly exclaimed , with a sort of shudder : -- `` Are you the man ? 
-- '' He cast a fresh glance upon the stranger , took three steps backwards , placed the lamp on the table , and took his gun down from the wall . 
Meanwhile , at the words , Are you the man ? 
the woman had risen , had clasped her two children in her arms , and had taken refuge precipitately behind her husband , staring in terror at the stranger , with her bosom uncovered , and with frightened eyes , as she murmured in a low tone , `` Tso-maraude . '' 
-LSB- 1 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- Patois of the French Alps : chat de maraude , rascally marauder . 
All this took place in less time than it requires to picture it to one 's self . 
After having scrutinized the man for several moments , as one scrutinizes a viper , the master of the house returned to the door and said : -- `` Clear out ! '' 
`` For pity 's sake , a glass of water , '' said the man . 
`` A shot from my gun ! '' 
said the peasant . 
Then he closed the door violently , and the man heard him shoot two large bolts . 
A moment later , the window-shutter was closed , and the sound of a bar of iron which was placed against it was audible outside . 
Night continued to fall . 
A cold wind from the Alps was blowing . 
By the light of the expiring day the stranger perceived , in one of the gardens which bordered the street , a sort of hut , which seemed to him to be built of sods . 
He climbed over the wooden fence resolutely , and found himself in the garden . 
He approached the hut ; its door consisted of a very low and narrow aperture , and it resembled those buildings which road-laborers construct for themselves along the roads . 
He thought without doubt , that it was , in fact , the dwelling of a road-laborer ; he was suffering from cold and hunger , but this was , at least , a shelter from the cold . 
This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night . 
He threw himself flat on his face , and crawled into the hut . 
It was warm there , and he found a tolerably good bed of straw . 
He lay , for a moment , stretched out on this bed , without the power to make a movement , so fatigued was he . 
Then , as the knapsack on his back was in his way , and as it furnished , moreover , a pillow ready to his hand , he set about unbuckling one of the straps . 
At that moment , a ferocious growl became audible . 
He raised his eyes . 
The head of an enormous dog was outlined in the darkness at the entrance of the hut . 
It was a dog 's kennel . 
He was himself vigorous and formidable ; he armed himself with his staff , made a shield of his knapsack , and made his way out of the kennel in the best way he could , not without enlarging the rents in his rags . 
He left the garden in the same manner , but backwards , being obliged , in order to keep the dog respectful , to have recourse to that manoeuvre with his stick which masters in that sort of fencing designate as la rose couverte . 
When he had , not without difficulty , repassed the fence , and found himself once more in the street , alone , without refuge , without shelter , without a roof over his head , chased even from that bed of straw and from that miserable kennel , he dropped rather than seated himself on a stone , and it appears that a passer-by heard him exclaim , `` I am not even a dog ! '' 
He soon rose again and resumed his march . 
He went out of the town , hoping to find some tree or haystack in the fields which would afford him shelter . 
He walked thus for some time , with his head still drooping . 
When he felt himself far from every human habitation , he raised his eyes and gazed searchingly about him . 
He was in a field . 
Before him was one of those low hills covered with close-cut stubble , which , after the harvest , resemble shaved heads . 
The horizon was perfectly black . 
This was not alone the obscurity of night ; it was caused by very low-hanging clouds which seemed to rest upon the hill itself , and which were mounting and filling the whole sky . 
Meanwhile , as the moon was about to rise , and as there was still floating in the zenith a remnant of the brightness of twilight , these clouds formed at the summit of the sky a sort of whitish arch , whence a gleam of light fell upon the earth . 
The earth was thus better lighted than the sky , which produces a particularly sinister effect , and the hill , whose contour was poor and mean , was outlined vague and wan against the gloomy horizon . 
The whole effect was hideous , petty , lugubrious , and narrow . 
There was nothing in the field or on the hill except a deformed tree , which writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer . 
This man was evidently very far from having those delicate habits of intelligence and spirit which render one sensible to the mysterious aspects of things ; nevertheless , there was something in that sky , in that hill , in that plain , in that tree , which was so profoundly desolate , that after a moment of immobility and revery he turned back abruptly . 
There are instants when nature seems hostile . 
He retraced his steps ; the gates of D -- were closed . 
D -- , which had sustained sieges during the wars of religion , was still surrounded in 1815 by ancient walls flanked by square towers which have been demolished since . 
He passed through a breach and entered the town again . 
It might have been eight o'clock in the evening . 
As he was not acquainted with the streets , he recommenced his walk at random . 
In this way he came to the prefecture , then to the seminary . 
As he passed through the Cathedral Square , he shook his fist at the church . 
At the corner of this square there is a printing establishment . 
It is there that the proclamations of the Emperor and of the Imperial Guard to the army , brought from the Island of Elba and dictated by Napoleon himself , were printed for the first time . 
Worn out with fatigue , and no longer entertaining any hope , he lay down on a stone bench which stands at the doorway of this printing office . 
At that moment an old woman came out of the church . 
She saw the man stretched out in the shadow . 
`` What are you doing there , my friend ? '' 
said she . 
He answered harshly and angrily : `` As you see , my good woman , I am sleeping . '' 
The good woman , who was well worthy the name , in fact , was the Marquise de R -- `` On this bench ? '' 
she went on . 
`` I have had a mattress of wood for nineteen years , '' said the man ; `` to-day I have a mattress of stone . '' 
`` You have been a soldier ? '' 
`` Yes , my good woman , a soldier . '' 
`` Why do you not go to the inn ? '' 
`` Because I have no money . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
said Madame de R -- , `` I have only four sous in my purse . '' 
`` Give it to me all the same . '' 
The man took the four sous . 
Madame de R -- continued : `` You can not obtain lodgings in an inn for so small a sum . 
But have you tried ? 
It is impossible for you to pass the night thus . 
You are cold and hungry , no doubt . 
Some one might have given you a lodging out of charity . '' 
`` I have knocked at all doors . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` I have been driven away everywhere . '' 
The `` good woman '' touched the man 's arm , and pointed out to him on the other side of the street a small , low house , which stood beside the Bishop 's palace . 
`` You have knocked at all doors ? '' 
