The door was closed . 
The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old rusty knocker . 
The sun was charming ; the branches had that soft shivering of May , which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind . 
A brave little bird , probably a lover , was carolling in a distracted manner in a large tree . 
The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation , resembling the hollow of a sphere , in the stone on the left , at the foot of the pier of the door . 
At this moment the leaves of the door parted , and a peasant woman emerged . 
She saw the wayfarer , and perceived what he was looking at . 
`` It was a French cannon-ball which made that , '' she said to him . 
And she added : -- `` That which you see there , higher up in the door , near a nail , is the hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg . 
The bullet did not pierce the wood . '' 
`` What is the name of this place ? '' 
inquired the wayfarer . 
`` Hougomont , '' said the peasant woman . 
The traveller straightened himself up . 
He walked on a few paces , and went off to look over the tops of the hedges . 
On the horizon through the trees , he perceived a sort of little elevation , and on this elevation something which at that distance resembled a lion . 
He was on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
HOUGOMONT Hougomont , -- this was a funereal spot , the beginning of the obstacle , the first resistance , which that great wood-cutter of Europe , called Napoleon , encountered at Waterloo , the first knot under the blows of his axe . 
It was a chateau ; it is no longer anything but a farm . 
For the antiquary , Hougomont is Hugomons . 
This manor was built by Hugo , Sire of Somerel , the same who endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey of Villiers . 
The traveller pushed open the door , elbowed an ancient calash under the porch , and entered the courtyard . 
The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of the sixteenth century , which here simulates an arcade , everything else having fallen prostrate around it . 
A monumental aspect often has its birth in ruin . 
In a wall near the arcade opens another arched door , of the time of Henry IV. , permitting a glimpse of the trees of an orchard ; beside this door , a manure-hole , some pickaxes , some shovels , some carts , an old well , with its flagstone and its iron reel , a chicken jumping , and a turkey spreading its tail , a chapel surmounted by a small bell-tower , a blossoming pear-tree trained in espalier against the wall of the chapel -- behold the court , the conquest of which was one of Napoleon 's dreams . 
This corner of earth , could he but have seized it , would , perhaps , have given him the world likewise . 
Chickens are scattering its dust abroad with their beaks . 
A growl is audible ; it is a huge dog , who shows his teeth and replaces the English . 
The English behaved admirably there . 
Cooke 's four companies of guards there held out for seven hours against the fury of an army . 
Hougomont viewed on the map , as a geometrical plan , comprising buildings and enclosures , presents a sort of irregular rectangle , one angle of which is nicked out . 
It is this angle which contains the southern door , guarded by this wall , which commands it only a gun 's length away . 
Hougomont has two doors , -- the southern door , that of the chateau ; and the northern door , belonging to the farm . 
Napoleon sent his brother Jerome against Hougomont ; the divisions of Foy , Guilleminot , and Bachelu hurled themselves against it ; nearly the entire corps of Reille was employed against it , and miscarried ; Kellermann 's balls were exhausted on this heroic section of wall . 
Bauduin 's brigade was not strong enough to force Hougomont on the north , and the brigade of Soye could not do more than effect the beginning of a breach on the south , but without taking it . 
The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south . 
A bit of the north door , broken by the French , hangs suspended to the wall . 
It consists of four planks nailed to two cross-beams , on which the scars of the attack are visible . 
The northern door , which was beaten in by the French , and which has had a piece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall , stands half-open at the bottom of the paddock ; it is cut squarely in the wall , built of stone below , of brick above which closes in the courtyard on the north . 
It is a simple door for carts , such as exist in all farms , with the two large leaves made of rustic planks : beyond lie the meadows . 
The dispute over this entrance was furious . 
For a long time , all sorts of imprints of bloody hands were visible on the door-posts . 
It was there that Bauduin was killed . 
The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard ; its horror is visible there ; the confusion of the fray was petrified there ; it lives and it dies there ; it was only yesterday . 
The walls are in the death agony , the stones fall ; the breaches cry aloud ; the holes are wounds ; the drooping , quivering trees seem to be making an effort to flee . 
This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day . 
Buildings which have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles . 
The English barricaded themselves there ; the French made their way in , but could not stand their ground . 
Beside the chapel , one wing of the chateau , the only ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont , rises in a crumbling state , -- disembowelled , one might say . 
The chateau served for a dungeon , the chapel for a block-house . 
There men exterminated each other . 
The French , fired on from every point , -- from behind the walls , from the summits of the garrets , from the depths of the cellars , through all the casements , through all the air-holes , through every crack in the stones , -- fetched fagots and set fire to walls and men ; the reply to the grape-shot was a conflagration . 
In the ruined wing , through windows garnished with bars of iron , the dismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible ; the English guards were in ambush in these rooms ; the spiral of the staircase , cracked from the ground floor to the very roof , appears like the inside of a broken shell . 
The staircase has two stories ; the English , besieged on the staircase , and massed on its upper steps , had cut off the lower steps . 
These consisted of large slabs of blue stone , which form a heap among the nettles . 
Half a score of steps still cling to the wall ; on the first is cut the figure of a trident . 
These inaccessible steps are solid in their niches . 
All the rest resembles a jaw which has been denuded of its teeth . 
There are two old trees there : one is dead ; the other is wounded at its base , and is clothed with verdure in April . 
Since 1815 it has taken to growing through the staircase . 
A massacre took place in the chapel . 
The interior , which has recovered its calm , is singular . 
The mass has not been said there since the carnage . 
Nevertheless , the altar has been left there -- an altar of unpolished wood , placed against a background of roughhewn stone . 
Four whitewashed walls , a door opposite the altar , two small arched windows ; over the door a large wooden crucifix , below the crucifix a square air-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay ; on the ground , in one corner , an old window-frame with the glass all broken to pieces -- such is the chapel . 
Near the altar there is nailed up a wooden statue of Saint Anne , of the fifteenth century ; the head of the infant Jesus has been carried off by a large ball . 
The French , who were masters of the chapel for a moment , and were then dislodged , set fire to it . 
The flames filled this building ; it was a perfect furnace ; the door was burned , the floor was burned , the wooden Christ was not burned . 
The fire preyed upon his feet , of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen ; then it stopped , -- a miracle , according to the assertion of the people of the neighborhood . 
The infant Jesus , decapitated , was less fortunate than the Christ . 
The walls are covered with inscriptions . 
Near the feet of Christ this name is to be read : Henquinez . 
Then these others : Conde de Rio Maior Marques y Marquesa de Almagro -LRB- Habana -RRB- . 
There are French names with exclamation points , -- a sign of wrath . 
The wall was freshly whitewashed in 1849 . 
The nations insulted each other there . 
It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up which held an axe in its hand ; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros . 
On emerging from the chapel , a well is visible on the left . 
There are two in this courtyard . 
One inquires , Why is there no bucket and pulley to this ? 
It is because water is no longer drawn there . 
Why is water not drawn there ? 
Because it is full of skeletons . 
The last person who drew water from the well was named Guillaume van Kylsom . 
He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont , and was gardener there . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , his family fled and concealed themselves in the woods . 
The forest surrounding the Abbey of Villiers sheltered these unfortunate people who had been scattered abroad , for many days and nights . 
There are at this day certain traces recognizable , such as old boles of burned trees , which mark the site of these poor bivouacs trembling in the depths of the thickets . 
Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont , `` to guard the chateau , '' and concealed himself in the cellar . 
The English discovered him there . 
They tore him from his hiding-place , and the combatants forced this frightened man to serve them , by administering blows with the flats of their swords . 
They were thirsty ; this Guillaume brought them water . 
It was from this well that he drew it . 
Many drank there their last draught . 
This well where drank so many of the dead was destined to die itself . 
After the engagement , they were in haste to bury the dead bodies . 
Death has a fashion of harassing victory , and she causes the pest to follow glory . 
The typhus is a concomitant of triumph . 
This well was deep , and it was turned into a sepulchre . 
Three hundred dead bodies were cast into it . 
