`` Spy , '' said the handsome Enjolras , `` we are judges and not assassins . '' 
Then he called Gavroche : -- `` Here you ! 
go about your business ! 
Do what I told you ! '' 
`` I 'm going ! '' 
cried Gavroche . 
And halting as he was on the point of setting out : -- `` By the way , you will give me his gun ! '' 
and he added : `` I leave you the musician , but I want the clarionet . '' 
The gamin made the military salute and passed gayly through the opening in the large barricade . 
MANY INTERROGATION POINTS WITH REGARD TO A CERTAIN LE CABUC WHOSE NAME MAY NOT HAVE BEEN LE CABUC The tragic picture which we have undertaken would not be complete , the reader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in a revolutionary birth , which contain convulsion mingled with effort , in their exact and real relief , were we to omit , in the sketch here outlined , an incident full of epic and savage horror which occurred almost immediately after Gavroche 's departure . 
Mobs , as the reader knows , are like a snowball , and collect as they roll along , a throng of tumultuous men . 
These men do not ask each other whence they come . 
Among the passers-by who had joined the rabble led by Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac , there had been a person wearing the jacket of a street porter , which was very threadbare on the shoulders , who gesticulated and vociferated , and who had the look of a drunken savage . 
This man , whose name or nickname was Le Cabuc , and who was , moreover , an utter stranger to those who pretended to know him , was very drunk , or assumed the appearance of being so , and had seated himself with several others at a table which they had dragged outside of the wine-shop . 
This Cabuc , while making those who vied with him drunk seemed to be examining with a thoughtful air the large house at the extremity of the barricade , whose five stories commanded the whole street and faced the Rue Saint-Denis . 
All at once he exclaimed : -- `` Do you know , comrades , it is from that house yonder that we must fire . 
When we are at the windows , the deuce is in it if any one can advance into the street ! '' 
`` Yes , but the house is closed , '' said one of the drinkers . 
`` Let us knock ! '' 
`` They will not open . '' 
`` Let us break in the door ! '' 
Le Cabuc runs to the door , which had a very massive knocker , and knocks . 
The door opens not . 
He strikes a second blow . 
No one answers . 
A third stroke . 
The same silence . 
`` Is there any one here ? '' 
shouts Cabuc . 
Nothing stirs . 
Then he seizes a gun and begins to batter the door with the butt end . 
It was an ancient alley door , low , vaulted , narrow , solid , entirely of oak , lined on the inside with a sheet of iron and iron stays , a genuine prison postern . 
The blows from the butt end of the gun made the house tremble , but did not shake the door . 
Nevertheless , it is probable that the inhabitants were disturbed , for a tiny , square window was finally seen to open on the third story , and at this aperture appeared the reverend and terrified face of a gray-haired old man , who was the porter , and who held a candle . 
The man who was knocking paused . 
`` Gentlemen , '' said the porter , `` what do you want ? '' 
`` Open ! '' 
said Cabuc . 
`` That can not be , gentlemen . '' 
`` Open , nevertheless . '' 
`` Impossible , gentlemen . '' 
Le Cabuc took his gun and aimed at the porter ; but as he was below , and as it was very dark , the porter did not see him . 
`` Will you open , yes or no ? '' 
`` No , gentlemen . '' 
`` Do you say no ? '' 
`` I say no , my goo -- '' The porter did not finish . 
The shot was fired ; the ball entered under his chin and came out at the nape of his neck , after traversing the jugular vein . 
The old man fell back without a sigh . 
The candle fell and was extinguished , and nothing more was to be seen except a motionless head lying on the sill of the small window , and a little whitish smoke which floated off towards the roof . 
`` There ! '' 
said Le Cabuc , dropping the butt end of his gun to the pavement . 
He had hardly uttered this word , when he felt a hand laid on his shoulder with the weight of an eagle 's talon , and he heard a voice saying to him : -- `` On your knees . '' 
The murderer turned round and saw before him Enjolras ' cold , white face . 
Enjolras held a pistol in his hand . 
He had hastened up at the sound of the discharge . 
He had seized Cabuc 's collar , blouse , shirt , and suspender with his left hand . 
`` On your knees ! '' 
he repeated . 
And , with an imperious motion , the frail young man of twenty years bent the thickset and sturdy porter like a reed , and brought him to his knees in the mire . 
Le Cabuc attempted to resist , but he seemed to have been seized by a superhuman hand . 
Enjolras , pale , with bare neck and dishevelled hair , and his woman 's face , had about him at that moment something of the antique Themis . 
His dilated nostrils , his downcast eyes , gave to his implacable Greek profile that expression of wrath and that expression of Chastity which , as the ancient world viewed the matter , befit Justice . 
The whole barricade hastened up , then all ranged themselves in a circle at a distance , feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in the presence of the thing which they were about to behold . 
Le Cabuc , vanquished , no longer tried to struggle , and trembled in every limb . 
Enjolras released him and drew out his watch . 
`` Collect yourself , '' said he . 
`` Think or pray . 
You have one minute . '' 
`` Mercy ! '' 
murmured the murderer ; then he dropped his head and stammered a few inarticulate oaths . 
Enjolras never took his eyes off of him : he allowed a minute to pass , then he replaced his watch in his fob . 
That done , he grasped Le Cabuc by the hair , as the latter coiled himself into a ball at his knees and shrieked , and placed the muzzle of the pistol to his ear . 
Many of those intrepid men , who had so tranquilly entered upon the most terrible of adventures , turned aside their heads . 
An explosion was heard , the assassin fell to the pavement face downwards . 
Enjolras straightened himself up , and cast a convinced and severe glance around him . 
Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said : -- `` Throw that outside . '' 
Three men raised the body of the unhappy wretch , which was still agitated by the last mechanical convulsions of the life that had fled , and flung it over the little barricade into the Rue Mondetour . 
Enjolras was thoughtful . 
It is impossible to say what grandiose shadows slowly spread over his redoubtable serenity . 
All at once he raised his voice . 
A silence fell upon them . 
`` Citizens , '' said Enjolras , `` what that man did is frightful , what I have done is horrible . 
He killed , therefore I killed him . 
I had to do it , because insurrection must have its discipline . 
Assassination is even more of a crime here than elsewhere ; we are under the eyes of the Revolution , we are the priests of the Republic , we are the victims of duty , and must not be possible to slander our combat . 
I have , therefore , tried that man , and condemned him to death . 
As for myself , constrained as I am to do what I have done , and yet abhorring it , I have judged myself also , and you shall soon see to what I have condemned myself . '' 
Those who listened to him shuddered . 
`` We will share thy fate , '' cried Combeferre . 
`` So be it , '' replied Enjolras . 
`` One word more . 
In executing this man , I have obeyed necessity ; but necessity is a monster of the old world , necessity 's name is Fatality . 
Now , the law of progress is , that monsters shall disappear before the angels , and that Fatality shall vanish before Fraternity . 
It is a bad moment to pronounce the word love . 
No matter , I do pronounce it . 
And I glorify it . 
Love , the future is thine . 
Death , I make use of thee , but I hate thee . 
Citizens , in the future there will be neither darkness nor thunderbolts ; neither ferocious ignorance , nor bloody retaliation . 
As there will be no more Satan , there will be no more Michael . 
