It was no small matter to reach that glade . 
By the beaten paths , which indulge in a thousand teasing zigzags , it required a good quarter of an hour . 
In a bee-line , through the underbrush , which is peculiarly dense , very thorny , and very aggressive in that locality , a full half hour was necessary . 
Boulatruelle committed the error of not comprehending this . 
He believed in the straight line ; a respectable optical illusion which ruins many a man . 
The thicket , bristling as it was , struck him as the best road . 
`` Let 's take to the wolves ' Rue de Rivoli , '' said he . 
Boulatruelle , accustomed to taking crooked courses , was on this occasion guilty of the fault of going straight . 
He flung himself resolutely into the tangle of undergrowth . 
He had to deal with holly bushes , nettles , hawthorns , eglantines , thistles , and very irascible brambles . 
He was much lacerated . 
At the bottom of the ravine he found water which he was obliged to traverse . 
At last he reached the Blaru-bottom , after the lapse of forty minutes , sweating , soaked , breathless , scratched , and ferocious . 
There was no one in the glade . 
Boulatruelle rushed to the heap of stones . 
It was in its place . 
It had not been carried off . 
As for the man , he had vanished in the forest . 
He had made his escape . 
Where ? 
in what direction ? 
into what thicket ? 
Impossible to guess . 
And , heartrending to say , there , behind the pile of stones , in front of the tree with the sheet of zinc , was freshly turned earth , a pick-axe , abandoned or forgotten , and a hole . 
The hole was empty . 
`` Thief ! '' 
shrieked Boulatruelle , shaking his fist at the horizon . 
MARIUS , EMERGING FROM CIVIL WAR , MAKES READY FOR DOMESTIC WAR For a long time , Marius was neither dead nor alive . 
For many weeks he lay in a fever accompanied by delirium , and by tolerably grave cerebral symptoms , caused more by the shocks of the wounds on the head than by the wounds themselves . 
He repeated Cosette 's name for whole nights in the melancholy loquacity of fever , and with the sombre obstinacy of agony . 
The extent of some of the lesions presented a serious danger , the suppuration of large wounds being always liable to become re-absorbed , and consequently , to kill the sick man , under certain atmospheric conditions ; at every change of weather , at the slightest storm , the physician was uneasy . 
`` Above all things , '' he repeated , `` let the wounded man be subjected to no emotion . '' 
The dressing of the wounds was complicated and difficult , the fixation of apparatus and bandages by cerecloths not having been invented as yet , at that epoch . 
Nicolette used up a sheet `` as big as the ceiling , '' as she put it , for lint . 
It was not without difficulty that the chloruretted lotions and the nitrate of silver overcame the gangrene . 
As long as there was any danger , M. Gillenormand , seated in despair at his grandson 's pillow , was , like Marius , neither alive nor dead . 
Every day , sometimes twice a day , a very well dressed gentleman with white hair , -- such was the description given by the porter , -- came to inquire about the wounded man , and left a large package of lint for the dressings . 
Finally , on the 7th of September , four months to a day , after the sorrowful night when he had been brought back to his grandfather in a dying condition , the doctor declared that he would answer for Marius . 
Convalescence began . 
But Marius was forced to remain for two months more stretched out on a long chair , on account of the results called up by the fracture of his collar-bone . 
There always is a last wound like that which will not close , and which prolongs the dressings indefinitely , to the great annoyance of the sick person . 
However , this long illness and this long convalescence saved him from all pursuit . 
In France , there is no wrath , not even of a public character , which six months will not extinguish . 
Revolts , in the present state of society , are so much the fault of every one , that they are followed by a certain necessity of shutting the eyes . 
Let us add , that the inexcusable Gisquet order , which enjoined doctors to lodge information against the wounded , having outraged public opinion , and not opinion alone , but the King first of all , the wounded were covered and protected by this indignation ; and , with the exception of those who had been made prisoners in the very act of combat , the councils of war did not dare to trouble any one . 
So Marius was left in peace . 
M. Gillenormand first passed through all manner of anguish , and then through every form of ecstasy . 
It was found difficult to prevent his passing every night beside the wounded man ; he had his big arm-chair carried to Marius ' bedside ; he required his daughter to take the finest linen in the house for compresses and bandages . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand , like a sage and elderly person , contrived to spare the fine linen , while allowing the grandfather to think that he was obeyed . 
M. Gillenormand would not permit any one to explain to him , that for the preparation of lint batiste is not nearly so good as coarse linen , nor new linen as old linen . 
He was present at all the dressings of the wounds from which Mademoiselle Gillenormand modestly absented herself . 
When the dead flesh was cut away with scissors , he said : `` Aie ! 
aie ! '' 
Nothing was more touching than to see him with his gentle , senile palsy , offer the wounded man a cup of his cooling-draught . 
He overwhelmed the doctor with questions . 
He did not observe that he asked the same ones over and over again . 
On the day when the doctor announced to him that Marius was out of danger , the good man was in a delirium . 
He made his porter a present of three louis . 
That evening , on his return to his own chamber , he danced a gavotte , using his thumb and forefinger as castanets , and he sang the following song : `` Jeanne est nee a Fougere `` Amour , tu vis en elle ; Vrai nid d'une bergere ; Car c'est dans sa prunelle J'adore son jupon , Que tu mets ton carquois . 
Fripon . 
Narquois ! 
`` Moi , je la chante , et j' aime , Plus que Diane meme , Jeanne et ses durs tetons Bretons . '' 
-LSB- 61 -RSB- -LSB- 61 -RSB- `` Jeanne was born at Fougere , a true shepherd 's nest ; I adore her petticoat , the rogue . 
`` Love , thou dwellest in her ; For 't is in her eyes that thou placest thy quiver , sly scamp ! 
`` As for me , I sing her , and I love , more than Diana herself , Jeanne and her firm Breton breasts . '' 
Then he knelt upon a chair , and Basque , who was watching him through the half-open door , made sure that he was praying . 
Up to that time , he had not believed in God . 
At each succeeding phase of improvement , which became more and more pronounced , the grandfather raved . 
He executed a multitude of mechanical actions full of joy ; he ascended and descended the stairs , without knowing why . 
A pretty female neighbor was amazed one morning at receiving a big bouquet ; it was M. Gillenormand who had sent it to her . 
The husband made a jealous scene . 
M. Gillenormand tried to draw Nicolette upon his knees . 
He called Marius , `` M. le Baron . '' 
He shouted : `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
Every moment , he kept asking the doctor : `` Is he no longer in danger ? '' 
He gazed upon Marius with the eyes of a grandmother . 
He brooded over him while he ate . 
He no longer knew himself , he no longer rendered himself an account of himself . 
Marius was the master of the house , there was abdication in his joy , he was the grandson of his grandson . 
In the state of joy in which he then was , he was the most venerable of children . 
In his fear lest he might fatigue or annoy the convalescent , he stepped behind him to smile . 
He was content , joyous , delighted , charming , young . 
His white locks added a gentle majesty to the gay radiance of his visage . 
When grace is mingled with wrinkles , it is adorable . 
There is an indescribable aurora in beaming old age . 
As for Marius , as he allowed them to dress his wounds and care for him , he had but one fixed idea : Cosette . 
After the fever and delirium had left him , he did not again pronounce her name , and it might have been supposed that he no longer thought of her . 
He held his peace , precisely because his soul was there . 
He did not know what had become of Cosette ; the whole affair of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was like a cloud in his memory ; shadows that were almost indistinct , floated through his mind , Eponine , Gavroche , Mabeuf , the Thenardiers , all his friends gloomily intermingled with the smoke of the barricade ; the strange passage of M. Fauchelevent through that adventure produced on him the effect of a puzzle in a tempest ; he understood nothing connected with his own life , he did not know how nor by whom he had been saved , and no one of those around him knew this ; all that they had been able to tell him was , that he had been brought home at night in a hackney-coach , to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; past , present , future were nothing more to him than the mist of a vague idea ; but in that fog there was one immovable point , one clear and precise outline , something made of granite , a resolution , a will ; to find Cosette once more . 
For him , the idea of life was not distinct from the idea of Cosette . 
He had decreed in his heart that he would not accept the one without the other , and he was immovably resolved to exact of any person whatever , who should desire to force him to live , -- from his grandfather , from fate , from hell , -- the restitution of his vanished Eden . 
He did not conceal from himself the fact that obstacles existed . 
Let us here emphasize one detail , he was not won over and was but little softened by all the solicitude and tenderness of his grandfather . 
In the first place , he was not in the secret ; then , in his reveries of an invalid , which were still feverish , possibly , he distrusted this tenderness as a strange and novel thing , which had for its object his conquest . 
He remained cold . 
The grandfather absolutely wasted his poor old smile . 
Marius said to himself that it was all right so long as he , Marius , did not speak , and let things take their course ; but that when it became a question of Cosette , he would find another face , and that his grandfather 's true attitude would be unmasked . 
Then there would be an unpleasant scene ; a recrudescence of family questions , a confrontation of positions , every sort of sarcasm and all manner of objections at one and the same time , Fauchelevent , Coupelevent , fortune , poverty , a stone about his neck , the future . 
Violent resistance ; conclusion : a refusal . 
Marius stiffened himself in advance . 
