Now , he had under his arm a volume of the memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon . 
A National Guard had read the words Saint-Simon on the book , and had shouted : `` Death ! '' 
On the 6th of June , 1832 , a company of the National Guards from the suburbs , commanded by the Captain Fannicot , above mentioned , had itself decimated in the Rue de la Chanvrerie out of caprice and its own good pleasure . 
This fact , singular though it may seem , was proved at the judicial investigation opened in consequence of the insurrection of 1832 . 
Captain Fannicot , a bold and impatient bourgeois , a sort of condottiere of the order of those whom we have just characterized , a fanatical and intractable governmentalist , could not resist the temptation to fire prematurely , and the ambition of capturing the barricade alone and unaided , that is to say , with his company . 
Exasperated by the successive apparition of the red flag and the old coat which he took for the black flag , he loudly blamed the generals and chiefs of the corps , who were holding council and did not think that the moment for the decisive assault had arrived , and who were allowing `` the insurrection to fry in its own fat , '' to use the celebrated expression of one of them . 
For his part , he thought the barricade ripe , and as that which is ripe ought to fall , he made the attempt . 
He commanded men as resolute as himself , `` raging fellows , '' as a witness said . 
His company , the same which had shot Jean Prouvaire the poet , was the first of the battalion posted at the angle of the street . 
At the moment when they were least expecting it , the captain launched his men against the barricade . 
This movement , executed with more good will than strategy , cost the Fannicot company dear . 
Before it had traversed two thirds of the street it was received by a general discharge from the barricade . 
Four , the most audacious , who were running on in front , were mown down point-blank at the very foot of the redoubt , and this courageous throng of National Guards , very brave men but lacking in military tenacity , were forced to fall back , after some hesitation , leaving fifteen corpses on the pavement . 
This momentary hesitation gave the insurgents time to re-load their weapons , and a second and very destructive discharge struck the company before it could regain the corner of the street , its shelter . 
A moment more , and it was caught between two fires , and it received the volley from the battery piece which , not having received the order , had not discontinued its firing . 
The intrepid and imprudent Fannicot was one of the dead from this grape-shot . 
He was killed by the cannon , that is to say , by order . 
This attack , which was more furious than serious , irritated Enjolras . 
-- `` The fools ! '' 
said he . 
`` They are getting their own men killed and they are using up our ammunition for nothing . '' 
Enjolras spoke like the real general of insurrection which he was . 
Insurrection and repression do not fight with equal weapons . 
Insurrection , which is speedily exhausted , has only a certain number of shots to fire and a certain number of combatants to expend . 
An empty cartridge-box , a man killed , can not be replaced . 
As repression has the army , it does not count its men , and , as it has Vincennes , it does not count its shots . 
Repression has as many regiments as the barricade has men , and as many arsenals as the barricade has cartridge-boxes . 
Thus they are struggles of one against a hundred , which always end in crushing the barricade ; unless the revolution , uprising suddenly , flings into the balance its flaming archangel 's sword . 
This does happen sometimes . 
Then everything rises , the pavements begin to seethe , popular redoubts abound . 
Paris quivers supremely , the quid divinum is given forth , a 10th of August is in the air , a 29th of July is in the air , a wonderful light appears , the yawning maw of force draws back , and the army , that lion , sees before it , erect and tranquil , that prophet , France . 
PASSING GLEAMS In the chaos of sentiments and passions which defend a barricade , there is a little of everything ; there is bravery , there is youth , honor , enthusiasm , the ideal , conviction , the rage of the gambler , and , above all , intermittences of hope . 
One of these intermittences , one of these vague quivers of hope suddenly traversed the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie at the moment when it was least expected . 
`` Listen , '' suddenly cried Enjolras , who was still on the watch , `` it seems to me that Paris is waking up . '' 
It is certain that , on the morning of the 6th of June , the insurrection broke out afresh for an hour or two , to a certain extent . 
The obstinacy of the alarm peal of Saint-Merry reanimated some fancies . 
Barricades were begun in the Rue du Poirier and the Rue des Gravilliers . 
In front of the Porte Saint-Martin , a young man , armed with a rifle , attacked alone a squadron of cavalry . 
In plain sight , on the open boulevard , he placed one knee on the ground , shouldered his weapon , fired , killed the commander of the squadron , and turned away , saying : `` There 's another who will do us no more harm . '' 
He was put to the sword . 
In the Rue Saint-Denis , a woman fired on the National Guard from behind a lowered blind . 
The slats of the blind could be seen to tremble at every shot . 
A child fourteen years of age was arrested in the Rue de la Cossonerie , with his pockets full of cartridges . 
Many posts were attacked . 
At the entrance to the Rue Bertin-Poiree , a very lively and utterly unexpected fusillade welcomed a regiment of cuirrassiers , at whose head marched Marshal General Cavaignac de Barague . 
In the Rue Planche-Mibray , they threw old pieces of pottery and household utensils down on the soldiers from the roofs ; a bad sign ; and when this matter was reported to Marshal Soult , Napoleon 's old lieutenant grew thoughtful , as he recalled Suchet 's saying at Saragossa : `` We are lost when the old women empty their pots de chambre on our heads . '' 
These general symptoms which presented themselves at the moment when it was thought that the uprising had been rendered local , this fever of wrath , these sparks which flew hither and thither above those deep masses of combustibles which are called the faubourgs of Paris , -- all this , taken together , disturbed the military chiefs . 
They made haste to stamp out these beginnings of conflagration . 
They delayed the attack on the barricades Maubuee , de la Chanvrerie and Saint-Merry until these sparks had been extinguished , in order that they might have to deal with the barricades only and be able to finish them at one blow . 
Columns were thrown into the streets where there was fermentation , sweeping the large , sounding the small , right and left , now slowly and cautiously , now at full charge . 
The troops broke in the doors of houses whence shots had been fired ; at the same time , manoeuvres by the cavalry dispersed the groups on the boulevards . 
This repression was not effected without some commotion , and without that tumultuous uproar peculiar to collisions between the army and the people . 
This was what Enjolras had caught in the intervals of the cannonade and the musketry . 
Moreover , he had seen wounded men passing the end of the street in litters , and he said to Courfeyrac : -- `` Those wounded do not come from us . '' 
Their hope did not last long ; the gleam was quickly eclipsed . 
In less than half an hour , what was in the air vanished , it was a flash of lightning unaccompanied by thunder , and the insurgents felt that sort of leaden cope , which the indifference of the people casts over obstinate and deserted men , fall over them once more . 
The general movement , which seemed to have assumed a vague outline , had miscarried ; and the attention of the minister of war and the strategy of the generals could now be concentrated on the three or four barricades which still remained standing . 
The sun was mounting above the horizon . 
An insurgent hailed Enjolras . 
`` We are hungry here . 
Are we really going to die like this , without anything to eat ? '' 
Enjolras , who was still leaning on his elbows at his embrasure , made an affirmative sign with his head , but without taking his eyes from the end of the street . 
WHEREIN WILL APPEAR THE NAME OF ENJOLRAS ' MISTRESS Courfeyrac , seated on a paving-stone beside Enjolras , continued to insult the cannon , and each time that that gloomy cloud of projectiles which is called grape-shot passed overhead with its terrible sound he assailed it with a burst of irony . 
`` You are wearing out your lungs , poor , brutal , old fellow , you pain me , you are wasting your row . 
That 's not thunder , it 's a cough . '' 
And the bystanders laughed . 
Courfeyrac and Bossuet , whose brave good humor increased with the peril , like Madame Scarron , replaced nourishment with pleasantry , and , as wine was lacking , they poured out gayety to all . 
`` I admire Enjolras , '' said Bossuet . 
`` His impassive temerity astounds me . 
He lives alone , which renders him a little sad , perhaps ; Enjolras complains of his greatness , which binds him to widowhood . 
The rest of us have mistresses , more or less , who make us crazy , that is to say , brave . 
When a man is as much in love as a tiger , the least that he can do is to fight like a lion . 
That is one way of taking our revenge for the capers that mesdames our grisettes play on us . 
Roland gets himself killed for Angelique ; all our heroism comes from our women . 
A man without a woman is a pistol without a trigger ; it is the woman that sets the man off . 
Well , Enjolras has no woman . 
He is not in love , and yet he manages to be intrepid . 
It is a thing unheard of that a man should be as cold as ice and as bold as fire . '' 
Enjolras did not appear to be listening , but had any one been near him , that person would have heard him mutter in a low voice : `` Patria . '' 
Bossuet was still laughing when Courfeyrac exclaimed : `` News ! '' 
And assuming the tone of an usher making an announcement , he added : `` My name is Eight-Pounder . '' 
In fact , a new personage had entered on the scene . 
This was a second piece of ordnance . 
The artillery-men rapidly performed their manoeuvres in force and placed this second piece in line with the first . 
This outlined the catastrophe . 
A few minutes later , the two pieces , rapidly served , were firing point-blank at the redoubt ; the platoon firing of the line and of the soldiers from the suburbs sustained the artillery . 
Another cannonade was audible at some distance . 
At the same time that the two guns were furiously attacking the redoubt from the Rue de la Chanvrerie , two other cannons , trained one from the Rue Saint-Denis , the other from the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher , were riddling the Saint-Merry barricade . 
The four cannons echoed each other mournfully . 
The barking of these sombre dogs of war replied to each other . 
One of the two pieces which was now battering the barricade on the Rue de la Chanvrerie was firing grape-shot , the other balls . 
The piece which was firing balls was pointed a little high , and the aim was calculated so that the ball struck the extreme edge of the upper crest of the barricade , and crumbled the stone down upon the insurgents , mingled with bursts of grape-shot . 
The object of this mode of firing was to drive the insurgents from the summit of the redoubt , and to compel them to gather close in the interior , that is to say , this announced the assault . 
The combatants once driven from the crest of the barricade by balls , and from the windows of the cabaret by grape-shot , the attacking columns could venture into the street without being picked off , perhaps , even , without being seen , could briskly and suddenly scale the redoubt , as on the preceding evening , and , who knows ? 
take it by surprise . 
`` It is absolutely necessary that the inconvenience of those guns should be diminished , '' said Enjolras , and he shouted : `` Fire on the artillery-men ! '' 
All were ready . 
The barricade , which had long been silent , poured forth a desperate fire ; seven or eight discharges followed , with a sort of rage and joy ; the street was filled with blinding smoke , and , at the end of a few minutes , athwart this mist all streaked with flame , two thirds of the gunners could be distinguished lying beneath the wheels of the cannons . 
Those who were left standing continued to serve the pieces with severe tranquillity , but the fire had slackened . 
`` Things are going well now , '' said Bossuet to Enjolras . 
