Her voice was so abrupt and hoarse that the two women thought they heard the voice of a man ; they wheeled round in affright . 
`` Answer me ! '' 
cried Fantine . 
The servant stammered : -- `` The portress told me that he could not come to-day . '' 
`` Be calm , my child , '' said the sister ; `` lie down again . '' 
Fantine , without changing her attitude , continued in a loud voice , and with an accent that was both imperious and heart-rending : -- `` He can not come ? 
Why not ? 
You know the reason . 
You are whispering it to each other there . 
I want to know it . '' 
The servant-maid hastened to say in the nun 's ear , `` Say that he is busy with the city council . '' 
Sister Simplice blushed faintly , for it was a lie that the maid had proposed to her . 
On the other hand , it seemed to her that the mere communication of the truth to the invalid would , without doubt , deal her a terrible blow , and that this was a serious matter in Fantine 's present state . 
Her flush did not last long ; the sister raised her calm , sad eyes to Fantine , and said , `` Monsieur le Maire has gone away . '' 
Fantine raised herself and crouched on her heels in the bed : her eyes sparkled ; indescribable joy beamed from that melancholy face . 
`` Gone ! '' 
she cried ; `` he has gone to get Cosette . '' 
Then she raised her arms to heaven , and her white face became ineffable ; her lips moved ; she was praying in a low voice . 
When her prayer was finished , `` Sister , '' she said , `` I am willing to lie down again ; I will do anything you wish ; I was naughty just now ; I beg your pardon for having spoken so loud ; it is very wrong to talk loudly ; I know that well , my good sister , but , you see , I am very happy : the good God is good ; M. Madeleine is good ; just think ! 
he has gone to Montfermeil to get my little Cosette . '' 
She lay down again , with the nun 's assistance , helped the nun to arrange her pillow , and kissed the little silver cross which she wore on her neck , and which Sister Simplice had given her . 
`` My child , '' said the sister , `` try to rest now , and do not talk any more . '' 
Fantine took the sister 's hand in her moist hands , and the latter was pained to feel that perspiration . 
`` He set out this morning for Paris ; in fact , he need not even go through Paris ; Montfermeil is a little to the left as you come thence . 
Do you remember how he said to me yesterday , when I spoke to him of Cosette , Soon , soon ? 
He wants to give me a surprise , you know ! 
he made me sign a letter so that she could be taken from the Thenardiers ; they can not say anything , can they ? 
they will give back Cosette , for they have been paid ; the authorities will not allow them to keep the child since they have received their pay . 
Do not make signs to me that I must not talk , sister ! 
I am extremely happy ; I am doing well ; I am not ill at all any more ; I am going to see Cosette again ; I am even quite hungry ; it is nearly five years since I saw her last ; you can not imagine how much attached one gets to children , and then , she will be so pretty ; you will see ! 
If you only knew what pretty little rosy fingers she had ! 
In the first place , she will have very beautiful hands ; she had ridiculous hands when she was only a year old ; like this ! 
she must be a big girl now ; she is seven years old ; she is quite a young lady ; I call her Cosette , but her name is really Euphrasie . 
Stop ! 
this morning I was looking at the dust on the chimney-piece , and I had a sort of idea come across me , like that , that I should see Cosette again soon . 
Mon Dieu ! 
how wrong it is not to see one 's children for years ! 
One ought to reflect that life is not eternal . 
Oh , how good M. le Maire is to go ! 
it is very cold ! 
it is true ; he had on his cloak , at least ? 
he will be here to-morrow , will he not ? 
to-morrow will be a festival day ; to-morrow morning , sister , you must remind me to put on my little cap that has lace on it . 
What a place that Montfermeil is ! 
I took that journey on foot once ; it was very long for me , but the diligences go very quickly ! 
he will be here to-morrow with Cosette : how far is it from here to Montfermeil ? '' 
The sister , who had no idea of distances , replied , `` Oh , I think that be will be here to-morrow . '' 
`` To-morrow ! 
to-morrow ! '' 
said Fantine , `` I shall see Cosette to-morrow ! 
you see , good sister of the good God , that I am no longer ill ; I am mad ; I could dance if any one wished it . '' 
A person who had seen her a quarter of an hour previously would not have understood the change ; she was all rosy now ; she spoke in a lively and natural voice ; her whole face was one smile ; now and then she talked , she laughed softly ; the joy of a mother is almost infantile . 
`` Well , '' resumed the nun , `` now that you are happy , mind me , and do not talk any more . '' 
Fantine laid her head on her pillow and said in a low voice : `` Yes , lie down again ; be good , for you are going to have your child ; Sister Simplice is right ; every one here is right . '' 
And then , without stirring , without even moving her head , she began to stare all about her with wide-open eyes and a joyous air , and she said nothing more . 
The sister drew the curtains together again , hoping that she would fall into a doze . 
Between seven and eight o'clock the doctor came ; not hearing any sound , he thought Fantine was asleep , entered softly , and approached the bed on tiptoe ; he opened the curtains a little , and , by the light of the taper , he saw Fantine 's big eyes gazing at him . 
She said to him , `` She will be allowed to sleep beside me in a little bed , will she not , sir ? '' 
The doctor thought that she was delirious . 
She added : -- `` See ! 
there is just room . '' 
The doctor took Sister Simplice aside , and she explained matters to him ; that M. Madeleine was absent for a day or two , and that in their doubt they had not thought it well to undeceive the invalid , who believed that the mayor had gone to Montfermeil ; that it was possible , after all , that her guess was correct : the doctor approved . 
He returned to Fantine 's bed , and she went on : -- `` You see , when she wakes up in the morning , I shall be able to say good morning to her , poor kitten , and when I can not sleep at night , I can hear her asleep ; her little gentle breathing will do me good . '' 
`` Give me your hand , '' said the doctor . 
She stretched out her arm , and exclaimed with a laugh : -- `` Ah , hold ! 
in truth , you did not know it ; I am cured ; Cosette will arrive to-morrow . '' 
The doctor was surprised ; she was better ; the pressure on her chest had decreased ; her pulse had regained its strength ; a sort of life had suddenly supervened and reanimated this poor , worn-out creature . 
`` Doctor , '' she went on , `` did the sister tell you that M. le Maire has gone to get that mite of a child ? '' 
The doctor recommended silence , and that all painful emotions should be avoided ; he prescribed an infusion of pure chinchona , and , in case the fever should increase again during the night , a calming potion . 
As he took his departure , he said to the sister : -- `` She is doing better ; if good luck willed that the mayor should actually arrive to-morrow with the child , who knows ? 
there are crises so astounding ; great joy has been known to arrest maladies ; I know well that this is an organic disease , and in an advanced state , but all those things are such mysteries : we may be able to save her . '' 
THE TRAVELLER ON HIS ARRIVAL TAKES PRECAUTIONS FOR DEPARTURE It was nearly eight o'clock in the evening when the cart , which we left on the road , entered the porte-cochere of the Hotel de la Poste in Arras ; the man whom we have been following up to this moment alighted from it , responded with an abstracted air to the attentions of the people of the inn , sent back the extra horse , and with his own hands led the little white horse to the stable ; then he opened the door of a billiard-room which was situated on the ground floor , sat down there , and leaned his elbows on a table ; he had taken fourteen hours for the journey which he had counted on making in six ; he did himself the justice to acknowledge that it was not his fault , but at bottom , he was not sorry . 
The landlady of the hotel entered . 
`` Does Monsieur wish a bed ? 
Does Monsieur require supper ? '' 
He made a sign of the head in the negative . 
`` The stableman says that Monsieur 's horse is extremely fatigued . '' 
Here he broke his silence . 
`` Will not the horse be in a condition to set out again to-morrow morning ? '' 
`` Oh , Monsieur ! 
he must rest for two days at least . '' 
He inquired : -- `` Is not the posting-station located here ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
The hostess conducted him to the office ; he showed his passport , and inquired whether there was any way of returning that same night to M. sur M. by the mail-wagon ; the seat beside the post-boy chanced to be vacant ; he engaged it and paid for it . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the clerk , `` do not fail to be here ready to start at precisely one o'clock in the morning . '' 
This done , he left the hotel and began to wander about the town . 
He was not acquainted with Arras ; the streets were dark , and he walked on at random ; but he seemed bent upon not asking the way of the passers-by . 
He crossed the little river Crinchon , and found himself in a labyrinth of narrow alleys where he lost his way . 
A citizen was passing along with a lantern . 
After some hesitation , he decided to apply to this man , not without having first glanced behind and in front of him , as though he feared lest some one should hear the question which he was about to put . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , `` where is the court-house , if you please . '' 
`` You do not belong in town , sir ? '' 
replied the bourgeois , who was an oldish man ; `` well , follow me . 
I happen to be going in the direction of the court-house , that is to say , in the direction of the hotel of the prefecture ; for the court-house is undergoing repairs just at this moment , and the courts are holding their sittings provisionally in the prefecture . '' 
`` Is it there that the Assizes are held ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Certainly , sir ; you see , the prefecture of to-day was the bishop 's palace before the Revolution . 
M. de Conzie , who was bishop in ' 82 , built a grand hall there . 
It is in this grand hall that the court is held . '' 
On the way , the bourgeois said to him : -- `` If Monsieur desires to witness a case , it is rather late . 
