There was something indescribably harmonious and striking about her entire dress . 
She wore a gown of mauve barege , little reddish brown buskins , whose ribbons traced an X on her fine , white , open-worked stockings , and that sort of muslin spencer , a Marseilles invention , whose name , canezou , a corruption of the words quinze aout , pronounced after the fashion of the Canebiere , signifies fine weather , heat , and midday . 
The three others , less timid , as we have already said , wore low-necked dresses without disguise , which in summer , beneath flower-adorned hats , are very graceful and enticing ; but by the side of these audacious outfits , blond Fantine 's canezou , with its transparencies , its indiscretion , and its reticence , concealing and displaying at one and the same time , seemed an alluring godsend of decency , and the famous Court of Love , presided over by the Vicomtesse de Cette , with the sea-green eyes , would , perhaps , have awarded the prize for coquetry to this canezou , in the contest for the prize of modesty . 
The most ingenious is , at times , the wisest . 
This does happen . 
Brilliant of face , delicate of profile , with eyes of a deep blue , heavy lids , feet arched and small , wrists and ankles admirably formed , a white skin which , here and there allowed the azure branching of the veins to be seen , joy , a cheek that was young and fresh , the robust throat of the Juno of AEgina , a strong and supple nape of the neck , shoulders modelled as though by Coustou , with a voluptuous dimple in the middle , visible through the muslin ; a gayety cooled by dreaminess ; sculptural and exquisite -- such was Fantine ; and beneath these feminine adornments and these ribbons one could divine a statue , and in that statue a soul . 
Fantine was beautiful , without being too conscious of it . 
Those rare dreamers , mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently confront everything with perfection , would have caught a glimpse in this little working-woman , through the transparency of her Parisian grace , of the ancient sacred euphony . 
This daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred . 
She was beautiful in the two ways -- style and rhythm . 
Style is the form of the ideal ; rhythm is its movement . 
We have said that Fantine was joy ; she was also modesty . 
To an observer who studied her attentively , that which breathed from her athwart all the intoxication of her age , the season , and her love affair , was an invincible expression of reserve and modesty . 
She remained a little astonished . 
This chaste astonishment is the shade of difference which separates Psyche from Venus . 
Fantine had the long , white , fine fingers of the vestal virgin who stirs the ashes of the sacred fire with a golden pin . 
Although she would have refused nothing to Tholomyes , as we shall have more than ample opportunity to see , her face in repose was supremely virginal ; a sort of serious and almost austere dignity suddenly overwhelmed her at certain times , and there was nothing more singular and disturbing than to see gayety become so suddenly extinct there , and meditation succeed to cheerfulness without any transition state . 
This sudden and sometimes severely accentuated gravity resembled the disdain of a goddess . 
Her brow , her nose , her chin , presented that equilibrium of outline which is quite distinct from equilibrium of proportion , and from which harmony of countenance results ; in the very characteristic interval which separates the base of the nose from the upper lip , she had that imperceptible and charming fold , a mysterious sign of chastity , which makes Barberousse fall in love with a Diana found in the treasures of Iconia . 
Love is a fault ; so be it . 
Fantine was innocence floating high over fault . 
THOLOMYES IS SO MERRY THAT HE SINGS A SPANISH DITTY That day was composed of dawn , from one end to the other . 
All nature seemed to be having a holiday , and to be laughing . 
The flower-beds of Saint-Cloud perfumed the air ; the breath of the Seine rustled the leaves vaguely ; the branches gesticulated in the wind , bees pillaged the jasmines ; a whole bohemia of butterflies swooped down upon the yarrow , the clover , and the sterile oats ; in the august park of the King of France there was a pack of vagabonds , the birds . 
The four merry couples , mingled with the sun , the fields , the flowers , the trees , were resplendent . 
And in this community of Paradise , talking , singing , running , dancing , chasing butterflies , plucking convolvulus , wetting their pink , open-work stockings in the tall grass , fresh , wild , without malice , all received , to some extent , the kisses of all , with the exception of Fantine , who was hedged about with that vague resistance of hers composed of dreaminess and wildness , and who was in love . 
`` You always have a queer look about you , '' said Favourite to her . 
Such things are joys . 
These passages of happy couples are a profound appeal to life and nature , and make a caress and light spring forth from everything . 
There was once a fairy who created the fields and forests expressly for those in love , -- in that eternal hedge-school of lovers , which is forever beginning anew , and which will last as long as there are hedges and scholars . 
Hence the popularity of spring among thinkers . 
The patrician and the knife-grinder , the duke and the peer , the limb of the law , the courtiers and townspeople , as they used to say in olden times , all are subjects of this fairy . 
They laugh and hunt , and there is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis -- what a transfiguration effected by love ! 
Notaries ' clerks are gods . 
And the little cries , the pursuits through the grass , the waists embraced on the fly , those jargons which are melodies , those adorations which burst forth in the manner of pronouncing a syllable , those cherries torn from one mouth by another , -- all this blazes forth and takes its place among the celestial glories . 
Beautiful women waste themselves sweetly . 
They think that this will never come to an end . 
Philosophers , poets , painters , observe these ecstasies and know not what to make of it , so greatly are they dazzled by it . 
The departure for Cythera ! 
exclaims Watteau ; Lancret , the painter of plebeians , contemplates his bourgeois , who have flitted away into the azure sky ; Diderot stretches out his arms to all these love idyls , and d'Urfe mingles druids with them . 
After breakfast the four couples went to what was then called the King 's Square to see a newly arrived plant from India , whose name escapes our memory at this moment , and which , at that epoch , was attracting all Paris to Saint-Cloud . 
It was an odd and charming shrub with a long stem , whose numerous branches , bristling and leafless and as fine as threads , were covered with a million tiny white rosettes ; this gave the shrub the air of a head of hair studded with flowers . 
There was always an admiring crowd about it . 
After viewing the shrub , Tholomyes exclaimed , `` I offer you asses ! '' 
and having agreed upon a price with the owner of the asses , they returned by way of Vanvres and Issy . 
At Issy an incident occurred . 
The truly national park , at that time owned by Bourguin the contractor , happened to be wide open . 
They passed the gates , visited the manikin anchorite in his grotto , tried the mysterious little effects of the famous cabinet of mirrors , the wanton trap worthy of a satyr become a millionaire or of Turcaret metamorphosed into a Priapus . 
They had stoutly shaken the swing attached to the two chestnut-trees celebrated by the Abbe de Bernis . 
As he swung these beauties , one after the other , producing folds in the fluttering skirts which Greuze would have found to his taste , amid peals of laughter , the Toulousan Tholomyes , who was somewhat of a Spaniard , Toulouse being the cousin of Tolosa , sang , to a melancholy chant , the old ballad gallega , probably inspired by some lovely maid dashing in full flight upon a rope between two trees : -- `` Soy de Badajoz , `` Badajoz is my home , Amor me llama , And Love is my name ; Toda mi alma , To my eyes in flame , Es en mi ojos , All my soul doth come ; Porque ensenas , For instruction meet A tuas piernas . 
I receive at thy feet '' Fantine alone refused to swing . 
`` I do n't like to have people put on airs like that , '' muttered Favourite , with a good deal of acrimony . 
After leaving the asses there was a fresh delight ; they crossed the Seine in a boat , and proceeding from Passy on foot they reached the barrier of l'Etoile . 
They had been up since five o'clock that morning , as the reader will remember ; but bah ! 
there is no such thing as fatigue on Sunday , said Favourite ; on Sunday fatigue does not work . 
About three o'clock the four couples , frightened at their happiness , were sliding down the Russian mountains , a singular edifice which then occupied the heights of Beaujon , and whose undulating line was visible above the trees of the Champs Elysees . 
From time to time Favourite exclaimed : -- `` And the surprise ? 
I claim the surprise . '' 
`` Patience , '' replied Tholomyes . 
AT BOMBARDA 'S The Russian mountains having been exhausted , they began to think about dinner ; and the radiant party of eight , somewhat weary at last , became stranded in Bombarda 's public house , a branch establishment which had been set up in the Champs-Elysees by that famous restaurant-keeper , Bombarda , whose sign could then be seen in the Rue de Rivoli , near Delorme Alley . 
A large but ugly room , with an alcove and a bed at the end -LRB- they had been obliged to put up with this accommodation in view of the Sunday crowd -RRB- ; two windows whence they could survey beyond the elms , the quay and the river ; a magnificent August sunlight lightly touching the panes ; two tables ; upon one of them a triumphant mountain of bouquets , mingled with the hats of men and women ; at the other the four couples seated round a merry confusion of platters , dishes , glasses , and bottles ; jugs of beer mingled with flasks of wine ; very little order on the table , some disorder beneath it ; `` They made beneath the table A noise , a clatter of the feet that was abominable , '' says Moliere . 
This was the state which the shepherd idyl , begun at five o'clock in the morning , had reached at half-past four in the afternoon . 
The sun was setting ; their appetites were satisfied . 
The Champs-Elysees , filled with sunshine and with people , were nothing but light and dust , the two things of which glory is composed . 
The horses of Marly , those neighing marbles , were prancing in a cloud of gold . 
Carriages were going and coming . 
A squadron of magnificent body-guards , with their clarions at their head , were descending the Avenue de Neuilly ; the white flag , showing faintly rosy in the setting sun , floated over the dome of the Tuileries . 
The Place de la Concorde , which had become the Place Louis XV . 
once more , was choked with happy promenaders . 
Many wore the silver fleur-de-lys suspended from the white-watered ribbon , which had not yet wholly disappeared from button-holes in the year 1817 . 
Here and there choruses of little girls threw to the winds , amid the passersby , who formed into circles and applauded , the then celebrated Bourbon air , which was destined to strike the Hundred Days with lightning , and which had for its refrain : -- `` Rendez-nous notre pere de Gand , Rendez-nous notre pere . '' 
`` Give us back our father from Ghent , Give us back our father . '' 
Groups of dwellers in the suburbs , in Sunday array , sometimes even decorated with the fleur-de-lys , like the bourgeois , scattered over the large square and the Marigny square , were playing at rings and revolving on the wooden horses ; others were engaged in drinking ; some journeyman printers had on paper caps ; their laughter was audible . 
Every thing was radiant . 
It was a time of undisputed peace and profound royalist security ; it was the epoch when a special and private report of Chief of Police Angeles to the King , on the subject of the suburbs of Paris , terminated with these lines : -- `` Taking all things into consideration , Sire , there is nothing to be feared from these people . 
They are as heedless and as indolent as cats . 
The populace is restless in the provinces ; it is not in Paris . 
These are very pretty men , Sire . 
It would take all of two of them to make one of your grenadiers . 
There is nothing to be feared on the part of the populace of Paris the capital . 
It is remarkable that the stature of this population should have diminished in the last fifty years ; and the populace of the suburbs is still more puny than at the time of the Revolution . 
It is not dangerous . 
In short , it is an amiable rabble . '' 
Prefects of the police do not deem it possible that a cat can transform itself into a lion ; that does happen , however , and in that lies the miracle wrought by the populace of Paris . 
Moreover , the cat so despised by Count Angles possessed the esteem of the republics of old . 
In their eyes it was liberty incarnate ; and as though to serve as pendant to the Minerva Aptera of the Piraeus , there stood on the public square in Corinth the colossal bronze figure of a cat . 
The ingenuous police of the Restoration beheld the populace of Paris in too `` rose-colored '' a light ; it is not so much of `` an amiable rabble '' as it is thought . 
The Parisian is to the Frenchman what the Athenian was to the Greek : no one sleeps more soundly than he , no one is more frankly frivolous and lazy than he , no one can better assume the air of forgetfulness ; let him not be trusted nevertheless ; he is ready for any sort of cool deed ; but when there is glory at the end of it , he is worthy of admiration in every sort of fury . 
Give him a pike , he will produce the 10th of August ; give him a gun , you will have Austerlitz . 
He is Napoleon 's stay and Danton 's resource . 
Is it a question of country , he enlists ; is it a question of liberty , he tears up the pavements . 
Beware ! 
his hair filled with wrath , is epic ; his blouse drapes itself like the folds of a chlamys . 
Take care ! 
he will make of the first Rue Grenetat which comes to hand Caudine Forks . 
When the hour strikes , this man of the faubourgs will grow in stature ; this little man will arise , and his gaze will be terrible , and his breath will become a tempest , and there will issue forth from that slender chest enough wind to disarrange the folds of the Alps . 
It is , thanks to the suburban man of Paris , that the Revolution , mixed with arms , conquers Europe . 
He sings ; it is his delight . 
Proportion his song to his nature , and you will see ! 
As long as he has for refrain nothing but la Carmagnole , he only overthrows Louis XVI. ; make him sing the Marseillaise , and he will free the world . 
