Whence should proceed that cry of love , if not from the heights of sacrifice ? 
Oh my brothers , this is the point of junction , of those who think and of those who suffer ; this barricade is not made of paving-stones , nor of joists , nor of bits of iron ; it is made of two heaps , a heap of ideas , and a heap of woes . 
Here misery meets the ideal . 
The day embraces the night , and says to it : ` I am about to die , and thou shalt be born again with me . ' 
From the embrace of all desolations faith leaps forth . 
Sufferings bring hither their agony and ideas their immortality . 
This agony and this immortality are about to join and constitute our death . 
Brothers , he who dies here dies in the radiance of the future , and we are entering a tomb all flooded with the dawn . '' 
Enjolras paused rather than became silent ; his lips continued to move silently , as though he were talking to himself , which caused them all to gaze attentively at him , in the endeavor to hear more . 
There was no applause ; but they whispered together for a long time . 
Speech being a breath , the rustling of intelligences resembles the rustling of leaves . 
MARIUS HAGGARD , JAVERT LACONIC Let us narrate what was passing in Marius ' thoughts . 
Let the reader recall the state of his soul . 
We have just recalled it , everything was a vision to him now . 
His judgment was disturbed . 
Marius , let us insist on this point , was under the shadow of the great , dark wings which are spread over those in the death agony . 
He felt that he had entered the tomb , it seemed to him that he was already on the other side of the wall , and he no longer beheld the faces of the living except with the eyes of one dead . 
How did M. Fauchelevent come there ? 
Why was he there ? 
What had he come there to do ? 
Marius did not address all these questions to himself . 
Besides , since our despair has this peculiarity , that it envelops others as well as ourselves , it seemed logical to him that all the world should come thither to die . 
Only , he thought of Cosette with a pang at his heart . 
However , M. Fauchelevent did not speak to him , did not look at him , and had not even the air of hearing him , when Marius raised his voice to say : `` I know him . '' 
As far as Marius was concerned , this attitude of M. Fauchelevent was comforting , and , if such a word can be used for such impressions , we should say that it pleased him . 
He had always felt the absolute impossibility of addressing that enigmatical man , who was , in his eyes , both equivocal and imposing . 
Moreover , it had been a long time since he had seen him ; and this still further augmented the impossibility for Marius ' timid and reserved nature . 
The five chosen men left the barricade by way of Mondetour lane ; they bore a perfect resemblance to members of the National Guard . 
One of them wept as he took his leave . 
Before setting out , they embraced those who remained . 
When the five men sent back to life had taken their departure , Enjolras thought of the man who had been condemned to death . 
He entered the tap-room . 
Javert , still bound to the post , was engaged in meditation . 
`` Do you want anything ? '' 
Enjolras asked him . 
`` Javert replied : `` When are you going to kill me ? '' 
`` Wait . 
We need all our cartridges just at present . '' 
`` Then give me a drink , '' said Javert . 
Enjolras himself offered him a glass of water , and , as Javert was pinioned , he helped him to drink . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
inquired Enjolras . 
`` I am uncomfortable against this post , '' replied Javert . 
`` You are not tender to have left me to pass the night here . 
Bind me as you please , but you surely might lay me out on a table like that other man . '' 
And with a motion of the head , he indicated the body of M. Mabeuf . 
There was , as the reader will remember , a long , broad table at the end of the room , on which they had been running bullets and making cartridges . 
All the cartridges having been made , and all the powder used , this table was free . 
At Enjolras ' command , four insurgents unbound Javert from the post . 
While they were loosing him , a fifth held a bayonet against his breast . 
Leaving his arms tied behind his back , they placed about his feet a slender but stout whip-cord , as is done to men on the point of mounting the scaffold , which allowed him to take steps about fifteen inches in length , and made him walk to the table at the end of the room , where they laid him down , closely bound about the middle of the body . 
By way of further security , and by means of a rope fastened to his neck , they added to the system of ligatures which rendered every attempt at escape impossible , that sort of bond which is called in prisons a martingale , which , starting at the neck , forks on the stomach , and meets the hands , after passing between the legs . 
While they were binding Javert , a man standing on the threshold was surveying him with singular attention . 
The shadow cast by this man made Javert turn his head . 
He raised his eyes , and recognized Jean Valjean . 
He did not even start , but dropped his lids proudly and confined himself to the remark : `` It is perfectly simple . '' 
THE SITUATION BECOMES AGGRAVATED The daylight was increasing rapidly . 
Not a window was opened , not a door stood ajar ; it was the dawn but not the awaking . 
The end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , opposite the barricade , had been evacuated by the troops , as we have stated it seemed to be free , and presented itself to passers-by with a sinister tranquillity . 
The Rue Saint-Denis was as dumb as the avenue of Sphinxes at Thebes . 
Not a living being in the cross-roads , which gleamed white in the light of the sun . 
Nothing is so mournful as this light in deserted streets . 
Nothing was to be seen , but there was something to be heard . 
A mysterious movement was going on at a certain distance . 
It was evident that the critical moment was approaching . 
As on the previous evening , the sentinels had come in ; but this time all had come . 
The barricade was stronger than on the occasion of the first attack . 
Since the departure of the five , they had increased its height still further . 
On the advice of the sentinel who had examined the region of the Halles , Enjolras , for fear of a surprise in the rear , came to a serious decision . 
He had the small gut of the Mondetour lane , which had been left open up to that time , barricaded . 
For this purpose , they tore up the pavement for the length of several houses more . 
In this manner , the barricade , walled on three streets , in front on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , to the left on the Rues du Cygne and de la Petite Truanderie , to the right on the Rue Mondetour , was really almost impregnable ; it is true that they were fatally hemmed in there . 
It had three fronts , but no exit . 
-- `` A fortress but a rat hole too , '' said Courfeyrac with a laugh . 
Enjolras had about thirty paving-stones `` torn up in excess , '' said Bossuet , piled up near the door of the wine-shop . 
The silence was now so profound in the quarter whence the attack must needs come , that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle . 
An allowance of brandy was doled out to each . 
Nothing is more curious than a barricade preparing for an assault . 
Each man selects his place as though at the theatre . 
They jostle , and elbow and crowd each other . 
There are some who make stalls of paving-stones . 
Here is a corner of the wall which is in the way , it is removed ; here is a redan which may afford protection , they take shelter behind it . 
Left-handed men are precious ; they take the places that are inconvenient to the rest . 
Many arrange to fight in a sitting posture . 
They wish to be at ease to kill , and to die comfortably . 
In the sad war of June , 1848 , an insurgent who was a formidable marksman , and who was firing from the top of a terrace upon a roof , had a reclining-chair brought there for his use ; a charge of grape-shot found him out there . 
As soon as the leader has given the order to clear the decks for action , all disorderly movements cease ; there is no more pulling from one another ; there are no more coteries ; no more asides , there is no more holding aloof ; everything in their spirits converges in , and changes into , a waiting for the assailants . 
A barricade before the arrival of danger is chaos ; in danger , it is discipline itself . 
Peril produces order . 
As soon as Enjolras had seized his double-barrelled rifle , and had placed himself in a sort of embrasure which he had reserved for himself , all the rest held their peace . 
A series of faint , sharp noises resounded confusedly along the wall of paving-stones . 
It was the men cocking their guns . 
Moreover , their attitudes were prouder , more confident than ever ; the excess of sacrifice strengthens ; they no longer cherished any hope , but they had despair , despair , -- the last weapon , which sometimes gives victory ; Virgil has said so . 
Supreme resources spring from extreme resolutions . 
To embark in death is sometimes the means of escaping a shipwreck ; and the lid of the coffin becomes a plank of safety . 
As on the preceding evening , the attention of all was directed , we might almost say leaned upon , the end of the street , now lighted up and visible . 
They had not long to wait . 
A stir began distinctly in the Saint-Leu quarter , but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack . 
A clashing of chains , the uneasy jolting of a mass , the click of brass skipping along the pavement , a sort of solemn uproar , announced that some sinister construction of iron was approaching . 
There arose a tremor in the bosoms of these peaceful old streets , pierced and built for the fertile circulation of interests and ideas , and which are not made for the horrible rumble of the wheels of war . 
