` Jean Valjean ! 
who 's Jean Valjean ? ' 
Champmathieu feigns astonishment . 
` Do n't play the innocent dodge , ' says Brevet . 
` You are Jean Valjean ! 
You have been in the galleys of Toulon ; it was twenty years ago ; we were there together . ' 
Champmathieu denies it . 
Parbleu ! 
You understand . 
The case is investigated . 
The thing was well ventilated for me . 
This is what they discovered : This Champmathieu had been , thirty years ago , a pruner of trees in various localities , notably at Faverolles . 
There all trace of him was lost . 
A long time afterwards he was seen again in Auvergne ; then in Paris , where he is said to have been a wheelwright , and to have had a daughter , who was a laundress ; but that has not been proved . 
Now , before going to the galleys for theft , what was Jean Valjean ? 
A pruner of trees . 
Where ? 
At Faverolles . 
Another fact . 
This Valjean 's Christian name was Jean , and his mother 's surname was Mathieu . 
What more natural to suppose than that , on emerging from the galleys , he should have taken his mother 's name for the purpose of concealing himself , and have called himself Jean Mathieu ? 
He goes to Auvergne . 
The local pronunciation turns Jean into Chan -- he is called Chan Mathieu . 
Our man offers no opposition , and behold him transformed into Champmathieu . 
You follow me , do you not ? 
Inquiries were made at Faverolles . 
The family of Jean Valjean is no longer there . 
It is not known where they have gone . 
You know that among those classes a family often disappears . 
Search was made , and nothing was found . 
When such people are not mud , they are dust . 
And then , as the beginning of the story dates thirty years back , there is no longer any one at Faverolles who knew Jean Valjean . 
Inquiries were made at Toulon . 
Besides Brevet , there are only two convicts in existence who have seen Jean Valjean ; they are Cochepaille and Chenildieu , and are sentenced for life . 
They are taken from the galleys and confronted with the pretended Champmathieu . 
They do not hesitate ; he is Jean Valjean for them as well as for Brevet . 
The same age , -- he is fifty-four , -- the same height , the same air , the same man ; in short , it is he . 
It was precisely at this moment that I forwarded my denunciation to the Prefecture in Paris . 
I was told that I had lost my reason , and that Jean Valjean is at Arras , in the power of the authorities . 
You can imagine whether this surprised me , when I thought that I had that same Jean Valjean here . 
I write to the examining judge ; he sends for me ; Champmathieu is conducted to me -- '' -LSB- 4 -RSB- An ex-convict . 
`` Well ? '' 
interposed M. Madeleine . 
Javert replied , his face incorruptible , and as melancholy as ever : -- `` Mr. Mayor , the truth is the truth . 
I am sorry ; but that man is Jean Valjean . 
I recognized him also . '' 
M. Madeleine resumed in , a very low voice : -- `` You are sure ? '' 
Javert began to laugh , with that mournful laugh which comes from profound conviction . 
`` O ! 
Sure ! '' 
He stood there thoughtfully for a moment , mechanically taking pinches of powdered wood for blotting ink from the wooden bowl which stood on the table , and he added : -- `` And even now that I have seen the real Jean Valjean , I do not see how I could have thought otherwise . 
I beg your pardon , Mr. Mayor . '' 
Javert , as he addressed these grave and supplicating words to the man , who six weeks before had humiliated him in the presence of the whole station-house , and bade him `` leave the room , '' -- Javert , that haughty man , was unconsciously full of simplicity and dignity , -- M. Madeleine made no other reply to his prayer than the abrupt question : -- `` And what does this man say ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
Indeed , Mr. Mayor , it 's a bad business . 
If he is Jean Valjean , he has his previous conviction against him . 
To climb a wall , to break a branch , to purloin apples , is a mischievous trick in a child ; for a man it is a misdemeanor ; for a convict it is a crime . 
Robbing and housebreaking -- it is all there . 
It is no longer a question of correctional police ; it is a matter for the Court of Assizes . 
It is no longer a matter of a few days in prison ; it is the galleys for life . 
And then , there is the affair with the little Savoyard , who will return , I hope . 
The deuce ! 
there is plenty to dispute in the matter , is there not ? 
Yes , for any one but Jean Valjean . 
But Jean Valjean is a sly dog . 
That is the way I recognized him . 
Any other man would have felt that things were getting hot for him ; he would struggle , he would cry out -- the kettle sings before the fire ; he would not be Jean Valjean , et cetera . 
But he has not the appearance of understanding ; he says , ` I am Champmathieu , and I wo n't depart from that ! ' 
He has an astonished air , he pretends to be stupid ; it is far better . 
Oh ! 
the rogue is clever ! 
But it makes no difference . 
The proofs are there . 
He has been recognized by four persons ; the old scamp will be condemned . 
The case has been taken to the Assizes at Arras . 
I shall go there to give my testimony . 
I have been summoned . '' 
M. Madeleine had turned to his desk again , and taken up his docket , and was turning over the leaves tranquilly , reading and writing by turns , like a busy man . 
He turned to Javert : -- `` That will do , Javert . 
In truth , all these details interest me but little . 
We are wasting our time , and we have pressing business on hand . 
Javert , you will betake yourself at once to the house of the woman Buseaupied , who sells herbs at the corner of the Rue Saint-Saulve . 
You will tell her that she must enter her complaint against carter Pierre Chesnelong . 
The man is a brute , who came near crushing this woman and her child . 
He must be punished . 
You will then go to M. Charcellay , Rue Montre-de-Champigny . 
He complained that there is a gutter on the adjoining house which discharges rain-water on his premises , and is undermining the foundations of his house . 
After that , you will verify the infractions of police regulations which have been reported to me in the Rue Guibourg , at Widow Doris 's , and Rue du Garraud-Blanc , at Madame Renee le Bosse 's , and you will prepare documents . 
But I am giving you a great deal of work . 
Are you not to be absent ? 
Did you not tell me that you were going to Arras on that matter in a week or ten days ? '' 
`` Sooner than that , Mr. Mayor . '' 
`` On what day , then ? '' 
`` Why , I thought that I had said to Monsieur le Maire that the case was to be tried to-morrow , and that I am to set out by diligence to-night . '' 
M. Madeleine made an imperceptible movement . 
`` And how long will the case last ? '' 
`` One day , at the most . 
The judgment will be pronounced to-morrow evening at latest . 
But I shall not wait for the sentence , which is certain ; I shall return here as soon as my deposition has been taken . '' 
`` That is well , '' said M. Madeleine . 
