`` All out ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The insurgents poured out tumultuously , and , as they went , received in the back , -- may we be permitted the expression , -- this sally of Javert 's : `` We shall meet again shortly ! '' 
JEAN VALJEAN TAKES HIS REVENGE When Jean Valjean was left alone with Javert , he untied the rope which fastened the prisoner across the middle of the body , and the knot of which was under the table . 
After this he made him a sign to rise . 
Javert obeyed with that indefinable smile in which the supremacy of enchained authority is condensed . 
Jean Valjean took Javert by the martingale , as one would take a beast of burden by the breast-band , and , dragging the latter after him , emerged from the wine-shop slowly , because Javert , with his impeded limbs , could take only very short steps . 
Jean Valjean had the pistol in his hand . 
In this manner they crossed the inner trapezium of the barricade . 
The insurgents , all intent on the attack , which was imminent , had their backs turned to these two . 
Marius alone , stationed on one side , at the extreme left of the barricade , saw them pass . 
This group of victim and executioner was illuminated by the sepulchral light which he bore in his own soul . 
Jean Valjean with some difficulty , but without relaxing his hold for a single instant , made Javert , pinioned as he was , scale the little entrenchment in the Mondetour lane . 
When they had crossed this barrier , they found themselves alone in the lane . 
No one saw them . 
Among the heap they could distinguish a livid face , streaming hair , a pierced hand and the half nude breast of a woman . 
It was Eponine . 
The corner of the houses hid them from the insurgents . 
The corpses carried away from the barricade formed a terrible pile a few paces distant . 
Javert gazed askance at this body , and , profoundly calm , said in a low tone : `` It strikes me that I know that girl . '' 
Then he turned to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean thrust the pistol under his arm and fixed on Javert a look which it required no words to interpret : `` Javert , it is I. '' Javert replied : `` Take your revenge . '' 
Jean Valjean drew from his pocket a knife , and opened it . 
`` A clasp-knife ! '' 
exclaimed Javert , `` you are right . 
That suits you better . '' 
Jean Valjean cut the martingale which Javert had about his neck , then he cut the cords on his wrists , then , stooping down , he cut the cord on his feet ; and , straightening himself up , he said to him : `` You are free . '' 
Javert was not easily astonished . 
Still , master of himself though he was , he could not repress a start . 
He remained open-mouthed and motionless . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` I do not think that I shall escape from this place . 
But if , by chance , I do , I live , under the name of Fauchelevent , in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
Javert snarled like a tiger , which made him half open one corner of his mouth , and he muttered between his teeth : `` Have a care . '' 
`` Go , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Javert began again : `` Thou saidst Fauchelevent , Rue de l'Homme Arme ? '' 
`` Number 7 . '' 
Javert repeated in a low voice : -- `` Number 7 . '' 
He buttoned up his coat once more , resumed the military stiffness between his shoulders , made a half turn , folded his arms and , supporting his chin on one of his hands , he set out in the direction of the Halles . 
Jean Valjean followed him with his eyes : A few minutes later , Javert turned round and shouted to Jean Valjean : `` You annoy me . 
Kill me , rather . '' 
Javert himself did not notice that he no longer addressed Jean Valjean as `` thou . '' 
`` Be off with you , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Javert retreated slowly . 
A moment later he turned the corner of the Rue des Precheurs . 
When Javert had disappeared , Jean Valjean fired his pistol in the air . 
Then he returned to the barricade and said : `` It is done . '' 
In the meanwhile , this is what had taken place . 
Marius , more intent on the outside than on the interior , had not , up to that time , taken a good look at the pinioned spy in the dark background of the tap-room . 
When he beheld him in broad daylight , striding over the barricade in order to proceed to his death , he recognized him . 
Something suddenly recurred to his mind . 
He recalled the inspector of the Rue de Pontoise , and the two pistols which the latter had handed to him and which he , Marius , had used in this very barricade , and not only did he recall his face , but his name as well . 
This recollection was misty and troubled , however , like all his ideas . 
It was not an affirmation that he made , but a question which he put to himself : `` Is not that the inspector of police who told me that his name was Javert ? '' 
Perhaps there was still time to intervene in behalf of that man . 
But , in the first place , he must know whether this was Javert . 
Marius called to Enjolras , who had just stationed himself at the other extremity of the barricade : `` Enjolras ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` What is the name of yonder man ? '' 
`` What man ? '' 
`` The police agent . 
Do you know his name ? '' 
`` Of course . 
He told us . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Marius sprang to his feet . 
At that moment , they heard the report of the pistol . 
Jean Valjean re-appeared and cried : `` It is done . '' 
A gloomy chill traversed Marius ' heart . 
THE DEAD ARE IN THE RIGHT AND THE LIVING ARE NOT IN THE WRONG The death agony of the barricade was about to begin . 
Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment ; a thousand mysterious crashes in the air , the breath of armed masses set in movement in the streets which were not visible , the intermittent gallop of cavalry , the heavy shock of artillery on the march , the firing by squads , and the cannonades crossing each other in the labyrinth of Paris , the smokes of battle mounting all gilded above the roofs , indescribable and vaguely terrible cries , lightnings of menace everywhere , the tocsin of Saint-Merry , which now had the accents of a sob , the mildness of the weather , the splendor of the sky filled with sun and clouds , the beauty of the day , and the alarming silence of the houses . 
For , since the preceding evening , the two rows of houses in the Rue de la Chanvrerie had become two walls ; ferocious walls , doors closed , windows closed , shutters closed . 
In those days , so different from those in which we live , when the hour was come , when the people wished to put an end to a situation , which had lasted too long , with a charter granted or with a legal country , when universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere , when the city consented to the tearing up of the pavements , when insurrection made the bourgeoisie smile by whispering its password in its ear , then the inhabitant , thoroughly penetrated with the revolt , so to speak , was the auxiliary of the combatant , and the house fraternized with the improvised fortress which rested on it . 
When the situation was not ripe , when the insurrection was not decidedly admitted , when the masses disowned the movement , all was over with the combatants , the city was changed into a desert around the revolt , souls grew chilled , refuges were nailed up , and the street turned into a defile to help the army to take the barricade . 
A people can not be forced , through surprise , to walk more quickly than it chooses . 
Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand ! 
A people does not let itself go at random . 
Then it abandons the insurrection to itself . 
The insurgents become noxious , infected with the plague . 
A house is an escarpment , a door is a refusal , a facade is a wall . 
This wall hears , sees and will not . 
It might open and save you . 
No . 
This wall is a judge . 
It gazes at you and condemns you . 
What dismal things are closed houses . 
They seem dead , they are living . 
Life which is , as it were , suspended there , persists there . 
No one has gone out of them for four and twenty hours , but no one is missing from them . 
In the interior of that rock , people go and come , go to bed and rise again ; they are a family party there ; there they eat and drink ; they are afraid , a terrible thing ! 
Fear excuses this fearful lack of hospitality ; terror is mixed with it , an extenuating circumstance . 
Sometimes , even , and this has been actually seen , fear turns to passion ; fright may change into fury , as prudence does into rage ; hence this wise saying : `` The enraged moderates . '' 
There are outbursts of supreme terror , whence springs wrath like a mournful smoke . 
-- `` What do these people want ? 
What have they come there to do ? 
Let them get out of the scrape . 
So much the worse for them . 
It is their fault . 
They are only getting what they deserve . 
It does not concern us . 
