` Only , do n't do it again , you hussy ! ' 
Oh ! 
I wo n't do it again , Monsieur Javert ! 
They may do whatever they please to me now ; I will not stir . 
But to-day , you see , I cried because it hurt me . 
I was not expecting that snow from the gentleman at all ; and then as I told you , I am not well ; I have a cough ; I seem to have a burning ball in my stomach , and the doctor tells me , ` Take care of yourself . ' 
Here , feel , give me your hand ; do n't be afraid -- it is here . '' 
She no longer wept , her voice was caressing ; she placed Javert 's coarse hand on her delicate , white throat and looked smilingly at him . 
All at once she rapidly adjusted her disordered garments , dropped the folds of her skirt , which had been pushed up as she dragged herself along , almost to the height of her knee , and stepped towards the door , saying to the soldiers in a low voice , and with a friendly nod : -- `` Children , Monsieur l'Inspecteur has said that I am to be released , and I am going . '' 
She laid her hand on the latch of the door . 
One step more and she would be in the street . 
Javert up to that moment had remained erect , motionless , with his eyes fixed on the ground , cast athwart this scene like some displaced statue , which is waiting to be put away somewhere . 
The sound of the latch roused him . 
He raised his head with an expression of sovereign authority , an expression all the more alarming in proportion as the authority rests on a low level , ferocious in the wild beast , atrocious in the man of no estate . 
`` Sergeant ! '' 
he cried , `` do n't you see that that jade is walking off ! 
Who bade you let her go ? '' 
`` I , '' said Madeleine . 
Fantine trembled at the sound of Javert 's voice , and let go of the latch as a thief relinquishes the article which he has stolen . 
At the sound of Madeleine 's voice she turned around , and from that moment forth she uttered no word , nor dared so much as to breathe freely , but her glance strayed from Madeleine to Javert , and from Javert to Madeleine in turn , according to which was speaking . 
It was evident that Javert must have been exasperated beyond measure before he would permit himself to apostrophize the sergeant as he had done , after the mayor 's suggestion that Fantine should be set at liberty . 
Had he reached the point of forgetting the mayor 's presence ? 
Had he finally declared to himself that it was impossible that any `` authority '' should have given such an order , and that the mayor must certainly have said one thing by mistake for another , without intending it ? 
Or , in view of the enormities of which he had been a witness for the past two hours , did he say to himself , that it was necessary to recur to supreme resolutions , that it was indispensable that the small should be made great , that the police spy should transform himself into a magistrate , that the policeman should become a dispenser of justice , and that , in this prodigious extremity , order , law , morality , government , society in its entirety , was personified in him , Javert ? 
However that may be , when M. Madeleine uttered that word , I , as we have just heard , Police Inspector Javert was seen to turn toward the mayor , pale , cold , with blue lips , and a look of despair , his whole body agitated by an imperceptible quiver and an unprecedented occurrence , and say to him , with downcast eyes but a firm voice : -- `` Mr. Mayor , that can not be . '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
said M. Madeleine . 
`` This miserable woman has insulted a citizen . '' 
`` Inspector Javert , '' replied the mayor , in a calm and conciliating tone , `` listen . 
You are an honest man , and I feel no hesitation in explaining matters to you . 
Here is the true state of the case : I was passing through the square just as you were leading this woman away ; there were still groups of people standing about , and I made inquiries and learned everything ; it was the townsman who was in the wrong and who should have been arrested by properly conducted police . '' 
Javert retorted : -- `` This wretch has just insulted Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` That concerns me , '' said M. Madeleine . 
`` My own insult belongs to me , I think . 
I can do what I please about it . '' 
`` I beg Monsieur le Maire 's pardon . 
The insult is not to him but to the law . '' 
`` Inspector Javert , '' replied M. Madeleine , `` the highest law is conscience . 
I have heard this woman ; I know what I am doing . '' 
`` And I , Mr. Mayor , do not know what I see . '' 
`` Then content yourself with obeying . '' 
`` I am obeying my duty . 
My duty demands that this woman shall serve six months in prison . '' 
M. Madeleine replied gently : -- `` Heed this well ; she will not serve a single day . '' 
At this decisive word , Javert ventured to fix a searching look on the mayor and to say , but in a tone of voice that was still profoundly respectful : -- `` I am sorry to oppose Monsieur le Maire ; it is for the first time in my life , but he will permit me to remark that I am within the bounds of my authority . 
I confine myself , since Monsieur le Maire desires it , to the question of the gentleman . 
I was present . 
This woman flung herself on Monsieur Bamatabnois , who is an elector and the proprietor of that handsome house with a balcony , which forms the corner of the esplanade , three stories high and entirely of cut stone . 
Such things as there are in the world ! 
In any case , Monsieur le Maire , this is a question of police regulations in the streets , and concerns me , and I shall detain this woman Fantine . '' 
Then M. Madeleine folded his arms , and said in a severe voice which no one in the town had heard hitherto : -- `` The matter to which you refer is one connected with the municipal police . 
According to the terms of articles nine , eleven , fifteen , and sixty-six of the code of criminal examination , I am the judge . 
I order that this woman shall be set at liberty . '' 
Javert ventured to make a final effort . 
`` But , Mr. Mayor -- '' `` I refer you to article eighty-one of the law of the 13th of December , 1799 , in regard to arbitrary detention . '' 
`` Monsieur le Maire , permit me -- '' `` Not another word . '' 
`` But -- '' `` Leave the room , '' said M. Madeleine . 
Javert received the blow erect , full in the face , in his breast , like a Russian soldier . 
He bowed to the very earth before the mayor and left the room . 
Fantine stood aside from the door and stared at him in amazement as he passed . 
Nevertheless , she also was the prey to a strange confusion . 
She had just seen herself a subject of dispute between two opposing powers . 
She had seen two men who held in their hands her liberty , her life , her soul , her child , in combat before her very eyes ; one of these men was drawing her towards darkness , the other was leading her back towards the light . 
In this conflict , viewed through the exaggerations of terror , these two men had appeared to her like two giants ; the one spoke like her demon , the other like her good angel . 
The angel had conquered the demon , and , strange to say , that which made her shudder from head to foot was the fact that this angel , this liberator , was the very man whom she abhorred , that mayor whom she had so long regarded as the author of all her woes , that Madeleine ! 
And at the very moment when she had insulted him in so hideous a fashion , he had saved her ! 
Had she , then , been mistaken ? 
Must she change her whole soul ? 
She did not know ; she trembled . 
She listened in bewilderment , she looked on in affright , and at every word uttered by M. Madeleine she felt the frightful shades of hatred crumble and melt within her , and something warm and ineffable , indescribable , which was both joy , confidence and love , dawn in her heart . 
When Javert had taken his departure , M. Madeleine turned to her and said to her in a deliberate voice , like a serious man who does not wish to weep and who finds some difficulty in speaking : -- `` I have heard you . 
I knew nothing about what you have mentioned . 
I believe that it is true , and I feel that it is true . 
I was even ignorant of the fact that you had left my shop . 
Why did you not apply to me ? 
But here ; I will pay your debts , I will send for your child , or you shall go to her . 
You shall live here , in Paris , or where you please . 
I undertake the care of your child and yourself . 
You shall not work any longer if you do not like . 
I will give all the money you require . 
You shall be honest and happy once more . 
And listen ! 
I declare to you that if all is as you say , -- and I do not doubt it , -- you have never ceased to be virtuous and holy in the sight of God . 
Oh ! 
poor woman . '' 
This was more than Fantine could bear . 
To have Cosette ! 
To leave this life of infamy . 
To live free , rich , happy , respectable with Cosette ; to see all these realities of paradise blossom of a sudden in the midst of her misery . 
She stared stupidly at this man who was talking to her , and could only give vent to two or three sobs , `` Oh ! 
Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
Her limbs gave way beneath her , she knelt in front of M. Madeleine , and before he could prevent her he felt her grasp his hand and press her lips to it . 
Then she fainted . 
THE BEGINNING OF REPOSE M. Madeleine had Fantine removed to that infirmary which he had established in his own house . 
He confided her to the sisters , who put her to bed . 
A burning fever had come on . 
She passed a part of the night in delirium and raving . 
At length , however , she fell asleep . 
On the morrow , towards midday , Fantine awoke . 
