This point was never explained . 
He ascended the staircase leading to his chamber . 
On arriving at the top , he left his candle on the top step of his stairs , opened his door with very little noise , went and closed his window and his shutters by feeling , then returned for his candle and re-entered his room . 
It was a useful precaution ; it will be recollected that his window could be seen from the street . 
He cast a glance about him , at his table , at his chair , at his bed which had not been disturbed for three days . 
No trace of the disorder of the night before last remained . 
The portress had `` done up '' his room ; only she had picked out of the ashes and placed neatly on the table the two iron ends of the cudgel and the forty-sou piece which had been blackened by the fire . 
He took a sheet of paper , on which he wrote : `` These are the two tips of my iron-shod cudgel and the forty-sou piece stolen from Little Gervais , which I mentioned at the Court of Assizes , '' and he arranged this piece of paper , the bits of iron , and the coin in such a way that they were the first things to be seen on entering the room . 
From a cupboard he pulled out one of his old shirts , which he tore in pieces . 
In the strips of linen thus prepared he wrapped the two silver candlesticks . 
He betrayed neither haste nor agitation ; and while he was wrapping up the Bishop 's candlesticks , he nibbled at a piece of black bread . 
It was probably the prison-bread which he had carried with him in his flight . 
This was proved by the crumbs which were found on the floor of the room when the authorities made an examination later on . 
There came two taps at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said he . 
It was Sister Simplice . 
She was pale ; her eyes were red ; the candle which she carried trembled in her hand . 
The peculiar feature of the violences of destiny is , that however polished or cool we may be , they wring human nature from our very bowels , and force it to reappear on the surface . 
The emotions of that day had turned the nun into a woman once more . 
She had wept , and she was trembling . 
Jean Valjean had just finished writing a few lines on a paper , which he handed to the nun , saying , `` Sister , you will give this to Monsieur le Cure . '' 
The paper was not folded . 
She cast a glance upon it . 
`` You can read it , '' said he . 
She read : -- `` I beg Monsieur le Cure to keep an eye on all that I leave behind me . 
He will be so good as to pay out of it the expenses of my trial , and of the funeral of the woman who died yesterday . 
The rest is for the poor . '' 
The sister tried to speak , but she only managed to stammer a few inarticulate sounds . 
She succeeded in saying , however : -- `` Does not Monsieur le Maire desire to take a last look at that poor , unhappy woman ? '' 
`` No , '' said he ; `` I am pursued ; it would only end in their arresting me in that room , and that would disturb her . '' 
He had hardly finished when a loud noise became audible on the staircase . 
They heard a tumult of ascending footsteps , and the old portress saying in her loudest and most piercing tones : -- `` My good sir , I swear to you by the good God , that not a soul has entered this house all day , nor all the evening , and that I have not even left the door . '' 
A man responded : -- `` But there is a light in that room , nevertheless . '' 
They recognized Javert 's voice . 
The chamber was so arranged that the door in opening masked the corner of the wall on the right . 
Jean Valjean blew out the light and placed himself in this angle . 
Sister Simplice fell on her knees near the table . 
The door opened . 
Javert entered . 
The whispers of many men and the protestations of the portress were audible in the corridor . 
The nun did not raise her eyes . 
She was praying . 
The candle was on the chimney-piece , and gave but very little light . 
Javert caught sight of the nun and halted in amazement . 
It will be remembered that the fundamental point in Javert , his element , the very air he breathed , was veneration for all authority . 
This was impregnable , and admitted of neither objection nor restriction . 
In his eyes , of course , the ecclesiastical authority was the chief of all ; he was religious , superficial and correct on this point as on all others . 
In his eyes , a priest was a mind , who never makes a mistake ; a nun was a creature who never sins ; they were souls walled in from this world , with a single door which never opened except to allow the truth to pass through . 
On perceiving the sister , his first movement was to retire . 
But there was also another duty which bound him and impelled him imperiously in the opposite direction . 
His second movement was to remain and to venture on at least one question . 
This was Sister Simplice , who had never told a lie in her life . 
Javert knew it , and held her in special veneration in consequence . 
`` Sister , '' said he , `` are you alone in this room ? '' 
A terrible moment ensued , during which the poor portress felt as though she should faint . 
The sister raised her eyes and answered : -- `` Yes . '' 
`` Then , '' resumed Javert , `` you will excuse me if I persist ; it is my duty ; you have not seen a certain person -- a man -- this evening ? 
He has escaped ; we are in search of him -- that Jean Valjean ; you have not seen him ? '' 
The sister replied : -- `` No . '' 
She lied . 
She had lied twice in succession , one after the other , without hesitation , promptly , as a person does when sacrificing herself . 
`` Pardon me , '' said Javert , and he retired with a deep bow . 
O sainted maid ! 
you left this world many years ago ; you have rejoined your sisters , the virgins , and your brothers , the angels , in the light ; may this lie be counted to your credit in paradise ! 
The sister 's affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he did not even observe the singularity of that candle which had but just been extinguished , and which was still smoking on the table . 
An hour later , a man , marching amid trees and mists , was rapidly departing from M. sur M. in the direction of Paris . 
That man was Jean Valjean . 
It has been established by the testimony of two or three carters who met him , that he was carrying a bundle ; that he was dressed in a blouse . 
Where had he obtained that blouse ? 
No one ever found out . 
But an aged workman had died in the infirmary of the factory a few days before , leaving behind him nothing but his blouse . 
Perhaps that was the one . 
One last word about Fantine . 
We all have a mother , -- the earth . 
Fantine was given back to that mother . 
The cure thought that he was doing right , and perhaps he really was , in reserving as much money as possible from what Jean Valjean had left for the poor . 
Who was concerned , after all ? 
A convict and a woman of the town . 
That is why he had a very simple funeral for Fantine , and reduced it to that strictly necessary form known as the pauper 's grave . 
So Fantine was buried in the free corner of the cemetery which belongs to anybody and everybody , and where the poor are lost . 
Fortunately , God knows where to find the soul again . 
Fantine was laid in the shade , among the first bones that came to hand ; she was subjected to the promiscuousness of ashes . 
She was thrown into the public grave . 
Her grave resembled her bed . 
-LSB- The end of Volume I. `` Fantine '' -RSB- COSETTE WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES Last year -LRB- 1861 -RRB- , on a beautiful May morning , a traveller , the person who is telling this story , was coming from Nivelles , and directing his course towards La Hulpe . 
He was on foot . 
He was pursuing a broad paved road , which undulated between two rows of trees , over the hills which succeed each other , raise the road and let it fall again , and produce something in the nature of enormous waves . 
He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac . 
In the west he perceived the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l'Alleud , which has the form of a reversed vase . 
He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence ; and at the angle of the cross-road , by the side of a sort of mouldy gibbet bearing the inscription Ancient Barrier No. 4 , a public house , bearing on its front this sign : At the Four Winds -LRB- Aux Quatre Vents -RRB- . 
Echabeau , Private Cafe . 
A quarter of a league further on , he arrived at the bottom of a little valley , where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through the embankment of the road . 
The clump of sparsely planted but very green trees , which fills the valley on one side of the road , is dispersed over the meadows on the other , and disappears gracefully and as in order in the direction of Braine-l'Alleud . 
On the right , close to the road , was an inn , with a four-wheeled cart at the door , a large bundle of hop-poles , a plough , a heap of dried brushwood near a flourishing hedge , lime smoking in a square hole , and a ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions . 
A young girl was weeding in a field , where a huge yellow poster , probably of some outside spectacle , such as a parish festival , was fluttering in the wind . 
At one corner of the inn , beside a pool in which a flotilla of ducks was navigating , a badly paved path plunged into the bushes . 
The wayfarer struck into this . 
After traversing a hundred paces , skirting a wall of the fifteenth century , surmounted by a pointed gable , with bricks set in contrast , he found himself before a large door of arched stone , with a rectilinear impost , in the sombre style of Louis XIV. , flanked by two flat medallions . 
A severe facade rose above this door ; a wall , perpendicular to the facade , almost touched the door , and flanked it with an abrupt right angle . 
In the meadow before the door lay three harrows , through which , in disorder , grew all the flowers of May . 
