His daughter , Marie-Louise , married Adrien-Charles de Gramont , son of the Duke Louis de Gramont , peer of France , colonel of the French guards , and lieutenant-general of the army . 
It is written Faux , Fauq , and Faoucq . 
Good Madame , recommend us to the prayers of your sainted relative , Monsieur the Cardinal . 
As for your dear Sylvanie , she has done well in not wasting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me . 
She is well , works as you would wish , and loves me . 
That is all that I desire . 
The souvenir which she sent through you reached me safely , and it makes me very happy . 
My health is not so very bad , and yet I grow thinner every day . 
Farewell ; my paper is at an end , and this forces me to leave you . 
A thousand good wishes . 
BAPTISTINE . 
P.S. Your grand nephew is charming . 
Do you know that he will soon be five years old ? 
Yesterday he saw some one riding by on horseback who had on knee-caps , and he said , `` What has he got on his knees ? '' 
He is a charming child ! 
His little brother is dragging an old broom about the room , like a carriage , and saying , `` Hu ! '' 
As will be perceived from this letter , these two women understood how to mould themselves to the Bishop 's ways with that special feminine genius which comprehends the man better than he comprehends himself . 
The Bishop of D -- , in spite of the gentle and candid air which never deserted him , sometimes did things that were grand , bold , and magnificent , without seeming to have even a suspicion of the fact . 
They trembled , but they let him alone . 
Sometimes Madame Magloire essayed a remonstrance in advance , but never at the time , nor afterwards . 
They never interfered with him by so much as a word or sign , in any action once entered upon . 
At certain moments , without his having occasion to mention it , when he was not even conscious of it himself in all probability , so perfect was his simplicity , they vaguely felt that he was acting as a bishop ; then they were nothing more than two shadows in the house . 
They served him passively ; and if obedience consisted in disappearing , they disappeared . 
They understood , with an admirable delicacy of instinct , that certain cares may be put under constraint . 
Thus , even when believing him to be in peril , they understood , I will not say his thought , but his nature , to such a degree that they no longer watched over him . 
They confided him to God . 
Moreover , Baptistine said , as we have just read , that her brother 's end would prove her own . 
Madame Magloire did not say this , but she knew it . 
THE BISHOP IN THE PRESENCE OF AN UNKNOWN LIGHT At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the preceding pages , he did a thing which , if the whole town was to be believed , was even more hazardous than his trip across the mountains infested with bandits . 
In the country near D -- a man lived quite alone . 
This man , we will state at once , was a former member of the Convention . 
His name was G -- Member of the Convention , G -- was mentioned with a sort of horror in the little world of D -- A member of the Convention -- can you imagine such a thing ? 
That existed from the time when people called each other thou , and when they said `` citizen . '' 
This man was almost a monster . 
He had not voted for the death of the king , but almost . 
He was a quasi-regicide . 
He had been a terrible man . 
How did it happen that such a man had not been brought before a provost 's court , on the return of the legitimate princes ? 
They need not have cut off his head , if you please ; clemency must be exercised , agreed ; but a good banishment for life . 
An example , in short , etc. . 
Besides , he was an atheist , like all the rest of those people . 
Gossip of the geese about the vulture . 
Was G -- a vulture after all ? 
Yes ; if he were to be judged by the element of ferocity in this solitude of his . 
As he had not voted for the death of the king , he had not been included in the decrees of exile , and had been able to remain in France . 
He dwelt at a distance of three-quarters of an hour from the city , far from any hamlet , far from any road , in some hidden turn of a very wild valley , no one knew exactly where . 
He had there , it was said , a sort of field , a hole , a lair . 
There were no neighbors , not even passers-by . 
Since he had dwelt in that valley , the path which led thither had disappeared under a growth of grass . 
The locality was spoken of as though it had been the dwelling of a hangman . 
Nevertheless , the Bishop meditated on the subject , and from time to time he gazed at the horizon at a point where a clump of trees marked the valley of the former member of the Convention , and he said , `` There is a soul yonder which is lonely . '' 
And he added , deep in his own mind , `` I owe him a visit . '' 
But , let us avow it , this idea , which seemed natural at the first blush , appeared to him after a moment 's reflection , as strange , impossible , and almost repulsive . 
For , at bottom , he shared the general impression , and the old member of the Convention inspired him , without his being clearly conscious of the fact himself , with that sentiment which borders on hate , and which is so well expressed by the word estrangement . 
Still , should the scab of the sheep cause the shepherd to recoil ? 
No . 
But what a sheep ! 
The good Bishop was perplexed . 
Sometimes he set out in that direction ; then he returned . 
Finally , the rumor one day spread through the town that a sort of young shepherd , who served the member of the Convention in his hovel , had come in quest of a doctor ; that the old wretch was dying , that paralysis was gaining on him , and that he would not live over night . 
-- `` Thank God ! '' 
some added . 
The Bishop took his staff , put on his cloak , on account of his too threadbare cassock , as we have mentioned , and because of the evening breeze which was sure to rise soon , and set out . 
The sun was setting , and had almost touched the horizon when the Bishop arrived at the excommunicated spot . 
With a certain beating of the heart , he recognized the fact that he was near the lair . 
He strode over a ditch , leaped a hedge , made his way through a fence of dead boughs , entered a neglected paddock , took a few steps with a good deal of boldness , and suddenly , at the extremity of the waste land , and behind lofty brambles , he caught sight of the cavern . 
It was a very low hut , poor , small , and clean , with a vine nailed against the outside . 
Near the door , in an old wheel-chair , the arm-chair of the peasants , there was a white-haired man , smiling at the sun . 
Near the seated man stood a young boy , the shepherd lad . 
He was offering the old man a jar of milk . 
While the Bishop was watching him , the old man spoke : `` Thank you , '' he said , `` I need nothing . '' 
And his smile quitted the sun to rest upon the child . 
The Bishop stepped forward . 
At the sound which he made in walking , the old man turned his head , and his face expressed the sum total of the surprise which a man can still feel after a long life . 
`` This is the first time since I have been here , '' said he , `` that any one has entered here . 
Who are you , sir ? '' 
The Bishop answered : -- `` My name is Bienvenu Myriel . '' 
`` Bienvenu Myriel ? 
I have heard that name . 
Are you the man whom the people call Monseigneur Welcome ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
The old man resumed with a half-smile `` In that case , you are my bishop ? '' 
`` Something of that sort . '' 
`` Enter , sir . '' 
The member of the Convention extended his hand to the Bishop , but the Bishop did not take it . 
The Bishop confined himself to the remark : -- `` I am pleased to see that I have been misinformed . 
You certainly do not seem to me to be ill . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the old man , `` I am going to recover . '' 
He paused , and then said : -- `` I shall die three hours hence . '' 
Then he continued : -- `` I am something of a doctor ; I know in what fashion the last hour draws on . 
Yesterday , only my feet were cold ; to-day , the chill has ascended to my knees ; now I feel it mounting to my waist ; when it reaches the heart , I shall stop . 
The sun is beautiful , is it not ? 
I had myself wheeled out here to take a last look at things . 
You can talk to me ; it does not fatigue me . 
You have done well to come and look at a man who is on the point of death . 
It is well that there should be witnesses at that moment . 
One has one 's caprices ; I should have liked to last until the dawn , but I know that I shall hardly live three hours . 
It will be night then . 
What does it matter , after all ? 
Dying is a simple affair . 
