She turned towards him ; she was making a visible effort to be calm and `` very good , '' as she expressed it in the feebleness of illness which resembles infancy , in order that , seeing her so peaceable , they might make no difficulty about bringing Cosette to her . 
But while she controlled herself she could not refrain from questioning M. Madeleine . 
`` Did you have a pleasant trip , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Oh ! 
how good you were to go and get her for me ! 
Only tell me how she is . 
Did she stand the journey well ? 
Alas ! 
she will not recognize me . 
She must have forgotten me by this time , poor darling ! 
Children have no memories . 
They are like birds . 
A child sees one thing to-day and another thing to-morrow , and thinks of nothing any longer . 
And did she have white linen ? 
Did those Thenardiers keep her clean ? 
How have they fed her ? 
Oh ! 
if you only knew how I have suffered , putting such questions as that to myself during all the time of my wretchedness . 
Now , it is all past . 
I am happy . 
Oh , how I should like to see her ! 
Do you think her pretty , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Is not my daughter beautiful ? 
You must have been very cold in that diligence ! 
Could she not be brought for just one little instant ? 
She might be taken away directly afterwards . 
Tell me ; you are the master ; it could be so if you chose ! '' 
He took her hand . 
`` Cosette is beautiful , '' he said , `` Cosette is well . 
You shall see her soon ; but calm yourself ; you are talking with too much vivacity , and you are throwing your arms out from under the clothes , and that makes you cough . '' 
In fact , fits of coughing interrupted Fantine at nearly every word . 
Fantine did not murmur ; she feared that she had injured by her too passionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous of inspiring , and she began to talk of indifferent things . 
`` Montfermeil is quite pretty , is it not ? 
People go there on pleasure parties in summer . 
Are the Thenardiers prosperous ? 
There are not many travellers in their parts . 
That inn of theirs is a sort of a cook-shop . '' 
M. Madeleine was still holding her hand , and gazing at her with anxiety ; it was evident that he had come to tell her things before which his mind now hesitated . 
The doctor , having finished his visit , retired . 
Sister Simplice remained alone with them . 
But in the midst of this pause Fantine exclaimed : -- `` I hear her ! 
mon Dieu , I hear her ! '' 
She stretched out her arm to enjoin silence about her , held her breath , and began to listen with rapture . 
There was a child playing in the yard -- the child of the portress or of some work-woman . 
It was one of those accidents which are always occurring , and which seem to form a part of the mysterious stage-setting of mournful scenes . 
The child -- a little girl -- was going and coming , running to warm herself , laughing , singing at the top of her voice . 
Alas ! 
in what are the plays of children not intermingled . 
It was this little girl whom Fantine heard singing . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she resumed , `` it is my Cosette ! 
I recognize her voice . '' 
The child retreated as it had come ; the voice died away . 
Fantine listened for a while longer , then her face clouded over , and M. Madeleine heard her say , in a low voice : `` How wicked that doctor is not to allow me to see my daughter ! 
That man has an evil countenance , that he has . '' 
But the smiling background of her thoughts came to the front again . 
She continued to talk to herself , with her head resting on the pillow : `` How happy we are going to be ! 
We shall have a little garden the very first thing ; M. Madeleine has promised it to me . 
My daughter will play in the garden . 
She must know her letters by this time . 
I will make her spell . 
She will run over the grass after butterflies . 
I will watch her . 
Then she will take her first communion . 
Ah ! 
when will she take her first communion ? '' 
She began to reckon on her fingers . 
`` One , two , three , four -- she is seven years old . 
In five years she will have a white veil , and openwork stockings ; she will look like a little woman . 
O my good sister , you do not know how foolish I become when I think of my daughter 's first communion ! '' 
She began to laugh . 
He had released Fantine 's hand . 
He listened to her words as one listens to the sighing of the breeze , with his eyes on the ground , his mind absorbed in reflection which had no bottom . 
All at once she ceased speaking , and this caused him to raise his head mechanically . 
Fantine had become terrible . 
She no longer spoke , she no longer breathed ; she had raised herself to a sitting posture , her thin shoulder emerged from her chemise ; her face , which had been radiant but a moment before , was ghastly , and she seemed to have fixed her eyes , rendered large with terror , on something alarming at the other extremity of the room . 
`` Good God ! '' 
he exclaimed ; `` what ails you , Fantine ? '' 
She made no reply ; she did not remove her eyes from the object which she seemed to see . 
She removed one hand from his arm , and with the other made him a sign to look behind him . 
He turned , and beheld Javert . 
JAVERT SATISFIED This is what had taken place . 
The half-hour after midnight had just struck when M. Madeleine quitted the Hall of Assizes in Arras . 
He regained his inn just in time to set out again by the mail-wagon , in which he had engaged his place . 
A little before six o'clock in the morning he had arrived at M. sur M. , and his first care had been to post a letter to M. Laffitte , then to enter the infirmary and see Fantine . 
However , he had hardly quitted the audience hall of the Court of Assizes , when the district-attorney , recovering from his first shock , had taken the word to deplore the mad deed of the honorable mayor of M. sur M. , to declare that his convictions had not been in the least modified by that curious incident , which would be explained thereafter , and to demand , in the meantime , the condemnation of that Champmathieu , who was evidently the real Jean Valjean . 
The district-attorney 's persistence was visibly at variance with the sentiments of every one , of the public , of the court , and of the jury . 
The counsel for the defence had some difficulty in refuting this harangue and in establishing that , in consequence of the revelations of M. Madeleine , that is to say , of the real Jean Valjean , the aspect of the matter had been thoroughly altered , and that the jury had before their eyes now only an innocent man . 
Thence the lawyer had drawn some epiphonemas , not very fresh , unfortunately , upon judicial errors , etc. , etc. ; the President , in his summing up , had joined the counsel for the defence , and in a few minutes the jury had thrown Champmathieu out of the case . 
Nevertheless , the district-attorney was bent on having a Jean Valjean ; and as he had no longer Champmathieu , he took Madeleine . 
Immediately after Champmathieu had been set at liberty , the district-attorney shut himself up with the President . 
They conferred `` as to the necessity of seizing the person of M. le Maire of M. sur M. '' This phrase , in which there was a great deal of of , is the district-attorney 's , written with his own hand , on the minutes of his report to the attorney-general . 
His first emotion having passed off , the President did not offer many objections . 
Justice must , after all , take its course . 
And then , when all was said , although the President was a kindly and a tolerably intelligent man , he was , at the same time , a devoted and almost an ardent royalist , and he had been shocked to hear the Mayor of M. sur M. say the Emperor , and not Bonaparte , when alluding to the landing at Cannes . 
The order for his arrest was accordingly despatched . 
The district-attorney forwarded it to M. sur M. by a special messenger , at full speed , and entrusted its execution to Police Inspector Javert . 
The reader knows that Javert had returned to M. sur M. immediately after having given his deposition . 
Javert was just getting out of bed when the messenger handed him the order of arrest and the command to produce the prisoner . 
The messenger himself was a very clever member of the police , who , in two words , informed Javert of what had taken place at Arras . 
