He had viewed , almost tranquilly , that coupling of words , in the Moniteur : M. Humblot-Conte , peer of France . 
The fact is , that the old man was deeply dejected . 
He did not bend , he did not yield ; this was no more a characteristic of his physical than of his moral nature , but he felt himself giving way internally . 
For four years he had been waiting for Marius , with his foot firmly planted , that is the exact word , in the conviction that that good-for-nothing young scamp would ring at his door some day or other ; now he had reached the point , where , at certain gloomy hours , he said to himself , that if Marius made him wait much longer -- It was not death that was insupportable to him ; it was the idea that perhaps he should never see Marius again . 
The idea of never seeing Marius again had never entered his brain until that day ; now the thought began to recur to him , and it chilled him . 
Absence , as is always the case in genuine and natural sentiments , had only served to augment the grandfather 's love for the ungrateful child , who had gone off like a flash . 
It is during December nights , when the cold stands at ten degrees , that one thinks oftenest of the son . 
M. Gillenormand was , or thought himself , above all things , incapable of taking a single step , he -- the grandfather , towards his grandson ; `` I would die rather , '' he said to himself . 
He did not consider himself as the least to blame ; but he thought of Marius only with profound tenderness , and the mute despair of an elderly , kindly old man who is about to vanish in the dark . 
He began to lose his teeth , which added to his sadness . 
M. Gillenormand , without however acknowledging it to himself , for it would have rendered him furious and ashamed , had never loved a mistress as he loved Marius . 
He had had placed in his chamber , opposite the head of his bed , so that it should be the first thing on which his eyes fell on waking , an old portrait of his other daughter , who was dead , Madame Pontmercy , a portrait which had been taken when she was eighteen . 
He gazed incessantly at that portrait . 
One day , he happened to say , as he gazed upon it : -- `` I think the likeness is strong . '' 
`` To my sister ? '' 
inquired Mademoiselle Gillenormand . 
`` Yes , certainly . '' 
`` The old man added : -- `` And to him also . '' 
Once as he sat with his knees pressed together , and his eyes almost closed , in a despondent attitude , his daughter ventured to say to him : -- `` Father , are you as angry with him as ever ? '' 
She paused , not daring to proceed further . 
`` With whom ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` With that poor Marius . '' 
He raised his aged head , laid his withered and emaciated fist on the table , and exclaimed in his most irritated and vibrating tone : -- `` Poor Marius , do you say ! 
That gentleman is a knave , a wretched scoundrel , a vain little ingrate , a heartless , soulless , haughty , and wicked man ! '' 
And he turned away so that his daughter might not see the tear that stood in his eye . 
Three days later he broke a silence which had lasted four hours , to say to his daughter point-blank : -- `` I had the honor to ask Mademoiselle Gillenormand never to mention him to me . '' 
Aunt Gillenormand renounced every effort , and pronounced this acute diagnosis : `` My father never cared very much for my sister after her folly . 
It is clear that he detests Marius . '' 
`` After her folly '' meant : `` after she had married the colonel . '' 
However , as the reader has been able to conjecture , Mademoiselle Gillenormand had failed in her attempt to substitute her favorite , the officer of lancers , for Marius . 
The substitute , Theodule , had not been a success . 
M. Gillenormand had not accepted the quid pro quo . 
A vacancy in the heart does not accommodate itself to a stop-gap . 
Theodule , on his side , though he scented the inheritance , was disgusted at the task of pleasing . 
The goodman bored the lancer ; and the lancer shocked the goodman . 
Lieutenant Theodule was gay , no doubt , but a chatter-box , frivolous , but vulgar ; a high liver , but a frequenter of bad company ; he had mistresses , it is true , and he had a great deal to say about them , it is true also ; but he talked badly . 
All his good qualities had a defect . 
M. Gillenormand was worn out with hearing him tell about the love affairs that he had in the vicinity of the barracks in the Rue de Babylone . 
And then , Lieutenant Gillenormand sometimes came in his uniform , with the tricolored cockade . 
This rendered him downright intolerable . 
Finally , Father Gillenormand had said to his daughter : `` I 've had enough of that Theodule . 
I have n't much taste for warriors in time of peace . 
Receive him if you choose . 
I do n't know but I prefer slashers to fellows that drag their swords . 
The clash of blades in battle is less dismal , after all , than the clank of the scabbard on the pavement . 
And then , throwing out your chest like a bully and lacing yourself like a girl , with stays under your cuirass , is doubly ridiculous . 
When one is a veritable man , one holds equally aloof from swagger and from affected airs . 
He is neither a blusterer nor a finnicky-hearted man . 
Keep your Theodule for yourself . '' 
It was in vain that his daughter said to him : `` But he is your grandnephew , nevertheless , '' -- it turned out that M. Gillenormand , who was a grandfather to the very finger-tips , was not in the least a grand-uncle . 
In fact , as he had good sense , and as he had compared the two , Theodule had only served to make him regret Marius all the more . 
One evening , -- it was the 24th of June , which did not prevent Father Gillenormand having a rousing fire on the hearth , -- he had dismissed his daughter , who was sewing in a neighboring apartment . 
He was alone in his chamber , amid its pastoral scenes , with his feet propped on the andirons , half enveloped in his huge screen of coromandel lacquer , with its nine leaves , with his elbow resting on a table where burned two candles under a green shade , engulfed in his tapestry armchair , and in his hand a book which he was not reading . 
He was dressed , according to his wont , like an incroyable , and resembled an antique portrait by Garat . 
This would have made people run after him in the street , had not his daughter covered him up , whenever he went out , in a vast bishop 's wadded cloak , which concealed his attire . 
At home , he never wore a dressing gown , except when he rose and retired . 
`` It gives one a look of age , '' said he . 
Father Gillenormand was thinking of Marius lovingly and bitterly ; and , as usual , bitterness predominated . 
His tenderness once soured always ended by boiling and turning to indignation . 
He had reached the point where a man tries to make up his mind and to accept that which rends his heart . 
He was explaining to himself that there was no longer any reason why Marius should return , that if he intended to return , he should have done it long ago , that he must renounce the idea . 
He was trying to accustom himself to the thought that all was over , and that he should die without having beheld `` that gentleman '' again . 
But his whole nature revolted ; his aged paternity would not consent to this . 
`` Well ! '' 
said he , -- this was his doleful refrain , -- `` he will not return ! '' 
His bald head had fallen upon his breast , and he fixed a melancholy and irritated gaze upon the ashes on his hearth . 
In the very midst of his revery , his old servant Basque entered , and inquired : -- `` Can Monsieur receive M. Marius ? '' 
The old man sat up erect , pallid , and like a corpse which rises under the influence of a galvanic shock . 
All his blood had retreated to his heart . 
He stammered : -- `` M. Marius what ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' replied Basque , intimidated and put out of countenance by his master 's air ; `` I have not seen him . 
Nicolette came in and said to me : ` There 's a young man here ; say that it is M. Marius . ' '' 
Father Gillenormand stammered in a low voice : -- `` Show him in . '' 
And he remained in the same attitude , with shaking head , and his eyes fixed on the door . 
It opened once more . 
A young man entered . 
It was Marius . 
Marius halted at the door , as though waiting to be bidden to enter . 
His almost squalid attire was not perceptible in the obscurity caused by the shade . 
Nothing could be seen but his calm , grave , but strangely sad face . 
It was several minutes before Father Gillenormand , dulled with amazement and joy , could see anything except a brightness as when one is in the presence of an apparition . 
He was on the point of swooning ; he saw Marius through a dazzling light . 
It certainly was he , it certainly was Marius . 
At last ! 
After the lapse of four years ! 
He grasped him entire , so to speak , in a single glance . 
He found him noble , handsome , distinguished , well-grown , a complete man , with a suitable mien and a charming air . 
He felt a desire to open his arms , to call him , to fling himself forward ; his heart melted with rapture , affectionate words swelled and overflowed his breast ; at length all his tenderness came to the light and reached his lips , and , by a contrast which constituted the very foundation of his nature , what came forth was harshness . 
He said abruptly : -- `` What have you come here for ? '' 
Marius replied with embarrassment : -- `` Monsieur -- '' M. Gillenormand would have liked to have Marius throw himself into his arms . 
He was displeased with Marius and with himself . 
He was conscious that he was brusque , and that Marius was cold . 
It caused the goodman unendurable and irritating anxiety to feel so tender and forlorn within , and only to be able to be hard outside . 
Bitterness returned . 
He interrupted Marius in a peevish tone : -- `` Then why did you come ? '' 
That `` then '' signified : If you do not come to embrace me . 
Marius looked at his grandfather , whose pallor gave him a face of marble . 
`` Monsieur -- '' `` Have you come to beg my pardon ? 
Do you acknowledge your faults ? '' 
