He took the place of Jean Valjean , who , on account of his arm being still in a sling , could not give his hand to the bride . 
Jean Valjean , dressed in black , followed them with a smile . 
`` Monsieur Fauchelevent , '' said the grandfather to him , `` this is a fine day . 
I vote for the end of afflictions and sorrows . 
Henceforth , there must be no sadness anywhere . 
Pardieu , I decree joy ! 
Evil has no right to exist . 
That there should be any unhappy men is , in sooth , a disgrace to the azure of the sky . 
Evil does not come from man , who is good at bottom . 
All human miseries have for their capital and central government hell , otherwise , known as the Devil 's Tuileries . 
Good , here I am uttering demagogical words ! 
As far as I am concerned , I have no longer any political opinions ; let all me be rich , that is to say , mirthful , and I confine myself to that . '' 
When , at the conclusion of all the ceremonies , after having pronounced before the mayor and before the priest all possible `` yesses , '' after having signed the registers at the municipality and at the sacristy , after having exchanged their rings , after having knelt side by side under the pall of white moire in the smoke of the censer , they arrived , hand in hand , admired and envied by all , Marius in black , she in white , preceded by the suisse , with the epaulets of a colonel , tapping the pavement with his halberd , between two rows of astonished spectators , at the portals of the church , both leaves of which were thrown wide open , ready to enter their carriage again , and all being finished , Cosette still could not believe that it was real . 
She looked at Marius , she looked at the crowd , she looked at the sky : it seemed as though she feared that she should wake up from her dream . 
Her amazed and uneasy air added something indescribably enchanting to her beauty . 
They entered the same carriage to return home , Marius beside Cosette ; M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean sat opposite them ; Aunt Gillenormand had withdrawn one degree , and was in the second vehicle . 
`` My children , '' said the grandfather , `` here you are , Monsieur le Baron and Madame la Baronne , with an income of thirty thousand livres . '' 
And Cosette , nestling close to Marius , caressed his ear with an angelic whisper : `` So it is true . 
My name is Marius . 
I am Madame Thou . '' 
These two creatures were resplendent . 
They had reached that irrevocable and irrecoverable moment , at the dazzling intersection of all youth and all joy . 
They realized the verses of Jean Prouvaire ; they were forty years old taken together . 
It was marriage sublimated ; these two children were two lilies . 
They did not see each other , they did not contemplate each other . 
Cosette perceived Marius in the midst of a glory ; Marius perceived Cosette on an altar . 
And on that altar , and in that glory , the two apotheoses mingling , in the background , one knows not how , behind a cloud for Cosette , in a flash for Marius , there was the ideal thing , the real thing , the meeting of the kiss and the dream , the nuptial pillow . 
All the torments through which they had passed came back to them in intoxication . 
It seemed to them that their sorrows , their sleepless nights , their tears , their anguish , their terrors , their despair , converted into caresses and rays of light , rendered still more charming the charming hour which was approaching ; and that their griefs were but so many handmaidens who were preparing the toilet of joy . 
How good it is to have suffered ! 
Their unhappiness formed a halo round their happiness . 
The long agony of their love was terminating in an ascension . 
It was the same enchantment in two souls , tinged with voluptuousness in Marius , and with modesty in Cosette . 
They said to each other in low tones : `` We will go back to take a look at our little garden in the Rue Plumet . '' 
The folds of Cosette 's gown lay across Marius . 
Such a day is an ineffable mixture of dream and of reality . 
One possesses and one supposes . 
One still has time before one to divine . 
The emotion on that day , of being at mid-day and of dreaming of midnight is indescribable . 
The delights of these two hearts overflowed upon the crowd , and inspired the passers-by with cheerfulness . 
People halted in the Rue Saint-Antoine , in front of Saint-Paul , to gaze through the windows of the carriage at the orange-flowers quivering on Cosette 's head . 
Then they returned home to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
Marius , triumphant and radiant , mounted side by side with Cosette the staircase up which he had been borne in a dying condition . 
The poor , who had trooped to the door , and who shared their purses , blessed them . 
There were flowers everywhere . 
The house was no less fragrant than the church ; after the incense , roses . 
They thought they heard voices carolling in the infinite ; they had God in their hearts ; destiny appeared to them like a ceiling of stars ; above their heads they beheld the light of a rising sun . 
All at once , the clock struck . 
Marius glanced at Cosette 's charming bare arm , and at the rosy things which were vaguely visible through the lace of her bodice , and Cosette , intercepting Marius ' glance , blushed to her very hair . 
Quite a number of old family friends of the Gillenormand family had been invited ; they pressed about Cosette . 
Each one vied with the rest in saluting her as Madame la Baronne . 
The officer , Theodule Gillenormand , now a captain , had come from Chartres , where he was stationed in garrison , to be present at the wedding of his cousin Pontmercy . 
Cosette did not recognize him . 
He , on his side , habituated as he was to have women consider him handsome , retained no more recollection of Cosette than of any other woman . 
`` How right I was not to believe in that story about the lancer ! '' 
said Father Gillenormand , to himself . 
Cosette had never been more tender with Jean Valjean . 
She was in unison with Father Gillenormand ; while he erected joy into aphorisms and maxims , she exhaled goodness like a perfume . 
Happiness desires that all the world should be happy . 
She regained , for the purpose of addressing Jean Valjean , inflections of voice belonging to the time when she was a little girl . 
She caressed him with her smile . 
A banquet had been spread in the dining-room . 
Illumination as brilliant as the daylight is the necessary seasoning of a great joy . 
Mist and obscurity are not accepted by the happy . 
They do not consent to be black . 
The night , yes ; the shadows , no . 
If there is no sun , one must be made . 
The dining-room was full of gay things . 
In the centre , above the white and glittering table , was a Venetian lustre with flat plates , with all sorts of colored birds , blue , violet , red , and green , perched amid the candles ; around the chandelier , girandoles , on the walls , sconces with triple and quintuple branches ; mirrors , silverware , glassware , plate , porcelain , faience , pottery , gold and silversmith 's work , all was sparkling and gay . 
The empty spaces between the candelabra were filled in with bouquets , so that where there was not a light , there was a flower . 
In the antechamber , three violins and a flute softly played quartettes by Haydn . 
Jean Valjean had seated himself on a chair in the drawing-room , behind the door , the leaf of which folded back upon him in such a manner as to nearly conceal him . 
A few moments before they sat down to table , Cosette came , as though inspired by a sudden whim , and made him a deep courtesy , spreading out her bridal toilet with both hands , and with a tenderly roguish glance , she asked him : `` Father , are you satisfied ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I am content ! '' 
`` Well , then , laugh . '' 
Jean Valjean began to laugh . 
A few moments later , Basque announced that dinner was served . 
The guests , preceded by M. Gillenormand with Cosette on his arm , entered the dining-room , and arranged themselves in the proper order around the table . 
Two large arm-chairs figured on the right and left of the bride , the first for M. Gillenormand , the other for Jean Valjean . 
M. Gillenormand took his seat . 
The other arm-chair remained empty . 
They looked about for M. Fauchelevent . 
He was no longer there . 
M. Gillenormand questioned Basque . 
`` Do you know where M. Fauchelevent is ? '' 
`` Sir , '' replied Basque , `` I do , precisely . 
M. Fauchelevent told me to say to you , sir , that he was suffering , his injured hand was paining him somewhat , and that he could not dine with Monsieur le Baron and Madame la Baronne . 
That he begged to be excused , that he would come to-morrow . 
He has just taken his departure . '' 
That empty arm-chair chilled the effusion of the wedding feast for a moment . 
But , if M. Fauchelevent was absent , M. Gillenormand was present , and the grandfather beamed for two . 
He affirmed that M. Fauchelevent had done well to retire early , if he were suffering , but that it was only a slight ailment . 
This declaration sufficed . 
Moreover , what is an obscure corner in such a submersion of joy ? 
Cosette and Marius were passing through one of those egotistical and blessed moments when no other faculty is left to a person than that of receiving happiness . 
And then , an idea occurred to M. Gillenormand . 
-- `` Pardieu , this armchair is empty . 
Come hither , Marius . 
Your aunt will permit it , although she has a right to you . 
This armchair is for you . 
