`` No , not that , '' said Marius , in a supplicating tone . 
`` We have to finish something . '' 
`` Still no ? '' 
Marius assumed a grave tone : `` I assure you , Cosette , that it is impossible . '' 
`` Ah ! 
you put on your man 's voice , sir . 
That is well , I go . 
You , father , have not upheld me . 
Monsieur my father , monsieur my husband , you are tyrants . 
I shall go and tell grandpapa . 
If you think that I am going to return and talk platitudes to you , you are mistaken . 
I am proud . 
I shall wait for you now . 
You shall see , that it is you who are going to be bored without me . 
I am going , it is well . '' 
And she left the room . 
Two seconds later , the door opened once more , her fresh and rosy head was again thrust between the two leaves , and she cried to them : `` I am very angry indeed . '' 
The door closed again , and the shadows descended once more . 
It was as though a ray of sunlight should have suddenly traversed the night , without itself being conscious of it . 
Marius made sure that the door was securely closed . 
`` Poor Cosette ! '' 
he murmured , `` when she finds out ... '' At that word Jean Valjean trembled in every limb . 
He fixed on Marius a bewildered eye . 
`` Cosette ! 
oh yes , it is true , you are going to tell Cosette about this . 
That is right . 
Stay , I had not thought of that . 
One has the strength for one thing , but not for another . 
Sir , I conjure you , I entreat now , sir , give me your most sacred word of honor , that you will not tell her . 
Is it not enough that you should know it ? 
I have been able to say it myself without being forced to it , I could have told it to the universe , to the whole world , -- it was all one to me . 
But she , she does not know what it is , it would terrify her . 
What , a convict ! 
we should be obliged to explain matters to her , to say to her : ` He is a man who has been in the galleys . ' 
She saw the chain-gang pass by one day . 
Oh ! 
My God ! '' 
... He dropped into an arm-chair and hid his face in his hands . 
His grief was not audible , but from the quivering of his shoulders it was evident that he was weeping . 
Silent tears , terrible tears . 
There is something of suffocation in the sob . 
He was seized with a sort of convulsion , he threw himself against the back of the chair as though to gain breath , letting his arms fall , and allowing Marius to see his face inundated with tears , and Marius heard him murmur , so low that his voice seemed to issue from fathomless depths : `` Oh ! 
would that I could die ! '' 
`` Be at your ease , '' said Marius , `` I will keep your secret for myself alone . '' 
x And , less touched , perhaps , than he ought to have been , but forced , for the last hour , to familiarize himself with something as unexpected as it was dreadful , gradually beholding the convict superposed before his very eyes , upon M. Fauchelevent , overcome , little by little , by that lugubrious reality , and led , by the natural inclination of the situation , to recognize the space which had just been placed between that man and himself , Marius added : `` It is impossible that I should not speak a word to you with regard to the deposit which you have so faithfully and honestly remitted . 
That is an act of probity . 
It is just that some recompense should be bestowed on you . 
Fix the sum yourself , it shall be counted out to you . 
Do not fear to set it very high . '' 
`` I thank you , sir , '' replied Jean Valjean , gently . 
He remained in thought for a moment , mechanically passing the tip of his fore-finger across his thumb-nail , then he lifted up his voice : `` All is nearly over . 
But one last thing remains for me ... '' `` What is it ? '' 
Jean Valjean struggled with what seemed a last hesitation , and , without voice , without breath , he stammered rather than said : `` Now that you know , do you think , sir , you , who are the master , that I ought not to see Cosette any more ? '' 
`` I think that would be better , '' replied Marius coldly . 
`` I shall never see her more , '' murmured Jean Valjean . 
And he directed his steps towards the door . 
He laid his hand on the knob , the latch yielded , the door opened . 
Jean Valjean pushed it open far enough to pass through , stood motionless for a second , then closed the door again and turned to Marius . 
He was no longer pale , he was livid . 
There were no longer any tears in his eyes , but only a sort of tragic flame . 
His voice had regained a strange composure . 
`` Stay , sir , '' he said . 
`` If you will allow it , I will come to see her . 
I assure you that I desire it greatly . 
If I had not cared to see Cosette , I should not have made to you the confession that I have made , I should have gone away ; but , as I desired to remain in the place where Cosette is , and to continue to see her , I had to tell you about it honestly . 
You follow my reasoning , do you not ? 
it is a matter easily understood . 
You see , I have had her with me for more than nine years . 
We lived first in that hut on the boulevard , then in the convent , then near the Luxembourg . 
That was where you saw her for the first time . 
You remember her blue plush hat . 
Then we went to the Quartier des Invalides , where there was a railing on a garden , the Rue Plumet . 
I lived in a little back court-yard , whence I could hear her piano . 
That was my life . 
We never left each other . 
That lasted for nine years and some months . 
I was like her own father , and she was my child . 
I do not know whether you understand , Monsieur Pontmercy , but to go away now , never to see her again , never to speak to her again , to no longer have anything , would be hard . 
If you do not disapprove of it , I will come to see Cosette from time to time . 
I will not come often . 
I will not remain long . 
You shall give orders that I am to be received in the little waiting-room . 
On the ground floor . 
I could enter perfectly well by the back door , but that might create surprise perhaps , and it would be better , I think , for me to enter by the usual door . 
Truly , sir , I should like to see a little more of Cosette . 
As rarely as you please . 
Put yourself in my place , I have nothing left but that . 
And then , we must be cautious . 
If I no longer come at all , it would produce a bad effect , it would be considered singular . 
What I can do , by the way , is to come in the afternoon , when night is beginning to fall . '' 
`` You shall come every evening , '' said Marius , `` and Cosette will be waiting for you . '' 
`` You are kind , sir , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Marius saluted Jean Valjean , happiness escorted despair to the door , and these two men parted . 
THE OBSCURITIES WHICH A REVELATION CAN CONTAIN Marius was quite upset . 
The sort of estrangement which he had always felt towards the man beside whom he had seen Cosette , was now explained to him . 
There was something enigmatic about that person , of which his instinct had warned him . 
This enigma was the most hideous of disgraces , the galleys . 
This M. Fauchelevent was the convict Jean Valjean . 
To abruptly find such a secret in the midst of one 's happiness resembles the discovery of a scorpion in a nest of turtledoves . 
Was the happiness of Marius and Cosette thenceforth condemned to such a neighborhood ? 
