I would ask his pardon . 
Oh , my God ! 
It makes no difference to me whether I ask his pardon . 
Do me the favor to-day , for this once , Monsieur Javert . 
Hold ! 
you do not know that in prison one can earn only seven sous a day ; it is not the government 's fault , but seven sous is one 's earnings ; and just fancy , I must pay one hundred francs , or my little girl will be sent to me . 
Oh , my God ! 
I can not have her with me . 
What I do is so vile ! 
Oh , my Cosette ! 
Oh , my little angel of the Holy Virgin ! 
what will become of her , poor creature ? 
I will tell you : it is the Thenardiers , inn-keepers , peasants ; and such people are unreasonable . 
They want money . 
Do n't put me in prison ! 
You see , there is a little girl who will be turned out into the street to get along as best she may , in the very heart of the winter ; and you must have pity on such a being , my good Monsieur Javert . 
If she were older , she might earn her living ; but it can not be done at that age . 
I am not a bad woman at bottom . 
It is not cowardliness and gluttony that have made me what I am . 
If I have drunk brandy , it was out of misery . 
I do not love it ; but it benumbs the senses . 
When I was happy , it was only necessary to glance into my closets , and it would have been evident that I was not a coquettish and untidy woman . 
I had linen , a great deal of linen . 
Have pity on me , Monsieur Javert ! '' 
She spoke thus , rent in twain , shaken with sobs , blinded with tears , her neck bare , wringing her hands , and coughing with a dry , short cough , stammering softly with a voice of agony . 
Great sorrow is a divine and terrible ray , which transfigures the unhappy . 
At that moment Fantine had become beautiful once more . 
From time to time she paused , and tenderly kissed the police agent 's coat . 
She would have softened a heart of granite ; but a heart of wood can not be softened . 
`` Come ! '' 
said Javert , `` I have heard you out . 
Have you entirely finished ? 
You will get six months . 
Now march ! 
The Eternal Father in person could do nothing more . '' 
At these solemn words , `` the Eternal Father in person could do nothing more , '' she understood that her fate was sealed . 
She sank down , murmuring , `` Mercy ! '' 
Javert turned his back . 
The soldiers seized her by the arms . 
A few moments earlier a man had entered , but no one had paid any heed to him . 
He shut the door , leaned his back against it , and listened to Fantine 's despairing supplications . 
At the instant when the soldiers laid their hands upon the unfortunate woman , who would not rise , he emerged from the shadow , and said : -- `` One moment , if you please . '' 
Javert raised his eyes and recognized M. Madeleine . 
He removed his hat , and , saluting him with a sort of aggrieved awkwardness : -- `` Excuse me , Mr. Mayor -- '' The words `` Mr. Mayor '' produced a curious effect upon Fantine . 
She rose to her feet with one bound , like a spectre springing from the earth , thrust aside the soldiers with both arms , walked straight up to M. Madeleine before any one could prevent her , and gazing intently at him , with a bewildered air , she cried : -- `` Ah ! 
so it is you who are M. le Maire ! '' 
Then she burst into a laugh , and spit in his face . 
M. Madeleine wiped his face , and said : -- `` Inspector Javert , set this woman at liberty . '' 
Javert felt that he was on the verge of going mad . 
He experienced at that moment , blow upon blow and almost simultaneously , the most violent emotions which he had ever undergone in all his life . 
To see a woman of the town spit in the mayor 's face was a thing so monstrous that , in his most daring flights of fancy , he would have regarded it as a sacrilege to believe it possible . 
On the other hand , at the very bottom of his thought , he made a hideous comparison as to what this woman was , and as to what this mayor might be ; and then he , with horror , caught a glimpse of I know not what simple explanation of this prodigious attack . 
But when he beheld that mayor , that magistrate , calmly wipe his face and say , `` Set this woman at liberty , '' he underwent a sort of intoxication of amazement ; thought and word failed him equally ; the sum total of possible astonishment had been exceeded in his case . 
He remained mute . 
The words had produced no less strange an effect on Fantine . 
She raised her bare arm , and clung to the damper of the stove , like a person who is reeling . 
Nevertheless , she glanced about her , and began to speak in a low voice , as though talking to herself : -- `` At liberty ! 
I am to be allowed to go ! 
I am not to go to prison for six months ! 
Who said that ? 
It is not possible that any one could have said that . 
I did not hear aright . 
It can not have been that monster of a mayor ! 
Was it you , my good Monsieur Javert , who said that I was to be set free ? 
Oh , see here ! 
I will tell you about it , and you will let me go . 
That monster of a mayor , that old blackguard of a mayor , is the cause of all . 
Just imagine , Monsieur Javert , he turned me out ! 
all because of a pack of rascally women , who gossip in the workroom . 
If that is not a horror , what is ? 
To dismiss a poor girl who is doing her work honestly ! 
Then I could no longer earn enough , and all this misery followed . 
In the first place , there is one improvement which these gentlemen of the police ought to make , and that is , to prevent prison contractors from wronging poor people . 
I will explain it to you , you see : you are earning twelve sous at shirt-making , the price falls to nine sous ; and it is not enough to live on . 
Then one has to become whatever one can . 
As for me , I had my little Cosette , and I was actually forced to become a bad woman . 
Now you understand how it is that that blackguard of a mayor caused all the mischief . 
After that I stamped on that gentleman 's hat in front of the officers ' cafe ; but he had spoiled my whole dress with snow . 
We women have but one silk dress for evening wear . 
You see that I did not do wrong deliberately -- truly , Monsieur Javert ; and everywhere I behold women who are far more wicked than I , and who are much happier . 
O Monsieur Javert ! 
it was you who gave orders that I am to be set free , was it not ? 
Make inquiries , speak to my landlord ; I am paying my rent now ; they will tell you that I am perfectly honest . 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
I beg your pardon ; I have unintentionally touched the damper of the stove , and it has made it smoke . '' 
M. Madeleine listened to her with profound attention . 
While she was speaking , he fumbled in his waistcoat , drew out his purse and opened it . 
It was empty . 
He put it back in his pocket . 
He said to Fantine , `` How much did you say that you owed ? '' 
Fantine , who was looking at Javert only , turned towards him : -- `` Was I speaking to you ? '' 
Then , addressing the soldiers : -- `` Say , you fellows , did you see how I spit in his face ? 
Ah ! 
you old wretch of a mayor , you came here to frighten me , but I 'm not afraid of you . 
I am afraid of Monsieur Javert . 
I am afraid of my good Monsieur Javert ! '' 
So saying , she turned to the inspector again : -- `` And yet , you see , Mr. Inspector , it is necessary to be just . 
I understand that you are just , Mr. Inspector ; in fact , it is perfectly simple : a man amuses himself by putting snow down a woman 's back , and that makes the officers laugh ; one must divert themselves in some way ; and we -- well , we are here for them to amuse themselves with , of course ! 
And then , you , you come ; you are certainly obliged to preserve order , you lead off the woman who is in the wrong ; but on reflection , since you are a good man , you say that I am to be set at liberty ; it is for the sake of the little one , for six months in prison would prevent my supporting my child . 
