Men shouted to Marius from the groups : `` Do you designate who is to remain . '' 
`` Yes , '' said the five , `` choose . 
We will obey you . '' 
Marius did not believe that he was capable of another emotion . 
Still , at this idea , that of choosing a man for death , his blood rushed back to his heart . 
He would have turned pale , had it been possible for him to become any paler . 
He advanced towards the five , who smiled upon him , and each , with his eyes full of that grand flame which one beholds in the depths of history hovering over Thermopylae , cried to him : `` Me ! 
me ! 
me ! '' 
And Marius stupidly counted them ; there were still five of them ! 
Then his glance dropped to the four uniforms . 
At that moment , a fifth uniform fell , as if from heaven , upon the other four . 
The fifth man was saved . 
Marius raised his eyes and recognized M. Fauchelevent . 
Jean Valjean had just entered the barricade . 
He had arrived by way of Mondetour lane , whither by dint of inquiries made , or by instinct , or chance . 
Thanks to his dress of a National Guardsman , he had made his way without difficulty . 
The sentinel stationed by the insurgents in the Rue Mondetour had no occasion to give the alarm for a single National Guardsman , and he had allowed the latter to entangle himself in the street , saying to himself : `` Probably it is a reinforcement , in any case it is a prisoner . '' 
The moment was too grave to admit of the sentinel abandoning his duty and his post of observation . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean entered the redoubt , no one had noticed him , all eyes being fixed on the five chosen men and the four uniforms . 
Jean Valjean also had seen and heard , and he had silently removed his coat and flung it on the pile with the rest . 
The emotion aroused was indescribable . 
`` Who is this man ? '' 
demanded Bossuet . 
`` He is a man who saves others , '' replied Combeferre . 
Marius added in a grave voice : `` I know him . '' 
This guarantee satisfied every one . 
Enjolras turned to Jean Valjean . 
`` Welcome , citizen . '' 
And he added : `` You know that we are about to die . '' 
Jean Valjean , without replying , helped the insurgent whom he was saving to don his uniform . 
THE HORIZON WHICH ONE BEHOLDS FROM THE SUMMIT OF A BARRICADE The situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place , had as result and culminating point Enjolras ' supreme melancholy . 
Enjolras bore within him the plenitude of the revolution ; he was incomplete , however , so far as the absolute can be so ; he had too much of Saint-Just about him , and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots ; still , his mind , in the society of the Friends of the A B C , had ended by undergoing a certain polarization from Combeferre 's ideas ; for some time past , he had been gradually emerging from the narrow form of dogma , and had allowed himself to incline to the broadening influence of progress , and he had come to accept , as a definitive and magnificent evolution , the transformation of the great French Republic , into the immense human republic . 
As far as the immediate means were concerned , a violent situation being given , he wished to be violent ; on that point , he never varied ; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable school which is summed up in the words : `` Eighty-three . '' 
Enjolras was standing erect on the staircase of paving-stones , one elbow resting on the stock of his gun . 
He was engaged in thought ; he quivered , as at the passage of prophetic breaths ; places where death is have these effects of tripods . 
A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes , which were filled with an inward look . 
All at once he threw back his head , his blond locks fell back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made of stars , they were like the mane of a startled lion in the flaming of an halo , and Enjolras cried : `` Citizens , do you picture the future to yourselves ? 
The streets of cities inundated with light , green branches on the thresholds , nations sisters , men just , old men blessing children , the past loving the present , thinkers entirely at liberty , believers on terms of full equality , for religion heaven , God the direct priest , human conscience become an altar , no more hatreds , the fraternity of the workshop and the school , for sole penalty and recompense fame , work for all , right for all , peace over all , no more bloodshed , no more wars , happy mothers ! 
To conquer matter is the first step ; to realize the ideal is the second . 
Reflect on what progress has already accomplished . 
Formerly , the first human races beheld with terror the hydra pass before their eyes , breathing on the waters , the dragon which vomited flame , the griffin who was the monster of the air , and who flew with the wings of an eagle and the talons of a tiger ; fearful beasts which were above man . 
Man , nevertheless , spread his snares , consecrated by intelligence , and finally conquered these monsters . 
We have vanquished the hydra , and it is called the locomotive ; we are on the point of vanquishing the griffin , we already grasp it , and it is called the balloon . 
On the day when this Promethean task shall be accomplished , and when man shall have definitely harnessed to his will the triple Chimaera of antiquity , the hydra , the dragon and the griffin , he will be the master of water , fire , and of air , and he will be for the rest of animated creation that which the ancient gods formerly were to him . 
Courage , and onward ! 
Citizens , whither are we going ? 
To science made government , to the force of things become the sole public force , to the natural law , having in itself its sanction and its penalty and promulgating itself by evidence , to a dawn of truth corresponding to a dawn of day . 
We are advancing to the union of peoples ; we are advancing to the unity of man . 
No more fictions ; no more parasites . 
The real governed by the true , that is the goal . 
Civilization will hold its assizes at the summit of Europe , and , later on , at the centre of continents , in a grand parliament of the intelligence . 
Something similar has already been seen . 
The amphictyons had two sittings a year , one at Delphos the seat of the gods , the other at Thermopylae , the place of heroes . 
Europe will have her amphictyons ; the globe will have its amphictyons . 
France bears this sublime future in her breast . 
This is the gestation of the nineteenth century . 
That which Greece sketched out is worthy of being finished by France . 
Listen to me , you , Feuilly , valiant artisan , man of the people . 
I revere you . 
Yes , you clearly behold the future , yes , you are right . 
You had neither father nor mother , Feuilly ; you adopted humanity for your mother and right for your father . 
You are about to die , that is to say to triumph , here . 
Citizens , whatever happens to-day , through our defeat as well as through our victory , it is a revolution that we are about to create . 
As conflagrations light up a whole city , so revolutions illuminate the whole human race . 
And what is the revolution that we shall cause ? 
I have just told you , the Revolution of the True . 
From a political point of view , there is but a single principle ; the sovereignty of man over himself . 
This sovereignty of myself over myself is called Liberty . 
Where two or three of these sovereignties are combined , the state begins . 
But in that association there is no abdication . 
Each sovereignty concedes a certain quantity of itself , for the purpose of forming the common right . 
This quantity is the same for all of us . 
This identity of concession which each makes to all , is called Equality . 
Common right is nothing else than the protection of all beaming on the right of each . 
This protection of all over each is called Fraternity . 
The point of intersection of all these assembled sovereignties is called society . 
This intersection being a junction , this point is a knot . 
Hence what is called the social bond . 
Some say social contract ; which is the same thing , the word contract being etymologically formed with the idea of a bond . 
Let us come to an understanding about equality ; for , if liberty is the summit , equality is the base . 
Equality , citizens , is not wholly a surface vegetation , a society of great blades of grass and tiny oaks ; a proximity of jealousies which render each other null and void ; legally speaking , it is all aptitudes possessed of the same opportunity ; politically , it is all votes possessed of the same weight ; religiously , it is all consciences possessed of the same right . 
Equality has an organ : gratuitous and obligatory instruction . 
The right to the alphabet , that is where the beginning must be made . 
The primary school imposed on all , the secondary school offered to all , that is the law . 
From an identical school , an identical society will spring . 
Yes , instruction ! 
light ! 
light ! 
everything comes from light , and to it everything returns . 
Citizens , the nineteenth century is great , but the twentieth century will be happy . 
Then , there will be nothing more like the history of old , we shall no longer , as to-day , have to fear a conquest , an invasion , a usurpation , a rivalry of nations , arms in hand , an interruption of civilization depending on a marriage of kings , on a birth in hereditary tyrannies , a partition of peoples by a congress , a dismemberment because of the failure of a dynasty , a combat of two religions meeting face to face , like two bucks in the dark , on the bridge of the infinite ; we shall no longer have to fear famine , farming out , prostitution arising from distress , misery from the failure of work and the scaffold and the sword , and battles and the ruffianism of chance in the forest of events . 
One might almost say : There will be no more events . 
We shall be happy . 
The human race will accomplish its law , as the terrestrial globe accomplishes its law ; harmony will be re-established between the soul and the star ; the soul will gravitate around the truth , as the planet around the light . 
Friends , the present hour in which I am addressing you , is a gloomy hour ; but these are terrible purchases of the future . 
A revolution is a toll . 
Oh ! 
the human race will be delivered , raised up , consoled ! 
We affirm it on this barrier . 
