A God has always passed over the street Arab . 
Fortune labors at this tiny being . 
By the word `` fortune '' we mean chance , to some extent . 
That pigmy kneaded out of common earth , ignorant , unlettered , giddy , vulgar , low . 
Will that become an Ionian or a Boeotian ? 
Wait , currit rota , the Spirit of Paris , that demon which creates the children of chance and the men of destiny , reversing the process of the Latin potter , makes of a jug an amphora . 
HIS FRONTIERS The gamin loves the city , he also loves solitude , since he has something of the sage in him . 
Urbis amator , like Fuscus ; ruris amator , like Flaccus . 
To roam thoughtfully about , that is to say , to lounge , is a fine employment of time in the eyes of the philosopher ; particularly in that rather illegitimate species of campaign , which is tolerably ugly but odd and composed of two natures , which surrounds certain great cities , notably Paris . 
To study the suburbs is to study the amphibious animal . 
End of the trees , beginning of the roofs ; end of the grass , beginning of the pavements ; end of the furrows , beginning of the shops , end of the wheel-ruts , beginning of the passions ; end of the divine murmur , beginning of the human uproar ; hence an extraordinary interest . 
Hence , in these not very attractive places , indelibly stamped by the passing stroller with the epithet : melancholy , the apparently objectless promenades of the dreamer . 
He who writes these lines has long been a prowler about the barriers of Paris , and it is for him a source of profound souvenirs . 
That close-shaven turf , those pebbly paths , that chalk , those pools , those harsh monotonies of waste and fallow lands , the plants of early market-garden suddenly springing into sight in a bottom , that mixture of the savage and the citizen , those vast desert nooks where the garrison drums practise noisily , and produce a sort of lisping of battle , those hermits by day and cut-throats by night , that clumsy mill which turns in the wind , the hoisting-wheels of the quarries , the tea-gardens at the corners of the cemeteries ; the mysterious charm of great , sombre walls squarely intersecting immense , vague stretches of land inundated with sunshine and full of butterflies , -- all this attracted him . 
There is hardly any one on earth who is not acquainted with those singular spots , the Glaciere , the Cunette , the hideous wall of Grenelle all speckled with balls , Mont-Parnasse , the Fosse-aux-Loups , Aubiers on the bank of the Marne , Mont-Souris , the Tombe-Issoire , the Pierre-Plate de Chatillon , where there is an old , exhausted quarry which no longer serves any purpose except to raise mushrooms , and which is closed , on a level with the ground , by a trap-door of rotten planks . 
The campagna of Rome is one idea , the banlieue of Paris is another ; to behold nothing but fields , houses , or trees in what a stretch of country offers us , is to remain on the surface ; all aspects of things are thoughts of God . 
The spot where a plain effects its junction with a city is always stamped with a certain piercing melancholy . 
Nature and humanity both appeal to you at the same time there . 
Local originalities there make their appearance . 
Any one who , like ourselves , has wandered about in these solitudes contiguous to our faubourgs , which may be designated as the limbos of Paris , has seen here and there , in the most desert spot , at the most unexpected moment , behind a meagre hedge , or in the corner of a lugubrious wall , children grouped tumultuously , fetid , muddy , dusty , ragged , dishevelled , playing hide-and-seek , and crowned with corn-flowers . 
All of them are little ones who have made their escape from poor families . 
The outer boulevard is their breathing space ; the suburbs belong to them . 
There they are eternally playing truant . 
There they innocently sing their repertory of dirty songs . 
There they are , or rather , there they exist , far from every eye , in the sweet light of May or June , kneeling round a hole in the ground , snapping marbles with their thumbs , quarrelling over half-farthings , irresponsible , volatile , free and happy ; and , no sooner do they catch sight of you than they recollect that they have an industry , and that they must earn their living , and they offer to sell you an old woollen stocking filled with cockchafers , or a bunch of lilacs . 
These encounters with strange children are one of the charming and at the same time poignant graces of the environs of Paris . 
Sometimes there are little girls among the throng of boys , -- are they their sisters ? 
-- who are almost young maidens , thin , feverish , with sunburnt hands , covered with freckles , crowned with poppies and ears of rye , gay , haggard , barefooted . 
They can be seen devouring cherries among the wheat . 
In the evening they can be heard laughing . 
These groups , warmly illuminated by the full glow of midday , or indistinctly seen in the twilight , occupy the thoughtful man for a very long time , and these visions mingle with his dreams . 
Paris , centre , banlieue , circumference ; this constitutes all the earth to those children . 
They never venture beyond this . 
They can no more escape from the Parisian atmosphere than fish can escape from the water . 
For them , nothing exists two leagues beyond the barriers : Ivry , Gentilly , Arcueil , Belleville , Aubervilliers , Menilmontant , Choisy-le-Roi , Billancourt , Mendon , Issy , Vanvre , Sevres , Puteaux , Neuilly , Gennevilliers , Colombes , Romainville , Chatou , Asnieres , Bougival , Nanterre , Enghien , Noisy-le-Sec , Nogent , Gournay , Drancy , Gonesse ; the universe ends there . 
A BIT OF HISTORY At the epoch , nearly contemporary by the way , when the action of this book takes place , there was not , as there is to-day , a policeman at the corner of every street -LRB- a benefit which there is no time to discuss here -RRB- ; stray children abounded in Paris . 
The statistics give an average of two hundred and sixty homeless children picked up annually at that period , by the police patrols , in unenclosed lands , in houses in process of construction , and under the arches of the bridges . 
One of these nests , which has become famous , produced `` the swallows of the bridge of Arcola . '' 
This is , moreover , the most disastrous of social symptoms . 
All crimes of the man begin in the vagabondage of the child . 
Let us make an exception in favor of Paris , nevertheless . 
In a relative measure , and in spite of the souvenir which we have just recalled , the exception is just . 
While in any other great city the vagabond child is a lost man , while nearly everywhere the child left to itself is , in some sort , sacrificed and abandoned to a kind of fatal immersion in the public vices which devour in him honesty and conscience , the street boy of Paris , we insist on this point , however defaced and injured on the surface , is almost intact on the interior . 
It is a magnificent thing to put on record , and one which shines forth in the splendid probity of our popular revolutions , that a certain incorruptibility results from the idea which exists in the air of Paris , as salt exists in the water of the ocean . 
To breathe Paris preserves the soul . 
What we have just said takes away nothing of the anguish of heart which one experiences every time that one meets one of these children around whom one fancies that he beholds floating the threads of a broken family . 
In the civilization of the present day , incomplete as it still is , it is not a very abnormal thing to behold these fractured families pouring themselves out into the darkness , not knowing clearly what has become of their children , and allowing their own entrails to fall on the public highway . 
Hence these obscure destinies . 
This is called , for this sad thing has given rise to an expression , `` to be cast on the pavements of Paris . '' 
Let it be said by the way , that this abandonment of children was not discouraged by the ancient monarchy . 
A little of Egypt and Bohemia in the lower regions suited the upper spheres , and compassed the aims of the powerful . 
The hatred of instruction for the children of the people was a dogma . 
What is the use of `` half-lights '' ? 
Such was the countersign . 
Now , the erring child is the corollary of the ignorant child . 
Besides this , the monarchy sometimes was in need of children , and in that case it skimmed the streets . 
Under Louis XIV. , not to go any further back , the king rightly desired to create a fleet . 
The idea was a good one . 
But let us consider the means . 
There can be no fleet , if , beside the sailing ship , that plaything of the winds , and for the purpose of towing it , in case of necessity , there is not the vessel which goes where it pleases , either by means of oars or of steam ; the galleys were then to the marine what steamers are to-day . 
Therefore , galleys were necessary ; but the galley is moved only by the galley-slave ; hence , galley-slaves were required . 
Colbert had the commissioners of provinces and the parliaments make as many convicts as possible . 
The magistracy showed a great deal of complaisance in the matter . 
A man kept his hat on in the presence of a procession -- it was a Huguenot attitude ; he was sent to the galleys . 
A child was encountered in the streets ; provided that he was fifteen years of age and did not know where he was to sleep , he was sent to the galleys . 
Grand reign ; grand century . 
Under Louis XV . 
children disappeared in Paris ; the police carried them off , for what mysterious purpose no one knew . 
People whispered with terror monstrous conjectures as to the king 's baths of purple . 
Barbier speaks ingenuously of these things . 
It sometimes happened that the exempts of the guard , when they ran short of children , took those who had fathers . 
The fathers , in despair , attacked the exempts . 
In that case , the parliament intervened and had some one hung . 
Who ? 
The exempts ? 
No , the fathers . 
THE GAMIN SHOULD HAVE HIS PLACE IN THE CLASSIFICATIONS OF INDIA The body of street Arabs in Paris almost constitutes a caste . 
One might almost say : Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so . 
This word gamin was printed for the first time , and reached popular speech through the literary tongue , in 1834 . 
It is in a little work entitled Claude Gueux that this word made its appearance . 
The horror was lively . 
The word passed into circulation . 
The elements which constitute the consideration of the gamins for each other are very various . 
We have known and associated with one who was greatly respected and vastly admired because he had seen a man fall from the top of the tower of Notre-Dame ; another , because he had succeeded in making his way into the rear courtyard where the statues of the dome of the Invalides had been temporarily deposited , and had `` prigged '' some lead from them ; a third , because he had seen a diligence tip over ; still another , because he `` knew '' a soldier who came near putting out the eye of a citizen . 
This explains that famous exclamation of a Parisian gamin , a profound epiphonema , which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending , -- Dieu de Dieu ! 
What ill-luck I do have ! 
to think that I have never yet seen anybody tumble from a fifth-story window ! 
-LRB- I have pronounced I ` ave and fifth pronounced fift ' . -RRB- 
Surely , this saying of a peasant is a fine one : `` Father So-and-So , your wife has died of her malady ; why did you not send for the doctor ? '' 
`` What would you have , sir , we poor folks die of ourselves . '' 
But if the peasant 's whole passivity lies in this saying , the whole of the free-thinking anarchy of the brat of the faubourgs is , assuredly , contained in this other saying . 
A man condemned to death is listening to his confessor in the tumbrel . 
The child of Paris exclaims : `` He is talking to his black cap ! 
Oh , the sneak ! '' 
A certain audacity on matters of religion sets off the gamin . 
To be strong-minded is an important item . 
To be present at executions constitutes a duty . 
He shows himself at the guillotine , and he laughs . 
He calls it by all sorts of pet names : The End of the Soup , The Growler , The Mother in the Blue -LRB- the sky -RRB- , The Last Mouthful , etc. , etc. . 
In order not to lose anything of the affair , he scales the walls , he hoists himself to balconies , he ascends trees , he suspends himself to gratings , he clings fast to chimneys . 
