Madame de Genlis was superstitious and a Latinist . 
These two words furnish a tolerably good profile of her . 
A few years ago , there were still to be seen , pasted in the inside of a little cupboard in her cell in which she locked up her silverware and her jewels , these five lines in Latin , written with her own hand in red ink on yellow paper , and which , in her opinion , possessed the property of frightening away robbers : -- Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis : -LSB- 15 -RSB- Dismas et Gesmas , media est divina potestas ; Alta petit Dismas , infelix , infima , Gesmas ; Nos et res nostras conservet summa potestas . 
Hos versus dicas , ne tu furto tua perdas . 
-LSB- 15 -RSB- On the boughs hang three bodies of unequal merits : Dismas and Gesmas , between is the divine power . 
Dismas seeks the heights , Gesmas , unhappy man , the lowest regions ; the highest power will preserve us and our effects . 
If you repeat this verse , you will not lose your things by theft . 
These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether the two thieves of Calvary were named , as is commonly believed , Dismas and Gestas , or Dismas and Gesmas . 
This orthography might have confounded the pretensions put forward in the last century by the Vicomte de Gestas , of a descent from the wicked thief . 
However , the useful virtue attached to these verses forms an article of faith in the order of the Hospitallers . 
The church of the house , constructed in such a manner as to separate the Great Convent from the Boarding-school like a veritable intrenchment , was , of course , common to the Boarding-school , the Great Convent , and the Little Convent . 
The public was even admitted by a sort of lazaretto entrance on the street . 
But all was so arranged , that none of the inhabitants of the cloister could see a face from the outside world . 
Suppose a church whose choir is grasped in a gigantic hand , and folded in such a manner as to form , not , as in ordinary churches , a prolongation behind the altar , but a sort of hall , or obscure cellar , to the right of the officiating priest ; suppose this hall to be shut off by a curtain seven feet in height , of which we have already spoken ; in the shadow of that curtain , pile up on wooden stalls the nuns in the choir on the left , the school-girls on the right , the lay-sisters and the novices at the bottom , and you will have some idea of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus assisting at divine service . 
That cavern , which was called the choir , communicated with the cloister by a lobby . 
The church was lighted from the garden . 
When the nuns were present at services where their rule enjoined silence , the public was warned of their presence only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising and falling . 
SOME SILHOUETTES OF THIS DARKNESS During the six years which separate 1819 from 1825 , the prioress of the Petit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur , whose name , in religion , was Mother Innocente . 
She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur , author of Lives of the Saints of the Order of Saint-Benoit . 
She had been re-elected . 
She was a woman about sixty years of age , short , thick , `` singing like a cracked pot , '' says the letter which we have already quoted ; an excellent woman , moreover , and the only merry one in the whole convent , and for that reason adored . 
She was learned , erudite , wise , competent , curiously proficient in history , crammed with Latin , stuffed with Greek , full of Hebrew , and more of a Benedictine monk than a Benedictine nun . 
The sub-prioress was an old Spanish nun , Mother Cineres , who was almost blind . 
The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine ; the treasurer , Mother Sainte-Gertrude , the chief mistress of the novices ; Mother-Saint-Ange , the assistant mistress ; Mother Annonciation , the sacristan ; Mother Saint-Augustin , the nurse , the only one in the convent who was malicious ; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde -LRB- Mademoiselle Gauvain -RRB- , very young and with a beautiful voice ; Mother des Anges -LRB- Mademoiselle Drouet -RRB- , who had been in the convent of the Filles-Dieu , and in the convent du Tresor , between Gisors and Magny ; Mother Saint-Joseph -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cogolludo -RRB- , Mother Sainte-Adelaide -LRB- Mademoiselle d'Auverney -RRB- , Mother Misericorde -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cifuentes , who could not resist austerities -RRB- , Mother Compassion -LRB- Mademoiselle de la Miltiere , received at the age of sixty in defiance of the rule , and very wealthy -RRB- ; Mother Providence -LRB- Mademoiselle de Laudiniere -RRB- , Mother Presentation -LRB- Mademoiselle de Siguenza -RRB- , who was prioress in 1847 ; and finally , Mother Sainte-Celigne -LRB- sister of the sculptor Ceracchi -RRB- , who went mad ; Mother Sainte-Chantal -LRB- Mademoiselle de Suzon -RRB- , who went mad . 
There was also , among the prettiest of them , a charming girl of three and twenty , who was from the Isle de Bourbon , a descendant of the Chevalier Roze , whose name had been Mademoiselle Roze , and who was called Mother Assumption . 
Mother Sainte-Mechtilde , intrusted with the singing and the choir , was fond of making use of the pupils in this quarter . 
She usually took a complete scale of them , that is to say , seven , from ten to sixteen years of age , inclusive , of assorted voices and sizes , whom she made sing standing , drawn up in a line , side by side , according to age , from the smallest to the largest . 
This presented to the eye , something in the nature of a reed-pipe of young girls , a sort of living Pan-pipe made of angels . 
Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were Sister Euphrasie , Sister Sainte-Marguerite , Sister Sainte-Marthe , who was in her dotage , and Sister Sainte-Michel , whose long nose made them laugh . 
All these women were gentle with the children . 
The nuns were severe only towards themselves . 
No fire was lighted except in the school , and the food was choice compared to that in the convent . 
Moreover , they lavished a thousand cares on their scholars . 
Only , when a child passed near a nun and addressed her , the nun never replied . 
This rule of silence had had this effect , that throughout the whole convent , speech had been withdrawn from human creatures , and bestowed on inanimate objects . 
Now it was the church-bell which spoke , now it was the gardener 's bell . 
A very sonorous bell , placed beside the portress , and which was audible throughout the house , indicated by its varied peals , which formed a sort of acoustic telegraph , all the actions of material life which were to be performed , and summoned to the parlor , in case of need , such or such an inhabitant of the house . 
Each person and each thing had its own peal . 
The prioress had one and one , the sub-prioress one and two . 
Six-five announced lessons , so that the pupils never said `` to go to lessons , '' but `` to go to six-five . '' 
Four-four was Madame de Genlis 's signal . 
It was very often heard . 
`` C'est le diable a quatre , -- it 's the very deuce -- said the uncharitable . 
Tennine strokes announced a great event . 
It was the opening of the door of seclusion , a frightful sheet of iron bristling with bolts which only turned on its hinges in the presence of the archbishop . 
With the exception of the archbishop and the gardener , no man entered the convent , as we have already said . 
The schoolgirls saw two others : one , the chaplain , the Abbe Banes , old and ugly , whom they were permitted to contemplate in the choir , through a grating ; the other the drawing-master , M. Ansiaux , whom the letter , of which we have perused a few lines , calls M. Anciot , and describes as a frightful old hunchback . 
It will be seen that all these men were carefully chosen . 
Such was this curious house . 
POST CORDA LAPIDES After having sketched its moral face , it will not prove unprofitable to point out , in a few words , its material configuration . 
The reader already has some idea of it . 
The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the whole of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue Polonceau , the Rue Droit-Mur , the Rue Petit-Picpus , and the unused lane , called Rue Aumarais on old plans . 
These four streets surrounded this trapezium like a moat . 
The convent was composed of several buildings and a garden . 
The principal building , taken in its entirety , was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which , viewed from a bird 's - eye view , outlined , with considerable exactness , a gibbet laid flat on the ground . 
The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of the fragment of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue Petit-Picpus and the Rue Polonceau ; the lesser arm was a lofty , gray , severe grated facade which faced the Rue Petit-Picpus ; the carriage entrance No. 62 marked its extremity . 
Towards the centre of this facade was a low , arched door , whitened with dust and ashes , where the spiders wove their webs , and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays , and on rare occasions , when the coffin of a nun left the convent . 
This was the public entrance of the church . 
The elbow of the gibbet was a square hall which was used as the servants ' hall , and which the nuns called the buttery . 
In the main arm were the cells of the mothers , the sisters , and the novices . 
In the lesser arm lay the kitchens , the refectory , backed up by the cloisters and the church . 
Between the door No. 62 and the corner of the closed lane Aumarais , was the school , which was not visible from without . 
The remainder of the trapezium formed the garden , which was much lower than the level of the Rue Polonceau , which caused the walls to be very much higher on the inside than on the outside . 
The garden , which was slightly arched , had in its centre , on the summit of a hillock , a fine pointed and conical fir-tree , whence ran , as from the peaked boss of a shield , four grand alleys , and , ranged by twos in between the branchings of these , eight small ones , so that , if the enclosure had been circular , the geometrical plan of the alleys would have resembled a cross superposed on a wheel . 
As the alleys all ended in the very irregular walls of the garden , they were of unequal length . 
They were bordered with currant bushes . 
At the bottom , an alley of tall poplars ran from the ruins of the old convent , which was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to the house of the Little Convent , which was at the angle of the Aumarais lane . 
In front of the Little Convent was what was called the little garden . 
To this whole , let the reader add a courtyard , all sorts of varied angles formed by the interior buildings , prison walls , the long black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue Polonceau for its sole perspective and neighborhood , and he will be able to form for himself a complete image of what the house of the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus was forty years ago . 
This holy house had been built on the precise site of a famous tennis-ground of the fourteenth to the sixteenth century , which was called the `` tennis-ground of the eleven thousand devils . '' 
All these streets , moreover , were more ancient than Paris . 
These names , Droit-Mur and Aumarais , are very ancient ; the streets which bear them are very much more ancient still . 
Aumarais Lane was called Maugout Lane ; the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Eglantiers , for God opened flowers before man cut stones . 
A CENTURY UNDER A GUIMPE Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in former times , and since we have ventured to open a window on that discreet retreat , the reader will permit us one other little digression , utterly foreign to this book , but characteristic and useful , since it shows that the cloister even has its original figures . 
In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbey of Fontevrault . 
She had even been in society before the Revolution . 
She talked a great deal of M. de Miromesnil , Keeper of the Seals under Louis XVI . 
and of a Presidentess Duplat , with whom she had been very intimate . 
It was her pleasure and her vanity to drag in these names on every pretext . 
She told wonders of the Abbey of Fontevrault , -- that it was like a city , and that there were streets in the monastery . 
She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils . 
Every year , she solemnly renewed her vows , and at the moment of taking the oath , she said to the priest , `` Monseigneur Saint-Francois gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Julien , Monseigneur Saint-Julien gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius , Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Procopius , etc. , etc. ; and thus I give it to you , father . '' 
And the school-girls would begin to laugh , not in their sleeves , but under their veils ; charming little stifled laughs which made the vocal mothers frown . 
On another occasion , the centenarian was telling stories . 
She said that in her youth the Bernardine monks were every whit as good as the mousquetaires . 
It was a century which spoke through her , but it was the eighteenth century . 
She told about the custom of the four wines , which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne . 
When a great personage , a marshal of France , a prince , a duke , and a peer , traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne , the city fathers came out to harangue him and presented him with four silver gondolas into which they had poured four different sorts of wine . 
On the first goblet this inscription could be read , monkey wine ; on the second , lion wine ; on the third , sheep wine ; on the fourth , hog wine . 
These four legends express the four stages descended by the drunkard ; the first , intoxication , which enlivens ; the second , that which irritates ; the third , that which dulls ; and the fourth , that which brutalizes . 
In a cupboard , under lock and key , she kept a mysterious object of which she thought a great deal . 
The rule of Fontevrault did not forbid this . 
She would not show this object to anyone . 
She shut herself up , which her rule allowed her to do , and hid herself , every time that she desired to contemplate it . 
If she heard a footstep in the corridor , she closed the cupboard again as hastily as it was possible with her aged hands . 
As soon as it was mentioned to her , she became silent , she who was so fond of talking . 
The most curious were baffled by her silence and the most tenacious by her obstinacy . 
Thus it furnished a subject of comment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent . 
What could that treasure of the centenarian be , which was so precious and so secret ? 
Some holy book , no doubt ? 
