It was her mother who confided her to me ; I can only resign her to her mother . 
You will say to me , ` But her mother is dead . ' 
Good ; in that case I can only give the child up to the person who shall bring me a writing , signed by her mother , to the effect that I am to hand the child over to the person therein mentioned ; that is clear . '' 
The man , without making any reply , fumbled in his pocket , and Thenardier beheld the pocket-book of bank-bills make its appearance once more . 
The tavern-keeper shivered with joy . 
`` Good ! '' 
thought he ; `` let us hold firm ; he is going to bribe me ! '' 
Before opening the pocket-book , the traveller cast a glance about him : the spot was absolutely deserted ; there was not a soul either in the woods or in the valley . 
The man opened his pocket-book once more and drew from it , not the handful of bills which Thenardier expected , but a simple little paper , which he unfolded and presented fully open to the inn-keeper , saying : -- `` You are right ; read ! '' 
Thenardier took the paper and read : -- `` M. SUR M. , March 25 , 1823 . 
`` MONSIEUR THENARDIER : -- You will deliver Cosette to this person . 
You will be paid for all the little things . 
I have the honor to salute you with respect , FANTINE . '' 
`` You know that signature ? '' 
resumed the man . 
It certainly was Fantine 's signature ; Thenardier recognized it . 
There was no reply to make ; he experienced two violent vexations , the vexation of renouncing the bribery which he had hoped for , and the vexation of being beaten ; the man added : -- `` You may keep this paper as your receipt . '' 
Thenardier retreated in tolerably good order . 
`` This signature is fairly well imitated , '' he growled between his teeth ; `` however , let it go ! '' 
Then he essayed a desperate effort . 
`` It is well , sir , '' he said , `` since you are the person , but I must be paid for all those little things . 
A great deal is owing to me . '' 
The man rose to his feet , filliping the dust from his thread-bare sleeve : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier , in January last , the mother reckoned that she owed you one hundred and twenty francs . 
In February , you sent her a bill of five hundred francs ; you received three hundred francs at the end of February , and three hundred francs at the beginning of March . 
Since then nine months have elapsed , at fifteen francs a month , the price agreed upon , which makes one hundred and thirty-five francs . 
You had received one hundred francs too much ; that makes thirty-five still owing you . 
I have just given you fifteen hundred francs . '' 
Thenardier 's sensations were those of the wolf at the moment when he feels himself nipped and seized by the steel jaw of the trap . 
`` Who is this devil of a man ? '' 
he thought . 
He did what the wolf does : he shook himself . 
Audacity had succeeded with him once . 
`` Monsieur-I-don ` t-know-your-name , '' he said resolutely , and this time casting aside all respectful ceremony , `` I shall take back Cosette if you do not give me a thousand crowns . '' 
The stranger said tranquilly : -- `` Come , Cosette . '' 
He took Cosette by his left hand , and with his right he picked up his cudgel , which was lying on the ground . 
Thenardier noted the enormous size of the cudgel and the solitude of the spot . 
The man plunged into the forest with the child , leaving the inn-keeper motionless and speechless . 
While they were walking away , Thenardier scrutinized his huge shoulders , which were a little rounded , and his great fists . 
Then , bringing his eyes back to his own person , they fell upon his feeble arms and his thin hands . 
`` I really must have been exceedingly stupid not to have thought to bring my gun , '' he said to himself , `` since I was going hunting ! '' 
However , the inn-keeper did not give up . 
`` I want to know where he is going , '' said he , and he set out to follow them at a distance . 
Two things were left on his hands , an irony in the shape of the paper signed Fantine , and a consolation , the fifteen hundred francs . 
The man led Cosette off in the direction of Livry and Bondy . 
He walked slowly , with drooping head , in an attitude of reflection and sadness . 
The winter had thinned out the forest , so that Thenardier did not lose them from sight , although he kept at a good distance . 
The man turned round from time to time , and looked to see if he was being followed . 
All at once he caught sight of Thenardier . 
He plunged suddenly into the brushwood with Cosette , where they could both hide themselves . 
`` The deuce ! '' 
said Thenardier , and he redoubled his pace . 
The thickness of the undergrowth forced him to draw nearer to them . 
When the man had reached the densest part of the thicket , he wheeled round . 
It was in vain that Thenardier sought to conceal himself in the branches ; he could not prevent the man seeing him . 
The man cast upon him an uneasy glance , then elevated his head and continued his course . 
The inn-keeper set out again in pursuit . 
Thus they continued for two or three hundred paces . 
All at once the man turned round once more ; he saw the inn-keeper . 
This time he gazed at him with so sombre an air that Thenardier decided that it was `` useless '' to proceed further . 
Thenardier retraced his steps . 
NUMBER 9,430 REAPPEARS , AND COSETTE WINS IT IN THE LOTTERY Jean Valjean was not dead . 
When he fell into the sea , or rather , when he threw himself into it , he was not ironed , as we have seen . 
He swam under water until he reached a vessel at anchor , to which a boat was moored . 
He found means of hiding himself in this boat until night . 
At night he swam off again , and reached the shore a little way from Cape Brun . 
There , as he did not lack money , he procured clothing . 
A small country-house in the neighborhood of Balaguier was at that time the dressing-room of escaped convicts , -- a lucrative specialty . 
Then Jean Valjean , like all the sorry fugitives who are seeking to evade the vigilance of the law and social fatality , pursued an obscure and undulating itinerary . 
He found his first refuge at Pradeaux , near Beausset . 
Then he directed his course towards Grand-Villard , near Briancon , in the Hautes-Alpes . 
It was a fumbling and uneasy flight , -- a mole 's track , whose branchings are untraceable . 
Later on , some trace of his passage into Ain , in the territory of Civrieux , was discovered ; in the Pyrenees , at Accons ; at the spot called Grange-de-Doumec , near the market of Chavailles , and in the environs of Perigueux at Brunies , canton of La Chapelle-Gonaguet . 
He reached Paris . 
We have just seen him at Montfermeil . 
His first care on arriving in Paris had been to buy mourning clothes for a little girl of from seven to eight years of age ; then to procure a lodging . 
That done , he had betaken himself to Montfermeil . 
It will be remembered that already , during his preceding escape , he had made a mysterious trip thither , or somewhere in that neighborhood , of which the law had gathered an inkling . 
However , he was thought to be dead , and this still further increased the obscurity which had gathered about him . 
At Paris , one of the journals which chronicled the fact fell into his hands . 
He felt reassured and almost at peace , as though he had really been dead . 
On the evening of the day when Jean Valjean rescued Cosette from the claws of the Thenardiers , he returned to Paris . 
He re-entered it at nightfall , with the child , by way of the Barrier Monceaux . 
There he entered a cabriolet , which took him to the esplanade of the Observatoire . 
There he got out , paid the coachman , took Cosette by the hand , and together they directed their steps through the darkness , -- through the deserted streets which adjoin the Ourcine and the Glaciere , towards the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
The day had been strange and filled with emotions for Cosette . 
They had eaten some bread and cheese purchased in isolated taverns , behind hedges ; they had changed carriages frequently ; they had travelled short distances on foot . 
She made no complaint , but she was weary , and Jean Valjean perceived it by the way she dragged more and more on his hand as she walked . 
He took her on his back . 
Cosette , without letting go of Catherine , laid her head on Jean Valjean 's shoulder , and there fell asleep . 
MASTER GORBEAU Forty years ago , a rambler who had ventured into that unknown country of the Salpetriere , and who had mounted to the Barriere d'Italie by way of the boulevard , reached a point where it might be said that Paris disappeared . 
It was no longer solitude , for there were passers-by ; it was not the country , for there were houses and streets ; it was not the city , for the streets had ruts like highways , and the grass grew in them ; it was not a village , the houses were too lofty . 
What was it , then ? 
It was an inhabited spot where there was no one ; it was a desert place where there was some one ; it was a boulevard of the great city , a street of Paris ; more wild at night than the forest , more gloomy by day than a cemetery . 
It was the old quarter of the Marche-aux-Chevaux . 
The rambler , if he risked himself outside the four decrepit walls of this Marche-aux-Chevaux ; if he consented even to pass beyond the Rue du Petit-Banquier , after leaving on his right a garden protected by high walls ; then a field in which tan-bark mills rose like gigantic beaver huts ; then an enclosure encumbered with timber , with a heap of stumps , sawdust , and shavings , on which stood a large dog , barking ; then a long , low , utterly dilapidated wall , with a little black door in mourning , laden with mosses , which were covered with flowers in the spring ; then , in the most deserted spot , a frightful and decrepit building , on which ran the inscription in large letters : POST NO BILLS , -- this daring rambler would have reached little known latitudes at the corner of the Rue des Vignes-Saint-Marcel . 
There , near a factory , and between two garden walls , there could be seen , at that epoch , a mean building , which , at the first glance , seemed as small as a thatched hovel , and which was , in reality , as large as a cathedral . 
It presented its side and gable to the public road ; hence its apparent diminutiveness . 
Nearly the whole of the house was hidden . 
Only the door and one window could be seen . 
This hovel was only one story high . 
