Leave the barricade instantly '' -LRB- Gavroche began to scratch his ear uneasily -RRB- `` and to-morrow morning , you will deliver it at its address to Mademoiselle Cosette , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
The heroic child replied `` Well , but ! 
in the meanwhile the barricade will be taken , and I shall not be there . '' 
`` The barricade will not be attacked until daybreak , according to all appearances , and will not be taken before to-morrow noon . '' 
The fresh respite which the assailants were granting to the barricade had , in fact , been prolonged . 
It was one of those intermissions which frequently occur in nocturnal combats , which are always followed by an increase of rage . 
`` Well , '' said Gavroche , `` what if I were to go and carry your letter to-morrow ? '' 
`` It will be too late . 
The barricade will probably be blockaded , all the streets will be guarded , and you will not be able to get out . 
Go at once . '' 
Gavroche could think of no reply to this , and stood there in indecision , scratching his ear sadly . 
All at once , he took the letter with one of those birdlike movements which were common with him . 
`` All right , '' said he . 
And he started off at a run through Mondetour lane . 
An idea had occurred to Gavroche which had brought him to a decision , but he had not mentioned it for fear that Marius might offer some objection to it . 
This was the idea : -- `` It is barely midnight , the Rue de l'Homme Arme is not far off ; I will go and deliver the letter at once , and I shall get back in time . '' 
A DRINKER IS A BABBLER What are the convulsions of a city in comparison with the insurrections of the soul ? 
Man is a depth still greater than the people . 
Jean Valjean at that very moment was the prey of a terrible upheaval . 
Every sort of gulf had opened again within him . 
He also was trembling , like Paris , on the brink of an obscure and formidable revolution . 
A few hours had sufficed to bring this about . 
His destiny and his conscience had suddenly been covered with gloom . 
Of him also , as well as of Paris , it might have been said : `` Two principles are face to face . 
The white angel and the black angel are about to seize each other on the bridge of the abyss . 
Which of the two will hurl the other over ? 
Who will carry the day ? '' 
On the evening preceding this same 5th of June , Jean Valjean , accompanied by Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
A change awaited him there . 
Cosette had not quitted the Rue Plumet without making an effort at resistance . 
For the first time since they had lived side by side , Cosette 's will and the will of Jean Valjean had proved to be distinct , and had been in opposition , at least , if they had not clashed . 
There had been objections on one side and inflexibility on the other . 
The abrupt advice : `` Leave your house , '' hurled at Jean Valjean by a stranger , had alarmed him to the extent of rendering him peremptory . 
He thought that he had been traced and followed . 
Cosette had been obliged to give way . 
Both had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme without opening their lips , and without uttering a word , each being absorbed in his own personal preoccupation ; Jean Valjean so uneasy that he did not notice Cosette 's sadness , Cosette so sad that she did not notice Jean Valjean 's uneasiness . 
Jean Valjean had taken Toussaint with him , a thing which he had never done in his previous absences . 
He perceived the possibility of not returning to the Rue Plumet , and he could neither leave Toussaint behind nor confide his secret to her . 
Besides , he felt that she was devoted and trustworthy . 
Treachery between master and servant begins in curiosity . 
Now Toussaint , as though she had been destined to be Jean Valjean 's servant , was not curious . 
She stammered in her peasant dialect of Barneville : `` I am made so ; I do my work ; the rest is no affair of mine . '' 
In this departure from the Rue Plumet , which had been almost a flight , Jean Valjean had carried away nothing but the little embalmed valise , baptized by Cosette `` the inseparable . '' 
Full trunks would have required porters , and porters are witnesses . 
A fiacre had been summoned to the door on the Rue de Babylone , and they had taken their departure . 
It was with difficulty that Toussaint had obtained permission to pack up a little linen and clothes and a few toilet articles . 
Cosette had taken only her portfolio and her blotting-book . 
Jean Valjean , with a view to augmenting the solitude and the mystery of this departure , had arranged to quit the pavilion of the Rue Plumet only at dusk , which had allowed Cosette time to write her note to Marius . 
They had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme after night had fully fallen . 
They had gone to bed in silence . 
The lodgings in the Rue de l'Homme Arme were situated on a back court , on the second floor , and were composed of two sleeping-rooms , a dining-room and a kitchen adjoining the dining-room , with a garret where there was a folding-bed , and which fell to Toussaint 's share . 
The dining-room was an antechamber as well , and separated the two bedrooms . 
The apartment was provided with all necessary utensils . 
People re-acquire confidence as foolishly as they lose it ; human nature is so constituted . 
Hardly had Jean Valjean reached the Rue de l'Homme Arme when his anxiety was lightened and by degrees dissipated . 
There are soothing spots which act in some sort mechanically on the mind . 
An obscure street , peaceable inhabitants . 
Jean Valjean experienced an indescribable contagion of tranquillity in that alley of ancient Paris , which is so narrow that it is barred against carriages by a transverse beam placed on two posts , which is deaf and dumb in the midst of the clamorous city , dimly lighted at mid-day , and is , so to speak , incapable of emotions between two rows of lofty houses centuries old , which hold their peace like ancients as they are . 
There was a touch of stagnant oblivion in that street . 
Jean Valjean drew his breath once more there . 
How could he be found there ? 
His first care was to place the inseparable beside him . 
He slept well . 
Night brings wisdom ; we may add , night soothes . 
On the following morning he awoke in a mood that was almost gay . 
He thought the dining-room charming , though it was hideous , furnished with an old round table , a long sideboard surmounted by a slanting mirror , a dilapidated arm-chair , and several plain chairs which were encumbered with Toussaint 's packages . 
In one of these packages Jean Valjean 's uniform of a National Guard was visible through a rent . 
As for Cosette , she had had Toussaint take some broth to her room , and did not make her appearance until evening . 
About five o'clock , Toussaint , who was going and coming and busying herself with the tiny establishment , set on the table a cold chicken , which Cosette , out of deference to her father , consented to glance at . 
That done , Cosette , under the pretext of an obstinate sick headache , had bade Jean Valjean good night and had shut herself up in her chamber . 
Jean Valjean had eaten a wing of the chicken with a good appetite , and with his elbows on the table , having gradually recovered his serenity , had regained possession of his sense of security . 
While he was discussing this modest dinner , he had , twice or thrice , noticed in a confused way , Toussaint 's stammering words as she said to him : `` Monsieur , there is something going on , they are fighting in Paris . '' 
But absorbed in a throng of inward calculations , he had paid no heed to it . 
To tell the truth , he had not heard her . 
He rose and began to pace from the door to the window and from the window to the door , growing ever more serene . 
With this calm , Cosette , his sole anxiety , recurred to his thoughts . 
Not that he was troubled by this headache , a little nervous crisis , a young girl 's fit of sulks , the cloud of a moment , there would be nothing left of it in a day or two ; but he meditated on the future , and , as was his habit , he thought of it with pleasure . 
After all , he saw no obstacle to their happy life resuming its course . 
At certain hours , everything seems impossible , at others everything appears easy ; Jean Valjean was in the midst of one of these good hours . 
They generally succeed the bad ones , as day follows night , by virtue of that law of succession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation of nature , and which superficial minds call antithesis . 
In this peaceful street where he had taken refuge , Jean Valjean got rid of all that had been troubling him for some time past . 
This very fact , that he had seen many shadows , made him begin to perceive a little azure . 
To have quitted the Rue Plumet without complications or incidents was one good step already accomplished . 
Perhaps it would be wise to go abroad , if only for a few months , and to set out for London . 
Well , they would go . 
What difference did it make to him whether he was in France or in England , provided he had Cosette beside him ? 
Cosette was his nation . 
Cosette sufficed for his happiness ; the idea that he , perhaps , did not suffice for Cosette 's happiness , that idea which had formerly been the cause of his fever and sleeplessness , did not even present itself to his mind . 
He was in a state of collapse from all his past sufferings , and he was fully entered on optimism . 
Cosette was by his side , she seemed to be his ; an optical illusion which every one has experienced . 
He arranged in his own mind , with all sorts of felicitous devices , his departure for England with Cosette , and he beheld his felicity reconstituted wherever he pleased , in the perspective of his revery . 
As he paced to and fro with long strides , his glance suddenly encountered something strange . 
In the inclined mirror facing him which surmounted the sideboard , he saw the four lines which follow : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Jean Valjean halted , perfectly haggard . 
Cosette on her arrival had placed her blotting-book on the sideboard in front of the mirror , and , utterly absorbed in her agony of grief , had forgotten it and left it there , without even observing that she had left it wide open , and open at precisely the page on which she had laid to dry the four lines which she had penned , and which she had given in charge of the young workman in the Rue Plumet . 
