Ask your way from this paper . '' 
The children set out , the elder leading the younger , and holding in his hand the paper which was to guide them . 
It was cold , and his benumbed little fingers could not close very firmly , and they did not keep a very good hold on the paper . 
At the corner of the Rue Clocheperce , a gust of wind tore it from him , and as night was falling , the child was not able to find it again . 
They began to wander aimlessly through the streets . 
IN WHICH LITTLE GAVROCHE EXTRACTS PROFIT FROM NAPOLEON THE GREAT Spring in Paris is often traversed by harsh and piercing breezes which do not precisely chill but freeze one ; these north winds which sadden the most beautiful days produce exactly the effect of those puffs of cold air which enter a warm room through the cracks of a badly fitting door or window . 
It seems as though the gloomy door of winter had remained ajar , and as though the wind were pouring through it . 
In the spring of 1832 , the epoch when the first great epidemic of this century broke out in Europe , these north gales were more harsh and piercing than ever . 
It was a door even more glacial than that of winter which was ajar . 
It was the door of the sepulchre . 
In these winds one felt the breath of the cholera . 
From a meteorological point of view , these cold winds possessed this peculiarity , that they did not preclude a strong electric tension . 
Frequent storms , accompanied by thunder and lightning , burst forth at this epoch . 
One evening , when these gales were blowing rudely , to such a degree that January seemed to have returned and that the bourgeois had resumed their cloaks , Little Gavroche , who was always shivering gayly under his rags , was standing as though in ecstasy before a wig-maker 's shop in the vicinity of the Orme-Saint-Gervais . 
He was adorned with a woman 's woollen shawl , picked up no one knows where , and which he had converted into a neck comforter . 
Little Gavroche appeared to be engaged in intent admiration of a wax bride , in a low-necked dress , and crowned with orange-flowers , who was revolving in the window , and displaying her smile to passers-by , between two argand lamps ; but in reality , he was taking an observation of the shop , in order to discover whether he could not `` prig '' from the shop-front a cake of soap , which he would then proceed to sell for a sou to a `` hair-dresser '' in the suburbs . 
He had often managed to breakfast off of such a roll . 
He called his species of work , for which he possessed special aptitude , `` shaving barbers . '' 
While contemplating the bride , and eyeing the cake of soap , he muttered between his teeth : `` Tuesday . 
It was not Tuesday . 
Was it Tuesday ? 
Perhaps it was Tuesday . 
Yes , it was Tuesday . '' 
No one has ever discovered to what this monologue referred . 
Yes , perchance , this monologue had some connection with the last occasion on which he had dined , three days before , for it was now Friday . 
The barber in his shop , which was warmed by a good stove , was shaving a customer and casting a glance from time to time at the enemy , that freezing and impudent street urchin both of whose hands were in his pockets , but whose mind was evidently unsheathed . 
While Gavroche was scrutinizing the shop-window and the cakes of windsor soap , two children of unequal stature , very neatly dressed , and still smaller than himself , one apparently about seven years of age , the other five , timidly turned the handle and entered the shop , with a request for something or other , alms possibly , in a plaintive murmur which resembled a groan rather than a prayer . 
They both spoke at once , and their words were unintelligible because sobs broke the voice of the younger , and the teeth of the elder were chattering with cold . 
The barber wheeled round with a furious look , and without abandoning his razor , thrust back the elder with his left hand and the younger with his knee , and slammed his door , saying : `` The idea of coming in and freezing everybody for nothing ! '' 
The two children resumed their march in tears . 
In the meantime , a cloud had risen ; it had begun to rain . 
Little Gavroche ran after them and accosted them : -- `` What 's the matter with you , brats ? '' 
`` We do n't know where we are to sleep , '' replied the elder . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` A great matter , truly . 
The idea of bawling about that . 
They must be greenies ! '' 
And adopting , in addition to his superiority , which was rather bantering , an accent of tender authority and gentle patronage : -- `` Come along with me , young ` uns ! '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said the elder . 
And the two children followed him as they would have followed an archbishop . 
They had stopped crying . 
Gavroche led them up the Rue Saint-Antoine in the direction of the Bastille . 
As Gavroche walked along , he cast an indignant backward glance at the barber 's shop . 
`` That fellow has no heart , the whiting , '' -LSB- 35 -RSB- he muttered . 
`` He 's an Englishman . '' 
-LSB- 35 -RSB- Merlan : a sobriquet given to hairdressers because they are white with powder . 
A woman who caught sight of these three marching in a file , with Gavroche at their head , burst into noisy laughter . 
This laugh was wanting in respect towards the group . 
`` Good day , Mamselle Omnibus , '' said Gavroche to her . 
An instant later , the wig-maker occurred to his mind once more , and he added : -- `` I am making a mistake in the beast ; he 's not a whiting , he 's a serpent . 
Barber , I 'll go and fetch a locksmith , and I 'll have a bell hung to your tail . '' 
This wig-maker had rendered him aggressive . 
As he strode over a gutter , he apostrophized a bearded portress who was worthy to meet Faust on the Brocken , and who had a broom in her hand . 
`` Madam , '' said he , `` so you are going out with your horse ? '' 
And thereupon , he spattered the polished boots of a pedestrian . 
`` You scamp ! '' 
shouted the furious pedestrian . 
Gavroche elevated his nose above his shawl . 
`` Is Monsieur complaining ? '' 
`` Of you ! '' 
ejaculated the man . 
`` The office is closed , '' said Gavroche , `` I do not receive any more complaints . '' 
In the meanwhile , as he went on up the street , he perceived a beggar-girl , thirteen or fourteen years old , and clad in so short a gown that her knees were visible , lying thoroughly chilled under a porte-cochere . 
The little girl was getting to be too old for such a thing . 
Growth does play these tricks . 
The petticoat becomes short at the moment when nudity becomes indecent . 
`` Poor girl ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` She has n't even trousers . 
Hold on , take this . '' 
And unwinding all the comfortable woollen which he had around his neck , he flung it on the thin and purple shoulders of the beggar-girl , where the scarf became a shawl once more . 
The child stared at him in astonishment , and received the shawl in silence . 
When a certain stage of distress has been reached in his misery , the poor man no longer groans over evil , no longer returns thanks for good . 
That done : `` Brrr ! '' 
said Gavroche , who was shivering more than Saint Martin , for the latter retained one-half of his cloak . 
At this brrr ! 
the downpour of rain , redoubled in its spite , became furious . 
The wicked skies punish good deeds . 
`` Ah , come now ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche , `` what 's the meaning of this ? 
It 's re-raining ! 
Good Heavens , if it goes on like this , I shall stop my subscription . '' 
And he set out on the march once more . 
`` It 's all right , '' he resumed , casting a glance at the beggar-girl , as she coiled up under the shawl , `` she 's got a famous peel . '' 
And looking up at the clouds he exclaimed : -- `` Caught ! '' 
The two children followed close on his heels . 
As they were passing one of these heavy grated lattices , which indicate a baker 's shop , for bread is put behind bars like gold , Gavroche turned round : -- `` Ah , by the way , brats , have we dined ? '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the elder , `` we have had nothing to eat since this morning . '' 
`` So you have neither father nor mother ? '' 
resumed Gavroche majestically . 
`` Excuse us , sir , we have a papa and a mamma , but we do n't know where they are . '' 
`` Sometimes that 's better than knowing where they are , '' said Gavroche , who was a thinker . 
`` We have been wandering about these two hours , '' continued the elder , `` we have hunted for things at the corners of the streets , but we have found nothing . '' 
`` I know , '' ejaculated Gavroche , `` it 's the dogs who eat everything . '' 
He went on , after a pause : -- `` Ah ! 
we have lost our authors . 
We do n't know what we have done with them . 
This should not be , gamins . 
It 's stupid to let old people stray off like that . 
