At times , amid his convict toil , he paused . 
He fell to thinking . 
His reason , at one and the same time riper and more troubled than of yore , rose in revolt . 
Everything which had happened to him seemed to him absurd ; everything that surrounded him seemed to him impossible . 
He said to himself , `` It is a dream . '' 
He gazed at the galley-sergeant standing a few paces from him ; the galley-sergeant seemed a phantom to him . 
All of a sudden the phantom dealt him a blow with his cudgel . 
Visible nature hardly existed for him . 
It would almost be true to say that there existed for Jean Valjean neither sun , nor fine summer days , nor radiant sky , nor fresh April dawns . 
I know not what vent-hole daylight habitually illumined his soul . 
To sum up , in conclusion , that which can be summed up and translated into positive results in all that we have just pointed out , we will confine ourselves to the statement that , in the course of nineteen years , Jean Valjean , the inoffensive tree-pruner of Faverolles , the formidable convict of Toulon , had become capable , thanks to the manner in which the galleys had moulded him , of two sorts of evil action : firstly , of evil action which was rapid , unpremeditated , dashing , entirely instinctive , in the nature of reprisals for the evil which he had undergone ; secondly , of evil action which was serious , grave , consciously argued out and premeditated , with the false ideas which such a misfortune can furnish . 
His deliberate deeds passed through three successive phases , which natures of a certain stamp can alone traverse , -- reasoning , will , perseverance . 
He had for moving causes his habitual wrath , bitterness of soul , a profound sense of indignities suffered , the reaction even against the good , the innocent , and the just , if there are any such . 
The point of departure , like the point of arrival , for all his thoughts , was hatred of human law ; that hatred which , if it be not arrested in its development by some providential incident , becomes , within a given time , the hatred of society , then the hatred of the human race , then the hatred of creation , and which manifests itself by a vague , incessant , and brutal desire to do harm to some living being , no matter whom . 
It will be perceived that it was not without reason that Jean Valjean 's passport described him as a very dangerous man . 
From year to year this soul had dried away slowly , but with fatal sureness . 
When the heart is dry , the eye is dry . 
On his departure from the galleys it had been nineteen years since he had shed a tear . 
BILLOWS AND SHADOWS A man overboard ! 
What matters it ? 
The vessel does not halt . 
The wind blows . 
That sombre ship has a path which it is forced to pursue . 
It passes on . 
The man disappears , then reappears ; he plunges , he rises again to the surface ; he calls , he stretches out his arms ; he is not heard . 
The vessel , trembling under the hurricane , is wholly absorbed in its own workings ; the passengers and sailors do not even see the drowning man ; his miserable head is but a speck amid the immensity of the waves . 
He gives vent to desperate cries from out of the depths . 
What a spectre is that retreating sail ! 
He gazes and gazes at it frantically . 
It retreats , it grows dim , it diminishes in size . 
He was there but just now , he was one of the crew , he went and came along the deck with the rest , he had his part of breath and of sunlight , he was a living man . 
Now , what has taken place ? 
He has slipped , he has fallen ; all is at an end . 
He is in the tremendous sea . 
Under foot he has nothing but what flees and crumbles . 
The billows , torn and lashed by the wind , encompass him hideously ; the tossings of the abyss bear him away ; all the tongues of water dash over his head ; a populace of waves spits upon him ; confused openings half devour him ; every time that he sinks , he catches glimpses of precipices filled with night ; frightful and unknown vegetations seize him , knot about his feet , draw him to them ; he is conscious that he is becoming an abyss , that he forms part of the foam ; the waves toss him from one to another ; he drinks in the bitterness ; the cowardly ocean attacks him furiously , to drown him ; the enormity plays with his agony . 
It seems as though all that water were hate . 
Nevertheless , he struggles . 
He tries to defend himself ; he tries to sustain himself ; he makes an effort ; he swims . 
He , his petty strength all exhausted instantly , combats the inexhaustible . 
Where , then , is the ship ? 
Yonder . 
Barely visible in the pale shadows of the horizon . 
The wind blows in gusts ; all the foam overwhelms him . 
He raises his eyes and beholds only the lividness of the clouds . 
He witnesses , amid his death-pangs , the immense madness of the sea . 
He is tortured by this madness ; he hears noises strange to man , which seem to come from beyond the limits of the earth , and from one knows not what frightful region beyond . 
There are birds in the clouds , just as there are angels above human distresses ; but what can they do for him ? 
They sing and fly and float , and he , he rattles in the death agony . 
He feels himself buried in those two infinities , the ocean and the sky , at one and the same time : the one is a tomb ; the other is a shroud . 
Night descends ; he has been swimming for hours ; his strength is exhausted ; that ship , that distant thing in which there were men , has vanished ; he is alone in the formidable twilight gulf ; he sinks , he stiffens himself , he twists himself ; he feels under him the monstrous billows of the invisible ; he shouts . 
There are no more men . 
Where is God ? 
He shouts . 
Help ! 
Help ! 
He still shouts on . 
Nothing on the horizon ; nothing in heaven . 
He implores the expanse , the waves , the seaweed , the reef ; they are deaf . 
He beseeches the tempest ; the imperturbable tempest obeys only the infinite . 
Around him darkness , fog , solitude , the stormy and nonsentient tumult , the undefined curling of those wild waters . 
In him horror and fatigue . 
Beneath him the depths . 
Not a point of support . 
He thinks of the gloomy adventures of the corpse in the limitless shadow . 
The bottomless cold paralyzes him . 
His hands contract convulsively ; they close , and grasp nothingness . 
Winds , clouds , whirlwinds , gusts , useless stars ! 
What is to be done ? 
The desperate man gives up ; he is weary , he chooses the alternative of death ; he resists not ; he lets himself go ; he abandons his grip ; and then he tosses forevermore in the lugubrious dreary depths of engulfment . 
Oh , implacable march of human societies ! 
Oh , losses of men and of souls on the way ! 
Ocean into which falls all that the law lets slip ! 
Disastrous absence of help ! 
Oh , moral death ! 
The sea is the inexorable social night into which the penal laws fling their condemned . 
The sea is the immensity of wretchedness . 
The soul , going down stream in this gulf , may become a corpse . 
Who shall resuscitate it ? 
NEW TROUBLES When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys , when Jean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words , Thou art free ! 
the moment seemed improbable and unprecedented ; a ray of vivid light , a ray of the true light of the living , suddenly penetrated within him . 
But it was not long before this ray paled . 
Jean Valjean had been dazzled by the idea of liberty . 
He had believed in a new life . 
He very speedily perceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow passport is provided . 
And this was encompassed with much bitterness . 
He had calculated that his earnings , during his sojourn in the galleys , ought to amount to a hundred and seventy-one francs . 
It is but just to add that he had forgotten to include in his calculations the forced repose of Sundays and festival days during nineteen years , which entailed a diminution of about eighty francs . 
At all events , his hoard had been reduced by various local levies to the sum of one hundred and nine francs fifteen sous , which had been counted out to him on his departure . 
He had understood nothing of this , and had thought himself wronged . 
Let us say the word -- robbed . 
On the day following his liberation , he saw , at Grasse , in front of an orange-flower distillery , some men engaged in unloading bales . 
He offered his services . 
Business was pressing ; they were accepted . 
He set to work . 
He was intelligent , robust , adroit ; he did his best ; the master seemed pleased . 
While he was at work , a gendarme passed , observed him , and demanded his papers . 
It was necessary to show him the yellow passport . 
That done , Jean Valjean resumed his labor . 
A little while before he had questioned one of the workmen as to the amount which they earned each day at this occupation ; he had been told thirty sous . 
