He remained in this state during the rest of the day , a whirlwind within , a profound tranquillity without . 
He took no `` preservative measures , '' as they may be called . 
Everything was still confused , and jostling together in his brain . 
His trouble was so great that he could not perceive the form of a single idea distinctly , and he could have told nothing about himself , except that he had received a great blow . 
He repaired to Fantine 's bed of suffering , as usual , and prolonged his visit , through a kindly instinct , telling himself that he must behave thus , and recommend her well to the sisters , in case he should be obliged to be absent himself . 
He had a vague feeling that he might be obliged to go to Arras ; and without having the least in the world made up his mind to this trip , he said to himself that being , as he was , beyond the shadow of any suspicion , there could be nothing out of the way in being a witness to what was to take place , and he engaged the tilbury from Scaufflaire in order to be prepared in any event . 
He dined with a good deal of appetite . 
On returning to his room , he communed with himself . 
He examined the situation , and found it unprecedented ; so unprecedented that in the midst of his revery he rose from his chair , moved by some inexplicable impulse of anxiety , and bolted his door . 
He feared lest something more should enter . 
He was barricading himself against possibilities . 
A moment later he extinguished his light ; it embarrassed him . 
lt seemed to him as though he might be seen . 
By whom ? 
Alas ! 
That on which he desired to close the door had already entered ; that which he desired to blind was staring him in the face , -- his conscience . 
His conscience ; that is to say , God . 
Nevertheless , he deluded himself at first ; he had a feeling of security and of solitude ; the bolt once drawn , he thought himself impregnable ; the candle extinguished , he felt himself invisible . 
Then he took possession of himself : he set his elbows on the table , leaned his head on his hand , and began to meditate in the dark . 
`` Where do I stand ? 
Am not I dreaming ? 
What have I heard ? 
Is it really true that I have seen that Javert , and that he spoke to me in that manner ? 
Who can that Champmathieu be ? 
So he resembles me ! 
Is it possible ? 
When I reflect that yesterday I was so tranquil , and so far from suspecting anything ! 
What was I doing yesterday at this hour ? 
What is there in this incident ? 
What will the end be ? 
What is to be done ? '' 
This was the torment in which he found himself . 
His brain had lost its power of retaining ideas ; they passed like waves , and he clutched his brow in both hands to arrest them . 
Nothing but anguish extricated itself from this tumult which overwhelmed his will and his reason , and from which he sought to draw proof and resolution . 
His head was burning . 
He went to the window and threw it wide open . 
There were no stars in the sky . 
He returned and seated himself at the table . 
The first hour passed in this manner . 
Gradually , however , vague outlines began to take form and to fix themselves in his meditation , and he was able to catch a glimpse with precision of the reality , -- not the whole situation , but some of the details . 
He began by recognizing the fact that , critical and extraordinary as was this situation , he was completely master of it . 
This only caused an increase of his stupor . 
Independently of the severe and religious aim which he had assigned to his actions , all that he had made up to that day had been nothing but a hole in which to bury his name . 
That which he had always feared most of all in his hours of self-communion , during his sleepless nights , was to ever hear that name pronounced ; he had said to himself , that that would be the end of all things for him ; that on the day when that name made its reappearance it would cause his new life to vanish from about him , and -- who knows ? 
-- perhaps even his new soul within him , also . 
He shuddered at the very thought that this was possible . 
Assuredly , if any one had said to him at such moments that the hour would come when that name would ring in his ears , when the hideous words , Jean Valjean , would suddenly emerge from the darkness and rise in front of him , when that formidable light , capable of dissipating the mystery in which he had enveloped himself , would suddenly blaze forth above his head , and that that name would not menace him , that that light would but produce an obscurity more dense , that this rent veil would but increase the mystery , that this earthquake would solidify his edifice , that this prodigious incident would have no other result , so far as he was concerned , if so it seemed good to him , than that of rendering his existence at once clearer and more impenetrable , and that , out of his confrontation with the phantom of Jean Valjean , the good and worthy citizen Monsieur Madeleine would emerge more honored , more peaceful , and more respected than ever -- if any one had told him that , he would have tossed his head and regarded the words as those of a madman . 
Well , all this was precisely what had just come to pass ; all that accumulation of impossibilities was a fact , and God had permitted these wild fancies to become real things ! 
His revery continued to grow clearer . 
He came more and more to an understanding of his position . 
It seemed to him that he had but just waked up from some inexplicable dream , and that he found himself slipping down a declivity in the middle of the night , erect , shivering , holding back all in vain , on the very brink of the abyss . 
He distinctly perceived in the darkness a stranger , a man unknown to him , whom destiny had mistaken for him , and whom she was thrusting into the gulf in his stead ; in order that the gulf might close once more , it was necessary that some one , himself or that other man , should fall into it : he had only let things take their course . 
The light became complete , and he acknowledged this to himself : That his place was empty in the galleys ; that do what he would , it was still awaiting him ; that the theft from little Gervais had led him back to it ; that this vacant place would await him , and draw him on until he filled it ; that this was inevitable and fatal ; and then he said to himself , `` that , at this moment , be had a substitute ; that it appeared that a certain Champmathieu had that ill luck , and that , as regards himself , being present in the galleys in the person of that Champmathieu , present in society under the name of M. Madeleine , he had nothing more to fear , provided that he did not prevent men from sealing over the head of that Champmathieu this stone of infamy which , like the stone of the sepulchre , falls once , never to rise again . '' 
All this was so strange and so violent , that there suddenly took place in him that indescribable movement , which no man feels more than two or three times in the course of his life , a sort of convulsion of the conscience which stirs up all that there is doubtful in the heart , which is composed of irony , of joy , and of despair , and which may be called an outburst of inward laughter . 
He hastily relighted his candle . 
`` Well , what then ? '' 
he said to himself ; `` what am I afraid of ? 
What is there in all that for me to think about ? 
I am safe ; all is over . 
I had but one partly open door through which my past might invade my life , and behold that door is walled up forever ! 
That Javert , who has been annoying me so long ; that terrible instinct which seemed to have divined me , which had divined me -- good God ! 
and which followed me everywhere ; that frightful hunting-dog , always making a point at me , is thrown off the scent , engaged elsewhere , absolutely turned from the trail : henceforth he is satisfied ; he will leave me in peace ; he has his Jean Valjean . 
Who knows ? 
it is even probable that he will wish to leave town ! 
And all this has been brought about without any aid from me , and I count for nothing in it ! 
Ah ! 
but where is the misfortune in this ? 
Upon my honor , people would think , to see me , that some catastrophe had happened to me ! 
After all , if it does bring harm to some one , that is not my fault in the least : it is Providence which has done it all ; it is because it wishes it so to be , evidently . 
Have I the right to disarrange what it has arranged ? 
What do I ask now ? 
Why should I meddle ? 
It does not concern me ; what ! 
I am not satisfied : but what more do I want ? 
The goal to which I have aspired for so many years , the dream of my nights , the object of my prayers to Heaven , -- security , -- I have now attained ; it is God who wills it ; I can do nothing against the will of God , and why does God will it ? 
In order that I may continue what I have begun , that I may do good , that I may one day be a grand and encouraging example , that it may be said at last , that a little happiness has been attached to the penance which I have undergone , and to that virtue to which I have returned . 
Really , I do not understand why I was afraid , a little while ago , to enter the house of that good cure , and to ask his advice ; this is evidently what he would have said to me : It is settled ; let things take their course ; let the good God do as he likes ! '' 
Thus did he address himself in the depths of his own conscience , bending over what may be called his own abyss ; he rose from his chair , and began to pace the room : `` Come , '' said he , `` let us think no more about it ; my resolve is taken ! '' 
but he felt no joy . 
Quite the reverse . 
One can no more prevent thought from recurring to an idea than one can the sea from returning to the shore : the sailor calls it the tide ; the guilty man calls it remorse ; God upheaves the soul as he does the ocean . 
After the expiration of a few moments , do what he would , he resumed the gloomy dialogue in which it was he who spoke and he who listened , saying that which he would have preferred to ignore , and listened to that which he would have preferred not to hear , yielding to that mysterious power which said to him : `` Think ! '' 
as it said to another condemned man , two thousand years ago , `` March on ! '' 
Before proceeding further , and in order to make ourselves fully understood , let us insist upon one necessary observation . 
It is certain that people do talk to themselves ; there is no living being who has not done it . 
It may even be said that the word is never a more magnificent mystery than when it goes from thought to conscience within a man , and when it returns from conscience to thought ; it is in this sense only that the words so often employed in this chapter , he said , he exclaimed , must be understood ; one speaks to one 's self , talks to one 's self , exclaims to one 's self without breaking the external silence ; there is a great tumult ; everything about us talks except the mouth . 
The realities of the soul are none the less realities because they are not visible and palpable . 
So he asked himself where he stood . 
He interrogated himself upon that `` settled resolve . '' 
He confessed to himself that all that he had just arranged in his mind was monstrous , that `` to let things take their course , to let the good God do as he liked , '' was simply horrible ; to allow this error of fate and of men to be carried out , not to hinder it , to lend himself to it through his silence , to do nothing , in short , was to do everything ! 
that this was hypocritical baseness in the last degree ! 
that it was a base , cowardly , sneaking , abject , hideous crime ! 
For the first time in eight years , the wretched man had just tasted the bitter savor of an evil thought and of an evil action . 
He spit it out with disgust . 
He continued to question himself . 
He asked himself severely what he had meant by this , `` My object is attained ! '' 
He declared to himself that his life really had an object ; but what object ? 
To conceal his name ? 
To deceive the police ? 
Was it for so petty a thing that he had done all that he had done ? 
