Let all the clouds fall upon her , and all the ocean sweep over her ! 
What matters it to her ? 
She is a sponge that is soaked . 
At least , she believes it to be so ; but it is an error to imagine that fate can be exhausted , and that one has reached the bottom of anything whatever . 
Alas ! 
What are all these fates , driven on pell-mell ? 
Whither are they going ? 
Why are they thus ? 
He who knows that sees the whole of the shadow . 
He is alone . 
His name is God . 
M. BAMATABOIS 'S INACTIVITY There is in all small towns , and there was at M. sur M. in particular , a class of young men who nibble away an income of fifteen hundred francs with the same air with which their prototypes devour two hundred thousand francs a year in Paris . 
These are beings of the great neuter species : impotent men , parasites , cyphers , who have a little land , a little folly , a little wit ; who would be rustics in a drawing-room , and who think themselves gentlemen in the dram-shop ; who say , `` My fields , my peasants , my woods '' ; who hiss actresses at the theatre to prove that they are persons of taste ; quarrel with the officers of the garrison to prove that they are men of war ; hunt , smoke , yawn , drink , smell of tobacco , play billiards , stare at travellers as they descend from the diligence , live at the cafe , dine at the inn , have a dog which eats the bones under the table , and a mistress who eats the dishes on the table ; who stick at a sou , exaggerate the fashions , admire tragedy , despise women , wear out their old boots , copy London through Paris , and Paris through the medium of Pont-A-Mousson , grow old as dullards , never work , serve no use , and do no great harm . 
M. Felix Tholomyes , had he remained in his own province and never beheld Paris , would have been one of these men . 
If they were richer , one would say , `` They are dandies ; '' if they were poorer , one would say , `` They are idlers . '' 
They are simply men without employment . 
Among these unemployed there are bores , the bored , dreamers , and some knaves . 
At that period a dandy was composed of a tall collar , a big cravat , a watch with trinkets , three vests of different colors , worn one on top of the other -- the red and blue inside ; of a short-waisted olive coat , with a codfish tail , a double row of silver buttons set close to each other and running up to the shoulder ; and a pair of trousers of a lighter shade of olive , ornamented on the two seams with an indefinite , but always uneven , number of lines , varying from one to eleven -- a limit which was never exceeded . 
Add to this , high shoes with little irons on the heels , a tall hat with a narrow brim , hair worn in a tuft , an enormous cane , and conversation set off by puns of Potier . 
Over all , spurs and a mustache . 
At that epoch mustaches indicated the bourgeois , and spurs the pedestrian . 
The provincial dandy wore the longest of spurs and the fiercest of mustaches . 
It was the period of the conflict of the republics of South America with the King of Spain , of Bolivar against Morillo . 
Narrow-brimmed hats were royalist , and were called morillos ; liberals wore hats with wide brims , which were called bolivars . 
Eight or ten months , then , after that which is related in the preceding pages , towards the first of January , 1823 , on a snowy evening , one of these dandies , one of these unemployed , a `` right thinker , '' for he wore a morillo , and was , moreover , warmly enveloped in one of those large cloaks which completed the fashionable costume in cold weather , was amusing himself by tormenting a creature who was prowling about in a ball-dress , with neck uncovered and flowers in her hair , in front of the officers ' cafe . 
This dandy was smoking , for he was decidedly fashionable . 
Each time that the woman passed in front of him , he bestowed on her , together with a puff from his cigar , some apostrophe which he considered witty and mirthful , such as , `` How ugly you are ! 
-- Will you get out of my sight ? 
-- You have no teeth ! '' 
etc. , etc. . 
This gentleman was known as M. Bamatabois . 
The woman , a melancholy , decorated spectre which went and came through the snow , made him no reply , did not even glance at him , and nevertheless continued her promenade in silence , and with a sombre regularity , which brought her every five minutes within reach of this sarcasm , like the condemned soldier who returns under the rods . 
The small effect which he produced no doubt piqued the lounger ; and taking advantage of a moment when her back was turned , he crept up behind her with the gait of a wolf , and stifling his laugh , bent down , picked up a handful of snow from the pavement , and thrust it abruptly into her back , between her bare shoulders . 
The woman uttered a roar , whirled round , gave a leap like a panther , and hurled herself upon the man , burying her nails in his face , with the most frightful words which could fall from the guard-room into the gutter . 
These insults , poured forth in a voice roughened by brandy , did , indeed , proceed in hideous wise from a mouth which lacked its two front teeth . 
It was Fantine . 
At the noise thus produced , the officers ran out in throngs from the cafe , passers-by collected , and a large and merry circle , hooting and applauding , was formed around this whirlwind composed of two beings , whom there was some difficulty in recognizing as a man and a woman : the man struggling , his hat on the ground ; the woman striking out with feet and fists , bareheaded , howling , minus hair and teeth , livid with wrath , horrible . 
Suddenly a man of lofty stature emerged vivaciously from the crowd , seized the woman by her satin bodice , which was covered with mud , and said to her , `` Follow me ! '' 
The woman raised her head ; her furious voice suddenly died away . 
Her eyes were glassy ; she turned pale instead of livid , and she trembled with a quiver of terror . 
She had recognized Javert . 
The dandy took advantage of the incident to make his escape . 
THE SOLUTION OF SOME QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE MUNICIPAL POLICE Javert thrust aside the spectators , broke the circle , and set out with long strides towards the police station , which is situated at the extremity of the square , dragging the wretched woman after him . 
She yielded mechanically . 
Neither he nor she uttered a word . 
The cloud of spectators followed , jesting , in a paroxysm of delight . 
Supreme misery an occasion for obscenity . 
On arriving at the police station , which was a low room , warmed by a stove , with a glazed and grated door opening on the street , and guarded by a detachment , Javert opened the door , entered with Fantine , and shut the door behind him , to the great disappointment of the curious , who raised themselves on tiptoe , and craned their necks in front of the thick glass of the station-house , in their effort to see . 
Curiosity is a sort of gluttony . 
To see is to devour . 
On entering , Fantine fell down in a corner , motionless and mute , crouching down like a terrified dog . 
The sergeant of the guard brought a lighted candle to the table . 
Javert seated himself , drew a sheet of stamped paper from his pocket , and began to write . 
This class of women is consigned by our laws entirely to the discretion of the police . 
The latter do what they please , punish them , as seems good to them , and confiscate at their will those two sorry things which they entitle their industry and their liberty . 
Javert was impassive ; his grave face betrayed no emotion whatever . 
Nevertheless , he was seriously and deeply preoccupied . 
It was one of those moments when he was exercising without control , but subject to all the scruples of a severe conscience , his redoubtable discretionary power . 
At that moment he was conscious that his police agent 's stool was a tribunal . 
He was entering judgment . 
He judged and condemned . 
He summoned all the ideas which could possibly exist in his mind , around the great thing which he was doing . 
The more he examined the deed of this woman , the more shocked he felt . 
It was evident that he had just witnessed the commission of a crime . 
He had just beheld , yonder , in the street , society , in the person of a freeholder and an elector , insulted and attacked by a creature who was outside all pales . 
A prostitute had made an attempt on the life of a citizen . 
He had seen that , he , Javert . 
He wrote in silence . 
When he had finished he signed the paper , folded it , and said to the sergeant of the guard , as he handed it to him , `` Take three men and conduct this creature to jail . '' 
Then , turning to Fantine , `` You are to have six months of it . '' 
The unhappy woman shuddered . 
`` Six months ! 
six months of prison ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
`` Six months in which to earn seven sous a day ! 
But what will become of Cosette ? 
My daughter ! 
my daughter ! 
But I still owe the Thenardiers over a hundred francs ; do you know that , Monsieur Inspector ? '' 
She dragged herself across the damp floor , among the muddy boots of all those men , without rising , with clasped hands , and taking great strides on her knees . 
`` Monsieur Javert , '' said she , `` I beseech your mercy . 
I assure you that I was not in the wrong . 
If you had seen the beginning , you would have seen . 
I swear to you by the good God that I was not to blame ! 
That gentleman , the bourgeois , whom I do not know , put snow in my back . 
Has any one the right to put snow down our backs when we are walking along peaceably , and doing no harm to any one ? 
I am rather ill , as you see . 
And then , he had been saying impertinent things to me for a long time : ` You are ugly ! 
you have no teeth ! ' 
I know well that I have no longer those teeth . 
I did nothing ; I said to myself , ` The gentleman is amusing himself . ' 
I was honest with him ; I did not speak to him . 
It was at that moment that he put the snow down my back . 
Monsieur Javert , good Monsieur Inspector ! 
is there not some person here who saw it and can tell you that this is quite true ? 
Perhaps I did wrong to get angry . 
You know that one is not master of one 's self at the first moment . 
One gives way to vivacity ; and then , when some one puts something cold down your back just when you are not expecting it ! 
I did wrong to spoil that gentleman 's hat . 
Why did he go away ? 
