Now , come with me . 
We will go and get the child . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` so there is a child ? '' 
He added not a word further , and followed Jean Valjean as a dog follows his master . 
Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette , who had grown rosy again before the flame of a good fire , was lying asleep in the old gardener 's bed . 
Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat once more ; his hat , which he had flung over the wall , had been found and picked up . 
While Jean Valjean was putting on his coat , Fauchelevent had removed the bell and kneecap , which now hung on a nail beside a vintage basket that adorned the wall . 
The two men were warming themselves with their elbows resting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese , black bread , a bottle of wine , and two glasses , and the old man was saying to Jean Valjean , as he laid his hand on the latter 's knee : `` Ah ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
You did not recognize me immediately ; you save people 's lives , and then you forget them ! 
That is bad ! 
But they remember you ! 
You are an ingrate ! '' 
WHICH EXPLAINS HOW JAVERT GOT ON THE SCENT The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side , so to speak , had come about in the simplest possible manner . 
When Jean Valjean , on the evening of the very day when Javert had arrested him beside Fantine 's death-bed , had escaped from the town jail of M. sur M. , the police had supposed that he had betaken himself to Paris . 
Paris is a maelstrom where everything is lost , and everything disappears in this belly of the world , as in the belly of the sea . 
No forest hides a man as does that crowd . 
Fugitives of every sort know this . 
They go to Paris as to an abyss ; there are gulfs which save . 
The police know it also , and it is in Paris that they seek what they have lost elsewhere . 
They sought the ex-mayor of M. sur M. Javert was summoned to Paris to throw light on their researches . 
Javert had , in fact , rendered powerful assistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean . 
Javert 's zeal and intelligence on that occasion had been remarked by M. Chabouillet , secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Angles . 
M. Chabouillet , who had , moreover , already been Javert 's patron , had the inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris . 
There Javert rendered himself useful in divers and , though the word may seem strange for such services , honorable manners . 
He no longer thought of Jean Valjean , -- the wolf of to-day causes these dogs who are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday , -- when , in December , 1823 , he read a newspaper , he who never read newspapers ; but Javert , a monarchical man , had a desire to know the particulars of the triumphal entry of the `` Prince Generalissimo '' into Bayonne . 
Just as he was finishing the article , which interested him ; a name , the name of Jean Valjean , attracted his attention at the bottom of a page . 
The paper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead , and published the fact in such formal terms that Javert did not doubt it . 
He confined himself to the remark , `` That 's a good entry . '' 
Then he threw aside the paper , and thought no more about it . 
Some time afterwards , it chanced that a police report was transmitted from the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police in Paris , concerning the abduction of a child , which had taken place , under peculiar circumstances , as it was said , in the commune of Montfermeil . 
A little girl of seven or eight years of age , the report said , who had been intrusted by her mother to an inn-keeper of that neighborhood , had been stolen by a stranger ; this child answered to the name of Cosette , and was the daughter of a girl named Fantine , who had died in the hospital , it was not known where or when . 
This report came under Javert 's eye and set him to thinking . 
The name of Fantine was well known to him . 
He remembered that Jean Valjean had made him , Javert , burst into laughter , by asking him for a respite of three days , for the purpose of going to fetch that creature 's child . 
He recalled the fact that Jean Valjean had been arrested in Paris at the very moment when he was stepping into the coach for Montfermeil . 
Some signs had made him suspect at the time that this was the second occasion of his entering that coach , and that he had already , on the previous day , made an excursion to the neighborhood of that village , for he had not been seen in the village itself . 
What had he been intending to do in that region of Montfermeil ? 
It could not even be surmised . 
Javert understood it now . 
Fantine 's daughter was there . 
Jean Valjean was going there in search of her . 
And now this child had been stolen by a stranger ! 
Who could that stranger be ? 
Could it be Jean Valjean ? 
But Jean Valjean was dead . 
Javert , without saying anything to anybody , took the coach from the Pewter Platter , Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette , and made a trip to Montfermeil . 
He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there ; he found a great deal of obscurity . 
For the first few days the Thenardiers had chattered in their rage . 
The disappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village . 
He immediately obtained numerous versions of the story , which ended in the abduction of a child . 
Hence the police report . 
But their first vexation having passed off , Thenardier , with his wonderful instinct , had very quickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up the prosecutor of the Crown , and that his complaints with regard to the abduction of Cosette would have as their first result to fix upon himself , and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand , the glittering eye of justice . 
The last thing that owls desire is to have a candle brought to them . 
And in the first place , how explain the fifteen hundred francs which he had received ? 
He turned squarely round , put a gag on his wife 's mouth , and feigned astonishment when the stolen child was mentioned to him . 
He understood nothing about it ; no doubt he had grumbled for awhile at having that dear little creature `` taken from him '' so hastily ; he should have liked to keep her two or three days longer , out of tenderness ; but her `` grandfather '' had come for her in the most natural way in the world . 
He added the `` grandfather , '' which produced a good effect . 
This was the story that Javert hit upon when he arrived at Montfermeil . 
The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish . 
Nevertheless , Javert dropped a few questions , like plummets , into Thenardier 's history . 
`` Who was that grandfather ? 
and what was his name ? '' 
Thenardier replied with simplicity : `` He is a wealthy farmer . 
I saw his passport . 
I think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert . '' 
Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name . 
Thereupon Javert returned to Paris . 
`` Jean Valjean is certainly dead , '' said he , `` and I am a ninny . '' 
He had again begun to forget this history , when , in the course of March , 1824 , he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the parish of Saint-Medard and who had been surnamed `` the mendicant who gives alms . '' 
This person , the story ran , was a man of means , whose name no one knew exactly , and who lived alone with a little girl of eight years , who knew nothing about herself , save that she had come from Montfermeil . 
Montfermeil ! 
that name was always coming up , and it made Javert prick up his ears . 
An old beggar police spy , an ex-beadle , to whom this person had given alms , added a few more details . 
This gentleman of property was very shy , -- never coming out except in the evening , speaking to no one , except , occasionally to the poor , and never allowing any one to approach him . 
He wore a horrible old yellow frock-coat , which was worth many millions , being all wadded with bank-bills . 
This piqued Javert 's curiosity in a decided manner . 
In order to get a close look at this fantastic gentleman without alarming him , he borrowed the beadle 's outfit for a day , and the place where the old spy was in the habit of crouching every evening , whining orisons through his nose , and playing the spy under cover of prayer . 
`` The suspected individual '' did indeed approach Javert thus disguised , and bestow alms on him . 
At that moment Javert raised his head , and the shock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal to the one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean . 
However , the darkness might have misled him ; Jean Valjean 's death was official ; Javert cherished very grave doubts ; and when in doubt , Javert , the man of scruples , never laid a finger on any one 's collar . 
He followed his man to the Gorbeau house , and got `` the old woman '' to talking , which was no difficult matter . 
The old woman confirmed the fact regarding the coat lined with millions , and narrated to him the episode of the thousand-franc bill . 
She had seen it ! 
She had handled it ! 
Javert hired a room ; that evening he installed himself in it . 
He came and listened at the mysterious lodger 's door , hoping to catch the sound of his voice , but Jean Valjean saw his candle through the key-hole , and foiled the spy by keeping silent . 
On the following day Jean Valjean decamped ; but the noise made by the fall of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman , who , hearing the rattling of coin , suspected that he might be intending to leave , and made haste to warn Javert . 
At night , when Jean Valjean came out , Javert was waiting for him behind the trees of the boulevard with two men . 
Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture , but he had not mentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize ; that was his secret , and he had kept it for three reasons : in the first place , because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert ; next , because , to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escape and was reputed dead , on a criminal whom justice had formerly classed forever as among malefactors of the most dangerous sort , was a magnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police would assuredly not leave to a new-comer like Javert , and he was afraid of being deprived of his convict ; and lastly , because Javert , being an artist , had a taste for the unforeseen . 
He hated those well-heralded successes which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloom brushed off . 
He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and to unveil them suddenly at the last . 
Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree , then from corner to corner of the street , and had not lost sight of him for a single instant ; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to be the most secure Javert 's eye had been on him . 
Why had not Javert arrested Jean Valjean ? 
Because he was still in doubt . 
It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely at its ease ; the free press embarrassed it ; several arbitrary arrests denounced by the newspapers , had echoed even as far as the Chambers , and had rendered the Prefecture timid . 
Interference with individual liberty was a grave matter . 
The police agents were afraid of making a mistake ; the prefect laid the blame on them ; a mistake meant dismissal . 
The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph , reproduced by twenty newspapers , would have caused in Paris : `` Yesterday , an aged grandfather , with white hair , a respectable and well-to-do gentleman , who was walking with his grandchild , aged eight , was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an escaped convict ! '' 
