His nature was so constructed ; once on the downward slope , it was almost impossible for him to put on the drag . 
Fanaticism for the sword took possession of him , and complicated in his mind his enthusiasm for the idea . 
He did not perceive that , along with genius , and pell-mell , he was admitting force , that is to say , that he was installing in two compartments of his idolatry , on the one hand that which is divine , on the other that which is brutal . 
In many respects , he had set about deceiving himself otherwise . 
He admitted everything . 
There is a way of encountering error while on one 's way to the truth . 
He had a violent sort of good faith which took everything in the lump . 
In the new path which he had entered on , in judging the mistakes of the old regime , as in measuring the glory of Napoleon , he neglected the attenuating circumstances . 
At all events , a tremendous step had been taken . 
Where he had formerly beheld the fall of the monarchy , he now saw the advent of France . 
His orientation had changed . 
What had been his East became the West . 
He had turned squarely round . 
All these revolutions were accomplished within him , without his family obtaining an inkling of the case . 
When , during this mysterious labor , he had entirely shed his old Bourbon and ultra skin , when he had cast off the aristocrat , the Jacobite and the Royalist , when he had become thoroughly a revolutionist , profoundly democratic and republican , he went to an engraver on the Quai des Orfevres and ordered a hundred cards bearing this name : Le Baron Marius Pontmercy . 
This was only the strictly logical consequence of the change which had taken place in him , a change in which everything gravitated round his father . 
Only , as he did not know any one and could not sow his cards with any porter , he put them in his pocket . 
By another natural consequence , in proportion as he drew nearer to his father , to the latter 's memory , and to the things for which the colonel had fought five and twenty years before , he receded from his grandfather . 
We have long ago said , that M. Gillenormand 's temper did not please him . 
There already existed between them all the dissonances of the grave young man and the frivolous old man . 
The gayety of Geronte shocks and exasperates the melancholy of Werther . 
So long as the same political opinions and the same ideas had been common to them both , Marius had met M. Gillenormand there as on a bridge . 
When the bridge fell , an abyss was formed . 
And then , over and above all , Marius experienced unutterable impulses to revolt , when he reflected that it was M. Gillenormand who had , from stupid motives , torn him ruthlessly from the colonel , thus depriving the father of the child , and the child of the father . 
By dint of pity for his father , Marius had nearly arrived at aversion for his grandfather . 
Nothing of this sort , however , was betrayed on the exterior , as we have already said . 
Only he grew colder and colder ; laconic at meals , and rare in the house . 
When his aunt scolded him for it , he was very gentle and alleged his studies , his lectures , the examinations , etc. , as a pretext . 
His grandfather never departed from his infallible diagnosis : `` In love ! 
I know all about it . '' 
From time to time Marius absented himself . 
`` Where is it that he goes off like this ? '' 
said his aunt . 
On one of these trips , which were always very brief , he went to Montfermeil , in order to obey the injunction which his father had left him , and he sought the old sergeant to Waterloo , the inn-keeper Thenardier . 
Thenardier had failed , the inn was closed , and no one knew what had become of him . 
Marius was away from the house for four days on this quest . 
`` He is getting decidedly wild , '' said his grandfather . 
They thought they had noticed that he wore something on his breast , under his shirt , which was attached to his neck by a black ribbon . 
SOME PETTICOAT We have mentioned a lancer . 
He was a great-grand-nephew of M. Gillenormand , on the paternal side , who led a garrison life , outside the family and far from the domestic hearth . 
Lieutenant Theodule Gillenormand fulfilled all the conditions required to make what is called a fine officer . 
He had `` a lady 's waist , '' a victorious manner of trailing his sword and of twirling his mustache in a hook . 
He visited Paris very rarely , and so rarely that Marius had never seen him . 
The cousins knew each other only by name . 
We think we have said that Theodule was the favorite of Aunt Gillenormand , who preferred him because she did not see him . 
Not seeing people permits one to attribute to them all possible perfections . 
One morning , Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder returned to her apartment as much disturbed as her placidity was capable of allowing . 
Marius had just asked his grandfather 's permission to take a little trip , adding that he meant to set out that very evening . 
`` Go ! '' 
had been his grandfather 's reply , and M. Gillenormand had added in an aside , as he raised his eyebrows to the top of his forehead : `` Here he is passing the night out again . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand had ascended to her chamber greatly puzzled , and on the staircase had dropped this exclamation : `` This is too much ! '' 
-- and this interrogation : `` But where is it that he goes ? '' 
She espied some adventure of the heart , more or less illicit , a woman in the shadow , a rendezvous , a mystery , and she would not have been sorry to thrust her spectacles into the affair . 
Tasting a mystery resembles getting the first flavor of a scandal ; sainted souls do not detest this . 
There is some curiosity about scandal in the secret compartments of bigotry . 
So she was the prey of a vague appetite for learning a history . 
In order to get rid of this curiosity which agitated her a little beyond her wont , she took refuge in her talents , and set about scalloping , with one layer of cotton after another , one of those embroideries of the Empire and the Restoration , in which there are numerous cart-wheels . 
The work was clumsy , the worker cross . 
She had been seated at this for several hours when the door opened . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand raised her nose . 
Lieutenant Theodule stood before her , making the regulation salute . 
She uttered a cry of delight . 
One may be old , one may be a prude , one may be pious , one may be an aunt , but it is always agreeable to see a lancer enter one 's chamber . 
`` You here , Theodule ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
`` On my way through town , aunt . '' 
`` Embrace me . '' 
`` Here goes ! '' 
said Theodule . 
And he kissed her . 
Aunt Gillenormand went to her writing-desk and opened it . 
`` You will remain with us a week at least ? '' 
`` I leave this very evening , aunt . '' 
`` It is not possible ! '' 
`` Mathematically ! '' 
`` Remain , my little Theodule , I beseech you . '' 
`` My heart says ` yes , ' but my orders say ` no . ' 
The matter is simple . 
They are changing our garrison ; we have been at Melun , we are being transferred to Gaillon . 
It is necessary to pass through Paris in order to get from the old post to the new one . 
I said : ` I am going to see my aunt . ' '' 
`` Here is something for your trouble . '' 
And she put ten louis into his hand . 
`` For my pleasure , you mean to say , my dear aunt . '' 
Theodule kissed her again , and she experienced the joy of having some of the skin scratched from her neck by the braidings on his uniform . 
`` Are you making the journey on horseback , with your regiment ? '' 
she asked him . 
`` No , aunt . 
I wanted to see you . 
I have special permission . 
My servant is taking my horse ; I am travelling by diligence . 
And , by the way , I want to ask you something . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Is my cousin Marius Pontmercy travelling so , too ? '' 
`` How do you know that ? '' 
said his aunt , suddenly pricked to the quick with a lively curiosity . 
`` On my arrival , I went to the diligence to engage my seat in the coupe . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` A traveller had already come to engage a seat in the imperial . 
I saw his name on the card . '' 
