She lived on them . 
In them she drowned what brains she possessed . 
This had given her , when very young , and even a little later , a sort of pensive attitude towards her husband , a scamp of a certain depth , a ruffian lettered to the extent of the grammar , coarse and fine at one and the same time , but , so far as sentimentalism was concerned , given to the perusal of Pigault-Lebrun , and `` in what concerns the sex , '' as he said in his jargon -- a downright , unmitigated lout . 
His wife was twelve or fifteen years younger than he was . 
Later on , when her hair , arranged in a romantically drooping fashion , began to grow gray , when the Magaera began to be developed from the Pamela , the female Thenardier was nothing but a coarse , vicious woman , who had dabbled in stupid romances . 
Now , one can not read nonsense with impunity . 
The result was that her eldest daughter was named Eponine ; as for the younger , the poor little thing came near being called Gulnare ; I know not to what diversion , effected by a romance of Ducray-Dumenil , she owed the fact that she merely bore the name of Azelma . 
However , we will remark by the way , everything was not ridiculous and superficial in that curious epoch to which we are alluding , and which may be designated as the anarchy of baptismal names . 
By the side of this romantic element which we have just indicated there is the social symptom . 
It is not rare for the neatherd 's boy nowadays to bear the name of Arthur , Alfred , or Alphonse , and for the vicomte -- if there are still any vicomtes -- to be called Thomas , Pierre , or Jacques . 
This displacement , which places the `` elegant '' name on the plebeian and the rustic name on the aristocrat , is nothing else than an eddy of equality . 
The irresistible penetration of the new inspiration is there as everywhere else . 
Beneath this apparent discord there is a great and a profound thing , -- the French Revolution . 
THE LARK It is not all in all sufficient to be wicked in order to prosper . 
The cook-shop was in a bad way . 
Thanks to the traveller 's fifty-seven francs , Thenardier had been able to avoid a protest and to honor his signature . 
On the following month they were again in need of money . 
The woman took Cosette 's outfit to Paris , and pawned it at the pawnbroker 's for sixty francs . 
As soon as that sum was spent , the Thenardiers grew accustomed to look on the little girl merely as a child whom they were caring for out of charity ; and they treated her accordingly . 
As she had no longer any clothes , they dressed her in the cast-off petticoats and chemises of the Thenardier brats ; that is to say , in rags . 
They fed her on what all the rest had left -- a little better than the dog , a little worse than the cat . 
Moreover , the cat and the dog were her habitual table-companions ; Cosette ate with them under the table , from a wooden bowl similar to theirs . 
The mother , who had established herself , as we shall see later on , at M. sur M. , wrote , or , more correctly , caused to be written , a letter every month , that she might have news of her child . 
The Thenardiers replied invariably , `` Cosette is doing wonderfully well . '' 
At the expiration of the first six months the mother sent seven francs for the seventh month , and continued her remittances with tolerable regularity from month to month . 
The year was not completed when Thenardier said : `` A fine favor she is doing us , in sooth ! 
What does she expect us to do with her seven francs ? '' 
and he wrote to demand twelve francs . 
The mother , whom they had persuaded into the belief that her child was happy , `` and was coming on well , '' submitted , and forwarded the twelve francs . 
Certain natures can not love on the one hand without hating on the other . 
Mother Thenardier loved her two daughters passionately , which caused her to hate the stranger . 
It is sad to think that the love of a mother can possess villainous aspects . 
Little as was the space occupied by Cosette , it seemed to her as though it were taken from her own , and that that little child diminished the air which her daughters breathed . 
This woman , like many women of her sort , had a load of caresses and a burden of blows and injuries to dispense each day . 
If she had not had Cosette , it is certain that her daughters , idolized as they were , would have received the whole of it ; but the stranger did them the service to divert the blows to herself . 
Her daughters received nothing but caresses . 
Cosette could not make a motion which did not draw down upon her head a heavy shower of violent blows and unmerited chastisement . 
The sweet , feeble being , who should not have understood anything of this world or of God , incessantly punished , scolded , ill-used , beaten , and seeing beside her two little creatures like herself , who lived in a ray of dawn ! 
Madame Thenardier was vicious with Cosette . 
Eponine and Azelma were vicious . 
Children at that age are only copies of their mother . 
The size is smaller ; that is all . 
A year passed ; then another . 
People in the village said : -- `` Those Thenardiers are good people . 
They are not rich , and yet they are bringing up a poor child who was abandoned on their hands ! '' 
They thought that Cosette 's mother had forgotten her . 
In the meanwhile , Thenardier , having learned , it is impossible to say by what obscure means , that the child was probably a bastard , and that the mother could not acknowledge it , exacted fifteen francs a month , saying that `` the creature '' was growing and `` eating , '' and threatening to send her away . 
`` Let her not bother me , '' he exclaimed , `` or I 'll fire her brat right into the middle of her secrets . 
I must have an increase . '' 
The mother paid the fifteen francs . 
From year to year the child grew , and so did her wretchedness . 
As long as Cosette was little , she was the scape-goat of the two other children ; as soon as she began to develop a little , that is to say , before she was even five years old , she became the servant of the household . 
Five years old ! 
the reader will say ; that is not probable . 
Alas ! 
it is true . 
Social suffering begins at all ages . 
Have we not recently seen the trial of a man named Dumollard , an orphan turned bandit , who , from the age of five , as the official documents state , being alone in the world , `` worked for his living and stole '' ? 
Cosette was made to run on errands , to sweep the rooms , the courtyard , the street , to wash the dishes , to even carry burdens . 
The Thenardiers considered themselves all the more authorized to behave in this manner , since the mother , who was still at M. sur M. , had become irregular in her payments . 
Some months she was in arrears . 
If this mother had returned to Montfermeil at the end of these three years , she would not have recognized her child . 
Cosette , so pretty and rosy on her arrival in that house , was now thin and pale . 
She had an indescribably uneasy look . 
`` The sly creature , '' said the Thenardiers . 
Injustice had made her peevish , and misery had made her ugly . 
Nothing remained to her except her beautiful eyes , which inspired pain , because , large as they were , it seemed as though one beheld in them a still larger amount of sadness . 
It was a heart-breaking thing to see this poor child , not yet six years old , shivering in the winter in her old rags of linen , full of holes , sweeping the street before daylight , with an enormous broom in her tiny red hands , and a tear in her great eyes . 
She was called the Lark in the neighborhood . 
The populace , who are fond of these figures of speech , had taken a fancy to bestow this name on this trembling , frightened , and shivering little creature , no bigger than a bird , who was awake every morning before any one else in the house or the village , and was always in the street or the fields before daybreak . 
Only the little lark never sang . 
BOOK FIFTH . 
-- THE DESCENT . 
THE HISTORY OF A PROGRESS IN BLACK GLASS TRINKETS And in the meantime , what had become of that mother who according to the people at Montfermeil , seemed to have abandoned her child ? 
Where was she ? 
What was she doing ? 
After leaving her little Cosette with the Thenardiers , she had continued her journey , and had reached M. sur M. This , it will be remembered , was in 1818 . 
Fantine had quitted her province ten years before . 
M. sur M. had changed its aspect . 
While Fantine had been slowly descending from wretchedness to wretchedness , her native town had prospered . 
About two years previously one of those industrial facts which are the grand events of small districts had taken place . 
This detail is important , and we regard it as useful to develop it at length ; we should almost say , to underline it . 
From time immemorial , M. sur M. had had for its special industry the imitation of English jet and the black glass trinkets of Germany . 
This industry had always vegetated , on account of the high price of the raw material , which reacted on the manufacture . 
At the moment when Fantine returned to M. sur M. , an unheard-of transformation had taken place in the production of `` black goods . '' 
Towards the close of 1815 a man , a stranger , had established himself in the town , and had been inspired with the idea of substituting , in this manufacture , gum-lac for resin , and , for bracelets in particular , slides of sheet-iron simply laid together , for slides of soldered sheet-iron . 
This very small change had effected a revolution . 
This very small change had , in fact , prodigiously reduced the cost of the raw material , which had rendered it possible in the first place , to raise the price of manufacture , a benefit to the country ; in the second place , to improve the workmanship , an advantage to the consumer ; in the third place , to sell at a lower price , while trebling the profit , which was a benefit to the manufacturer . 
Thus three results ensued from one idea . 
In less than three years the inventor of this process had become rich , which is good , and had made every one about him rich , which is better . 
He was a stranger in the Department . 
Of his origin , nothing was known ; of the beginning of his career , very little . 
It was rumored that he had come to town with very little money , a few hundred francs at the most . 
It was from this slender capital , enlisted in the service of an ingenious idea , developed by method and thought , that he had drawn his own fortune , and the fortune of the whole countryside . 
On his arrival at M. sur M. he had only the garments , the appearance , and the language of a workingman . 
It appears that on the very day when he made his obscure entry into the little town of M. sur M. , just at nightfall , on a December evening , knapsack on back and thorn club in hand , a large fire had broken out in the town-hall . 
This man had rushed into the flames and saved , at the risk of his own life , two children who belonged to the captain of the gendarmerie ; this is why they had forgotten to ask him for his passport . 
Afterwards they had learned his name . 
He was called Father Madeleine . 
MADELEINE He was a man about fifty years of age , who had a preoccupied air , and who was good . 
