`` It is impossible to wait another quarter of an hour , '' said Madeleine to the peasants , who were staring at him . 
`` We must ! '' 
`` But it will be too late then ! 
Do n't you see that the cart is sinking ? '' 
`` Well ! '' 
`` Listen , '' resumed Madeleine ; `` there is still room enough under the cart to allow a man to crawl beneath it and raise it with his back . 
Only half a minute , and the poor man can be taken out . 
Is there any one here who has stout loins and heart ? 
There are five louis d'or to be earned ! '' 
Not a man in the group stirred . 
`` Ten louis , '' said Madeleine . 
The persons present dropped their eyes . 
One of them muttered : `` A man would need to be devilish strong . 
And then he runs the risk of getting crushed ! '' 
`` Come , '' began Madeleine again , `` twenty louis . '' 
The same silence . 
`` It is not the will which is lacking , '' said a voice . 
M. Madeleine turned round , and recognized Javert . 
He had not noticed him on his arrival . 
Javert went on : -- `` It is strength . 
One would have to be a terrible man to do such a thing as lift a cart like that on his back . '' 
Then , gazing fixedly at M. Madeleine , he went on , emphasizing every word that he uttered : -- `` Monsieur Madeleine , I have never known but one man capable of doing what you ask . '' 
Madeleine shuddered . 
Javert added , with an air of indifference , but without removing his eyes from Madeleine : -- `` He was a convict . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Madeleine . 
`` In the galleys at Toulon . '' 
Madeleine turned pale . 
Meanwhile , the cart continued to sink slowly . 
Father Fauchelevent rattled in the throat , and shrieked : -- `` I am strangling ! 
My ribs are breaking ! 
a screw ! 
something ! 
Ah ! '' 
Madeleine glanced about him . 
`` Is there , then , no one who wishes to earn twenty louis and save the life of this poor old man ? '' 
No one stirred . 
Javert resumed : -- `` I have never known but one man who could take the place of a screw , and he was that convict . '' 
`` Ah ! 
It is crushing me ! '' 
cried the old man . 
Madeleine raised his head , met Javert 's falcon eye still fixed upon him , looked at the motionless peasants , and smiled sadly . 
Then , without saying a word , he fell on his knees , and before the crowd had even had time to utter a cry , he was underneath the vehicle . 
A terrible moment of expectation and silence ensued . 
They beheld Madeleine , almost flat on his stomach beneath that terrible weight , make two vain efforts to bring his knees and his elbows together . 
They shouted to him , `` Father Madeleine , come out ! '' 
Old Fauchelevent himself said to him , `` Monsieur Madeleine , go away ! 
You see that I am fated to die ! 
Leave me ! 
You will get yourself crushed also ! '' 
Madeleine made no reply . 
All the spectators were panting . 
The wheels had continued to sink , and it had become almost impossible for Madeleine to make his way from under the vehicle . 
Suddenly the enormous mass was seen to quiver , the cart rose slowly , the wheels half emerged from the ruts . 
They heard a stifled voice crying , `` Make haste ! 
Help ! '' 
It was Madeleine , who had just made a final effort . 
They rushed forwards . 
The devotion of a single man had given force and courage to all . 
The cart was raised by twenty arms . 
Old Fauchelevent was saved . 
Madeleine rose . 
He was pale , though dripping with perspiration . 
His clothes were torn and covered with mud . 
All wept . 
The old man kissed his knees and called him the good God . 
As for him , he bore upon his countenance an indescribable expression of happy and celestial suffering , and he fixed his tranquil eye on Javert , who was still staring at him . 
FAUCHELEVENT BECOMES A GARDENER IN PARIS Fauchelevent had dislocated his kneepan in his fall . 
Father Madeleine had him conveyed to an infirmary which he had established for his workmen in the factory building itself , and which was served by two sisters of charity . 
On the following morning the old man found a thousand-franc bank-note on his night-stand , with these words in Father Madeleine 's writing : `` I purchase your horse and cart . '' 
The cart was broken , and the horse was dead . 
Fauchelevent recovered , but his knee remained stiff . 
M. Madeleine , on the recommendation of the sisters of charity and of his priest , got the good man a place as gardener in a female convent in the Rue Saint-Antoine in Paris . 
Some time afterwards , M. Madeleine was appointed mayor . 
The first time that Javert beheld M. Madeleine clothed in the scarf which gave him authority over the town , he felt the sort of shudder which a watch-dog might experience on smelling a wolf in his master 's clothes . 
From that time forth he avoided him as much as he possibly could . 
When the requirements of the service imperatively demanded it , and he could not do otherwise than meet the mayor , he addressed him with profound respect . 
This prosperity created at M. sur M. by Father Madeleine had , besides the visible signs which we have mentioned , another symptom which was none the less significant for not being visible . 
This never deceives . 
When the population suffers , when work is lacking , when there is no commerce , the tax-payer resists imposts through penury , he exhausts and oversteps his respite , and the state expends a great deal of money in the charges for compelling and collection . 
When work is abundant , when the country is rich and happy , the taxes are paid easily and cost the state nothing . 
It may be said , that there is one infallible thermometer of the public misery and riches , -- the cost of collecting the taxes . 
In the course of seven years the expense of collecting the taxes had diminished three-fourths in the arrondissement of M. sur M. , and this led to this arrondissement being frequently cited from all the rest by M. de Villele , then Minister of Finance . 
Such was the condition of the country when Fantine returned thither . 
No one remembered her . 
Fortunately , the door of M. Madeleine 's factory was like the face of a friend . 
She presented herself there , and was admitted to the women 's workroom . 
The trade was entirely new to Fantine ; she could not be very skilful at it , and she therefore earned but little by her day 's work ; but it was sufficient ; the problem was solved ; she was earning her living . 
MADAME VICTURNIEN EXPENDS THIRTY FRANCS ON MORALITY When Fantine saw that she was making her living , she felt joyful for a moment . 
To live honestly by her own labor , what mercy from heaven ! 
The taste for work had really returned to her . 
She bought a looking-glass , took pleasure in surveying in it her youth , her beautiful hair , her fine teeth ; she forgot many things ; she thought only of Cosette and of the possible future , and was almost happy . 
She hired a little room and furnished on credit on the strength of her future work -- a lingering trace of her improvident ways . 
As she was not able to say that she was married she took good care , as we have seen , not to mention her little girl . 
At first , as the reader has seen , she paid the Thenardiers promptly . 
As she only knew how to sign her name , she was obliged to write through a public letter-writer . 
She wrote often , and this was noticed . 
It began to be said in an undertone , in the women 's workroom , that Fantine `` wrote letters '' and that `` she had ways about her . '' 
There is no one for spying on people 's actions like those who are not concerned in them . 
Why does that gentleman never come except at nightfall ? 
