He goes down stairs ; you will tear up your sheets , little by little you will make of them a rope , then you will climb out of your window , and you will suspend yourself by that thread over an abyss , and it will be night , amid storm , rain , and the hurricane , and if the rope is too short , but one way of descending will remain to you , to fall . 
To drop hap-hazard into the gulf , from an unknown height , on what ? 
On what is beneath , on the unknown . 
Or you will crawl up a chimney-flue , at the risk of burning ; or you will creep through a sewer-pipe , at the risk of drowning ; I do not speak of the holes that you will be obliged to mask , of the stones which you will have to take up and replace twenty times a day , of the plaster that you will have to hide in your straw pallet . 
A lock presents itself ; the bourgeois has in his pocket a key made by a locksmith . 
If you wish to pass out , you will be condemned to execute a terrible work of art ; you will take a large sou , you will cut it in two plates ; with what tools ? 
You will have to invent them . 
That is your business . 
Then you will hollow out the interior of these plates , taking great care of the outside , and you will make on the edges a thread , so that they can be adjusted one upon the other like a box and its cover . 
The top and bottom thus screwed together , nothing will be suspected . 
To the overseers it will be only a sou ; to you it will be a box . 
What will you put in this box ? 
A small bit of steel . 
A watch-spring , in which you will have cut teeth , and which will form a saw . 
With this saw , as long as a pin , and concealed in a sou , you will cut the bolt of the lock , you will sever bolts , the padlock of your chain , and the bar at your window , and the fetter on your leg . 
This masterpiece finished , this prodigy accomplished , all these miracles of art , address , skill , and patience executed , what will be your recompense if it becomes known that you are the author ? 
The dungeon . 
There is your future . 
What precipices are idleness and pleasure ! 
Do you know that to do nothing is a melancholy resolution ? 
To live in idleness on the property of society ! 
to be useless , that is to say , pernicious ! 
This leads straight to the depth of wretchedness . 
Woe to the man who desires to be a parasite ! 
He will become vermin ! 
Ah ! 
So it does not please you to work ? 
Ah ! 
You have but one thought , to drink well , to eat well , to sleep well . 
You will drink water , you will eat black bread , you will sleep on a plank with a fetter whose cold touch you will feel on your flesh all night long , riveted to your limbs . 
You will break those fetters , you will flee . 
That is well . 
You will crawl on your belly through the brushwood , and you will eat grass like the beasts of the forest . 
And you will be recaptured . 
And then you will pass years in a dungeon , riveted to a wall , groping for your jug that you may drink , gnawing at a horrible loaf of darkness which dogs would not touch , eating beans that the worms have eaten before you . 
You will be a wood-louse in a cellar . 
Ah ! 
Have pity on yourself , you miserable young child , who were sucking at nurse less than twenty years ago , and who have , no doubt , a mother still alive ! 
I conjure you , listen to me , I entreat you . 
You desire fine black cloth , varnished shoes , to have your hair curled and sweet-smelling oils on your locks , to please low women , to be handsome . 
You will be shaven clean , and you will wear a red blouse and wooden shoes . 
You want rings on your fingers , you will have an iron necklet on your neck . 
If you glance at a woman , you will receive a blow . 
And you will enter there at the age of twenty . 
And you will come out at fifty ! 
You will enter young , rosy , fresh , with brilliant eyes , and all your white teeth , and your handsome , youthful hair ; you will come out broken , bent , wrinkled , toothless , horrible , with white locks ! 
Ah ! 
my poor child , you are on the wrong road ; idleness is counselling you badly ; the hardest of all work is thieving . 
Believe me , do not undertake that painful profession of an idle man . 
It is not comfortable to become a rascal . 
It is less disagreeable to be an honest man . 
Now go , and ponder on what I have said to you . 
By the way , what did you want of me ? 
My purse ? 
Here it is . '' 
And the old man , releasing Montparnasse , put his purse in the latter 's hand ; Montparnasse weighed it for a moment , after which he allowed it to slide gently into the back pocket of his coat , with the same mechanical precaution as though he had stolen it . 
All this having been said and done , the goodman turned his back and tranquilly resumed his stroll . 
`` The blockhead ! '' 
muttered Montparnasse . 
Who was this goodman ? 
The reader has , no doubt , already divined . 
Montparnasse watched him with amazement , as he disappeared in the dusk . 
This contemplation was fatal to him . 
While the old man was walking away , Gavroche drew near . 
Gavroche had assured himself , with a sidelong glance , that Father Mabeuf was still sitting on his bench , probably sound asleep . 
Then the gamin emerged from his thicket , and began to crawl after Montparnasse in the dark , as the latter stood there motionless . 
In this manner he came up to Montparnasse without being seen or heard , gently insinuated his hand into the back pocket of that frock-coat of fine black cloth , seized the purse , withdrew his hand , and having recourse once more to his crawling , he slipped away like an adder through the shadows . 
Montparnasse , who had no reason to be on his guard , and who was engaged in thought for the first time in his life , perceived nothing . 
When Gavroche had once more attained the point where Father Mabeuf was , he flung the purse over the hedge , and fled as fast as his legs would carry him . 
The purse fell on Father Mabeuf 's foot . 
This commotion roused him . 
He bent over and picked up the purse . 
He did not understand in the least , and opened it . 
The purse had two compartments ; in one of them there was some small change ; in the other lay six napoleons . 
M. Mabeuf , in great alarm , referred the matter to his housekeeper . 
`` That has fallen from heaven , '' said Mother Plutarque . 
SOLITUDE AND THE BARRACKS COMBINED Cosette 's grief , which had been so poignant and lively four or five months previously , had , without her being conscious of the fact , entered upon its convalescence . 
Nature , spring , youth , love for her father , the gayety of the birds and flowers , caused something almost resembling forgetfulness to filter gradually , drop by drop , into that soul , which was so virgin and so young . 
Was the fire wholly extinct there ? 
Or was it merely that layers of ashes had formed ? 
The truth is , that she hardly felt the painful and burning spot any longer . 
One day she suddenly thought of Marius : `` Why ! '' 
said she , `` I no longer think of him . '' 
That same week , she noticed a very handsome officer of lancers , with a wasp-like waist , a delicious uniform , the cheeks of a young girl , a sword under his arm , waxed mustaches , and a glazed schapka , passing the gate . 
Moreover , he had light hair , prominent blue eyes , a round face , was vain , insolent and good-looking ; quite the reverse of Marius . 
He had a cigar in his mouth . 
Cosette thought that this officer doubtless belonged to the regiment in barracks in the Rue de Babylone . 
On the following day , she saw him pass again . 
She took note of the hour . 
From that time forth , was it chance ? 
she saw him pass nearly every day . 
The officer 's comrades perceived that there was , in that `` badly kept '' garden , behind that malicious rococo fence , a very pretty creature , who was almost always there when the handsome lieutenant , -- who is not unknown to the reader , and whose name was Theodule Gillenormand , -- passed by . 
`` See here ! '' 
they said to him , `` there 's a little creature there who is making eyes at you , look . '' 
`` Have I the time , '' replied the lancer , `` to look at all the girls who look at me ? '' 
This was at the precise moment when Marius was descending heavily towards agony , and was saying : `` If I could but see her before I die ! '' 
-- Had his wish been realized , had he beheld Cosette at that moment gazing at the lancer , he would not have been able to utter a word , and he would have expired with grief . 
Whose fault was it ? 
No one 's . 
Marius possessed one of those temperaments which bury themselves in sorrow and there abide ; Cosette was one of those persons who plunge into sorrow and emerge from it again . 
