This chain suggested , not the beams , which it was its office to transport , but the mastodons and mammoths which it might have served to harness ; it had the air of the galleys , but of cyclopean and superhuman galleys , and it seemed to have been detached from some monster . 
Homer would have bound Polyphemus with it , and Shakespeare , Caliban . 
Why was that fore-carriage of a truck in that place in the street ? 
In the first place , to encumber the street ; next , in order that it might finish the process of rusting . 
There is a throng of institutions in the old social order , which one comes across in this fashion as one walks about outdoors , and which have no other reasons for existence than the above . 
The centre of the chain swung very near the ground in the middle , and in the loop , as in the rope of a swing , there were seated and grouped , on that particular evening , in exquisite interlacement , two little girls ; one about two years and a half old , the other , eighteen months ; the younger in the arms of the other . 
A handkerchief , cleverly knotted about them , prevented their falling out . 
A mother had caught sight of that frightful chain , and had said , `` Come ! 
there 's a plaything for my children . '' 
The two children , who were dressed prettily and with some elegance , were radiant with pleasure ; one would have said that they were two roses amid old iron ; their eyes were a triumph ; their fresh cheeks were full of laughter . 
One had chestnut hair ; the other , brown . 
Their innocent faces were two delighted surprises ; a blossoming shrub which grew near wafted to the passers-by perfumes which seemed to emanate from them ; the child of eighteen months displayed her pretty little bare stomach with the chaste indecency of childhood . 
Above and around these two delicate heads , all made of happiness and steeped in light , the gigantic fore-carriage , black with rust , almost terrible , all entangled in curves and wild angles , rose in a vault , like the entrance of a cavern . 
A few paces apart , crouching down upon the threshold of the hostelry , the mother , not a very prepossessing woman , by the way , though touching at that moment , was swinging the two children by means of a long cord , watching them carefully , for fear of accidents , with that animal and celestial expression which is peculiar to maternity . 
At every backward and forward swing the hideous links emitted a strident sound , which resembled a cry of rage ; the little girls were in ecstasies ; the setting sun mingled in this joy , and nothing could be more charming than this caprice of chance which had made of a chain of Titans the swing of cherubim . 
As she rocked her little ones , the mother hummed in a discordant voice a romance then celebrated : -- `` It must be , said a warrior . '' 
Her song , and the contemplation of her daughters , prevented her hearing and seeing what was going on in the street . 
In the meantime , some one had approached her , as she was beginning the first couplet of the romance , and suddenly she heard a voice saying very near her ear : -- `` You have two beautiful children there , Madame . '' 
`` To the fair and tender Imogene -- '' replied the mother , continuing her romance ; then she turned her head . 
A woman stood before her , a few paces distant . 
This woman also had a child , which she carried in her arms . 
She was carrying , in addition , a large carpet-bag , which seemed very heavy . 
This woman 's child was one of the most divine creatures that it is possible to behold . 
lt was a girl , two or three years of age . 
She could have entered into competition with the two other little ones , so far as the coquetry of her dress was concerned ; she wore a cap of fine linen , ribbons on her bodice , and Valenciennes lace on her cap . 
The folds of her skirt were raised so as to permit a view of her white , firm , and dimpled leg . 
She was admirably rosy and healthy . 
The little beauty inspired a desire to take a bite from the apples of her cheeks . 
Of her eyes nothing could be known , except that they must be very large , and that they had magnificent lashes . 
She was asleep . 
She slept with that slumber of absolute confidence peculiar to her age . 
The arms of mothers are made of tenderness ; in them children sleep profoundly . 
As for the mother , her appearance was sad and poverty-stricken . 
She was dressed like a working-woman who is inclined to turn into a peasant again . 
She was young . 
Was she handsome ? 
Perhaps ; but in that attire it was not apparent . 
Her hair , a golden lock of which had escaped , seemed very thick , but was severely concealed beneath an ugly , tight , close , nun-like cap , tied under the chin . 
A smile displays beautiful teeth when one has them ; but she did not smile . 
Her eyes did not seem to have been dry for a very long time . 
She was pale ; she had a very weary and rather sickly appearance . 
She gazed upon her daughter asleep in her arms with the air peculiar to a mother who has nursed her own child . 
A large blue handkerchief , such as the Invalides use , was folded into a fichu , and concealed her figure clumsily . 
Her hands were sunburnt and all dotted with freckles , her forefinger was hardened and lacerated with the needle ; she wore a cloak of coarse brown woollen stuff , a linen gown , and coarse shoes . 
It was Fantine . 
It was Fantine , but difficult to recognize . 
Nevertheless , on scrutinizing her attentively , it was evident that she still retained her beauty . 
A melancholy fold , which resembled the beginning of irony , wrinkled her right cheek . 
As for her toilette , that aerial toilette of muslin and ribbons , which seemed made of mirth , of folly , and of music , full of bells , and perfumed with lilacs had vanished like that beautiful and dazzling hoar-frost which is mistaken for diamonds in the sunlight ; it melts and leaves the branch quite black . 
Ten months had elapsed since the `` pretty farce . '' 
What had taken place during those ten months ? 
It can be divined . 
After abandonment , straightened circumstances . 
Fantine had immediately lost sight of Favourite , Zephine and Dahlia ; the bond once broken on the side of the men , it was loosed between the women ; they would have been greatly astonished had any one told them a fortnight later , that they had been friends ; there no longer existed any reason for such a thing . 
Fantine had remained alone . 
The father of her child gone , -- alas ! 
such ruptures are irrevocable , -- she found herself absolutely isolated , minus the habit of work and plus the taste for pleasure . 
Drawn away by her liaison with Tholomyes to disdain the pretty trade which she knew , she had neglected to keep her market open ; it was now closed to her . 
She had no resource . 
Fantine barely knew how to read , and did not know how to write ; in her childhood she had only been taught to sign her name ; she had a public letter-writer indite an epistle to Tholomyes , then a second , then a third . 
Tholomyes replied to none of them . 
Fantine heard the gossips say , as they looked at her child : `` Who takes those children seriously ! 
One only shrugs one 's shoulders over such children ! '' 
Then she thought of Tholomyes , who had shrugged his shoulders over his child , and who did not take that innocent being seriously ; and her heart grew gloomy toward that man . 
But what was she to do ? 
She no longer knew to whom to apply . 
She had committed a fault , but the foundation of her nature , as will be remembered , was modesty and virtue . 
She was vaguely conscious that she was on the verge of falling into distress , and of gliding into a worse state . 
Courage was necessary ; she possessed it , and held herself firm . 
The idea of returning to her native town of M. sur M. occurred to her . 
There , some one might possibly know her and give her work ; yes , but it would be necessary to conceal her fault . 
In a confused way she perceived the necessity of a separation which would be more painful than the first one . 
Her heart contracted , but she took her resolution . 
Fantine , as we shall see , had the fierce bravery of life . 
She had already valiantly renounced finery , had dressed herself in linen , and had put all her silks , all her ornaments , all her ribbons , and all her laces on her daughter , the only vanity which was left to her , and a holy one it was . 
She sold all that she had , which produced for her two hundred francs ; her little debts paid , she had only about eighty francs left . 
At the age of twenty-two , on a beautiful spring morning , she quitted Paris , bearing her child on her back . 
Any one who had seen these two pass would have had pity on them . 
This woman had , in all the world , nothing but her child , and the child had , in all the world , no one but this woman . 
Fantine had nursed her child , and this had tired her chest , and she coughed a little . 
We shall have no further occasion to speak of M. Felix Tholomyes . 
Let us confine ourselves to saying , that , twenty years later , under King Louis Philippe , he was a great provincial lawyer , wealthy and influential , a wise elector , and a very severe juryman ; he was still a man of pleasure . 
Towards the middle of the day , after having , from time to time , for the sake of resting herself , travelled , for three or four sous a league , in what was then known as the Petites Voitures des Environs de Paris , the `` little suburban coach service , '' Fantine found herself at Montfermeil , in the alley Boulanger . 
As she passed the Thenardier hostelry , the two little girls , blissful in the monster swing , had dazzled her in a manner , and she had halted in front of that vision of joy . 
Charms exist . 
These two little girls were a charm to this mother . 
She gazed at them in much emotion . 
The presence of angels is an announcement of Paradise . 
She thought that , above this inn , she beheld the mysterious HERE of Providence . 
These two little creatures were evidently happy . 
She gazed at them , she admired them , in such emotion that at the moment when their mother was recovering her breath between two couplets of her song , she could not refrain from addressing to her the remark which we have just read : -- `` You have two pretty children , Madame . '' 
The most ferocious creatures are disarmed by caresses bestowed on their young . 
The mother raised her head and thanked her , and bade the wayfarer sit down on the bench at the door , she herself being seated on the threshold . 
The two women began to chat . 
`` My name is Madame Thenardier , '' said the mother of the two little girls . 
`` We keep this inn . '' 
Then , her mind still running on her romance , she resumed humming between her teeth : -- `` It must be so ; I am a knight , And I am off to Palestine . '' 
This Madame Thenardier was a sandy-complexioned woman , thin and angular -- the type of the soldier 's wife in all its unpleasantness ; and what was odd , with a languishing air , which she owed to her perusal of romances . 
She was a simpering , but masculine creature . 
Old romances produce that effect when rubbed against the imagination of cook-shop woman . 
