It is only half past twelve . 
Cosette is asleep . '' 
That word : `` Father , '' said to M. Fauchelevent by Marius , signified : supreme felicity . 
There had always existed , as the reader knows , a lofty wall , a coldness and a constraint between them ; ice which must be broken or melted . 
Marius had reached that point of intoxication when the wall was lowered , when the ice dissolved , and when M. Fauchelevent was to him , as to Cosette , a father . 
He continued : his words poured forth , as is the peculiarity of divine paroxysms of joy . 
`` How glad I am to see you ! 
If you only knew how we missed you yesterday ! 
Good morning , father . 
How is your hand ? 
Better , is it not ? '' 
And , satisfied with the favorable reply which he had made to himself , he pursued : `` We have both been talking about you . 
Cosette loves you so dearly ! 
You must not forget that you have a chamber here , We want nothing more to do with the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
We will have no more of it at all . 
How could you go to live in a street like that , which is sickly , which is disagreeable , which is ugly , which has a barrier at one end , where one is cold , and into which one can not enter ? 
You are to come and install yourself here . 
And this very day . 
Or you will have to deal with Cosette . 
She means to lead us all by the nose , I warn you . 
You have your own chamber here , it is close to ours , it opens on the garden ; the trouble with the clock has been attended to , the bed is made , it is all ready , you have only to take possession of it . 
Near your bed Cosette has placed a huge , old , easy-chair covered with Utrecht velvet and she has said to it : ` Stretch out your arms to him . ' 
A nightingale comes to the clump of acacias opposite your windows , every spring . 
In two months more you will have it . 
You will have its nest on your left and ours on your right . 
By night it will sing , and by day Cosette will prattle . 
Your chamber faces due South . 
Cosette will arrange your books for you , your Voyages of Captain Cook and the other , -- Vancouver 's and all your affairs . 
I believe that there is a little valise to which you are attached , I have fixed upon a corner of honor for that . 
You have conquered my grandfather , you suit him . 
We will live together . 
Do you play whist ? 
you will overwhelm my grandfather with delight if you play whist . 
It is you who shall take Cosette to walk on the days when I am at the courts , you shall give her your arm , you know , as you used to , in the Luxembourg . 
We are absolutely resolved to be happy . 
And you shall be included in it , in our happiness , do you hear , father ? 
Come , will you breakfast with us to-day ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I have something to say to you . 
I am an ex-convict . '' 
The limit of shrill sounds perceptible can be overleaped , as well in the case of the mind as in that of the ear . 
These words : `` I am an ex-convict , '' proceeding from the mouth of M. Fauchelevent and entering the ear of Marius overshot the possible . 
It seemed to him that something had just been said to him ; but he did not know what . 
He stood with his mouth wide open . 
Then he perceived that the man who was addressing him was frightful . 
Wholly absorbed in his own dazzled state , he had not , up to that moment , observed the other man 's terrible pallor . 
Jean Valjean untied the black cravat which supported his right arm , unrolled the linen from around his hand , bared his thumb and showed it to Marius . 
`` There is nothing the matter with my hand , '' said he . 
Marius looked at the thumb . 
`` There has not been anything the matter with it , '' went on Jean Valjean . 
There was , in fact , no trace of any injury . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` It was fitting that I should be absent from your marriage . 
I absented myself as much as was in my power . 
So I invented this injury in order that I might not commit a forgery , that I might not introduce a flaw into the marriage documents , in order that I might escape from signing . '' 
Marius stammered . 
`` What is the meaning of this ? '' 
`` The meaning of it is , '' replied Jean Valjean , `` that I have been in the galleys . '' 
`` You are driving me mad ! '' 
exclaimed Marius in terror . 
`` Monsieur Pontmercy , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I was nineteen years in the galleys . 
For theft . 
Then , I was condemned for life for theft , for a second offence . 
At the present moment , I have broken my ban . '' 
In vain did Marius recoil before the reality , refuse the fact , resist the evidence , he was forced to give way . 
He began to understand , and , as always happens in such cases , he understood too much . 
An inward shudder of hideous enlightenment flashed through him ; an idea which made him quiver traversed his mind . 
He caught a glimpse of a wretched destiny for himself in the future . 
`` Say all , say all ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You are Cosette 's father ! '' 
And he retreated a couple of paces with a movement of indescribable horror . 
Jean Valjean elevated his head with so much majesty of attitude that he seemed to grow even to the ceiling . 
`` It is necessary that you should believe me here , sir ; although our oath to others may not be received in law ... '' Here he paused , then , with a sort of sovereign and sepulchral authority , he added , articulating slowly , and emphasizing the syllables : '' ... You will believe me . 
I the father of Cosette ! 
before God , no . 
Monsieur le Baron Pontmercy , I am a peasant of Faverolles . 
I earned my living by pruning trees . 
My name is not Fauchelevent , but Jean Valjean . 
I am not related to Cosette . 
Reassure yourself . '' 
Marius stammered : `` Who will prove that to me ? '' 
`` I . 
Since I tell you so . '' 
Marius looked at the man . 
He was melancholy yet tranquil . 
No lie could proceed from such a calm . 
That which is icy is sincere . 
The truth could be felt in that chill of the tomb . 
`` I believe you , '' said Marius . 
Jean Valjean bent his head , as though taking note of this , and continued : `` What am I to Cosette ? 
A passer-by . 
Ten years ago , I did not know that she was in existence . 
I love her , it is true . 
One loves a child whom one has seen when very young , being old oneself . 
When one is old , one feels oneself a grandfather towards all little children . 
You may , it seems to me , suppose that I have something which resembles a heart . 
She was an orphan . 
Without either father or mother . 
She needed me . 
That is why I began to love her . 
Children are so weak that the first comer , even a man like me , can become their protector . 
