`` You will take the road on the left , leading to Carency ; you will cross the river ; when you reach Camblin , you will turn to the right ; that is the road to Mont-Saint-Eloy which leads to Arras . '' 
`` But it is night , and I shall lose my way . '' 
`` You do not belong in these parts ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` And , besides , it is all cross-roads ; stop ! 
sir , '' resumed the road-mender ; `` shall I give you a piece of advice ? 
your horse is tired ; return to Tinques ; there is a good inn there ; sleep there ; you can reach Arras to-morrow . '' 
`` I must be there this evening . '' 
`` That is different ; but go to the inn all the same , and get an extra horse ; the stable-boy will guide you through the cross-roads . '' 
He followed the road-mender 's advice , retraced his steps , and , half an hour later , he passed the same spot again , but this time at full speed , with a good horse to aid ; a stable-boy , who called himself a postilion , was seated on the shaft of the cariole . 
Still , he felt that he had lost time . 
Night had fully come . 
They turned into the cross-road ; the way became frightfully bad ; the cart lurched from one rut to the other ; he said to the postilion : -- `` Keep at a trot , and you shall have a double fee . '' 
In one of the jolts , the whiffle-tree broke . 
`` There 's the whiffle-tree broken , sir , '' said the postilion ; `` I do n't know how to harness my horse now ; this road is very bad at night ; if you wish to return and sleep at Tinques , we could be in Arras early to-morrow morning . '' 
He replied , `` Have you a bit of rope and a knife ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
He cut a branch from a tree and made a whiffle-tree of it . 
This caused another loss of twenty minutes ; but they set out again at a gallop . 
The plain was gloomy ; low-hanging , black , crisp fogs crept over the hills and wrenched themselves away like smoke : there were whitish gleams in the clouds ; a strong breeze which blew in from the sea produced a sound in all quarters of the horizon , as of some one moving furniture ; everything that could be seen assumed attitudes of terror . 
How many things shiver beneath these vast breaths of the night ! 
He was stiff with cold ; he had eaten nothing since the night before ; he vaguely recalled his other nocturnal trip in the vast plain in the neighborhood of D -- , eight years previously , and it seemed but yesterday . 
The hour struck from a distant tower ; he asked the boy : -- `` What time is it ? '' 
`` Seven o'clock , sir ; we shall reach Arras at eight ; we have but three leagues still to go . '' 
At that moment , he for the first time indulged in this reflection , thinking it odd the while that it had not occurred to him sooner : that all this trouble which he was taking was , perhaps , useless ; that he did not know so much as the hour of the trial ; that he should , at least , have informed himself of that ; that he was foolish to go thus straight ahead without knowing whether he would be of any service or not ; then he sketched out some calculations in his mind : that , ordinarily , the sittings of the Court of Assizes began at nine o'clock in the morning ; that it could not be a long affair ; that the theft of the apples would be very brief ; that there would then remain only a question of identity , four or five depositions , and very little for the lawyers to say ; that he should arrive after all was over . 
The postilion whipped up the horses ; they had crossed the river and left Mont-Saint-Eloy behind them . 
The night grew more profound . 
SISTER SIMPLICE PUT TO THE PROOF But at that moment Fantine was joyous . 
She had passed a very bad night ; her cough was frightful ; her fever had doubled in intensity ; she had had dreams : in the morning , when the doctor paid his visit , she was delirious ; he assumed an alarmed look , and ordered that he should be informed as soon as M. Madeleine arrived . 
All the morning she was melancholy , said but little , and laid plaits in her sheets , murmuring the while , in a low voice , calculations which seemed to be calculations of distances . 
Her eyes were hollow and staring . 
They seemed almost extinguished at intervals , then lighted up again and shone like stars . 
It seems as though , at the approach of a certain dark hour , the light of heaven fills those who are quitting the light of earth . 
Each time that Sister Simplice asked her how she felt , she replied invariably , `` Well . 
I should like to see M. Madeleine . '' 
Some months before this , at the moment when Fantine had just lost her last modesty , her last shame , and her last joy , she was the shadow of herself ; now she was the spectre of herself . 
Physical suffering had completed the work of moral suffering . 
This creature of five and twenty had a wrinkled brow , flabby cheeks , pinched nostrils , teeth from which the gums had receded , a leaden complexion , a bony neck , prominent shoulder-blades , frail limbs , a clayey skin , and her golden hair was growing out sprinkled with gray . 
Alas ! 
how illness improvises old-age ! 
At mid-day the physician returned , gave some directions , inquired whether the mayor had made his appearance at the infirmary , and shook his head . 
M. Madeleine usually came to see the invalid at three o'clock . 
As exactness is kindness , he was exact . 
About half-past two , Fantine began to be restless . 
In the course of twenty minutes , she asked the nun more than ten times , `` What time is it , sister ? '' 
Three o'clock struck . 
At the third stroke , Fantine sat up in bed ; she who could , in general , hardly turn over , joined her yellow , fleshless hands in a sort of convulsive clasp , and the nun heard her utter one of those profound sighs which seem to throw off dejection . 
Then Fantine turned and looked at the door . 
No one entered ; the door did not open . 
She remained thus for a quarter of an hour , her eyes riveted on the door , motionless and apparently holding her breath . 
The sister dared not speak to her . 
The clock struck a quarter past three . 
Fantine fell back on her pillow . 
She said nothing , but began to plait the sheets once more . 
Half an hour passed , then an hour , no one came ; every time the clock struck , Fantine started up and looked towards the door , then fell back again . 
Her thought was clearly perceptible , but she uttered no name , she made no complaint , she blamed no one . 
But she coughed in a melancholy way . 
One would have said that something dark was descending upon her . 
She was livid and her lips were blue . 
She smiled now and then . 
Five o'clock struck . 
Then the sister heard her say , very low and gently , `` He is wrong not to come to-day , since I am going away to-morrow . '' 
Sister Simplice herself was surprised at M. Madeleine 's delay . 
In the meantime , Fantine was staring at the tester of her bed . 
She seemed to be endeavoring to recall something . 
All at once she began to sing in a voice as feeble as a breath . 
The nun listened . 
This is what Fantine was singing : -- `` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through . 
Roses are pink , corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , corn-flowers are blue . 
`` Yestere'en the Virgin Mary came near my stove , in a broidered mantle clad , and said to me , ` Here , hide ` neath my veil the child whom you one day begged from me . 
Haste to the city , buy linen , buy a needle , buy thread . ' 
`` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through . 
`` Dear Holy Virgin , beside my stove I have set a cradle with ribbons decked . 
God may give me his loveliest star ; I prefer the child thou hast granted me . 
` Madame , what shall I do with this linen fine ? ' 
-- ` Make of it clothes for thy new-born babe . ' 
`` Roses are pink and corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , and corn-flowers are blue . '' 
` Wash this linen . ' 
-- ` Where ? ' 
-- ` In the stream . 
Make of it , soiling not , spoiling not , a petticoat fair with its bodice fine , which I will embroider and fill with flowers . ' 
-- ` Madame , the child is no longer here ; what is to be done ? ' 
-- ` Then make of it a winding-sheet in which to bury me . ' 
`` Lovely things we will buy As we stroll the faubourgs through , Roses are pink , corn-flowers are blue , I love my love , corn-flowers are blue . '' 
This song was an old cradle romance with which she had , in former days , lulled her little Cosette to sleep , and which had never recurred to her mind in all the five years during which she had been parted from her child . 
She sang it in so sad a voice , and to so sweet an air , that it was enough to make any one , even a nun , weep . 
The sister , accustomed as she was to austerities , felt a tear spring to her eyes . 
The clock struck six . 
Fantine did not seem to hear it . 
She no longer seemed to pay attention to anything about her . 
Sister Simplice sent a serving-maid to inquire of the portress of the factory , whether the mayor had returned , and if he would not come to the infirmary soon . 
The girl returned in a few minutes . 
Fantine was still motionless and seemed absorbed in her own thoughts . 
The servant informed Sister Simplice in a very low tone , that the mayor had set out that morning before six o'clock , in a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse , cold as the weather was ; that he had gone alone , without even a driver ; that no one knew what road he had taken ; that people said he had been seen to turn into the road to Arras ; that others asserted that they had met him on the road to Paris . 
That when he went away he had been very gentle , as usual , and that he had merely told the portress not to expect him that night . 
While the two women were whispering together , with their backs turned to Fantine 's bed , the sister interrogating , the servant conjecturing , Fantine , with the feverish vivacity of certain organic maladies , which unite the free movements of health with the frightful emaciation of death , had raised herself to her knees in bed , with her shrivelled hands resting on the bolster , and her head thrust through the opening of the curtains , and was listening . 
All at once she cried : -- `` You are speaking of M. Madeleine ! 
Why are you talking so low ? 
What is he doing ? 
Why does he not come ? '' 
