That is legal and delightful . 
Fortunatus beside Fortunata . '' 
-- Applause from the whole table . 
Marius took Jean Valjean 's place beside Cosette , and things fell out so that Cosette , who had , at first , been saddened by Jean Valjean 's absence , ended by being satisfied with it . 
From the moment when Marius took his place , and was the substitute , Cosette would not have regretted God himself . 
She set her sweet little foot , shod in white satin , on Marius ' foot . 
The arm-chair being occupied , M. Fauchelevent was obliterated ; and nothing was lacking . 
And , five minutes afterward , the whole table from one end to the other , was laughing with all the animation of forgetfulness . 
At dessert , M. Gillenormand , rising to his feet , with a glass of champagne in his hand -- only half full so that the palsy of his eighty years might not cause an overflow , -- proposed the health of the married pair . 
`` You shall not escape two sermons , '' he exclaimed . 
`` This morning you had one from the cure , this evening you shall have one from your grandfather . 
Listen to me ; I will give you a bit of advice : Adore each other . 
I do not make a pack of gyrations , I go straight to the mark , be happy . 
In all creation , only the turtle-doves are wise . 
Philosophers say : ` Moderate your joys . ' 
I say : ` Give rein to your joys . ' 
Be as much smitten with each other as fiends . 
Be in a rage about it . 
The philosophers talk stuff and nonsense . 
I should like to stuff their philosophy down their gullets again . 
Can there be too many perfumes , too many open rose-buds , too many nightingales singing , too many green leaves , too much aurora in life ? 
can people love each other too much ? 
can people please each other too much ? 
Take care , Estelle , thou art too pretty ! 
Have a care , Nemorin , thou art too handsome ! 
Fine stupidity , in sooth ! 
Can people enchant each other too much , cajole each other too much , charm each other too much ? 
Can one be too much alive , too happy ? 
Moderate your joys . 
Ah , indeed ! 
Down with the philosophers ! 
Wisdom consists in jubilation . 
Make merry , let us make merry . 
Are we happy because we are good , or are we good because we are happy ? 
Is the Sancy diamond called the Sancy because it belonged to Harley de Sancy , or because it weighs six hundred carats ? 
I know nothing about it , life is full of such problems ; the important point is to possess the Sancy and happiness . 
Let us be happy without quibbling and quirking . 
Let us obey the sun blindly . 
What is the sun ? 
It is love . 
He who says love , says woman . 
Ah ! 
ah ! 
behold omnipotence -- women . 
Ask that demagogue of a Marius if he is not the slave of that little tyrant of a Cosette . 
And of his own free will , too , the coward ! 
Woman ! 
There is no Robespierre who keeps his place but woman reigns . 
I am no longer Royalist except towards that royalty . 
What is Adam ? 
The kingdom of Eve . 
No '89 for Eve . 
There has been the royal sceptre surmounted by a fleur-de-lys , there has been the imperial sceptre surmounted by a globe , there has been the sceptre of Charlemagne , which was of iron , there has been the sceptre of Louis the Great , which was of gold , -- the revolution twisted them between its thumb and forefinger , ha ` penny straws ; it is done with , it is broken , it lies on the earth , there is no longer any sceptre , but make me a revolution against that little embroidered handkerchief , which smells of patchouli ! 
I should like to see you do it . 
Try . 
Why is it so solid ? 
Because it is a gewgaw . 
Ah ! 
you are the nineteenth century ? 
Well , what then ? 
And we have been as foolish as you . 
Do not imagine that you have effected much change in the universe , because your trip-gallant is called the cholera-morbus , and because your pourree is called the cachuca . 
In fact , the women must always be loved . 
I defy you to escape from that . 
These friends are our angels . 
Yes , love , woman , the kiss forms a circle from which I defy you to escape ; and , for my own part , I should be only too happy to re-enter it . 
Which of you has seen the planet Venus , the coquette of the abyss , the Celimene of the ocean , rise in the infinite , calming all here below ? 
The ocean is a rough Alcestis . 
Well , grumble as he will , when Venus appears he is forced to smile . 
That brute beast submits . 
We are all made so . 
Wrath , tempest , claps of thunder , foam to the very ceiling . 
A woman enters on the scene , a planet rises ; flat on your face ! 
Marius was fighting six months ago ; to-day he is married . 
That is well . 
Yes , Marius , yes , Cosette , you are in the right . 
Exist boldly for each other , make us burst with rage that we can not do the same , idealize each other , catch in your beaks all the tiny blades of felicity that exist on earth , and arrange yourselves a nest for life . 
Pardi , to love , to be loved , what a fine miracle when one is young ! 
Do n't imagine that you have invented that . 
I , too , have had my dream , I , too , have meditated , I , too , have sighed ; I , too , have had a moonlight soul . 
Love is a child six thousand years old . 
Love has the right to a long white beard . 
Methusalem is a street arab beside Cupid . 
For sixty centuries men and women have got out of their scrape by loving . 
The devil , who is cunning , took to hating man ; man , who is still more cunning , took to loving woman . 
In this way he does more good than the devil does him harm . 
This craft was discovered in the days of the terrestrial paradise . 
The invention is old , my friends , but it is perfectly new . 
Profit by it . 
Be Daphnis and Chloe , while waiting to become Philemon and Baucis . 
Manage so that , when you are with each other , nothing shall be lacking to you , and that Cosette may be the sun for Marius , and that Marius may be the universe to Cosette . 
Cosette , let your fine weather be the smile of your husband ; Marius , let your rain be your wife 's tears . 
And let it never rain in your household . 
You have filched the winning number in the lottery ; you have gained the great prize , guard it well , keep it under lock and key , do not squander it , adore each other and snap your fingers at all the rest . 
Believe what I say to you . 
It is good sense . 
And good sense can not lie . 
Be a religion to each other . 
Each man has his own fashion of adoring God . 
Saperlotte ! 
