And he dismissed Javert with a wave of the hand . 
Javert did not withdraw . 
`` Excuse me , Mr. Mayor , '' said he . 
`` What is it now ? '' 
demanded M. Madeleine . 
`` Mr. Mayor , there is still something of which I must remind you . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I must be dismissed . '' 
M. Madeleine rose . 
`` Javert , you are a man of honor , and I esteem you . 
You exaggerate your fault . 
Moreover , this is an offence which concerns me . 
Javert , you deserve promotion instead of degradation . 
I wish you to retain your post . '' 
Javert gazed at M. Madeleine with his candid eyes , in whose depths his not very enlightened but pure and rigid conscience seemed visible , and said in a tranquil voice : -- `` Mr. Mayor , I can not grant you that . '' 
`` I repeat , '' replied M. Madeleine , `` that the matter concerns me . '' 
But Javert , heeding his own thought only , continued : -- `` So far as exaggeration is concerned , I am not exaggerating . 
This is the way I reason : I have suspected you unjustly . 
That is nothing . 
It is our right to cherish suspicion , although suspicion directed above ourselves is an abuse . 
But without proofs , in a fit of rage , with the object of wreaking my vengeance , I have denounced you as a convict , you , a respectable man , a mayor , a magistrate ! 
That is serious , very serious . 
I have insulted authority in your person , I , an agent of the authorities ! 
If one of my subordinates had done what I have done , I should have declared him unworthy of the service , and have expelled him . 
Well ? 
Stop , Mr. Mayor ; one word more . 
I have often been severe in the course of my life towards others . 
That is just . 
I have done well . 
Now , if I were not severe towards myself , all the justice that I have done would become injustice . 
Ought I to spare myself more than others ? 
No ! 
What ! 
I should be good for nothing but to chastise others , and not myself ! 
Why , I should be a blackguard ! 
Those who say , ` That blackguard of a Javert ! ' 
would be in the right . 
Mr. Mayor , I do not desire that you should treat me kindly ; your kindness roused sufficient bad blood in me when it was directed to others . 
I want none of it for myself . 
The kindness which consists in upholding a woman of the town against a citizen , the police agent against the mayor , the man who is down against the man who is up in the world , is what I call false kindness . 
That is the sort of kindness which disorganizes society . 
Good God ! 
it is very easy to be kind ; the difficulty lies in being just . 
Come ! 
if you had been what I thought you , I should not have been kind to you , not I ! 
You would have seen ! 
Mr. Mayor , I must treat myself as I would treat any other man . 
When I have subdued malefactors , when I have proceeded with vigor against rascals , I have often said to myself , ` If you flinch , if I ever catch you in fault , you may rest at your ease ! ' 
I have flinched , I have caught myself in a fault . 
So much the worse ! 
Come , discharged , cashiered , expelled ! 
That is well . 
I have arms . 
I will till the soil ; it makes no difference to me . 
Mr. Mayor , the good of the service demands an example . 
I simply require the discharge of Inspector Javert . '' 
All this was uttered in a proud , humble , despairing , yet convinced tone , which lent indescribable grandeur to this singular , honest man . 
`` We shall see , '' said M. Madeleine . 
And he offered him his hand . 
Javert recoiled , and said in a wild voice : -- `` Excuse me , Mr. Mayor , but this must not be . 
A mayor does not offer his hand to a police spy . '' 
He added between his teeth : -- `` A police spy , yes ; from the moment when I have misused the police . 
I am no more than a police spy . '' 
Then he bowed profoundly , and directed his steps towards the door . 
There he wheeled round , and with eyes still downcast : -- `` Mr. Mayor , '' he said , `` I shall continue to serve until I am superseded . '' 
He withdrew . 
M. Madeleine remained thoughtfully listening to the firm , sure step , which died away on the pavement of the corridor . 
SISTER SIMPLICE The incidents the reader is about to peruse were not all known at M. sur M . 
But the small portion of them which became known left such a memory in that town that a serious gap would exist in this book if we did not narrate them in their most minute details . 
Among these details the reader will encounter two or three improbable circumstances , which we preserve out of respect for the truth . 
On the afternoon following the visit of Javert , M. Madeleine went to see Fantine according to his wont . 
Before entering Fantine 's room , he had Sister Simplice summoned . 
The two nuns who performed the services of nurse in the infirmary , Lazariste ladies , like all sisters of charity , bore the names of Sister Perpetue and Sister Simplice . 
Sister Perpetue was an ordinary villager , a sister of charity in a coarse style , who had entered the service of God as one enters any other service . 
She was a nun as other women are cooks . 
This type is not so very rare . 
The monastic orders gladly accept this heavy peasant earthenware , which is easily fashioned into a Capuchin or an Ursuline . 
These rustics are utilized for the rough work of devotion . 
The transition from a drover to a Carmelite is not in the least violent ; the one turns into the other without much effort ; the fund of ignorance common to the village and the cloister is a preparation ready at hand , and places the boor at once on the same footing as the monk : a little more amplitude in the smock , and it becomes a frock . 
Sister Perpetue was a robust nun from Marines near Pontoise , who chattered her patois , droned , grumbled , sugared the potion according to the bigotry or the hypocrisy of the invalid , treated her patients abruptly , roughly , was crabbed with the dying , almost flung God in their faces , stoned their death agony with prayers mumbled in a rage ; was bold , honest , and ruddy . 
Sister Simplice was white , with a waxen pallor . 
Beside Sister Perpetue , she was the taper beside the candle . 
Vincent de Paul has divinely traced the features of the Sister of Charity in these admirable words , in which he mingles as much freedom as servitude : `` They shall have for their convent only the house of the sick ; for cell only a hired room ; for chapel only their parish church ; for cloister only the streets of the town and the wards of the hospitals ; for enclosure only obedience ; for gratings only the fear of God ; for veil only modesty . '' 
This ideal was realized in the living person of Sister Simplice : she had never been young , and it seemed as though she would never grow old . 
No one could have told Sister Simplice 's age . 
She was a person -- we dare not say a woman -- who was gentle , austere , well-bred , cold , and who had never lied . 
She was so gentle that she appeared fragile ; but she was more solid than granite . 
She touched the unhappy with fingers that were charmingly pure and fine . 
There was , so to speak , silence in her speech ; she said just what was necessary , and she possessed a tone of voice which would have equally edified a confessional or enchanted a drawing-room . 
This delicacy accommodated itself to the serge gown , finding in this harsh contact a continual reminder of heaven and of God . 
Let us emphasize one detail . 
Never to have lied , never to have said , for any interest whatever , even in indifference , any single thing which was not the truth , the sacred truth , was Sister Simplice 's distinctive trait ; it was the accent of her virtue . 
She was almost renowned in the congregation for this imperturbable veracity . 
The Abbe Sicard speaks of Sister Simplice in a letter to the deaf-mute Massieu . 
However pure and sincere we may be , we all bear upon our candor the crack of the little , innocent lie . 
She did not . 
Little lie , innocent lie -- does such a thing exist ? 
To lie is the absolute form of evil . 
To lie a little is not possible : he who lies , lies the whole lie . 
To lie is the very face of the demon . 
