His happiness was so great that the horrible discovery of the Thenardiers made in the Jondrette hovel , unexpected as it was , had , after a fashion , glided over him unnoticed . 
He had succeeded in making his escape ; all trace of him was lost -- what more did he care for ! 
he only thought of those wretched beings to pity them . 
`` Here they are in prison , and henceforth they will be incapacitated for doing any harm , '' he thought , `` but what a lamentable family in distress ! '' 
As for the hideous vision of the Barriere du Maine , Cosette had not referred to it again . 
Sister Sainte-Mechtilde had taught Cosette music in the convent ; Cosette had the voice of a linnet with a soul , and sometimes , in the evening , in the wounded man 's humble abode , she warbled melancholy songs which delighted Jean Valjean . 
Spring came ; the garden was so delightful at that season of the year , that Jean Valjean said to Cosette : -- `` You never go there ; I want you to stroll in it . '' 
`` As you like , father , '' said Cosette . 
And for the sake of obeying her father , she resumed her walks in the garden , generally alone , for , as we have mentioned , Jean Valjean , who was probably afraid of being seen through the fence , hardly ever went there . 
Jean Valjean 's wound had created a diversion . 
When Cosette saw that her father was suffering less , that he was convalescing , and that he appeared to be happy , she experienced a contentment which she did not even perceive , so gently and naturally had it come . 
Then , it was in the month of March , the days were growing longer , the winter was departing , the winter always bears away with it a portion of our sadness ; then came April , that daybreak of summer , fresh as dawn always is , gay like every childhood ; a little inclined to weep at times like the new-born being that it is . 
In that month , nature has charming gleams which pass from the sky , from the trees , from the meadows and the flowers into the heart of man . 
Cosette was still too young to escape the penetrating influence of that April joy which bore so strong a resemblance to herself . 
Insensibly , and without her suspecting the fact , the blackness departed from her spirit . 
In spring , sad souls grow light , as light falls into cellars at midday . 
Cosette was no longer sad . 
However , though this was so , she did not account for it to herself . 
In the morning , about ten o'clock , after breakfast , when she had succeeded in enticing her father into the garden for a quarter of an hour , and when she was pacing up and down in the sunlight in front of the steps , supporting his left arm for him , she did not perceive that she laughed every moment and that she was happy . 
Jean Valjean , intoxicated , beheld her growing fresh and rosy once more . 
`` Oh ! 
What a good wound ! '' 
he repeated in a whisper . 
And he felt grateful to the Thenardiers . 
His wound once healed , he resumed his solitary twilight strolls . 
It is a mistake to suppose that a person can stroll alone in that fashion in the uninhabited regions of Paris without meeting with some adventure . 
MOTHER PLUTARQUE FINDS NO DIFFICULTY IN EXPLAINING A PHENOMENON One evening , little Gavroche had had nothing to eat ; he remembered that he had not dined on the preceding day either ; this was becoming tiresome . 
He resolved to make an effort to secure some supper . 
He strolled out beyond the Salpetriere into deserted regions ; that is where windfalls are to be found ; where there is no one , one always finds something . 
He reached a settlement which appeared to him to be the village of Austerlitz . 
In one of his preceding lounges he had noticed there an old garden haunted by an old man and an old woman , and in that garden , a passable apple-tree . 
Beside the apple-tree stood a sort of fruit-house , which was not securely fastened , and where one might contrive to get an apple . 
One apple is a supper ; one apple is life . 
That which was Adam 's ruin might prove Gavroche 's salvation . 
The garden abutted on a solitary , unpaved lane , bordered with brushwood while awaiting the arrival of houses ; the garden was separated from it by a hedge . 
Gavroche directed his steps towards this garden ; he found the lane , he recognized the apple-tree , he verified the fruit-house , he examined the hedge ; a hedge means merely one stride . 
The day was declining , there was not even a cat in the lane , the hour was propitious . 
Gavroche began the operation of scaling the hedge , then suddenly paused . 
Some one was talking in the garden . 
Gavroche peeped through one of the breaks in the hedge . 
A couple of paces distant , at the foot of the hedge on the other side , exactly at the point where the gap which he was meditating would have been made , there was a sort of recumbent stone which formed a bench , and on this bench was seated the old man of the garden , while the old woman was standing in front of him . 
The old woman was grumbling . 
Gavroche , who was not very discreet , listened . 
`` Monsieur Mabeuf ! '' 
said the old woman . 
`` Mabeuf ! '' 
thought Gavroche , `` that name is a perfect farce . '' 
The old man who was thus addressed , did not stir . 
The old woman repeated : -- `` Monsieur Mabeuf ! '' 
The old man , without raising his eyes from the ground , made up his mind to answer : -- `` What is it , Mother Plutarque ? '' 
`` Mother Plutarque ! '' 
thought Gavroche , `` another farcical name . '' 
Mother Plutarque began again , and the old man was forced to accept the conversation : -- `` The landlord is not pleased . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` We owe three quarters rent . '' 
`` In three months , we shall owe him for four quarters . '' 
`` He says that he will turn you out to sleep . '' 
`` I will go . '' 
`` The green-grocer insists on being paid . 
She will no longer leave her fagots . 
What will you warm yourself with this winter ? 
We shall have no wood . '' 
`` There is the sun . '' 
`` The butcher refuses to give credit ; he will not let us have any more meat . '' 
`` That is quite right . 
I do not digest meat well . 
It is too heavy . '' 
`` What shall we have for dinner ? '' 
`` Bread . '' 
`` The baker demands a settlement , and says , ` no money , no bread . ' '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` What will you eat ? '' 
`` We have apples in the apple-room . '' 
`` But , Monsieur , we ca n't live like that without money . '' 
`` I have none . '' 
The old woman went away , the old man remained alone . 
He fell into thought . 
Gavroche became thoughtful also . 
It was almost dark . 
The first result of Gavroche 's meditation was , that instead of scaling the hedge , he crouched down under it . 
The branches stood apart a little at the foot of the thicket . 
`` Come , '' exclaimed Gavroche mentally , `` here 's a nook ! '' 
and he curled up in it . 
His back was almost in contact with Father Mabeuf 's bench . 
He could hear the octogenarian breathe . 
Then , by way of dinner , he tried to sleep . 
It was a cat-nap , with one eye open . 
While he dozed , Gavroche kept on the watch . 
The twilight pallor of the sky blanched the earth , and the lane formed a livid line between two rows of dark bushes . 
All at once , in this whitish band , two figures made their appearance . 
One was in front , the other some distance in the rear . 
`` There come two creatures , '' muttered Gavroche . 
The first form seemed to be some elderly bourgeois , who was bent and thoughtful , dressed more than plainly , and who was walking slowly because of his age , and strolling about in the open evening air . 
The second was straight , firm , slender . 
It regulated its pace by that of the first ; but in the voluntary slowness of its gait , suppleness and agility were discernible . 
This figure had also something fierce and disquieting about it , the whole shape was that of what was then called an elegant ; the hat was of good shape , the coat black , well cut , probably of fine cloth , and well fitted in at the waist . 
The head was held erect with a sort of robust grace , and beneath the hat the pale profile of a young man could be made out in the dim light . 
The profile had a rose in its mouth . 
This second form was well known to Gavroche ; it was Montparnasse . 
He could have told nothing about the other , except that he was a respectable old man . 
