This rascal of composite order was , in all probability , some Fleming from Lille , in Flanders , a Frenchman in Paris , a Belgian at Brussels , being comfortably astride of both frontiers . 
As for his prowess at Waterloo , the reader is already acquainted with that . 
It will be perceived that he exaggerated it a trifle . 
Ebb and flow , wandering , adventure , was the leven of his existence ; a tattered conscience entails a fragmentary life , and , apparently at the stormy epoch of June 18 , 1815 , Thenardier belonged to that variety of marauding sutlers of which we have spoken , beating about the country , selling to some , stealing from others , and travelling like a family man , with wife and children , in a rickety cart , in the rear of troops on the march , with an instinct for always attaching himself to the victorious army . 
This campaign ended , and having , as he said , `` some quibus , '' he had come to Montfermeil and set up an inn there . 
This quibus , composed of purses and watches , of gold rings and silver crosses , gathered in harvest-time in furrows sown with corpses , did not amount to a large total , and did not carry this sutler turned eating-house-keeper very far . 
Thenardier had that peculiar rectilinear something about his gestures which , accompanied by an oath , recalls the barracks , and by a sign of the cross , the seminary . 
He was a fine talker . 
He allowed it to be thought that he was an educated man . 
Nevertheless , the schoolmaster had noticed that he pronounced improperly . 
-LSB- 12 -RSB- -LSB- 12 -RSB- Literally `` made cuirs '' ; i. e. , pronounced a t or an s at the end of words where the opposite letter should occur , or used either one of them where neither exists . 
He composed the travellers ' tariff card in a superior manner , but practised eyes sometimes spied out orthographical errors in it . 
Thenardier was cunning , greedy , slothful , and clever . 
He did not disdain his servants , which caused his wife to dispense with them . 
This giantess was jealous . 
It seemed to her that that thin and yellow little man must be an object coveted by all . 
Thenardier , who was , above all , an astute and well-balanced man , was a scamp of a temperate sort . 
This is the worst species ; hypocrisy enters into it . 
It is not that Thenardier was not , on occasion , capable of wrath to quite the same degree as his wife ; but this was very rare , and at such times , since he was enraged with the human race in general , as he bore within him a deep furnace of hatred . 
And since he was one of those people who are continually avenging their wrongs , who accuse everything that passes before them of everything which has befallen them , and who are always ready to cast upon the first person who comes to hand , as a legitimate grievance , the sum total of the deceptions , the bankruptcies , and the calamities of their lives , -- when all this leaven was stirred up in him and boiled forth from his mouth and eyes , he was terrible . 
Woe to the person who came under his wrath at such a time ! 
In addition to his other qualities , Thenardier was attentive and penetrating , silent or talkative , according to circumstances , and always highly intelligent . 
He had something of the look of sailors , who are accustomed to screw up their eyes to gaze through marine glasses . 
Thenardier was a statesman . 
Every new-comer who entered the tavern said , on catching sight of Madame Thenardier , `` There is the master of the house . '' 
A mistake . 
She was not even the mistress . 
The husband was both master and mistress . 
She worked ; he created . 
He directed everything by a sort of invisible and constant magnetic action . 
A word was sufficient for him , sometimes a sign ; the mastodon obeyed . 
Thenardier was a sort of special and sovereign being in Madame Thenardier 's eyes , though she did not thoroughly realize it . 
She was possessed of virtues after her own kind ; if she had ever had a disagreement as to any detail with `` Monsieur Thenardier , '' -- which was an inadmissible hypothesis , by the way , -- she would not have blamed her husband in public on any subject whatever . 
She would never have committed `` before strangers '' that mistake so often committed by women , and which is called in parliamentary language , `` exposing the crown . '' 
Although their concord had only evil as its result , there was contemplation in Madame Thenardier 's submission to her husband . 
That mountain of noise and of flesh moved under the little finger of that frail despot . 
Viewed on its dwarfed and grotesque side , this was that grand and universal thing , the adoration of mind by matter ; for certain ugly features have a cause in the very depths of eternal beauty . 
There was an unknown quantity about Thenardier ; hence the absolute empire of the man over that woman . 
At certain moments she beheld him like a lighted candle ; at others she felt him like a claw . 
This woman was a formidable creature who loved no one except her children , and who did not fear any one except her husband . 
She was a mother because she was mammiferous . 
But her maternity stopped short with her daughters , and , as we shall see , did not extend to boys . 
The man had but one thought , -- how to enrich himself . 
He did not succeed in this . 
A theatre worthy of this great talent was lacking . 
Thenardier was ruining himself at Montfermeil , if ruin is possible to zero ; in Switzerland or in the Pyrenees this penniless scamp would have become a millionaire ; but an inn-keeper must browse where fate has hitched him . 
It will be understood that the word inn-keeper is here employed in a restricted sense , and does not extend to an entire class . 
In this same year , 1823 , Thenardier was burdened with about fifteen hundred francs ' worth of petty debts , and this rendered him anxious . 
Whatever may have been the obstinate injustice of destiny in this case , Thenardier was one of those men who understand best , with the most profundity and in the most modern fashion , that thing which is a virtue among barbarous peoples and an object of merchandise among civilized peoples , -- hospitality . 
Besides , he was an admirable poacher , and quoted for his skill in shooting . 
He had a certain cold and tranquil laugh , which was particularly dangerous . 
His theories as a landlord sometimes burst forth in lightning flashes . 
He had professional aphorisms , which he inserted into his wife 's mind . 
`` The duty of the inn-keeper , '' he said to her one day , violently , and in a low voice , `` is to sell to the first comer , stews , repose , light , fire , dirty sheets , a servant , lice , and a smile ; to stop passers-by , to empty small purses , and to honestly lighten heavy ones ; to shelter travelling families respectfully : to shave the man , to pluck the woman , to pick the child clean ; to quote the window open , the window shut , the chimney-corner , the arm-chair , the chair , the ottoman , the stool , the feather-bed , the mattress and the truss of straw ; to know how much the shadow uses up the mirror , and to put a price on it ; and , by five hundred thousand devils , to make the traveller pay for everything , even for the flies which his dog eats ! '' 
This man and this woman were ruse and rage wedded -- a hideous and terrible team . 
While the husband pondered and combined , Madame Thenardier thought not of absent creditors , took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow , and lived in a fit of anger , all in a minute . 
Such were these two beings . 
Cosette was between them , subjected to their double pressure , like a creature who is at the same time being ground up in a mill and pulled to pieces with pincers . 
The man and the woman each had a different method : Cosette was overwhelmed with blows -- this was the woman 's ; she went barefooted in winter -- that was the man 's doing . 
Cosette ran up stairs and down , washed , swept , rubbed , dusted , ran , fluttered about , panted , moved heavy articles , and weak as she was , did the coarse work . 
There was no mercy for her ; a fierce mistress and venomous master . 
The Thenardier hostelry was like a spider 's web , in which Cosette had been caught , and where she lay trembling . 
The ideal of oppression was realized by this sinister household . 
It was something like the fly serving the spiders . 
The poor child passively held her peace . 
What takes place within these souls when they have but just quitted God , find themselves thus , at the very dawn of life , very small and in the midst of men all naked ! 
MEN MUST HAVE WINE , AND HORSES MUST HAVE WATER Four new travellers had arrived . 
Cosette was meditating sadly ; for , although she was only eight years old , she had already suffered so much that she reflected with the lugubrious air of an old woman . 
Her eye was black in consequence of a blow from Madame Thenardier 's fist , which caused the latter to remark from time to time , `` How ugly she is with her fist-blow on her eye ! '' 
Cosette was thinking that it was dark , very dark , that the pitchers and caraffes in the chambers of the travellers who had arrived must have been filled and that there was no more water in the cistern . 
She was somewhat reassured because no one in the Thenardier establishment drank much water . 
Thirsty people were never lacking there ; but their thirst was of the sort which applies to the jug rather than to the pitcher . 
Any one who had asked for a glass of water among all those glasses of wine would have appeared a savage to all these men . 
But there came a moment when the child trembled ; Madame Thenardier raised the cover of a stew-pan which was boiling on the stove , then seized a glass and briskly approached the cistern . 
She turned the faucet ; the child had raised her head and was following all the woman 's movements . 
A thin stream of water trickled from the faucet , and half filled the glass . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` there is no more water ! '' 
A momentary silence ensued . 
The child did not breathe . 
`` Bah ! '' 
resumed Madame Thenardier , examining the half-filled glass , `` this will be enough . '' 
Cosette applied herself to her work once more , but for a quarter of an hour she felt her heart leaping in her bosom like a big snow-flake . 
She counted the minutes that passed in this manner , and wished it were the next morning . 
From time to time one of the drinkers looked into the street , and exclaimed , `` It 's as black as an oven ! '' 
or , `` One must needs be a cat to go about the streets without a lantern at this hour ! '' 
And Cosette trembled . 
All at once one of the pedlers who lodged in the hostelry entered , and said in a harsh voice : -- `` My horse has not been watered . '' 
`` Yes , it has , '' said Madame Thenardier . 
`` I tell you that it has not , '' retorted the pedler . 
Cosette had emerged from under the table . 
`` Oh , yes , sir ! '' 
said she , `` the horse has had a drink ; he drank out of a bucket , a whole bucketful , and it was I who took the water to him , and I spoke to him . '' 
It was not true ; Cosette lied . 
`` There 's a brat as big as my fist who tells lies as big as the house , '' exclaimed the pedler . 
`` I tell you that he has not been watered , you little jade ! 
He has a way of blowing when he has had no water , which I know well . '' 
Cosette persisted , and added in a voice rendered hoarse with anguish , and which was hardly audible : -- `` And he drank heartily . '' 
`` Come , '' said the pedler , in a rage , `` this wo n't do at all , let my horse be watered , and let that be the end of it ! '' 
Cosette crept under the table again . 
`` In truth , that is fair ! '' 
