When he entered , he was asked : `` Whence come you ? '' 
He replied : `` From the street . '' 
When he went away , they asked him : `` Whither are you going ? '' 
He replied : `` Into the streets . '' 
His mother said to him : `` What did you come here for ? '' 
This child lived , in this absence of affection , like the pale plants which spring up in cellars . 
It did not cause him suffering , and he blamed no one . 
He did not know exactly how a father and mother should be . 
Nevertheless , his mother loved his sisters . 
We have forgotten to mention , that on the Boulevard du Temple this child was called Little Gavroche . 
Why was he called Little Gavroche ? 
Probably because his father 's name was Jondrette . 
It seems to be the instinct of certain wretched families to break the thread . 
The chamber which the Jondrettes inhabited in the Gorbeau hovel was the last at the end of the corridor . 
The cell next to it was occupied by a very poor young man who was called M. Marius . 
Let us explain who this M. Marius was . 
NINETY YEARS AND THIRTY-TWO TEETH In the Rue Boucherat , Rue de Normandie and the Rue de Saintonge there still exist a few ancient inhabitants who have preserved the memory of a worthy man named M. Gillenormand , and who mention him with complaisance . 
This good man was old when they were young . 
This silhouette has not yet entirely disappeared -- for those who regard with melancholy that vague swarm of shadows which is called the past -- from the labyrinth of streets in the vicinity of the Temple to which , under Louis XIV. , the names of all the provinces of France were appended exactly as in our day , the streets of the new Tivoli quarter have received the names of all the capitals of Europe ; a progression , by the way , in which progress is visible . 
M.Gillenormand , who was as much alive as possible in 1831 , was one of those men who had become curiosities to be viewed , simply because they have lived a long time , and who are strange because they formerly resembled everybody , and now resemble nobody . 
He was a peculiar old man , and in very truth , a man of another age , the real , complete and rather haughty bourgeois of the eighteenth century , who wore his good , old bourgeoisie with the air with which marquises wear their marquisates . 
He was over ninety years of age , his walk was erect , he talked loudly , saw clearly , drank neat , ate , slept , and snored . 
He had all thirty-two of his teeth . 
He only wore spectacles when he read . 
He was of an amorous disposition , but declared that , for the last ten years , he had wholly and decidedly renounced women . 
He could no longer please , he said ; he did not add : `` I am too old , '' but : `` I am too poor . '' 
He said : `` If I were not ruined -- Heee ! '' 
All he had left , in fact , was an income of about fifteen thousand francs . 
His dream was to come into an inheritance and to have a hundred thousand livres income for mistresses . 
He did not belong , as the reader will perceive , to that puny variety of octogenaries who , like M. de Voltaire , have been dying all their life ; his was no longevity of a cracked pot ; this jovial old man had always had good health . 
He was superficial , rapid , easily angered . 
He flew into a passion at everything , generally quite contrary to all reason . 
When contradicted , he raised his cane ; he beat people as he had done in the great century . 
He had a daughter over fifty years of age , and unmarried , whom he chastised severely with his tongue , when in a rage , and whom he would have liked to whip . 
She seemed to him to be eight years old . 
He boxed his servants ' ears soundly , and said : `` Ah ! 
carogne ! '' 
One of his oaths was : `` By the pantoufloche of the pantouflochade ! '' 
He had singular freaks of tranquillity ; he had himself shaved every day by a barber who had been mad and who detested him , being jealous of M. Gillenormand on account of his wife , a pretty and coquettish barberess . 
M. Gillenormand admired his own discernment in all things , and declared that he was extremely sagacious ; here is one of his sayings : `` I have , in truth , some penetration ; I am able to say when a flea bites me , from what woman it came . '' 
The words which he uttered the most frequently were : the sensible man , and nature . 
He did not give to this last word the grand acceptation which our epoch has accorded to it , but he made it enter , after his own fashion , into his little chimney-corner satires : `` Nature , '' he said , `` in order that civilization may have a little of everything , gives it even specimens of its amusing barbarism . 
Europe possesses specimens of Asia and Africa on a small scale . 
The cat is a drawing-room tiger , the lizard is a pocket crocodile . 
The dancers at the opera are pink female savages . 
They do not eat men , they crunch them ; or , magicians that they are , they transform them into oysters and swallow them . 
The Caribbeans leave only the bones , they leave only the shell . 
Such are our morals . 
We do not devour , we gnaw ; we do not exterminate , we claw . '' 
LIKE MASTER , LIKE HOUSE He lived in the Marais , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 . 
He owned the house . 
This house has since been demolished and rebuilt , and the number has probably been changed in those revolutions of numeration which the streets of Paris undergo . 
He occupied an ancient and vast apartment on the first floor , between street and gardens , furnished to the very ceilings with great Gobelins and Beauvais tapestries representing pastoral scenes ; the subjects of the ceilings and the panels were repeated in miniature on the arm-chairs . 
He enveloped his bed in a vast , nine-leaved screen of Coromandel lacquer . 
Long , full curtains hung from the windows , and formed great , broken folds that were very magnificent . 
The garden situated immediately under his windows was attached to that one of them which formed the angle , by means of a staircase twelve or fifteen steps long , which the old gentleman ascended and descended with great agility . 
In addition to a library adjoining his chamber , he had a boudoir of which he thought a great deal , a gallant and elegant retreat , with magnificent hangings of straw , with a pattern of flowers and fleurs-de-lys made on the galleys of Louis XIV . 
and ordered of his convicts by M. de Vivonne for his mistress . 
M. Gillenormand had inherited it from a grim maternal great-aunt , who had died a centenarian . 
He had had two wives . 
His manners were something between those of the courtier , which he had never been , and the lawyer , which he might have been . 
He was gay , and caressing when he had a mind . 
In his youth he had been one of those men who are always deceived by their wives and never by their mistresses , because they are , at the same time , the most sullen of husbands and the most charming of lovers in existence . 
He was a connoisseur of painting . 
He had in his chamber a marvellous portrait of no one knows whom , painted by Jordaens , executed with great dashes of the brush , with millions of details , in a confused and hap-hazard manner . 
M. Gillenormand 's attire was not the habit of Louis XIV . 
nor yet that of Louis XVI. ; it was that of the Incroyables of the Directory . 
He had thought himself young up to that period and had followed the fashions . 
His coat was of light-weight cloth with voluminous revers , a long swallow-tail and large steel buttons . 
With this he wore knee-breeches and buckle shoes . 
He always thrust his hands into his fobs . 
He said authoritatively : `` The French Revolution is a heap of blackguards . '' 
LUC-ESPRIT At the age of sixteen , one evening at the opera , he had had the honor to be stared at through opera-glasses by two beauties at the same time -- ripe and celebrated beauties then , and sung by Voltaire , the Camargo and the Salle . 
Caught between two fires , he had beaten a heroic retreat towards a little dancer , a young girl named Nahenry , who was sixteen like himself , obscure as a cat , and with whom he was in love . 
He abounded in memories . 
He was accustomed to exclaim : `` How pretty she was -- that Guimard-Guimardini-Guimardinette , the last time I saw her at Longchamps , her hair curled in sustained sentiments , with her come-and-see of turquoises , her gown of the color of persons newly arrived , and her little agitation muff ! '' 
He had worn in his young manhood a waistcoat of Nain-Londrin , which he was fond of talking about effusively . 
`` I was dressed like a Turk of the Levant Levantin , '' said he . 
Madame de Boufflers , having seen him by chance when he was twenty , had described him as `` a charming fool . '' 
He was horrified by all the names which he saw in politics and in power , regarding them as vulgar and bourgeois . 
He read the journals , the newspapers , the gazettes as he said , stifling outbursts of laughter the while . 
`` Oh ! '' 
he said , `` what people these are ! 
Corbiere ! 
Humann ! 
Casimir Perier ! 
There 's a minister for you ! 
I can imagine this in a journal : ` M. Gillenorman , minister ! ' 
that would be a farce . 
Well ! 
They are so stupid that it would pass '' ; he merrily called everything by its name , whether decent or indecent , and did not restrain himself in the least before ladies . 
He uttered coarse speeches , obscenities , and filth with a certain tranquillity and lack of astonishment which was elegant . 
It was in keeping with the unceremoniousness of his century . 
It is to be noted that the age of periphrase in verse was the age of crudities in prose . 
His god-father had predicted that he would turn out a man of genius , and had bestowed on him these two significant names : Luc-Esprit . 
A CENTENARIAN ASPIRANT He had taken prizes in his boyhood at the College of Moulins , where he was born , and he had been crowned by the hand of the Duc de Nivernais , whom he called the Duc de Nevers . 
Neither the Convention , nor the death of Louis XVI. , nor the Napoleon , nor the return of the Bourbons , nor anything else had been able to efface the memory of this crowning . 
The Duc de Nevers was , in his eyes , the great figure of the century . 
`` What a charming grand seigneur , '' he said , `` and what a fine air he had with his blue ribbon ! '' 
In the eyes of M. Gillenormand , Catherine the Second had made reparation for the crime of the partition of Poland by purchasing , for three thousand roubles , the secret of the elixir of gold , from Bestucheff . 
