Very rarely , however ; twice a month at most . 
Marius ' pleasure consisted in taking long walks alone on the outer boulevards , or in the Champs-de-Mars , or in the least frequented alleys of the Luxembourg . 
He often spent half a day in gazing at a market garden , the beds of lettuce , the chickens on the dung-heap , the horse turning the water-wheel . 
The passers-by stared at him in surprise , and some of them thought his attire suspicious and his mien sinister . 
He was only a poor young man dreaming in an objectless way . 
It was during one of his strolls that he had hit upon the Gorbeau house , and , tempted by its isolation and its cheapness , had taken up his abode there . 
He was known there only under the name of M. Marius . 
Some of his father 's old generals or old comrades had invited him to go and see them , when they learned about him . 
Marius had not refused their invitations . 
They afforded opportunities of talking about his father . 
Thus he went from time to time , to Comte Pajol , to General Bellavesne , to General Fririon , to the Invalides . 
There was music and dancing there . 
On such evenings , Marius put on his new coat . 
But he never went to these evening parties or balls except on days when it was freezing cold , because he could not afford a carriage , and he did not wish to arrive with boots otherwise than like mirrors . 
He said sometimes , but without bitterness : `` Men are so made that in a drawing-room you may be soiled everywhere except on your shoes . 
In order to insure a good reception there , only one irreproachable thing is asked of you ; your conscience ? 
No , your boots . '' 
All passions except those of the heart are dissipated by revery . 
Marius ' political fevers vanished thus . 
The Revolution of 1830 assisted in the process , by satisfying and calming him . 
He remained the same , setting aside his fits of wrath . 
He still held the same opinions . 
Only , they had been tempered . 
To speak accurately , he had no longer any opinions , he had sympathies . 
To what party did he belong ? 
To the party of humanity . 
Out of humanity he chose France ; out of the Nation he chose the people ; out of the people he chose the woman . 
It was to that point above all , that his pity was directed . 
Now he preferred an idea to a deed , a poet to a hero , and he admired a book like Job more than an event like Marengo . 
And then , when , after a day spent in meditation , he returned in the evening through the boulevards , and caught a glimpse through the branches of the trees of the fathomless space beyond , the nameless gleams , the abyss , the shadow , the mystery , all that which is only human seemed very pretty indeed to him . 
He thought that he had , and he really had , in fact , arrived at the truth of life and of human philosophy , and he had ended by gazing at nothing but heaven , the only thing which Truth can perceive from the bottom of her well . 
This did not prevent him from multiplying his plans , his combinations , his scaffoldings , his projects for the future . 
In this state of revery , an eye which could have cast a glance into Marius ' interior would have been dazzled with the purity of that soul . 
In fact , had it been given to our eyes of the flesh to gaze into the consciences of others , we should be able to judge a man much more surely according to what he dreams , than according to what he thinks . 
There is will in thought , there is none in dreams . 
Revery , which is utterly spontaneous , takes and keeps , even in the gigantic and the ideal , the form of our spirit . 
Nothing proceeds more directly and more sincerely from the very depth of our soul , than our unpremeditated and boundless aspirations towards the splendors of destiny . 
In these aspirations , much more than in deliberate , rational coordinated ideas , is the real character of a man to be found . 
Our chimeras are the things which the most resemble us . 
Each one of us dreams of the unknown and the impossible in accordance with his nature . 
Towards the middle of this year 1831 , the old woman who waited on Marius told him that his neighbors , the wretched Jondrette family , had been turned out of doors . 
Marius , who passed nearly the whole of his days out of the house , hardly knew that he had any neighbors . 
`` Why are they turned out ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Because they do not pay their rent ; they owe for two quarters . '' 
`` How much is it ? '' 
`` Twenty francs , '' said the old woman . 
Marius had thirty francs saved up in a drawer . 
`` Here , '' he said to the old woman , `` take these twenty-five francs . 
Pay for the poor people and give them five francs , and do not tell them that it was I. '' THE SUBSTITUTE It chanced that the regiment to which Lieutenant Theodule belonged came to perform garrison duty in Paris . 
This inspired Aunt Gillenormand with a second idea . 
She had , on the first occasion , hit upon the plan of having Marius spied upon by Theodule ; now she plotted to have Theodule take Marius ' place . 
At all events and in case the grandfather should feel the vague need of a young face in the house , -- these rays of dawn are sometimes sweet to ruin , -- it was expedient to find another Marius . 
`` Take it as a simple erratum , '' she thought , `` such as one sees in books . 
For Marius , read Theodule . '' 
A grandnephew is almost the same as a grandson ; in default of a lawyer one takes a lancer . 
One morning , when M. Gillenormand was about to read something in the Quotidienne , his daughter entered and said to him in her sweetest voice ; for the question concerned her favorite : -- `` Father , Theodule is coming to present his respects to you this morning . '' 
`` Who 's Theodule ? '' 
`` Your grandnephew . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the grandfather . 
Then he went back to his reading , thought no more of his grandnephew , who was merely some Theodule or other , and soon flew into a rage , which almost always happened when he read . 
The `` sheet '' which he held , although Royalist , of course , announced for the following day , without any softening phrases , one of these little events which were of daily occurrence at that date in Paris : `` That the students of the schools of law and medicine were to assemble on the Place du Pantheon , at midday , -- to deliberate . '' 
The discussion concerned one of the questions of the moment , the artillery of the National Guard , and a conflict between the Minister of War and `` the citizen 's militia , '' on the subject of the cannon parked in the courtyard of the Louvre . 
The students were to `` deliberate '' over this . 
It did not take much more than this to swell M. Gillenormand 's rage . 
He thought of Marius , who was a student , and who would probably go with the rest , to `` deliberate , at midday , on the Place du Pantheon . '' 
As he was indulging in this painful dream , Lieutenant Theodule entered clad in plain clothes as a bourgeois , which was clever of him , and was discreetly introduced by Mademoiselle Gillenormand . 
The lancer had reasoned as follows : `` The old druid has not sunk all his money in a life pension . 
It is well to disguise one 's self as a civilian from time to time . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand said aloud to her father : -- `` Theodule , your grandnephew . '' 
And in a low voice to the lieutenant : -- `` Approve of everything . '' 
And she withdrew . 
The lieutenant , who was but little accustomed to such venerable encounters , stammered with some timidity : `` Good day , uncle , '' -- and made a salute composed of the involuntary and mechanical outline of the military salute finished off as a bourgeois salute . 
`` Ah ! 
so it 's you ; that is well , sit down , '' said the old gentleman . 
That said , he totally forgot the lancer . 
Theodule seated himself , and M. Gillenormand rose . 
M. Gillenormand began to pace back and forth , his hands in his pockets , talking aloud , and twitching , with his irritated old fingers , at the two watches which he wore in his two fobs . 
`` That pack of brats ! 
they convene on the Place du Pantheon ! 
by my life ! 
urchins who were with their nurses but yesterday ! 
If one were to squeeze their noses , milk would burst out . 
And they deliberate to-morrow , at midday . 
What are we coming to ? 
What are we coming to ? 
It is clear that we are making for the abyss . 
That is what the descamisados have brought us to ! 
To deliberate on the citizen artillery ! 
To go and jabber in the open air over the jibes of the National Guard ! 
And with whom are they to meet there ? 
Just see whither Jacobinism leads . 
I will bet anything you like , a million against a counter , that there will be no one there but returned convicts and released galley-slaves . 
The Republicans and the galley-slaves , -- they form but one nose and one handkerchief . 
Carnot used to say : ` Where would you have me go , traitor ? ' 
Fouche replied : ` Wherever you please , imbecile ! ' 
That 's what the Republicans are like . '' 
`` That is true , '' said Theodule . 
M. Gillenormand half turned his head , saw Theodule , and went on : -- `` When one reflects that that scoundrel was so vile as to turn carbonaro ! 
