They renounce the world , towns , sensualities , pleasures , vanities , pride , interests . 
They are clothed in coarse woollen or coarse linen . 
Not one of them possesses in his own right anything whatever . 
On entering there , each one who was rich makes himself poor . 
What he has , he gives to all . 
He who was what is called noble , a gentleman and a lord , is the equal of him who was a peasant . 
The cell is identical for all . 
All undergo the same tonsure , wear the same frock , eat the same black bread , sleep on the same straw , die on the same ashes . 
The same sack on their backs , the same rope around their loins . 
If the decision has been to go barefoot , all go barefoot . 
There may be a prince among them ; that prince is the same shadow as the rest . 
No titles . 
Even family names have disappeared . 
They bear only first names . 
All are bowed beneath the equality of baptismal names . 
They have dissolved the carnal family , and constituted in their community a spiritual family . 
They have no other relatives than all men . 
They succor the poor , they care for the sick . 
They elect those whom they obey . 
They call each other `` my brother . '' 
You stop me and exclaim , `` But that is the ideal convent ! '' 
It is sufficient that it may be the possible convent , that I should take notice of it . 
Thence it results that , in the preceding book , I have spoken of a convent with respectful accents . 
The Middle Ages cast aside , Asia cast aside , the historical and political question held in reserve , from the purely philosophical point of view , outside the requirements of militant policy , on condition that the monastery shall be absolutely a voluntary matter and shall contain only consenting parties , I shall always consider a cloistered community with a certain attentive , and , in some respects , a deferential gravity . 
Wherever there is a community , there is a commune ; where there is a commune , there is right . 
The monastery is the product of the formula : Equality , Fraternity . 
Oh ! 
how grand is liberty ! 
And what a splendid transfiguration ! 
Liberty suffices to transform the monastery into a republic . 
Let us continue . 
But these men , or these women who are behind these four walls . 
They dress themselves in coarse woollen , they are equals , they call each other brothers , that is well ; but they do something else ? 
Yes . 
What ? 
They gaze on the darkness , they kneel , and they clasp their hands . 
What does this signify ? 
PRAYER They pray . 
To whom ? 
To God . 
To pray to God , -- what is the meaning of these words ? 
Is there an infinite beyond us ? 
Is that infinite there , inherent , permanent ; necessarily substantial , since it is infinite ; and because , if it lacked matter it would be bounded ; necessarily intelligent , since it is infinite , and because , if it lacked intelligence , it would end there ? 
Does this infinite awaken in us the idea of essence , while we can attribute to ourselves only the idea of existence ? 
In other terms , is it not the absolute , of which we are only the relative ? 
At the same time that there is an infinite without us , is there not an infinite within us ? 
Are not these two infinites -LRB- what an alarming plural ! -RRB- 
superposed , the one upon the other ? 
Is not this second infinite , so to speak , subjacent to the first ? 
Is it not the latter 's mirror , reflection , echo , an abyss which is concentric with another abyss ? 
Is this second infinity intelligent also ? 
Does it think ? 
Does it love ? 
Does it will ? 
If these two infinities are intelligent , each of them has a will principle , and there is an I in the upper infinity as there is an I in the lower infinity . 
The I below is the soul ; the I on high is God . 
To place the infinity here below in contact , by the medium of thought , with the infinity on high , is called praying . 
Let us take nothing from the human mind ; to suppress is bad . 
We must reform and transform . 
Certain faculties in man are directed towards the Unknown ; thought , revery , prayer . 
The Unknown is an ocean . 
What is conscience ? 
It is the compass of the Unknown . 
Thought , revery , prayer , -- these are great and mysterious radiations . 
Let us respect them . 
Whither go these majestic irradiations of the soul ? 
Into the shadow ; that is to say , to the light . 
The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing of humanity . 
Close to the right of the man , beside it , at the least , there exists the right of the soul . 
To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite , such is the law . 
Let us not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree of creation , and to the contemplation of its branches full of stars . 
We have a duty to labor over the human soul , to defend the mystery against the miracle , to adore the incomprehensible and reject the absurd , to admit , as an inexplicable fact , only what is necessary , to purify belief , to remove superstitions from above religion ; to clear God of caterpillars . 
THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER With regard to the modes of prayer , all are good , provided that they are sincere . 
Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite . 
There is , as we know , a philosophy which denies the infinite . 
There is also a philosophy , pathologically classified , which denies the sun ; this philosophy is called blindness . 
To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth , is a fine blind man 's self-sufficiency . 
The curious thing is the haughty , superior , and compassionate airs which this groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy which beholds God . 
One fancies he hears a mole crying , `` I pity them with their sun ! '' 
There are , as we know , powerful and illustrious atheists . 
At bottom , led back to the truth by their very force , they are not absolutely sure that they are atheists ; it is with them only a question of definition , and in any case , if they do not believe in God , being great minds , they prove God . 
We salute them as philosophers , while inexorably denouncing their philosophy . 
Let us go on . 
The remarkable thing about it is , also , their facility in paying themselves off with words . 
A metaphysical school of the North , impregnated to some extent with fog , has fancied that it has worked a revolution in human understanding by replacing the word Force with the word Will . 
To say : `` the plant wills , '' instead of : `` the plant grows '' : this would be fecund in results , indeed , if we were to add : `` the universe wills . '' 
Why ? 
Because it would come to this : the plant wills , therefore it has an _ I _ ; the universe wills , therefore it has a God . 
As for us , who , however , in contradistinction to this school , reject nothing a priori , a will in the plant , accepted by this school , appears to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universe denied by it . 
To deny the will of the infinite , that is to say , God , is impossible on any other conditions than a denial of the infinite . 
We have demonstrated this . 
The negation of the infinite leads straight to nihilism . 
Everything becomes `` a mental conception . '' 
With nihilism , no discussion is possible ; for the nihilist logic doubts the existence of its interlocutor , and is not quite sure that it exists itself . 
From its point of view , it is possible that it may be for itself , only `` a mental conception . '' 
Only , it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits in the lump , simply by the utterance of the word , mind . 
In short , no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes all end in the monosyllable , No . 
To No there is only one reply , Yes . 
Nihilism has no point . 
There is no such thing as nothingness . 
