There he turned round , bowed deeply to his grandfather , raised his head erect again , and said : -- `` Five years ago you insulted my father ; to-day you have insulted my wife . 
I ask nothing more of you , sir . 
Farewell . '' 
Father Gillenormand , utterly confounded , opened his mouth , extended his arms , tried to rise , and before he could utter a word , the door closed once more , and Marius had disappeared . 
The old man remained for several minutes motionless and as though struck by lightning , without the power to speak or breathe , as though a clenched fist grasped his throat . 
At last he tore himself from his arm-chair , ran , so far as a man can run at ninety-one , to the door , opened it , and cried : -- `` Help ! 
Help ! '' 
His daughter made her appearance , then the domestics . 
He began again , with a pitiful rattle : `` Run after him ! 
Bring him back ! 
What have I done to him ? 
He is mad ! 
He is going away ! 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
This time he will not come back ! '' 
He went to the window which looked out on the street , threw it open with his aged and palsied hands , leaned out more than half-way , while Basque and Nicolette held him behind , and shouted : -- `` Marius ! 
Marius ! 
Marius ! 
Marius ! '' 
But Marius could no longer hear him , for at that moment he was turning the corner of the Rue Saint-Louis . 
The octogenarian raised his hands to his temples two or three times with an expression of anguish , recoiled tottering , and fell back into an arm-chair , pulseless , voiceless , tearless , with quivering head and lips which moved with a stupid air , with nothing in his eyes and nothing any longer in his heart except a gloomy and profound something which resembled night . 
JEAN VALJEAN That same day , towards four o'clock in the afternoon , Jean Valjean was sitting alone on the back side of one of the most solitary slopes in the Champ-de-Mars . 
Either from prudence , or from a desire to meditate , or simply in consequence of one of those insensible changes of habit which gradually introduce themselves into the existence of every one , he now rarely went out with Cosette . 
He had on his workman 's waistcoat , and trousers of gray linen ; and his long-visored cap concealed his countenance . 
He was calm and happy now beside Cosette ; that which had , for a time , alarmed and troubled him had been dissipated ; but for the last week or two , anxieties of another nature had come up . 
One day , while walking on the boulevard , he had caught sight of Thenardier ; thanks to his disguise , Thenardier had not recognized him ; but since that day , Jean Valjean had seen him repeatedly , and he was now certain that Thenardier was prowling about in their neighborhood . 
This had been sufficient to make him come to a decision . 
Moreover , Paris was not tranquil : political troubles presented this inconvenient feature , for any one who had anything to conceal in his life , that the police had grown very uneasy and very suspicious , and that while seeking to ferret out a man like Pepin or Morey , they might very readily discover a man like Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had made up his mind to quit Paris , and even France , and go over to England . 
He had warned Cosette . 
He wished to set out before the end of the week . 
He had seated himself on the slope in the Champ-de-Mars , turning over all sorts of thoughts in his mind , -- Thenardier , the police , the journey , and the difficulty of procuring a passport . 
He was troubled from all these points of view . 
Last of all , an inexplicable circumstance which had just attracted his attention , and from which he had not yet recovered , had added to his state of alarm . 
On the morning of that very day , when he alone of the household was stirring , while strolling in the garden before Cosette 's shutters were open , he had suddenly perceived on the wall , the following line , engraved , probably with a nail : -- 16 Rue de la Verrerie . 
This was perfectly fresh , the grooves in the ancient black mortar were white , a tuft of nettles at the foot of the wall was powdered with the fine , fresh plaster . 
This had probably been written on the preceding night . 
What was this ? 
A signal for others ? 
A warning for himself ? 
In any case , it was evident that the garden had been violated , and that strangers had made their way into it . 
He recalled the odd incidents which had already alarmed the household . 
His mind was now filling in this canvas . 
He took good care not to speak to Cosette of the line written on the wall , for fear of alarming her . 
In the midst of his preoccupations , he perceived , from a shadow cast by the sun , that some one had halted on the crest of the slope immediately behind him . 
He was on the point of turning round , when a paper folded in four fell upon his knees as though a hand had dropped it over his head . 
He took the paper , unfolded it , and read these words written in large characters , with a pencil : -- `` MOVE AWAY FROM YOUR HOUSE . '' 
Jean Valjean sprang hastily to his feet ; there was no one on the slope ; he gazed all around him and perceived a creature larger than a child , not so large as a man , clad in a gray blouse and trousers of dust-colored cotton velvet , who was jumping over the parapet and who slipped into the moat of the Champde-Mars . 
Jean Valjean returned home at once , in a very thoughtful mood . 
MARIUS Marius had left M. Gillenormand in despair . 
He had entered the house with very little hope , and quitted it with immense despair . 
However , and those who have observed the depths of the human heart will understand this , the officer , the lancer , the ninny , Cousin Theodule , had left no trace in his mind . 
Not the slightest . 
The dramatic poet might , apparently , expect some complications from this revelation made point-blank by the grandfather to the grandson . 
But what the drama would gain thereby , truth would lose . 
Marius was at an age when one believes nothing in the line of evil ; later on comes the age when one believes everything . 
Suspicions are nothing else than wrinkles . 
Early youth has none of them . 
That which overwhelmed Othello glides innocuous over Candide . 
Suspect Cosette ! 
There are hosts of crimes which Marius could sooner have committed . 
He began to wander about the streets , the resource of those who suffer . 
He thought of nothing , so far as he could afterwards remember . 
At two o'clock in the morning he returned to Courfeyrac 's quarters and flung himself , without undressing , on his mattress . 
The sun was shining brightly when he sank into that frightful leaden slumber which permits ideas to go and come in the brain . 
When he awoke , he saw Courfeyrac , Enjolras , Feuilly , and Combeferre standing in the room with their hats on and all ready to go out . 
Courfeyrac said to him : -- `` Are you coming to General Lamarque 's funeral ? '' 
It seemed to him that Courfeyrac was speaking Chinese . 
He went out some time after them . 
He put in his pocket the pistols which Javert had given him at the time of the adventure on the 3d of February , and which had remained in his hands . 
These pistols were still loaded . 
It would be difficult to say what vague thought he had in his mind when he took them with him . 
All day long he prowled about , without knowing where he was going ; it rained at times , he did not perceive it ; for his dinner , he purchased a penny roll at a baker 's , put it in his pocket and forgot it . 
It appears that he took a bath in the Seine without being aware of it . 
There are moments when a man has a furnace within his skull . 
Marius was passing through one of those moments . 
He no longer hoped for anything ; this step he had taken since the preceding evening . 
He waited for night with feverish impatience , he had but one idea clearly before his mind ; -- this was , that at nine o'clock he should see Cosette . 
This last happiness now constituted his whole future ; after that , gloom . 
At intervals , as he roamed through the most deserted boulevards , it seemed to him that he heard strange noises in Paris . 
He thrust his head out of his revery and said : `` Is there fighting on hand ? '' 
At nightfall , at nine o'clock precisely , as he had promised Cosette , he was in the Rue Plumet . 
When he approached the grating he forgot everything . 
It was forty-eight hours since he had seen Cosette ; he was about to behold her once more ; every other thought was effaced , and he felt only a profound and unheard-of joy . 
Those minutes in which one lives centuries always have this sovereign and wonderful property , that at the moment when they are passing they fill the heart completely . 
Marius displaced the bar , and rushed headlong into the garden . 
Cosette was not at the spot where she ordinarily waited for him . 
He traversed the thicket , and approached the recess near the flight of steps : `` She is waiting for me there , '' said he . 
Cosette was not there . 
He raised his eyes , and saw that the shutters of the house were closed . 
He made the tour of the garden , the garden was deserted . 
Then he returned to the house , and , rendered senseless by love , intoxicated , terrified , exasperated with grief and uneasiness , like a master who returns home at an evil hour , he tapped on the shutters . 
He knocked and knocked again , at the risk of seeing the window open , and her father 's gloomy face make its appearance , and demand : `` What do you want ? '' 
This was nothing in comparison with what he dimly caught a glimpse of . 
When he had rapped , he lifted up his voice and called Cosette . 
-- `` Cosette ! '' 
he cried ; `` Cosette ! '' 
