You would have seen ! 
Oh , if the kind hearts only had fat purses , how much better things would go ! 
I picture myself Jesus Christ with Rothschild 's fortune ! 
How much good he would do ! 
Matelote , embrace me ! 
You are voluptuous and timid ! 
You have cheeks which invite the kiss of a sister , and lips which claim the kiss of a lover . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , you cask ! '' 
said Courfeyrac . 
Grantaire retorted : -- `` I am the capitoul -LSB- 52 -RSB- and the master of the floral games ! '' 
-LSB- 52 -RSB- Municipal officer of Toulouse . 
Enjolras , who was standing on the crest of the barricade , gun in hand , raised his beautiful , austere face . 
Enjolras , as the reader knows , had something of the Spartan and of the Puritan in his composition . 
He would have perished at Thermopylae with Leonidas , and burned at Drogheda with Cromwell . 
`` Grantaire , '' he shouted , `` go get rid of the fumes of your wine somewhere else than here . 
This is the place for enthusiasm , not for drunkenness . 
Do n't disgrace the barricade ! '' 
This angry speech produced a singular effect on Grantaire . 
One would have said that he had had a glass of cold water flung in his face . 
He seemed to be rendered suddenly sober . 
He sat down , put his elbows on a table near the window , looked at Enjolras with indescribable gentleness , and said to him : -- `` Let me sleep here . '' 
`` Go and sleep somewhere else , '' cried Enjolras . 
But Grantaire , still keeping his tender and troubled eyes fixed on him , replied : -- `` Let me sleep here , -- until I die . '' 
Enjolras regarded him with disdainful eyes : -- `` Grantaire , you are incapable of believing , of thinking , of willing , of living , and of dying . '' 
Grantaire replied in a grave tone : -- `` You will see . '' 
He stammered a few more unintelligible words , then his head fell heavily on the table , and , as is the usual effect of the second period of inebriety , into which Enjolras had roughly and abruptly thrust him , an instant later he had fallen asleep . 
AN ATTEMPT TO CONSOLE THE WIDOW HUCHELOUP Bahorel , in ecstasies over the barricade , shouted : -- `` Here 's the street in its low-necked dress ! 
How well it looks ! '' 
Courfeyrac , as he demolished the wine-shop to some extent , sought to console the widowed proprietress . 
`` Mother Hucheloup , were n't you complaining the other day because you had had a notice served on you for infringing the law , because Gibelotte shook a counterpane out of your window ? '' 
`` Yes , my good Monsieur Courfeyrac . 
Ah ! 
good Heavens , are you going to put that table of mine in your horror , too ? 
And it was for the counterpane , and also for a pot of flowers which fell from the attic window into the street , that the government collected a fine of a hundred francs . 
If that is n't an abomination , what is ! '' 
`` Well , Mother Hucheloup , we are avenging you . '' 
Mother Hucheloup did not appear to understand very clearly the benefit which she was to derive from these reprisals made on her account . 
She was satisfied after the manner of that Arab woman , who , having received a box on the ear from her husband , went to complain to her father , and cried for vengeance , saying : `` Father , you owe my husband affront for affront . '' 
The father asked : `` On which cheek did you receive the blow ? '' 
`` On the left cheek . '' 
The father slapped her right cheek and said : `` Now you are satisfied . 
Go tell your husband that he boxed my daughter 's ears , and that I have accordingly boxed his wife 's . '' 
The rain had ceased . 
Recruits had arrived . 
Workmen had brought under their blouses a barrel of powder , a basket containing bottles of vitriol , two or three carnival torches , and a basket filled with fire-pots , `` left over from the King 's festival . '' 
This festival was very recent , having taken place on the 1st of May . 
It was said that these munitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine named Pepin . 
They smashed the only street lantern in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the lantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis , and all the lanterns in the surrounding streets , de Mondetour , du Cygne , des Precheurs , and de la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie . 
Enjolras , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac directed everything . 
Two barricades were now in process of construction at once , both of them resting on the Corinthe house and forming a right angle ; the larger shut off the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the other closed the Rue Mondetour , on the side of the Rue de Cygne . 
This last barricade , which was very narrow , was constructed only of casks and paving-stones . 
There were about fifty workers on it ; thirty were armed with guns ; for , on their way , they had effected a wholesale loan from an armorer 's shop . 
Nothing could be more bizarre and at the same time more motley than this troop . 
One had a round-jacket , a cavalry sabre , and two holster-pistols , another was in his shirt-sleeves , with a round hat , and a powder-horn slung at his side , a third wore a plastron of nine sheets of gray paper and was armed with a saddler 's awl . 
There was one who was shouting : `` Let us exterminate them to the last man and die at the point of our bayonet . '' 
This man had no bayonet . 
Another spread out over his coat the cross-belt and cartridge-box of a National Guardsman , the cover of the cartridge-box being ornamented with this inscription in red worsted : Public Order . 
There were a great many guns bearing the numbers of the legions , few hats , no cravats , many bare arms , some pikes . 
Add to this , all ages , all sorts of faces , small , pale young men , and bronzed longshoremen . 
All were in haste ; and as they helped each other , they discussed the possible chances . 
That they would receive succor about three o'clock in the morning -- that they were sure of one regiment , that Paris would rise . 
Terrible sayings with which was mingled a sort of cordial joviality . 
One would have pronounced them brothers , but they did not know each other 's names . 
Great perils have this fine characteristic , that they bring to light the fraternity of strangers . 
A fire had been lighted in the kitchen , and there they were engaged in moulding into bullets , pewter mugs , spoons , forks , and all the brass table-ware of the establishment . 
In the midst of it all , they drank . 
Caps and buckshot were mixed pell-mell on the tables with glasses of wine . 
In the billiard-hall , Mame Hucheloup , Matelote , and Gibelotte , variously modified by terror , which had stupefied one , rendered another breathless , and roused the third , were tearing up old dish-cloths and making lint ; three insurgents were assisting them , three bushy-haired , jolly blades with beards and moustaches , who plucked away at the linen with the fingers of seamstresses and who made them tremble . 
The man of lofty stature whom Courfeyrac , Combeferre , and Enjolras had observed at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the Rue des Billettes , was at work on the smaller barricade and was making himself useful there . 
Gavroche was working on the larger one . 
As for the young man who had been waiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings , and who had inquired for M. Marius , he had disappeared at about the time when the omnibus had been overturned . 
Gavroche , completely carried away and radiant , had undertaken to get everything in readiness . 
He went , came , mounted , descended , re-mounted , whistled , and sparkled . 
He seemed to be there for the encouragement of all . 
Had he any incentive ? 
Yes , certainly , his poverty ; had he wings ? 
yes , certainly , his joy . 
Gavroche was a whirlwind . 
He was constantly visible , he was incessantly audible . 
He filled the air , as he was everywhere at once . 
He was a sort of almost irritating ubiquity ; no halt was possible with him . 
The enormous barricade felt him on its haunches . 
He troubled the loungers , he excited the idle , he reanimated the weary , he grew impatient over the thoughtful , he inspired gayety in some , and breath in others , wrath in others , movement in all , now pricking a student , now biting an artisan ; he alighted , paused , flew off again , hovered over the tumult , and the effort , sprang from one party to another , murmuring and humming , and harassed the whole company ; a fly on the immense revolutionary coach . 
Perpetual motion was in his little arms and perpetual clamor in his little lungs . 
`` Courage ! 
more paving-stones ! 
more casks ! 
more machines ! 
Where are you now ? 
A hod of plaster for me to stop this hole with ! 
Your barricade is very small . 
It must be carried up . 
Put everything on it , fling everything there , stick it all in . 
Break down the house . 
A barricade is Mother Gibou 's tea . 
Hullo , here 's a glass door . '' 
This elicited an exclamation from the workers . 
`` A glass door ? 
what do you expect us to do with a glass door , tubercle ? '' 
`` Hercules yourselves ! '' 
