No trait of the universal face is lacking in the profile of Paris . 
The bal Mabile is not the polymnia dance of the Janiculum , but the dealer in ladies ' wearing apparel there devours the lorette with her eyes , exactly as the procuress Staphyla lay in wait for the virgin Planesium . 
The Barriere du Combat is not the Coliseum , but people are as ferocious there as though Caesar were looking on . 
The Syrian hostess has more grace than Mother Saguet , but , if Virgil haunted the Roman wine-shop , David d'Angers , Balzac and Charlet have sat at the tables of Parisian taverns . 
Paris reigns . 
Geniuses flash forth there , the red tails prosper there . 
Adonai passes on his chariot with its twelve wheels of thunder and lightning ; Silenus makes his entry there on his ass . 
For Silenus read Ramponneau . 
Paris is the synonym of Cosmos , Paris is Athens , Sybaris , Jerusalem , Pantin . 
All civilizations are there in an abridged form , all barbarisms also . 
Paris would greatly regret it if it had not a guillotine . 
A little of the Place de Greve is a good thing . 
What would all that eternal festival be without this seasoning ? 
Our laws are wisely provided , and thanks to them , this blade drips on this Shrove Tuesday . 
TO SCOFF , TO REIGN There is no limit to Paris . 
No city has had that domination which sometimes derides those whom it subjugates . 
To please you , O Athenians ! 
exclaimed Alexander . 
Paris makes more than the law , it makes the fashion ; Paris sets more than the fashion , it sets the routine . 
Paris may be stupid , if it sees fit ; it sometimes allows itself this luxury ; then the universe is stupid in company with it ; then Paris awakes , rubs its eyes , says : `` How stupid I am ! '' 
and bursts out laughing in the face of the human race . 
What a marvel is such a city ! 
it is a strange thing that this grandioseness and this burlesque should be amicable neighbors , that all this majesty should not be thrown into disorder by all this parody , and that the same mouth can to-day blow into the trump of the Judgment Day , and to-morrow into the reed-flute ! 
Paris has a sovereign joviality . 
Its gayety is of the thunder and its farce holds a sceptre . 
Its tempest sometimes proceeds from a grimace . 
Its explosions , its days , its masterpieces , its prodigies , its epics , go forth to the bounds of the universe , and so also do its cock-and-bull stories . 
Its laugh is the mouth of a volcano which spatters the whole earth . 
Its jests are sparks . 
It imposes its caricatures as well as its ideal on people ; the highest monuments of human civilization accept its ironies and lend their eternity to its mischievous pranks . 
It is superb ; it has a prodigious 14th of July , which delivers the globe ; it forces all nations to take the oath of tennis ; its night of the 4th of August dissolves in three hours a thousand years of feudalism ; it makes of its logic the muscle of unanimous will ; it multiplies itself under all sorts of forms of the sublime ; it fills with its light Washington , Kosciusko , Bolivar , Bozzaris , Riego , Bem , Manin , Lopez , John Brown , Garibaldi ; it is everywhere where the future is being lighted up , at Boston in 1779 , at the Isle de Leon in 1820 , at Pesth in 1848 , at Palermo in 1860 , it whispers the mighty countersign : Liberty , in the ear of the American abolitionists grouped about the boat at Harper 's Ferry , and in the ear of the patriots of Ancona assembled in the shadow , to the Archi before the Gozzi inn on the seashore ; it creates Canaris ; it creates Quiroga ; it creates Pisacane ; it irradiates the great on earth ; it was while proceeding whither its breath urge them , that Byron perished at Missolonghi , and that Mazet died at Barcelona ; it is the tribune under the feet of Mirabeau , and a crater under the feet of Robespierre ; its books , its theatre , its art , its science , its literature , its philosophy , are the manuals of the human race ; it has Pascal , Regnier , Corneille , Descartes , Jean-Jacques : Voltaire for all moments , Moliere for all centuries ; it makes its language to be talked by the universal mouth , and that language becomes the word ; it constructs in all minds the idea of progress , the liberating dogmas which it forges are for the generations trusty friends , and it is with the soul of its thinkers and its poets that all heroes of all nations have been made since 1789 ; this does not prevent vagabondism , and that enormous genius which is called Paris , while transfiguring the world by its light , sketches in charcoal Bouginier 's nose on the wall of the temple of Theseus and writes Credeville the thief on the Pyramids . 
Paris is always showing its teeth ; when it is not scolding it is laughing . 
Such is Paris . 
The smoke of its roofs forms the ideas of the universe . 
A heap of mud and stone , if you will , but , above all , a moral being . 
It is more than great , it is immense . 
Why ? 
Because it is daring . 
To dare ; that is the price of progress . 
All sublime conquests are , more or less , the prizes of daring . 
In order that the Revolution should take place , it does not suffice that Montesquieu should foresee it , that Diderot should preach it , that Beaumarchais should announce it , that Condorcet should calculate it , that Arouet should prepare it , that Rousseau should premeditate it ; it is necessary that Danton should dare it . 
The cry : Audacity ! 
is a Fiat lux . 
It is necessary , for the sake of the forward march of the human race , that there should be proud lessons of courage permanently on the heights . 
Daring deeds dazzle history and are one of man 's great sources of light . 
The dawn dares when it rises . 
To attempt , to brave , to persist , to persevere , to be faithful to one 's self , to grasp fate bodily , to astound catastrophe by the small amount of fear that it occasions us , now to affront unjust power , again to insult drunken victory , to hold one 's position , to stand one 's ground ; that is the example which nations need , that is the light which electrifies them . 
The same formidable lightning proceeds from the torch of Prometheus to Cambronne 's short pipe . 
THE FUTURE LATENT IN THE PEOPLE As for the Parisian populace , even when a man grown , it is always the street Arab ; to paint the child is to paint the city ; and it is for that reason that we have studied this eagle in this arrant sparrow . 
It is in the faubourgs , above all , we maintain , that the Parisian race appears ; there is the pure blood ; there is the true physiognomy ; there this people toils and suffers , and suffering and toil are the two faces of man . 
There exist there immense numbers of unknown beings , among whom swarm types of the strangest , from the porter of la Rapee to the knacker of Montfaucon . 
Fex urbis , exclaims Cicero ; mob , adds Burke , indignantly ; rabble , multitude , populace . 
These are words and quickly uttered . 
But so be it . 
What does it matter ? 
What is it to me if they do go barefoot ! 
They do not know how to read ; so much the worse . 
Would you abandon them for that ? 
Would you turn their distress into a malediction ? 
Can not the light penetrate these masses ? 
Let us return to that cry : Light ! 
and let us obstinately persist therein ! 
Light ! 
Light ! 
Who knows whether these opacities will not become transparent ? 
Are not revolutions transfigurations ? 
Come , philosophers , teach , enlighten , light up , think aloud , speak aloud , hasten joyously to the great sun , fraternize with the public place , announce the good news , spend your alphabets lavishly , proclaim rights , sing the Marseillaises , sow enthusiasms , tear green boughs from the oaks . 
Make a whirlwind of the idea . 
This crowd may be rendered sublime . 
Let us learn how to make use of that vast conflagration of principles and virtues , which sparkles , bursts forth and quivers at certain hours . 
These bare feet , these bare arms , these rags , these ignorances , these abjectnesses , these darknesses , may be employed in the conquest of the ideal . 
Gaze past the people , and you will perceive truth . 
Let that vile sand which you trample under foot be cast into the furnace , let it melt and seethe there , it will become a splendid crystal , and it is thanks to it that Galileo and Newton will discover stars . 
LITTLE GAVROCHE Eight or nine years after the events narrated in the second part of this story , people noticed on the Boulevard du Temple , and in the regions of the Chateau-d'Eau , a little boy eleven or twelve years of age , who would have realized with tolerable accuracy that ideal of the gamin sketched out above , if , with the laugh of his age on his lips , he had not had a heart absolutely sombre and empty . 
This child was well muffled up in a pair of man 's trousers , but he did not get them from his father , and a woman 's chemise , but he did not get it from his mother . 
Some people or other had clothed him in rags out of charity . 
Still , he had a father and a mother . 
But his father did not think of him , and his mother did not love him . 
He was one of those children most deserving of pity , among all , one of those who have father and mother , and who are orphans nevertheless . 
This child never felt so well as when he was in the street . 
The pavements were less hard to him than his mother 's heart . 
His parents had despatched him into life with a kick . 
He simply took flight . 
He was a boisterous , pallid , nimble , wide-awake , jeering , lad , with a vivacious but sickly air . 
He went and came , sang , played at hopscotch , scraped the gutters , stole a little , but , like cats and sparrows , gayly laughed when he was called a rogue , and got angry when called a thief . 
He had no shelter , no bread , no fire , no love ; but he was merry because he was free . 
When these poor creatures grow to be men , the millstones of the social order meet them and crush them , but so long as they are children , they escape because of their smallness . 
The tiniest hole saves them . 
Nevertheless , abandoned as this child was , it sometimes happened , every two or three months , that he said , `` Come , I 'll go and see mamma ! '' 
Then he quitted the boulevard , the Cirque , the Porte Saint-Martin , descended to the quays , crossed the bridges , reached the suburbs , arrived at the Salpetriere , and came to a halt , where ? 
Precisely at that double number 50-52 with which the reader is acquainted -- at the Gorbeau hovel . 
At that epoch , the hovel 50-52 generally deserted and eternally decorated with the placard : `` Chambers to let , '' chanced to be , a rare thing , inhabited by numerous individuals who , however , as is always the case in Paris , had no connection with each other . 
All belonged to that indigent class which begins to separate from the lowest of petty bourgeoisie in straitened circumstances , and which extends from misery to misery into the lowest depths of society down to those two beings in whom all the material things of civilization end , the sewer-man who sweeps up the mud , and the ragpicker who collects scraps . 
The `` principal lodger '' of Jean Valjean 's day was dead and had been replaced by another exactly like her . 
I know not what philosopher has said : `` Old women are never lacking . '' 
This new old woman was named Madame Bourgon , and had nothing remarkable about her life except a dynasty of three paroquets , who had reigned in succession over her soul . 
The most miserable of those who inhabited the hovel were a family of four persons , consisting of father , mother , and two daughters , already well grown , all four of whom were lodged in the same attic , one of the cells which we have already mentioned . 
At first sight , this family presented no very special feature except its extreme destitution ; the father , when he hired the chamber , had stated that his name was Jondrette . 
Some time after his moving in , which had borne a singular resemblance to the entrance of nothing at all , to borrow the memorable expression of the principal tenant , this Jondrette had said to the woman , who , like her predecessor , was at the same time portress and stair-sweeper : `` Mother So-and-So , if any one should chance to come and inquire for a Pole or an Italian , or even a Spaniard , perchance , it is I. '' This family was that of the merry barefoot boy . 
He arrived there and found distress , and , what is still sadder , no smile ; a cold hearth and cold hearts . 
