`` I think I am not mistaken in saying that those are the names which my brother mentioned . 
Then he interrupted himself and addressed me : -- '' ` Have we not some relatives in those parts , my dear sister ? ' 
`` I replied , -- '' ` We did have some ; among others , M. de Lucenet , who was captain of the gates at Pontarlier under the old regime . ' '' 
` Yes , ' resumed my brother ; ` but in ' 93 , one had no longer any relatives , one had only one 's arms . 
I worked . 
They have , in the country of Pontarlier , whither you are going , Monsieur Valjean , a truly patriarchal and truly charming industry , my sister . 
It is their cheese-dairies , which they call fruitieres . ' 
`` Then my brother , while urging the man to eat , explained to him , with great minuteness , what these fruitieres of Pontarlier were ; that they were divided into two classes : the big barns which belong to the rich , and where there are forty or fifty cows which produce from seven to eight thousand cheeses each summer , and the associated fruitieres , which belong to the poor ; these are the peasants of mid-mountain , who hold their cows in common , and share the proceeds . 
` They engage the services of a cheese-maker , whom they call the grurin ; the grurin receives the milk of the associates three times a day , and marks the quantity on a double tally . 
It is towards the end of April that the work of the cheese-dairies begins ; it is towards the middle of June that the cheese-makers drive their cows to the mountains . ' 
`` The man recovered his animation as he ate . 
My brother made him drink that good Mauves wine , which he does not drink himself , because he says that wine is expensive . 
My brother imparted all these details with that easy gayety of his with which you are acquainted , interspersing his words with graceful attentions to me . 
He recurred frequently to that comfortable trade of grurin , as though he wished the man to understand , without advising him directly and harshly , that this would afford him a refuge . 
One thing struck me . 
This man was what I have told you . 
Well , neither during supper , nor during the entire evening , did my brother utter a single word , with the exception of a few words about Jesus when he entered , which could remind the man of what he was , nor of what my brother was . 
To all appearances , it was an occasion for preaching him a little sermon , and of impressing the Bishop on the convict , so that a mark of the passage might remain behind . 
This might have appeared to any one else who had this , unfortunate man in his hands to afford a chance to nourish his soul as well as his body , and to bestow upon him some reproach , seasoned with moralizing and advice , or a little commiseration , with an exhortation to conduct himself better in the future . 
My brother did not even ask him from what country he came , nor what was his history . 
For in his history there is a fault , and my brother seemed to avoid everything which could remind him of it . 
To such a point did he carry it , that at one time , when my brother was speaking of the mountaineers of Pontarlier , who exercise a gentle labor near heaven , and who , he added , are happy because they are innocent , he stopped short , fearing lest in this remark there might have escaped him something which might wound the man . 
By dint of reflection , I think I have comprehended what was passing in my brother 's heart . 
He was thinking , no doubt , that this man , whose name is Jean Valjean , had his misfortune only too vividly present in his mind ; that the best thing was to divert him from it , and to make him believe , if only momentarily , that he was a person like any other , by treating him just in his ordinary way . 
Is not this indeed , to understand charity well ? 
Is there not , dear Madame , something truly evangelical in this delicacy which abstains from sermon , from moralizing , from allusions ? 
and is not the truest pity , when a man has a sore point , not to touch it at all ? 
It has seemed to me that this might have been my brother 's private thought . 
In any case , what I can say is that , if he entertained all these ideas , he gave no sign of them ; from beginning to end , even to me he was the same as he is every evening , and he supped with this Jean Valjean with the same air and in the same manner in which he would have supped with M. Gedeon le Provost , or with the curate of the parish . 
`` Towards the end , when he had reached the figs , there came a knock at the door . 
It was Mother Gerbaud , with her little one in her arms . 
My brother kissed the child on the brow , and borrowed fifteen sous which I had about me to give to Mother Gerbaud . 
The man was not paying much heed to anything then . 
He was no longer talking , and he seemed very much fatigued . 
After poor old Gerbaud had taken her departure , my brother said grace ; then he turned to the man and said to him , ` You must be in great need of your bed . ' 
Madame Magloire cleared the table very promptly . 
I understood that we must retire , in order to allow this traveller to go to sleep , and we both went up stairs . 
Nevertheless , I sent Madame Magloire down a moment later , to carry to the man 's bed a goat skin from the Black Forest , which was in my room . 
The nights are frigid , and that keeps one warm . 
It is a pity that this skin is old ; all the hair is falling out . 
My brother bought it while he was in Germany , at Tottlingen , near the sources of the Danube , as well as the little ivory-handled knife which I use at table . 
`` Madame Magloire returned immediately . 
We said our prayers in the drawing-room , where we hang up the linen , and then we each retired to our own chambers , without saying a word to each other . '' 
TRANQUILLITY After bidding his sister good night , Monseigneur Bienvenu took one of the two silver candlesticks from the table , handed the other to his guest , and said to him , -- `` Monsieur , I will conduct you to your room . '' 
The man followed him . 
As might have been observed from what has been said above , the house was so arranged that in order to pass into the oratory where the alcove was situated , or to get out of it , it was necessary to traverse the Bishop 's bedroom . 
At the moment when he was crossing this apartment , Madame Magloire was putting away the silverware in the cupboard near the head of the bed . 
This was her last care every evening before she went to bed . 
The Bishop installed his guest in the alcove . 
A fresh white bed had been prepared there . 
The man set the candle down on a small table . 
`` Well , '' said the Bishop , `` may you pass a good night . 
To-morrow morning , before you set out , you shall drink a cup of warm milk from our cows . '' 
`` Thanks , Monsieur l'Abbe , '' said the man . 
Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace , when all of a sudden , and without transition , he made a strange movement , which would have frozen the two sainted women with horror , had they witnessed it . 
Even at this day it is difficult for us to explain what inspired him at that moment . 
Did he intend to convey a warning or to throw out a menace ? 
Was he simply obeying a sort of instinctive impulse which was obscure even to himself ? 
He turned abruptly to the old man , folded his arms , and bending upon his host a savage gaze , he exclaimed in a hoarse voice : -- `` Ah ! 
really ! 
You lodge me in your house , close to yourself like this ? '' 
He broke off , and added with a laugh in which there lurked something monstrous : -- `` Have you really reflected well ? 
How do you know that I have not been an assassin ? '' 
The Bishop replied : -- `` That is the concern of the good God . '' 
Then gravely , and moving his lips like one who is praying or talking to himself , he raised two fingers of his right hand and bestowed his benediction on the man , who did not bow , and without turning his head or looking behind him , he returned to his bedroom . 
When the alcove was in use , a large serge curtain drawn from wall to wall concealed the altar . 
The Bishop knelt before this curtain as he passed and said a brief prayer . 
A moment later he was in his garden , walking , meditating , conteplating , his heart and soul wholly absorbed in those grand and mysterious things which God shows at night to the eyes which remain open . 
As for the man , he was actually so fatigued that he did not even profit by the nice white sheets . 
Snuffing out his candle with his nostrils after the manner of convicts , he dropped , all dressed as he was , upon the bed , where he immediately fell into a profound sleep . 
Midnight struck as the Bishop returned from his garden to his apartment . 
A few minutes later all were asleep in the little house . 
JEAN VALJEAN Towards the middle of the night Jean Valjean woke . 
Jean Valjean came from a poor peasant family of Brie . 
He had not learned to read in his childhood . 
When he reached man 's estate , be became a tree-pruner at Faverolles . 
His mother was named Jeanne Mathieu ; his father was called Jean Valjean or Vlajean , probably a sobriquet , and a contraction of viola Jean , `` here 's Jean . '' 
Jean Valjean was of that thoughtful but not gloomy disposition which constitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures . 
On the whole , however , there was something decidedly sluggish and insignificant about Jean Valjean in appearance , at least . 
He had lost his father and mother at a very early age . 
His mother had died of a milk fever , which had not been properly attended to . 
His father , a tree-pruner , like himself , had been killed by a fall from a tree . 
All that remained to Jean Valjean was a sister older than himself , -- a widow with seven children , boys and girls . 
This sister had brought up Jean Valjean , and so long as she had a husband she lodged and fed her young brother . 
The husband died . 
The eldest of the seven children was eight years old . 
The youngest , one . 
Jean Valjean had just attained his twenty-fifth year . 
He took the father 's place , and , in his turn , supported the sister who had brought him up . 
This was done simply as a duty and even a little churlishly on the part of Jean Valjean . 
Thus his youth had been spent in rude and ill-paid toil . 
He had never known a `` kind woman friend '' in his native parts . 
He had not had the time to fall in love . 
He returned at night weary , and ate his broth without uttering a word . 
His sister , mother Jeanne , often took the best part of his repast from his bowl while he was eating , -- a bit of meat , a slice of bacon , the heart of the cabbage , -- to give to one of her children . 
As he went on eating , with his head bent over the table and almost into his soup , his long hair falling about his bowl and concealing his eyes , he had the air of perceiving nothing and allowing it . 
There was at Faverolles , not far from the Valjean thatched cottage , on the other side of the lane , a farmer 's wife named Marie-Claude ; the Valjean children , habitually famished , sometimes went to borrow from Marie-Claude a pint of milk , in their mother 's name , which they drank behind a hedge or in some alley corner , snatching the jug from each other so hastily that the little girls spilled it on their aprons and down their necks . 
If their mother had known of this marauding , she would have punished the delinquents severely . 
Jean Valjean gruffly and grumblingly paid Marie-Claude for the pint of milk behind their mother 's back , and the children were not punished . 
In pruning season he earned eighteen sous a day ; then he hired out as a hay-maker , as laborer , as neat-herd on a farm , as a drudge . 
