Whether Monsieur your father comes in that category , I do not know ! 
I am sorry for it , so much the worse , your humble servant ! '' 
In his turn , it was Marius who was the firebrand and M. Gillenormand who was the bellows . 
Marius quivered in every limb , he did not know what would happen next , his brain was on fire . 
He was the priest who beholds all his sacred wafers cast to the winds , the fakir who beholds a passer-by spit upon his idol . 
It could not be that such things had been uttered in his presence . 
What was he to do ? 
His father had just been trampled under foot and stamped upon in his presence , but by whom ? 
By his grandfather . 
How was he to avenge the one without outraging the other ? 
It was impossible for him to insult his grandfather and it was equally impossible for him to leave his father unavenged . 
On the one hand was a sacred grave , on the other hoary locks . 
He stood there for several moments , staggering as though intoxicated , with all this whirlwind dashing through his head ; then he raised his eyes , gazed fixedly at his grandfather , and cried in a voice of thunder : -- `` Down with the Bourbons , and that great hog of a Louis XVIII . ! '' 
Louis XVIII . 
had been dead for four years ; but it was all the same to him . 
The old man , who had been crimson , turned whiter than his hair . 
He wheeled round towards a bust of M. le Duc de Berry , which stood on the chimney-piece , and made a profound bow , with a sort of peculiar majesty . 
Then he paced twice , slowly and in silence , from the fireplace to the window and from the window to the fireplace , traversing the whole length of the room , and making the polished floor creak as though he had been a stone statue walking . 
On his second turn , he bent over his daughter , who was watching this encounter with the stupefied air of an antiquated lamb , and said to her with a smile that was almost calm : `` A baron like this gentleman , and a bourgeois like myself can not remain under the same roof . '' 
And drawing himself up , all at once , pallid , trembling , terrible , with his brow rendered more lofty by the terrible radiance of wrath , he extended his arm towards Marius and shouted to him : -- `` Be off ! '' 
Marius left the house . 
On the following day , M. Gillenormand said to his daughter : `` You will send sixty pistoles every six months to that blood-drinker , and you will never mention his name to me . '' 
Having an immense reserve fund of wrath to get rid of , and not knowing what to do with it , he continued to address his daughter as you instead of thou for the next three months . 
Marius , on his side , had gone forth in indignation . 
There was one circumstance which , it must be admitted , aggravated his exasperation . 
There are always petty fatalities of the sort which complicate domestic dramas . 
They augment the grievances in such cases , although , in reality , the wrongs are not increased by them . 
While carrying Marius ' `` duds '' precipitately to his chamber , at his grandfather 's command , Nicolette had , inadvertently , let fall , probably , on the attic staircase , which was dark , that medallion of black shagreen which contained the paper penned by the colonel . 
Neither paper nor case could afterwards be found . 
Marius was convinced that `` Monsieur Gillenormand '' -- from that day forth he never alluded to him otherwise -- had flung `` his father 's testament '' in the fire . 
He knew by heart the few lines which the colonel had written , and , consequently , nothing was lost . 
But the paper , the writing , that sacred relic , -- all that was his very heart . 
What had been done with it ? 
Marius had taken his departure without saying whither he was going , and without knowing where , with thirty francs , his watch , and a few clothes in a hand-bag . 
He had entered a hackney-coach , had engaged it by the hour , and had directed his course at hap-hazard towards the Latin quarter . 
What was to become of Marius ? 
A GROUP WHICH BARELY MISSED BECOMING HISTORIC At that epoch , which was , to all appearances indifferent , a certain revolutionary quiver was vaguely current . 
Breaths which had started forth from the depths of '89 and '93 were in the air . 
Youth was on the point , may the reader pardon us the word , of moulting . 
People were undergoing a transformation , almost without being conscious of it , through the movement of the age . 
The needle which moves round the compass also moves in souls . 
Each person was taking that step in advance which he was bound to take . 
The Royalists were becoming liberals , liberals were turning democrats . 
It was a flood tide complicated with a thousand ebb movements ; the peculiarity of ebbs is to create intermixtures ; hence the combination of very singular ideas ; people adored both Napoleon and liberty . 
We are making history here . 
These were the mirages of that period . 
Opinions traverse phases . 
Voltairian royalism , a quaint variety , had a no less singular sequel , Bonapartist liberalism . 
Other groups of minds were more serious . 
In that direction , they sounded principles , they attached themselves to the right . 
They grew enthusiastic for the absolute , they caught glimpses of infinite realizations ; the absolute , by its very rigidity , urges spirits towards the sky and causes them to float in illimitable space . 
There is nothing like dogma for bringing forth dreams . 
And there is nothing like dreams for engendering the future . 
Utopia to-day , flesh and blood to-morrow . 
These advanced opinions had a double foundation . 
A beginning of mystery menaced `` the established order of things , '' which was suspicious and underhand . 
A sign which was revolutionary to the highest degree . 
The second thoughts of power meet the second thoughts of the populace in the mine . 
The incubation of insurrections gives the retort to the premeditation of coups d'etat . 
There did not , as yet , exist in France any of those vast underlying organizations , like the German tugendbund and Italian Carbonarism ; but here and there there were dark underminings , which were in process of throwing off shoots . 
The Cougourde was being outlined at Aix ; there existed at Paris , among other affiliations of that nature , the society of the Friends of the A B C . 
What were these Friends of the A B C ? 
A society which had for its object apparently the education of children , in reality the elevation of man . 
They declared themselves the Friends of the A B C , -- the Abaisse , -- the debased , -- that is to say , the people . 
They wished to elevate the people . 
It was a pun which we should do wrong to smile at . 
Puns are sometimes serious factors in politics ; witness the Castratus ad castra , which made a general of the army of Narses ; witness : Barbari et Barberini ; witness : Tu es Petrus et super hanc petram , etc. , etc. . 
The Friends of the A B C were not numerous , it was a secret society in the state of embryo , we might almost say a coterie , if coteries ended in heroes . 
They assembled in Paris in two localities , near the fish-market , in a wine-shop called Corinthe , of which more will be heard later on , and near the Pantheon in a little cafe in the Rue Saint-Michel called the Cafe Musain , now torn down ; the first of these meeting-places was close to the workingman , the second to the students . 
The assemblies of the Friends of the A B C were usually held in a back room of the Cafe Musain . 
This hall , which was tolerably remote from the cafe , with which it was connected by an extremely long corridor , had two windows and an exit with a private stairway on the little Rue des Gres . 
There they smoked and drank , and gambled and laughed . 
There they conversed in very loud tones about everything , and in whispers of other things . 
An old map of France under the Republic was nailed to the wall , -- a sign quite sufficient to excite the suspicion of a police agent . 
The greater part of the Friends of the A B C were students , who were on cordial terms with the working classes . 
Here are the names of the principal ones . 
They belong , in a certain measure , to history : Enjolras , Combeferre , Jean Prouvaire , Feuilly , Courfeyrac , Bahorel , Lesgle or Laigle , Joly , Grantaire . 
These young men formed a sort of family , through the bond of friendship . 
All , with the exception of Laigle , were from the South . 
This was a remarkable group . 
It vanished in the invisible depths which lie behind us . 
At the point of this drama which we have now reached , it will not perhaps be superfluous to throw a ray of light upon these youthful heads , before the reader beholds them plunging into the shadow of a tragic adventure . 
Enjolras , whose name we have mentioned first of all , -- the reader shall see why later on , -- was an only son and wealthy . 
Enjolras was a charming young man , who was capable of being terrible . 
He was angelically handsome . 
He was a savage Antinous . 
One would have said , to see the pensive thoughtfulness of his glance , that he had already , in some previous state of existence , traversed the revolutionary apocalypse . 
He possessed the tradition of it as though he had been a witness . 
He was acquainted with all the minute details of the great affair . 
A pontifical and warlike nature , a singular thing in a youth . 
He was an officiating priest and a man of war ; from the immediate point of view , a soldier of the democracy ; above the contemporary movement , the priest of the ideal . 
His eyes were deep , his lids a little red , his lower lip was thick and easily became disdainful , his brow was lofty . 
A great deal of brow in a face is like a great deal of horizon in a view . 
Like certain young men at the beginning of this century and the end of the last , who became illustrious at an early age , he was endowed with excessive youth , and was as rosy as a young girl , although subject to hours of pallor . 
Already a man , he still seemed a child . 
His two and twenty years appeared to be but seventeen ; he was serious , it did not seem as though he were aware there was on earth a thing called woman . 
He had but one passion -- the right ; but one thought -- to overthrow the obstacle . 
On Mount Aventine , he would have been Gracchus ; in the Convention , he would have been Saint-Just . 
He hardly saw the roses , he ignored spring , he did not hear the carolling of the birds ; the bare throat of Evadne would have moved him no more than it would have moved Aristogeiton ; he , like Harmodius , thought flowers good for nothing except to conceal the sword . 
He was severe in his enjoyments . 
