And then , in proportion as he regained life , the old ulcers of his memory opened once more , he reflected again on the past , Colonel Pontmercy placed himself once more between M. Gillenormand and him , Marius , he told himself that he had no true kindness to expect from a person who had been so unjust and so hard to his father . 
And with health , there returned to him a sort of harshness towards his grandfather . 
The old man was gently pained by this . 
M. Gillenormand , without however allowing it to appear , observed that Marius , ever since the latter had been brought back to him and had regained consciousness , had not once called him father . 
It is true that he did not say `` monsieur '' to him ; but he contrived not to say either the one or the other , by means of a certain way of turning his phrases . 
Obviously , a crisis was approaching . 
As almost always happens in such cases , Marius skirmished before giving battle , by way of proving himself . 
This is called `` feeling the ground . '' 
One morning it came to pass that M. Gillenormand spoke slightingly of the Convention , apropos of a newspaper which had fallen into his hands , and gave vent to a Royalist harangue on Danton , Saint-Juste and Robespierre . 
-- `` The men of '93 were giants , '' said Marius with severity . 
The old man held his peace , and uttered not a sound during the remainder of that day . 
Marius , who had always present to his mind the inflexible grandfather of his early years , interpreted this silence as a profound concentration of wrath , augured from it a hot conflict , and augmented his preparations for the fray in the inmost recesses of his mind . 
He decided that , in case of a refusal , he would tear off his bandages , dislocate his collar-bone , that he would lay bare all the wounds which he had left , and would reject all food . 
His wounds were his munitions of war . 
He would have Cosette or die . 
He awaited the propitious moment with the crafty patience of the sick . 
That moment arrived . 
MARIUS ATTACKED One day , M. Gillenormand , while his daughter was putting in order the phials and cups on the marble of the commode , bent over Marius and said to him in his tenderest accents : `` Look here , my little Marius , if I were in your place , I would eat meat now in preference to fish . 
A fried sole is excellent to begin a convalescence with , but a good cutlet is needed to put a sick man on his feet . '' 
Marius , who had almost entirely recovered his strength , collected the whole of it , drew himself up into a sitting posture , laid his two clenched fists on the sheets of his bed , looked his grandfather in the face , assumed a terrible air , and said : `` This leads me to say something to you . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I wish to marry . '' 
`` Agreed , '' said his grandfather . 
-- And he burst out laughing . 
`` How agreed ? '' 
`` Yes , agreed . 
You shall have your little girl . '' 
Marius , stunned and overwhelmed with the dazzling shock , trembled in every limb . 
M. Gillenormand went on : `` Yes , you shall have her , that pretty little girl of yours . 
She comes every day in the shape of an old gentleman to inquire after you . 
Ever since you were wounded , she has passed her time in weeping and making lint . 
I have made inquiries . 
She lives in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
Ah ! 
There we have it ! 
Ah ! 
so you want her ! 
Well , you shall have her . 
You 're caught . 
You had arranged your little plot , you had said to yourself : -- ` I 'm going to signify this squarely to my grandfather , to that mummy of the Regency and of the Directory , to that ancient beau , to that Dorante turned Geronte ; he has indulged in his frivolities also , that he has , and he has had his love affairs , and his grisettes and his Cosettes ; he has made his rustle , he has had his wings , he has eaten of the bread of spring ; he certainly must remember it . ' 
Ah ! 
you take the cockchafer by the horns . 
That 's good . 
I offer you a cutlet and you answer me : ` By the way , I want to marry . ' 
There 's a transition for you ! 
Ah ! 
you reckoned on a bickering ! 
You do not know that I am an old coward . 
What do you say to that ? 
You are vexed ? 
You did not expect to find your grandfather still more foolish than yourself , you are wasting the discourse which you meant to bestow upon me , Mr. Lawyer , and that 's vexatious . 
Well , so much the worse , rage away . 
I 'll do whatever you wish , and that cuts you short , imbecile ! 
Listen . 
I have made my inquiries , I 'm cunning too ; she is charming , she is discreet , it is not true about the lancer , she has made heaps of lint , she 's a jewel , she adores you , if you had died , there would have been three of us , her coffin would have accompanied mine . 
I have had an idea , ever since you have been better , of simply planting her at your bedside , but it is only in romances that young girls are brought to the bedsides of handsome young wounded men who interest them . 
It is not done . 
What would your aunt have said to it ? 
You were nude three quarters of the time , my good fellow . 
Ask Nicolette , who has not left you for a moment , if there was any possibility of having a woman here . 
And then , what would the doctor have said ? 
A pretty girl does not cure a man of fever . 
In short , it 's all right , let us say no more about it , all 's said , all 's done , it 's all settled , take her . 
Such is my ferocity . 
You see , I perceived that you did not love me . 
I said to myself : ` Here now , I have my little Cosette right under my hand , I 'm going to give her to him , he will be obliged to love me a little then , or he must tell the reason why . ' 
Ah ! 
so you thought that the old man was going to storm , to put on a big voice , to shout no , and to lift his cane at all that aurora . 
Not a bit of it . 
Cosette , so be it ; love , so be it ; I ask nothing better . 
Pray take the trouble of getting married , sir . 
Be happy , my well-beloved child . '' 
That said , the old man burst forth into sobs . 
And he seized Marius ' head , and pressed it with both arms against his breast , and both fell to weeping . 
This is one of the forms of supreme happiness . 
`` Father ! '' 
cried Marius . 
`` Ah , so you love me ! '' 
said the old man . 
An ineffable moment ensued . 
They were choking and could not speak . 
At length the old man stammered : `` Come ! 
his mouth is unstopped at last . 
He has said : ` Father ' to me . '' 
Marius disengaged his head from his grandfather 's arms , and said gently : `` But , father , now that I am quite well , it seems to me that I might see her . '' 
`` Agreed again , you shall see her to-morrow . '' 
`` Father ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Why not to-day ? '' 
`` Well , to-day then . 
Let it be to-day . 
You have called me ` father ' three times , and it is worth it . 
I will attend to it . 
She shall be brought hither . 
Agreed , I tell you . 
It has already been put into verse . 
This is the ending of the elegy of the ` Jeune Malade ' by Andre Chenier , by Andre Chenier whose throat was cut by the ras ... by the giants of ' 93 . '' 
M. Gillenormand fancied that he detected a faint frown on the part of Marius , who , in truth , as we must admit , was no longer listening to him , and who was thinking far more of Cosette than of 1793 . 
The grandfather , trembling at having so inopportunely introduced Andre Chenier , resumed precipitately : `` Cut his throat is not the word . 
The fact is that the great revolutionary geniuses , who were not malicious , that is incontestable , who were heroes , pardi ! 
