The fixity of eye in all the combatants upon the extremity of the street became ferocious . 
A cannon made its appearance . 
Artillery-men were pushing the piece ; it was in firing trim ; the fore-carriage had been detached ; two upheld the gun-carriage , four were at the wheels ; others followed with the caisson . 
They could see the smoke of the burning lint-stock . 
`` Fire ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The whole barricade fired , the report was terrible ; an avalanche of smoke covered and effaced both cannon and men ; after a few seconds , the cloud dispersed , and the cannon and men re-appeared ; the gun-crew had just finished rolling it slowly , correctly , without haste , into position facing the barricade . 
Not one of them had been struck . 
Then the captain of the piece , bearing down upon the breech in order to raise the muzzle , began to point the cannon with the gravity of an astronomer levelling a telescope . 
`` Bravo for the cannoneers ! '' 
cried Bossuet . 
And the whole barricade clapped their hands . 
A moment later , squarely planted in the very middle of the street , astride of the gutter , the piece was ready for action . 
A formidable pair of jaws yawned on the barricade . 
`` Come , merrily now ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` That 's the brutal part of it . 
After the fillip on the nose , the blow from the fist . 
The army is reaching out its big paw to us . 
The barricade is going to be severely shaken up . 
The fusillade tries , the cannon takes . '' 
`` It is a piece of eight , new model , brass , '' added Combeferre . 
`` Those pieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts of tin to one hundred of brass is exceeded . 
The excess of tin renders them too tender . 
Then it comes to pass that they have caves and chambers when looked at from the vent hole . 
In order to obviate this danger , and to render it possible to force the charge , it may become necessary to return to the process of the fourteenth century , hooping , and to encircle the piece on the outside with a series of unwelded steel bands , from the breech to the trunnions . 
In the meantime , they remedy this defect as best they may ; they manage to discover where the holes are located in the vent of a cannon , by means of a searcher . 
But there is a better method , with Gribeauval 's movable star . '' 
`` In the sixteenth century , '' remarked Bossuet , `` they used to rifle cannon . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` that augments the projectile force , but diminishes the accuracy of the firing . 
In firing at short range , the trajectory is not as rigid as could be desired , the parabola is exaggerated , the line of the projectile is no longer sufficiently rectilinear to allow of its striking intervening objects , which is , nevertheless , a necessity of battle , the importance of which increases with the proximity of the enemy and the precipitation of the discharge . 
This defect of the tension of the curve of the projectile in the rifled cannon of the sixteenth century arose from the smallness of the charge ; small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by the ballistic necessities , such , for instance , as the preservation of the gun-carriage . 
In short , that despot , the cannon , can not do all that it desires ; force is a great weakness . 
A cannon-ball only travels six hundred leagues an hour ; light travels seventy thousand leagues a second . 
Such is the superiority of Jesus Christ over Napoleon . '' 
`` Reload your guns , '' said Enjolras . 
How was the casing of the barricade going to behave under the cannon-balls ? 
Would they effect a breach ? 
That was the question . 
While the insurgents were reloading their guns , the artillery-men were loading the cannon . 
The anxiety in the redoubt was profound . 
The shot sped the report burst forth . 
`` Present ! '' 
shouted a joyous voice . 
And Gavroche flung himself into the barricade just as the ball dashed against it . 
He came from the direction of the Rue du Cygne , and he had nimbly climbed over the auxiliary barricade which fronted on the labyrinth of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Gavroche produced a greater sensation in the barricade than the cannon-ball . 
The ball buried itself in the mass of rubbish . 
At the most there was an omnibus wheel broken , and the old Anceau cart was demolished . 
On seeing this , the barricade burst into a laugh . 
`` Go on ! '' 
shouted Bossuet to the artillerists . 
THE ARTILLERY-MEN COMPEL PEOPLE TO TAKE THEM SERIOUSLY Thet flocked round Gavroche . 
But he had no time to tell anything . 
Marius drew him aside with a shudder . 
`` What are you doing here ? '' 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said the child , `` what are you doing here yourself ? '' 
And he stared at Marius intently with his epic effrontery . 
His eyes grew larger with the proud light within them . 
It was with an accent of severity that Marius continued : `` Who told you to come back ? 
Did you deliver my letter at the address ? '' 
Gavroche was not without some compunctions in the matter of that letter . 
In his haste to return to the barricade , he had got rid of it rather than delivered it . 
He was forced to acknowledge to himself that he had confided it rather lightly to that stranger whose face he had not been able to make out . 
It is true that the man was bareheaded , but that was not sufficient . 
In short , he had been administering to himself little inward remonstrances and he feared Marius ' reproaches . 
In order to extricate himself from the predicament , he took the simplest course ; he lied abominably . 
`` Citizen , I delivered the letter to the porter . 
The lady was asleep . 
She will have the letter when she wakes up . 
Marius had had two objects in sending that letter : to bid farewell to Cosette and to save Gavroche . 
He was obliged to content himself with the half of his desire . 
The despatch of his letter and the presence of M. Fauchelevent in the barricade , was a coincidence which occurred to him . 
He pointed out M. Fauchelevent to Gavroche . 
`` Do you know that man ? '' 
`` No , '' said Gavroche . 
Gavroche had , in fact , as we have just mentioned , seen Jean Valjean only at night . 
The troubled and unhealthy conjectures which had outlined themselves in Marius ' mind were dissipated . 
Did he know M. Fauchelevent 's opinions ? 
Perhaps M. Fauchelevent was a republican . 
Hence his very natural presence in this combat . 
In the meanwhile , Gavroche was shouting , at the other end of the barricade : `` My gun ! '' 
Courfeyrac had it returned to him . 
Gavroche warned `` his comrades '' as he called them , that the barricade was blocked . 
He had had great difficulty in reaching it . 
A battalion of the line whose arms were piled in the Rue de la Petite Truanderie was on the watch on the side of the Rue du Cygne ; on the opposite side , the municipal guard occupied the Rue des Precheurs . 
The bulk of the army was facing them in front . 
This information given , Gavroche added : `` I authorize you to hit 'em a tremendous whack . '' 
Meanwhile , Enjolras was straining his ears and watching at his embrasure . 
The assailants , dissatisfied , no doubt , with their shot , had not repeated it . 
A company of infantry of the line had come up and occupied the end of the street behind the piece of ordnance . 
The soldiers were tearing up the pavement and constructing with the stones a small , low wall , a sort of side-work not more than eighteen inches high , and facing the barricade . 
In the angle at the left of this epaulement , there was visible the head of the column of a battalion from the suburbs massed in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
Enjolras , on the watch , thought he distinguished the peculiar sound which is produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from the caissons , and he saw the commander of the piece change the elevation and incline the mouth of the cannon slightly to the left . 
Then the cannoneers began to load the piece . 
The chief seized the lint-stock himself and lowered it to the vent . 
`` Down with your heads , hug the wall ! '' 
shouted Enjolras , `` and all on your knees along the barricade ! '' 
The insurgents who were straggling in front of the wine-shop , and who had quitted their posts of combat on Gavroche 's arrival , rushed pell-mell towards the barricade ; but before Enjolras ' order could be executed , the discharge took place with the terrifying rattle of a round of grape-shot . 
