The shore , beginning with the rubbish heap , was only about thirty paces long , then it plunged into the water which beat against the wall of the quay . 
The fugitive could not have thrown himself into the Seine without being seen by the man who was following him . 
What had become of him ? 
The man in the buttoned-up coat walked to the extremity of the shore , and remained there in thought for a moment , his fists clenched , his eyes searching . 
All at once he smote his brow . 
He had just perceived , at the point where the land came to an end and the water began , a large iron grating , low , arched , garnished with a heavy lock and with three massive hinges . 
This grating , a sort of door pierced at the base of the quay , opened on the river as well as on the shore . 
A blackish stream passed under it . 
This stream discharged into the Seine . 
Beyond the heavy , rusty iron bars , a sort of dark and vaulted corridor could be descried . 
The man folded his arms and stared at the grating with an air of reproach . 
As this gaze did not suffice , he tried to thrust it aside ; he shook it , it resisted solidly . 
It is probable that it had just been opened , although no sound had been heard , a singular circumstance in so rusty a grating ; but it is certain that it had been closed again . 
This indicated that the man before whom that door had just opened had not a hook but a key . 
This evidence suddenly burst upon the mind of the man who was trying to move the grating , and evoked from him this indignant ejaculation : `` That is too much ! 
A government key ! '' 
Then , immediately regaining his composure , he expressed a whole world of interior ideas by this outburst of monosyllables accented almost ironically : `` Come ! 
Come ! 
Come ! 
Come ! '' 
That said , and in the hope of something or other , either that he should see the man emerge or other men enter , he posted himself on the watch behind a heap of rubbish , with the patient rage of a pointer . 
The hackney-coach , which regulated all its movements on his , had , in its turn , halted on the quay above him , close to the parapet . 
The coachman , foreseeing a prolonged wait , encased his horses ' muzzles in the bag of oats which is damp at the bottom , and which is so familiar to Parisians , to whom , be it said in parenthesis , the Government sometimes applies it . 
The rare passers-by on the Pont de Jena turned their heads , before they pursued their way , to take a momentary glance at these two motionless items in the landscape , the man on the shore , the carriage on the quay . 
HE ALSO BEARS HIS CROSS Jean Valjean had resumed his march and had not again paused . 
This march became more and more laborious . 
The level of these vaults varies ; the average height is about five feet , six inches , and has been calculated for the stature of a man ; Jean Valjean was forced to bend over , in order not to strike Marius against the vault ; at every step he had to bend , then to rise , and to feel incessantly of the wall . 
The moisture of the stones , and the viscous nature of the timber framework furnished but poor supports to which to cling , either for hand or foot . 
He stumbled along in the hideous dung-heap of the city . 
The intermittent gleams from the air-holes only appeared at very long intervals , and were so wan that the full sunlight seemed like the light of the moon ; all the rest was mist , miasma , opaqueness , blackness . 
Jean Valjean was both hungry and thirsty ; especially thirsty ; and this , like the sea , was a place full of water where a man can not drink . 
His strength , which was prodigious , as the reader knows , and which had been but little decreased by age , thanks to his chaste and sober life , began to give way , nevertheless . 
Fatigue began to gain on him ; and as his strength decreased , it made the weight of his burden increase . 
Marius , who was , perhaps , dead , weighed him down as inert bodies weigh . 
Jean Valjean held him in such a manner that his chest was not oppressed , and so that respiration could proceed as well as possible . 
Between his legs he felt the rapid gliding of the rats . 
One of them was frightened to such a degree that he bit him . 
From time to time , a breath of fresh air reached him through the vent-holes of the mouths of the sewer , and re-animated him . 
It might have been three hours past midday when he reached the belt-sewer . 
He was , at first , astonished at this sudden widening . 
He found himself , all at once , in a gallery where his outstretched hands could not reach the two walls , and beneath a vault which his head did not touch . 
The Grand Sewer is , in fact , eight feet wide and seven feet high . 
At the point where the Montmartre sewer joins the Grand Sewer , two other subterranean galleries , that of the Rue de Provence , and that of the Abattoir , form a square . 
Between these four ways , a less sagacious man would have remained undecided . 
Jean Valjean selected the broadest , that is to say , the belt-sewer . 
But here the question again came up -- should he descend or ascend ? 
He thought that the situation required haste , and that he must now gain the Seine at any risk . 
In other terms , he must descend . 
He turned to the left . 
It was well that he did so , for it is an error to suppose that the belt-sewer has two outlets , the one in the direction of Bercy , the other towards Passy , and that it is , as its name indicates , the subterranean girdle of the Paris on the right bank . 
The Grand Sewer , which is , it must be remembered , nothing else than the old brook of Menilmontant , terminates , if one ascends it , in a blind sack , that is to say , at its ancient point of departure which was its source , at the foot of the knoll of Menilmontant . 
There is no direct communication with the branch which collects the waters of Paris beginning with the Quartier Popincourt , and which falls into the Seine through the Amelot sewer above the ancient Isle Louviers . 
This branch , which completes the collecting sewer , is separated from it , under the Rue Menilmontant itself , by a pile which marks the dividing point of the waters , between upstream and downstream . 
If Jean Valjean had ascended the gallery he would have arrived , after a thousand efforts , and broken down with fatigue , and in an expiring condition , in the gloom , at a wall . 
He would have been lost . 
In case of necessity , by retracing his steps a little way , and entering the passage of the Filles-du-Calvaire , on condition that he did not hesitate at the subterranean crossing of the Carrefour Boucherat , and by taking the corridor Saint-Louis , then the Saint-Gilles gut on the left , then turning to the right and avoiding the Saint-Sebastian gallery , he might have reached the Amelot sewer , and thence , provided that he did not go astray in the sort of F which lies under the Bastille , he might have attained the outlet on the Seine near the Arsenal . 
But in order to do this , he must have been thoroughly familiar with the enormous madrepore of the sewer in all its ramifications and in all its openings . 
Now , we must again insist that he knew nothing of that frightful drain which he was traversing ; and had any one asked him in what he was , he would have answered : `` In the night . '' 
His instinct served him well . 
To descend was , in fact , possible safety . 
He left on his right the two narrow passages which branch out in the form of a claw under the Rue Laffitte and the Rue Saint-Georges and the long , bifurcated corridor of the Chaussee d'Antin . 
A little beyond an affluent , which was , probably , the Madeleine branch , he halted . 
He was extremely weary . 
A passably large air-hole , probably the man-hole in the Rue d'Anjou , furnished a light that was almost vivid . 
Jean Valjean , with the gentleness of movement which a brother would exercise towards his wounded brother , deposited Marius on the banquette of the sewer . 
Marius ' blood-stained face appeared under the wan light of the air-hole like the ashes at the bottom of a tomb . 
His eyes were closed , his hair was plastered down on his temples like a painter 's brushes dried in red wash ; his hands hung limp and dead . 
A clot of blood had collected in the knot of his cravat ; his limbs were cold , and blood was clotted at the corners of his mouth ; his shirt had thrust itself into his wounds , the cloth of his coat was chafing the yawning gashes in the living flesh . 
Jean Valjean , pushing aside the garments with the tips of his fingers , laid his hand upon Marius ' breast ; his heart was still beating . 
Jean Valjean tore up his shirt , bandaged the young man 's wounds as well as he was able and stopped the flowing blood ; then bending over Marius , who still lay unconscious and almost without breathing , in that half light , he gazed at him with inexpressible hatred . 
On disarranging Marius ' garments , he had found two things in his pockets , the roll which had been forgotten there on the preceding evening , and Marius ' pocketbook . 
He ate the roll and opened the pocketbook . 
On the first page he found the four lines written by Marius . 
The reader will recall them : `` My name is Marius Pontmercy . 
Carry my body to my grandfather , M. Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 , in the Marais . '' 
Jean Valjean read these four lines by the light of the air-hole , and remained for a moment as though absorbed in thought , repeating in a low tone : `` Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , number 6 , Monsieur Gillenormand . '' 
He replaced the pocketbook in Marius ' pocket . 
He had eaten , his strength had returned to him ; he took Marius up once more upon his back , placed the latter 's head carefully on his right shoulder , and resumed his descent of the sewer . 
The Grand Sewer , directed according to the course of the valley of Menilmontant , is about two leagues long . 
It is paved throughout a notable portion of its extent . 
This torch of the names of the streets of Paris , with which we are illuminating for the reader Jean Valjean 's subterranean march , Jean Valjean himself did not possess . 
Nothing told him what zone of the city he was traversing , nor what way he had made . 
Only the growing pallor of the pools of light which he encountered from time to time indicated to him that the sun was withdrawing from the pavement , and that the day would soon be over ; and the rolling of vehicles overhead , having become intermittent instead of continuous , then having almost ceased , he concluded that he was no longer under central Paris , and that he was approaching some solitary region , in the vicinity of the outer boulevards , or the extreme outer quays . 
Where there are fewer houses and streets , the sewer has fewer air-holes . 
The gloom deepened around Jean Valjean . 
Nevertheless , he continued to advance , groping his way in the dark . 
Suddenly this darkness became terrible . 
IN THE CASE OF SAND AS IN THAT OF WOMAN , THERE IS A FINENESS WHICH IS TREACHEROUS He felt that he was entering the water , and that he no longer had a pavement under his feet , but only mud . 
It sometimes happens , that on certain shores of Bretagne or Scotland a man , either a traveller or a fisherman , while walking at low tide on the beach far from shore , suddenly notices that for several minutes past , he has been walking with some difficulty . 
The beach under foot is like pitch ; his soles stick fast to it ; it is no longer sand , it is bird-lime . 
The strand is perfectly dry , but at every step that he takes , as soon as the foot is raised , the print is filled with water . 
The eye , however , has perceived no change ; the immense beach is smooth and tranquil , all the sand has the same aspect , nothing distinguishes the soil that is solid from that which is not solid ; the joyous little cloud of sand-lice continues to leap tumultuously under the feet of the passer-by . 
The man pursues his way , he walks on , turns towards the land , endeavors to approach the shore . 
He is not uneasy . 
Uneasy about what ? 
Only he is conscious that the heaviness of his feet seems to be increasing at every step that he takes . 
All at once he sinks in . 
He sinks in two or three inches . 
Decidedly , he is not on the right road ; he halts to get his bearings . 
Suddenly he glances at his feet ; his feet have disappeared . 
