Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart . 
`` To get out ! '' 
`` Yes , Monsieur Madeleine . 
In order to return here it is first necessary to get out . '' 
And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded , Fauchelevent went on : -- `` You must not be found here in this fashion . 
Whence come you ? 
For me , you fall from heaven , because I know you ; but the nuns require one to enter by the door . '' 
All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` they are ringing up the vocal mothers . 
They are going to the chapter . 
They always hold a chapter when any one dies . 
She died at daybreak . 
People generally do die at daybreak . 
But can not you get out by the way in which you entered ? 
Come , I do not ask for the sake of questioning you , but how did you get in ? '' 
Jean Valjean turned pale ; the very thought of descending again into that terrible street made him shudder . 
You make your way out of a forest filled with tigers , and once out of it , imagine a friendly counsel that shall advise you to return thither ! 
Jean Valjean pictured to himself the whole police force still engaged in swarming in that quarter , agents on the watch , sentinels everywhere , frightful fists extended towards his collar , Javert at the corner of the intersection of the streets perhaps . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
said he . 
`` Father Fauchelevent , say that I fell from the sky . '' 
`` But I believe it , I believe it , '' retorted Fauchelevent . 
`` You have no need to tell me that . 
The good God must have taken you in his hand for the purpose of getting a good look at you close to , and then dropped you . 
Only , he meant to place you in a man 's convent ; he made a mistake . 
Come , there goes another peal , that is to order the porter to go and inform the municipality that the dead-doctor is to come here and view a corpse . 
All that is the ceremony of dying . 
These good ladies are not at all fond of that visit . 
A doctor is a man who does not believe in anything . 
He lifts the veil . 
Sometimes he lifts something else too . 
How quickly they have had the doctor summoned this time ! 
What is the matter ? 
Your little one is still asleep . 
What is her name ? '' 
`` Cosette . '' 
`` She is your daughter ? 
You are her grandfather , that is ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` It will be easy enough for her to get out of here . 
I have my service door which opens on the courtyard . 
I knock . 
The porter opens ; I have my vintage basket on my back , the child is in it , I go out . 
Father Fauchelevent goes out with his basket -- that is perfectly natural . 
You will tell the child to keep very quiet . 
She will be under the cover . 
I will leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend , a fruit-seller whom I know in the Rue Chemin-Vert , who is deaf , and who has a little bed . 
I will shout in the fruit-seller 's ear , that she is a niece of mine , and that she is to keep her for me until to-morrow . 
Then the little one will re-enter with you ; for I will contrive to have you re-enter . 
It must be done . 
But how will you manage to get out ? '' 
Jean Valjean shook his head . 
`` No one must see me , the whole point lies there , Father Fauchelevent . 
Find some means of getting me out in a basket , under cover , like Cosette . '' 
Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger of his left hand , a sign of serious embarrassment . 
A third peal created a diversion . 
`` That is the dead-doctor taking his departure , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` He has taken a look and said : ` She is dead , that is well . ' 
When the doctor has signed the passport for paradise , the undertaker 's company sends a coffin . 
If it is a mother , the mothers lay her out ; if she is a sister , the sisters lay her out . 
After which , I nail her up . 
That forms a part of my gardener 's duty . 
A gardener is a bit of a grave-digger . 
She is placed in a lower hall of the church which communicates with the street , and into which no man may enter save the doctor of the dead . 
I do n't count the undertaker 's men and myself as men . 
It is in that hall that I nail up the coffin . 
The undertaker 's men come and get it , and whip up , coachman ! 
that 's the way one goes to heaven . 
They fetch a box with nothing in it , they take it away again with something in it . 
That 's what a burial is like . 
De profundis . '' 
A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleeping Cosette , who lay with her mouth vaguely open , and had the air of an angel drinking in the light . 
Jean Valjean had fallen to gazing at her . 
He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent . 
That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence . 
The good old gardener went on tranquilly with his babble : -- `` The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery . 
They declare that they are going to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery . 
It is an ancient cemetery which is outside the regulations , which has no uniform , and which is going to retire . 
It is a shame , for it is convenient . 
I have a friend there , Father Mestienne , the grave-digger . 
The nuns here possess one privilege , it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall . 
There is a special permission from the Prefecture on their behalf . 
But how many events have happened since yesterday ! 
Mother Crucifixion is dead , and Father Madeleine -- '' `` Is buried , '' said Jean Valjean , smiling sadly . 
Fauchelevent caught the word . 
`` Goodness ! 
if you were here for good , it would be a real burial . '' 
A fourth peal burst out . 
Fauchelevent hastily detached the belled knee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again . 
`` This time it is for me . 
The Mother Prioress wants me . 
Good , now I am pricking myself on the tongue of my buckle . 
Monsieur Madeleine , do n't stir from here , and wait for me . 
Something new has come up . 
If you are hungry , there is wine , bread and cheese . '' 
And he hastened out of the hut , crying : `` Coming ! 
coming ! '' 
Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as his crooked leg would permit , casting a sidelong glance by the way on his melon patch . 
Less than ten minutes later , Father Fauchelevent , whose bell put the nuns in his road to flight , tapped gently at a door , and a gentle voice replied : `` Forever ! 
