Nevertheless , it would be a good thing to know how to make use of them . 
When the nettle is young , the leaf makes an excellent vegetable ; when it is older , it has filaments and fibres like hemp and flax . 
Nettle cloth is as good as linen cloth . 
Chopped up , nettles are good for poultry ; pounded , they are good for horned cattle . 
The seed of the nettle , mixed with fodder , gives gloss to the hair of animals ; the root , mixed with salt , produces a beautiful yellow coloring-matter . 
Moreover , it is an excellent hay , which can be cut twice . 
And what is required for the nettle ? 
A little soil , no care , no culture . 
Only the seed falls as it is ripe , and it is difficult to collect it . 
That is all . 
With the exercise of a little care , the nettle could be made useful ; it is neglected and it becomes hurtful . 
It is exterminated . 
How many men resemble the nettle ! '' 
He added , after a pause : `` Remember this , my friends : there are no such things as bad plants or bad men . 
There are only bad cultivators . '' 
The children loved him because he knew how to make charming little trifles of straw and cocoanuts . 
When he saw the door of a church hung in black , he entered : he sought out funerals as other men seek christenings . 
Widowhood and the grief of others attracted him , because of his great gentleness ; he mingled with the friends clad in mourning , with families dressed in black , with the priests groaning around a coffin . 
He seemed to like to give to his thoughts for text these funereal psalmodies filled with the vision of the other world . 
With his eyes fixed on heaven , he listened with a sort of aspiration towards all the mysteries of the infinite , those sad voices which sing on the verge of the obscure abyss of death . 
He performed a multitude of good actions , concealing his agency in them as a man conceals himself because of evil actions . 
He penetrated houses privately , at night ; he ascended staircases furtively . 
A poor wretch on returning to his attic would find that his door had been opened , sometimes even forced , during his absence . 
The poor man made a clamor over it : some malefactor had been there ! 
He entered , and the first thing he beheld was a piece of gold lying forgotten on some piece of furniture . 
The `` malefactor '' who had been there was Father Madeleine . 
He was affable and sad . 
The people said : `` There is a rich man who has not a haughty air . 
There is a happy man who has not a contented air . '' 
Some people maintained that he was a mysterious person , and that no one ever entered his chamber , which was a regular anchorite 's cell , furnished with winged hour-glasses and enlivened by cross-bones and skulls of dead men ! 
This was much talked of , so that one of the elegant and malicious young women of M. sur M. came to him one day , and asked : `` Monsieur le Maire , pray show us your chamber . 
It is said to be a grotto . '' 
He smiled , and introduced them instantly into this `` grotto . '' 
They were well punished for their curiosity . 
The room was very simply furnished in mahogany , which was rather ugly , like all furniture of that sort , and hung with paper worth twelve sous . 
They could see nothing remarkable about it , except two candlesticks of antique pattern which stood on the chimney-piece and appeared to be silver , `` for they were hall-marked , '' an observation full of the type of wit of petty towns . 
Nevertheless , people continued to say that no one ever got into the room , and that it was a hermit 's cave , a mysterious retreat , a hole , a tomb . 
It was also whispered about that he had `` immense '' sums deposited with Laffitte , with this peculiar feature , that they were always at his immediate disposal , so that , it was added , M. Madeleine could make his appearance at Laffitte 's any morning , sign a receipt , and carry off his two or three millions in ten minutes . 
In reality , `` these two or three millions '' were reducible , as we have said , to six hundred and thirty or forty thousand francs . 
M. MADELEINE IN MOURNING At the beginning of 1820 the newspapers announced the death of M. Myriel , Bishop of D -- , surnamed `` Monseigneur Bienvenu , '' who had died in the odor of sanctity at the age of eighty-two . 
The Bishop of D -- -- to supply here a detail which the papers omitted -- had been blind for many years before his death , and content to be blind , as his sister was beside him . 
Let us remark by the way , that to be blind and to be loved , is , in fact , one of the most strangely exquisite forms of happiness upon this earth , where nothing is complete . 
To have continually at one 's side a woman , a daughter , a sister , a charming being , who is there because you need her and because she can not do without you ; to know that we are indispensable to a person who is necessary to us ; to be able to incessantly measure one 's affection by the amount of her presence which she bestows on us , and to say to ourselves , `` Since she consecrates the whole of her time to me , it is because I possess the whole of her heart '' ; to behold her thought in lieu of her face ; to be able to verify the fidelity of one being amid the eclipse of the world ; to regard the rustle of a gown as the sound of wings ; to hear her come and go , retire , speak , return , sing , and to think that one is the centre of these steps , of this speech ; to manifest at each instant one 's personal attraction ; to feel one 's self all the more powerful because of one 's infirmity ; to become in one 's obscurity , and through one 's obscurity , the star around which this angel gravitates , -- few felicities equal this . 
The supreme happiness of life consists in the conviction that one is loved ; loved for one 's own sake -- let us say rather , loved in spite of one 's self ; this conviction the blind man possesses . 
To be served in distress is to be caressed . 
Does he lack anything ? 
No . 
One does not lose the sight when one has love . 
And what love ! 
A love wholly constituted of virtue ! 
There is no blindness where there is certainty . 
Soul seeks soul , gropingly , and finds it . 
And this soul , found and tested , is a woman . 
A hand sustains you ; it is hers : a mouth lightly touches your brow ; it is her mouth : you hear a breath very near you ; it is hers . 
To have everything of her , from her worship to her pity , never to be left , to have that sweet weakness aiding you , to lean upon that immovable reed , to touch Providence with one 's hands , and to be able to take it in one 's arms , -- God made tangible , -- what bliss ! 
The heart , that obscure , celestial flower , undergoes a mysterious blossoming . 
One would not exchange that shadow for all brightness ! 
The angel soul is there , uninterruptedly there ; if she departs , it is but to return again ; she vanishes like a dream , and reappears like reality . 
One feels warmth approaching , and behold ! 
she is there . 
One overflows with serenity , with gayety , with ecstasy ; one is a radiance amid the night . 
And there are a thousand little cares . 
Nothings , which are enormous in that void . 
The most ineffable accents of the feminine voice employed to lull you , and supplying the vanished universe to you . 
One is caressed with the soul . 
One sees nothing , but one feels that one is adored . 
It is a paradise of shadows . 
It was from this paradise that Monseigneur Welcome had passed to the other . 
The announcement of his death was reprinted by the local journal of M. sur M. On the following day , M. Madeleine appeared clad wholly in black , and with crape on his hat . 
This mourning was noticed in the town , and commented on . 
It seemed to throw a light on M. Madeleine 's origin . 
It was concluded that some relationship existed between him and the venerable Bishop . 
`` He has gone into mourning for the Bishop of D -- '' said the drawing-rooms ; this raised M. Madeleine 's credit greatly , and procured for him , instantly and at one blow , a certain consideration in the noble world of M. sur M . 
The microscopic Faubourg Saint-Germain of the place meditated raising the quarantine against M. Madeleine , the probable relative of a bishop . 
M. Madeleine perceived the advancement which he had obtained , by the more numerous courtesies of the old women and the more plentiful smiles of the young ones . 
One evening , a ruler in that petty great world , who was curious by right of seniority , ventured to ask him , `` M. le Maire is doubtless a cousin of the late Bishop of D -- ? '' 
He said , `` No , Madame . '' 
`` But , '' resumed the dowager , `` you are wearing mourning for him . '' 
He replied , `` It is because I was a servant in his family in my youth . '' 
Another thing which was remarked , was , that every time that he encountered in the town a young Savoyard who was roaming about the country and seeking chimneys to sweep , the mayor had him summoned , inquired his name , and gave him money . 
The little Savoyards told each other about it : a great many of them passed that way . 
VAGUE FLASHES ON THE HORIZON Little by little , and in the course of time , all this opposition subsided . 
There had at first been exercised against M. Madeleine , in virtue of a sort of law which all those who rise must submit to , blackening and calumnies ; then they grew to be nothing more than ill-nature , then merely malicious remarks , then even this entirely disappeared ; respect became complete , unanimous , cordial , and towards 1821 the moment arrived when the word `` Monsieur le Maire '' was pronounced at M. sur M. with almost the same accent as `` Monseigneur the Bishop '' had been pronounced in D -- in 1815 . 
People came from a distance of ten leagues around to consult M. Madeleine . 
He put an end to differences , he prevented lawsuits , he reconciled enemies . 
Every one took him for the judge , and with good reason . 
It seemed as though he had for a soul the book of the natural law . 
It was like an epidemic of veneration , which in the course of six or seven years gradually took possession of the whole district . 
One single man in the town , in the arrondissement , absolutely escaped this contagion , and , whatever Father Madeleine did , remained his opponent as though a sort of incorruptible and imperturbable instinct kept him on the alert and uneasy . 
It seems , in fact , as though there existed in certain men a veritable bestial instinct , though pure and upright , like all instincts , which creates antipathies and sympathies , which fatally separates one nature from another nature , which does not hesitate , which feels no disquiet , which does not hold its peace , and which never belies itself , clear in its obscurity , infallible , imperious , intractable , stubborn to all counsels of the intelligence and to all the dissolvents of reason , and which , in whatever manner destinies are arranged , secretly warns the man-dog of the presence of the man-cat , and the man-fox of the presence of the man-lion . 
It frequently happened that when M. Madeleine was passing along a street , calm , affectionate , surrounded by the blessings of all , a man of lofty stature , clad in an iron-gray frock-coat , armed with a heavy cane , and wearing a battered hat , turned round abruptly behind him , and followed him with his eyes until he disappeared , with folded arms and a slow shake of the head , and his upper lip raised in company with his lower to his nose , a sort of significant grimace which might be translated by : `` What is that man , after all ? 
I certainly have seen him somewhere . 
In any case , I am not his dupe . '' 
This person , grave with a gravity which was almost menacing , was one of those men who , even when only seen by a rapid glimpse , arrest the spectator 's attention . 
His name was Javert , and he belonged to the police . 
At M. sur M. he exercised the unpleasant but useful functions of an inspector . 
He had not seen Madeleine 's beginnings . 
Javert owed the post which he occupied to the protection of M. Chabouillet , the secretary of the Minister of State , Comte Angeles , then prefect of police at Paris . 
When Javert arrived at M. sur M. the fortune of the great manufacturer was already made , and Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine . 
Certain police officers have a peculiar physiognomy , which is complicated with an air of baseness mingled with an air of authority . 
