Every one has noticed with what nimbleness a coin which one has dropped on the ground rolls away and hides , and with what art it renders itself undiscoverable . 
There are thoughts which play us the same trick ; they nestle away in a corner of our brain ; that is the end of them ; they are lost ; it is impossible to lay the memory on them . 
Cosette was somewhat vexed at the useless little effort made by her memory . 
She told herself , that it was very naughty and very wicked of her , to have forgotten the words uttered by Marius . 
She sprang out of bed and accomplished the two ablutions of soul and body , her prayers and her toilet . 
One may , in a case of exigency , introduce the reader into a nuptial chamber , not into a virginal chamber . 
Verse would hardly venture it , prose must not . 
It is the interior of a flower that is not yet unfolded , it is whiteness in the dark , it is the private cell of a closed lily , which must not be gazed upon by man so long as the sun has not gazed upon it . 
Woman in the bud is sacred . 
That innocent bud which opens , that adorable half-nudity which is afraid of itself , that white foot which takes refuge in a slipper , that throat which veils itself before a mirror as though a mirror were an eye , that chemise which makes haste to rise up and conceal the shoulder for a creaking bit of furniture or a passing vehicle , those cords tied , those clasps fastened , those laces drawn , those tremors , those shivers of cold and modesty , that exquisite affright in every movement , that almost winged uneasiness where there is no cause for alarm , the successive phases of dressing , as charming as the clouds of dawn , -- it is not fitting that all this should be narrated , and it is too much to have even called attention to it . 
The eye of man must be more religious in the presence of the rising of a young girl than in the presence of the rising of a star . 
The possibility of hurting should inspire an augmentation of respect . 
The down on the peach , the bloom on the plum , the radiated crystal of the snow , the wing of the butterfly powdered with feathers , are coarse compared to that chastity which does not even know that it is chaste . 
The young girl is only the flash of a dream , and is not yet a statue . 
Her bed-chamber is hidden in the sombre part of the ideal . 
The indiscreet touch of a glance brutalizes this vague penumbra . 
Here , contemplation is profanation . 
We shall , therefore , show nothing of that sweet little flutter of Cosette 's rising . 
An oriental tale relates how the rose was made white by God , but that Adam looked upon her when she was unfolding , and she was ashamed and turned crimson . 
We are of the number who fall speechless in the presence of young girls and flowers , since we think them worthy of veneration . 
Cosette dressed herself very hastily , combed and dressed her hair , which was a very simple matter in those days , when women did not swell out their curls and bands with cushions and puffs , and did not put crinoline in their locks . 
Then she opened the window and cast her eyes around her in every direction , hoping to descry some bit of the street , an angle of the house , an edge of pavement , so that she might be able to watch for Marius there . 
But no view of the outside was to be had . 
The back court was surrounded by tolerably high walls , and the outlook was only on several gardens . 
Cosette pronounced these gardens hideous : for the first time in her life , she found flowers ugly . 
The smallest scrap of the gutter of the street would have met her wishes better . 
She decided to gaze at the sky , as though she thought that Marius might come from that quarter . 
All at once , she burst into tears . 
Not that this was fickleness of soul ; but hopes cut in twain by dejection -- that was her case . 
She had a confused consciousness of something horrible . 
Thoughts were rife in the air , in fact . 
She told herself that she was not sure of anything , that to withdraw herself from sight was to be lost ; and the idea that Marius could return to her from heaven appeared to her no longer charming but mournful . 
Then , as is the nature of these clouds , calm returned to her , and hope and a sort of unconscious smile , which yet indicated trust in God . 
Every one in the house was still asleep . 
A country-like silence reigned . 
Not a shutter had been opened . 
The porter 's lodge was closed . 
Toussaint had not risen , and Cosette , naturally , thought that her father was asleep . 
She must have suffered much , and she must have still been suffering greatly , for she said to herself , that her father had been unkind ; but she counted on Marius . 
The eclipse of such a light was decidedly impossible . 
Now and then , she heard sharp shocks in the distance , and she said : `` It is odd that people should be opening and shutting their carriage gates so early . '' 
They were the reports of the cannon battering the barricade . 
A few feet below Cosette 's window , in the ancient and perfectly black cornice of the wall , there was a martin 's nest ; the curve of this nest formed a little projection beyond the cornice , so that from above it was possible to look into this little paradise . 
The mother was there , spreading her wings like a fan over her brood ; the father fluttered about , flew away , then came back , bearing in his beak food and kisses . 
The dawning day gilded this happy thing , the great law , `` Multiply , '' lay there smiling and august , and that sweet mystery unfolded in the glory of the morning . 
Cosette , with her hair in the sunlight , her soul absorbed in chimeras , illuminated by love within and by the dawn without , bent over mechanically , and almost without daring to avow to herself that she was thinking at the same time of Marius , began to gaze at these birds , at this family , at that male and female , that mother and her little ones , with the profound trouble which a nest produces on a virgin . 
THE SHOT WHICH MISSES NOTHING AND KILLS NO ONE The assailants ' fire continued . 
Musketry and grape-shot alternated , but without committing great ravages , to tell the truth . 
The top alone of the Corinthe facade suffered ; the window on the first floor , and the attic window in the roof , riddled with buck-shot and biscaiens , were slowly losing their shape . 
The combatants who had been posted there had been obliged to withdraw . 
However , this is according to the tactics of barricades ; to fire for a long while , in order to exhaust the insurgents ' ammunition , if they commit the mistake of replying . 
When it is perceived , from the slackening of their fire , that they have no more powder and ball , the assault is made . 
Enjolras had not fallen into this trap ; the barricade did not reply . 
At every discharge by platoons , Gavroche puffed out his cheek with his tongue , a sign of supreme disdain . 
`` Good for you , '' said he , `` rip up the cloth . 
We want some lint . '' 
Courfeyrac called the grape-shot to order for the little effect which it produced , and said to the cannon : `` You are growing diffuse , my good fellow . '' 
One gets puzzled in battle , as at a ball . 
It is probable that this silence on the part of the redoubt began to render the besiegers uneasy , and to make them fear some unexpected incident , and that they felt the necessity of getting a clear view behind that heap of paving-stones , and of knowing what was going on behind that impassable wall which received blows without retorting . 
The insurgents suddenly perceived a helmet glittering in the sun on a neighboring roof . 
A fireman had placed his back against a tall chimney , and seemed to be acting as sentinel . 
His glance fell directly down into the barricade . 
`` There 's an embarrassing watcher , '' said Enjolras . 
Jean Valjean had returned Enjolras ' rifle , but he had his own gun . 
Without saying a word , he took aim at the fireman , and , a second later , the helmet , smashed by a bullet , rattled noisily into the street . 
The terrified soldier made haste to disappear . 
A second observer took his place . 
This one was an officer . 
Jean Valjean , who had re-loaded his gun , took aim at the newcomer and sent the officer 's casque to join the soldier 's . 
The officer did not persist , and retired speedily . 
This time the warning was understood . 
No one made his appearance thereafter on that roof ; and the idea of spying on the barricade was abandoned . 
`` Why did you not kill the man ? '' 
Bossuet asked Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean made no reply . 
DISORDER A PARTISAN OF ORDER Bossuet muttered in Combeferre 's ear : `` He did not answer my question . '' 
`` He is a man who does good by gun-shots , '' said Combeferre . 
Those who have preserved some memory of this already distant epoch know that the National Guard from the suburbs was valiant against insurrections . 
It was particularly zealous and intrepid in the days of June , 1832 . 
A certain good dram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or la Cunette , whose `` establishment '' had been closed by the riots , became leonine at the sight of his deserted dance-hall , and got himself killed to preserve the order represented by a tea-garden . 
In that bourgeois and heroic time , in the presence of ideas which had their knights , interests had their paladins . 
The prosiness of the originators detracted nothing from the bravery of the movement . 
The diminution of a pile of crowns made bankers sing the Marseillaise . 
They shed their blood lyrically for the counting-house ; and they defended the shop , that immense diminutive of the fatherland , with Lacedaemonian enthusiasm . 
At bottom , we will observe , there was nothing in all this that was not extremely serious . 
It was social elements entering into strife , while awaiting the day when they should enter into equilibrium . 
Another sign of the times was the anarchy mingled with governmentalism -LSB- the barbarous name of the correct party -RSB- . 
People were for order in combination with lack of discipline . 
The drum suddenly beat capricious calls , at the command of such or such a Colonel of the National Guard ; such and such a captain went into action through inspiration ; such and such National Guardsmen fought , `` for an idea , '' and on their own account . 
At critical moments , on `` days '' they took counsel less of their leaders than of their instincts . 
There existed in the army of order , veritable guerilleros , some of the sword , like Fannicot , others of the pen , like Henri Fonfrede . 
Civilization , unfortunately , represented at this epoch rather by an aggregation of interests than by a group of principles , was or thought itself , in peril ; it set up the cry of alarm ; each , constituting himself a centre , defended it , succored it , and protected it with his own head ; and the first comer took it upon himself to save society . 
Zeal sometimes proceeded to extermination . 
A platoon of the National Guard would constitute itself on its own authority a private council of war , and judge and execute a captured insurgent in five minutes . 
It was an improvisation of this sort that had slain Jean Prouvaire . 
Fierce Lynch law , with which no one party had any right to reproach the rest , for it has been applied by the Republic in America , as well as by the monarchy in Europe . 
This Lynch law was complicated with mistakes . 
On one day of rioting , a young poet , named Paul Aime Garnier , was pursued in the Place Royale , with a bayonet at his loins , and only escaped by taking refuge under the porte-cochere of No. 6 . 
They shouted : -- `` There 's another of those Saint-Simonians ! '' 
and they wanted to kill him . 
