It was customary for bishops in former days . '' 
`` Hold ! '' 
cried the Bishop , `` you are quite right , Madame Magloire . '' 
And he made his demand . 
Some time afterwards the General Council took this demand under consideration , and voted him an annual sum of three thousand francs , under this heading : Allowance to M. the Bishop for expenses of carriage , expenses of posting , and expenses of pastoral visits . 
This provoked a great outcry among the local burgesses ; and a senator of the Empire , a former member of the Council of the Five Hundred which favored the 18 Brumaire , and who was provided with a magnificent senatorial office in the vicinity of the town of D -- , wrote to M. Bigot de Preameneu , the minister of public worship , a very angry and confidential note on the subject , from which we extract these authentic lines : -- `` Expenses of carriage ? 
What can be done with it in a town of less than four thousand inhabitants ? 
Expenses of journeys ? 
What is the use of these trips , in the first place ? 
Next , how can the posting be accomplished in these mountainous parts ? 
There are no roads . 
No one travels otherwise than on horseback . 
Even the bridge between Durance and Chateau-Arnoux can barely support ox-teams . 
These priests are all thus , greedy and avaricious . 
This man played the good priest when he first came . 
Now he does like the rest ; he must have a carriage and a posting-chaise , he must have luxuries , like the bishops of the olden days . 
Oh , all this priesthood ! 
Things will not go well , M. le Comte , until the Emperor has freed us from these black-capped rascals . 
Down with the Pope ! 
-LSB- Matters were getting embroiled with Rome . -RSB- 
For my part , I am for Caesar alone . '' 
Etc. , etc. . 
On the other hand , this affair afforded great delight to Madame Magloire . 
`` Good , '' said she to Mademoiselle Baptistine ; `` Monseigneur began with other people , but he has had to wind up with himself , after all . 
He has regulated all his charities . 
Now here are three thousand francs for us ! 
At last ! '' 
That same evening the Bishop wrote out and handed to his sister a memorandum conceived in the following terms : -- EXPENSES OF CARRIAGE AND CIRCUIT . 
For furnishing meat soup to the patients in the hospital . 
1,500 livres For the maternity charitable society of Aix ... 250 '' For the maternity charitable society of Draguignan ... 250 '' For foundlings ... 500 '' For orphans ... 500 '' ----- Total ... 3,000 '' Such was M. Myriel 's budget . 
As for the chance episcopal perquisites , the fees for marriage bans , dispensations , private baptisms , sermons , benedictions , of churches or chapels , marriages , etc. , the Bishop levied them on the wealthy with all the more asperity , since he bestowed them on the needy . 
After a time , offerings of money flowed in . 
Those who had and those who lacked knocked at M. Myriel 's door , -- the latter in search of the alms which the former came to deposit . 
In less than a year the Bishop had become the treasurer of all benevolence and the cashier of all those in distress . 
Considerable sums of money passed through his hands , but nothing could induce him to make any change whatever in his mode of life , or add anything superfluous to his bare necessities . 
Far from it . 
As there is always more wretchedness below than there is brotherhood above , all was given away , so to speak , before it was received . 
It was like water on dry soil ; no matter how much money he received , he never had any . 
Then he stripped himself . 
The usage being that bishops shall announce their baptismal names at the head of their charges and their pastoral letters , the poor people of the country-side had selected , with a sort of affectionate instinct , among the names and prenomens of their bishop , that which had a meaning for them ; and they never called him anything except Monseigneur Bienvenu -LSB- Welcome -RSB- . 
We will follow their example , and will also call him thus when we have occasion to name him . 
Moreover , this appellation pleased him . 
`` I like that name , '' said he . 
`` Bienvenu makes up for the Monseigneur . '' 
We do not claim that the portrait herewith presented is probable ; we confine ourselves to stating that it resembles the original . 
A HARD BISHOPRIC FOR A GOOD BISHOP The Bishop did not omit his pastoral visits because he had converted his carriage into alms . 
The diocese of D -- is a fatiguing one . 
There are very few plains and a great many mountains ; hardly any roads , as we have just seen ; thirty-two curacies , forty-one vicarships , and two hundred and eighty-five auxiliary chapels . 
To visit all these is quite a task . 
The Bishop managed to do it . 
He went on foot when it was in the neighborhood , in a tilted spring-cart when it was on the plain , and on a donkey in the mountains . 
The two old women accompanied him . 
When the trip was too hard for them , he went alone . 
One day he arrived at Senez , which is an ancient episcopal city . 
He was mounted on an ass . 
His purse , which was very dry at that moment , did not permit him any other equipage . 
The mayor of the town came to receive him at the gate of the town , and watched him dismount from his ass , with scandalized eyes . 
Some of the citizens were laughing around him . 
`` Monsieur the Mayor , '' said the Bishop , `` and Messieurs Citizens , I perceive that I shock you . 
You think it very arrogant in a poor priest to ride an animal which was used by Jesus Christ . 
I have done so from necessity , I assure you , and not from vanity . '' 
In the course of these trips he was kind and indulgent , and talked rather than preached . 
He never went far in search of his arguments and his examples . 
He quoted to the inhabitants of one district the example of a neighboring district . 
In the cantons where they were harsh to the poor , he said : `` Look at the people of Briancon ! 
They have conferred on the poor , on widows and orphans , the right to have their meadows mown three days in advance of every one else . 
They rebuild their houses for them gratuitously when they are ruined . 
Therefore it is a country which is blessed by God . 
For a whole century , there has not been a single murderer among them . '' 
In villages which were greedy for profit and harvest , he said : `` Look at the people of Embrun ! 
If , at the harvest season , the father of a family has his son away on service in the army , and his daughters at service in the town , and if he is ill and incapacitated , the cure recommends him to the prayers of the congregation ; and on Sunday , after the mass , all the inhabitants of the village -- men , women , and children -- go to the poor man 's field and do his harvesting for him , and carry his straw and his grain to his granary . '' 
To families divided by questions of money and inheritance he said : `` Look at the mountaineers of Devolny , a country so wild that the nightingale is not heard there once in fifty years . 
Well , when the father of a family dies , the boys go off to seek their fortunes , leaving the property to the girls , so that they may find husbands . '' 
To the cantons which had a taste for lawsuits , and where the farmers ruined themselves in stamped paper , he said : `` Look at those good peasants in the valley of Queyras ! 
There are three thousand souls of them . 
Mon Dieu ! 
it is like a little republic . 
Neither judge nor bailiff is known there . 
The mayor does everything . 
He allots the imposts , taxes each person conscientiously , judges quarrels for nothing , divides inheritances without charge , pronounces sentences gratuitously ; and he is obeyed , because he is a just man among simple men . '' 
To villages where he found no schoolmaster , he quoted once more the people of Queyras : `` Do you know how they manage ? '' 
he said . 
`` Since a little country of a dozen or fifteen hearths can not always support a teacher , they have school-masters who are paid by the whole valley , who make the round of the villages , spending a week in this one , ten days in that , and instruct them . 
These teachers go to the fairs . 
I have seen them there . 
They are to be recognized by the quill pens which they wear in the cord of their hat . 
Those who teach reading only have one pen ; those who teach reading and reckoning have two pens ; those who teach reading , reckoning , and Latin have three pens . 
But what a disgrace to be ignorant ! 
Do like the people of Queyras ! '' 
Thus he discoursed gravely and paternally ; in default of examples , he invented parables , going directly to the point , with few phrases and many images , which characteristic formed the real eloquence of Jesus Christ . 
And being convinced himself , he was persuasive . 
WORKS CORRESPONDING TO WORDS His conversation was gay and affable . 
He put himself on a level with the two old women who had passed their lives beside him . 
When he laughed , it was the laugh of a schoolboy . 
Madame Magloire liked to call him Your Grace -LSB- Votre Grandeur -RSB- . 
One day he rose from his arm-chair , and went to his library in search of a book . 
This book was on one of the upper shelves . 
As the bishop was rather short of stature , he could not reach it . 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said he , `` fetch me a chair . 
My greatness -LSB- grandeur -RSB- does not reach as far as that shelf . '' 
