He grew animated on this subject : `` The elixir of gold , '' he exclaimed , `` the yellow dye of Bestucheff , General Lamotte 's drops , in the eighteenth century , -- this was the great remedy for the catastrophes of love , the panacea against Venus , at one louis the half-ounce phial . 
Louis XV . 
sent two hundred phials of it to the Pope . '' 
He would have been greatly irritated and thrown off his balance , had any one told him that the elixir of gold is nothing but the perchloride of iron . 
M. Gillenormand adored the Bourbons , and had a horror of 1789 ; he was forever narrating in what manner he had saved himself during the Terror , and how he had been obliged to display a vast deal of gayety and cleverness in order to escape having his head cut off . 
If any young man ventured to pronounce an eulogium on the Republic in his presence , he turned purple and grew so angry that he was on the point of swooning . 
He sometimes alluded to his ninety years , and said , `` I hope that I shall not see ninety-three twice . '' 
On these occasions , he hinted to people that he meant to live to be a hundred . 
BASQUE AND NICOLETTE He had theories . 
Here is one of them : `` When a man is passionately fond of women , and when he has himself a wife for whom he cares but little , who is homely , cross , legitimate , with plenty of rights , perched on the code , and jealous at need , there is but one way of extricating himself from the quandry and of procuring peace , and that is to let his wife control the purse-strings . 
This abdication sets him free . 
Then his wife busies herself , grows passionately fond of handling coin , gets her fingers covered with verdigris in the process , undertakes the education of half-share tenants and the training of farmers , convokes lawyers , presides over notaries , harangues scriveners , visits limbs of the law , follows lawsuits , draws up leases , dictates contracts , feels herself the sovereign , sells , buys , regulates , promises and compromises , binds fast and annuls , yields , concedes and retrocedes , arranges , disarranges , hoards , lavishes ; she commits follies , a supreme and personal delight , and that consoles her . 
While her husband disdains her , she has the satisfaction of ruining her husband . '' 
This theory M. Gillenormand had himself applied , and it had become his history . 
His wife -- the second one -- had administered his fortune in such a manner that , one fine day , when M. Gillenormand found himself a widower , there remained to him just sufficient to live on , by sinking nearly the whole of it in an annuity of fifteen thousand francs , three-quarters of which would expire with him . 
He had not hesitated on this point , not being anxious to leave a property behind him . 
Besides , he had noticed that patrimonies are subject to adventures , and , for instance , become national property ; he had been present at the avatars of consolidated three per cents , and he had no great faith in the Great Book of the Public Debt . 
`` All that 's the Rue Quincampois ! '' 
he said . 
His house in the Rue Filles-du-Clavaire belonged to him , as we have already stated . 
He had two servants , `` a male and a female . '' 
When a servant entered his establishment , M. Gillenormand re-baptized him . 
He bestowed on the men the name of their province : Nimois , Comtois , Poitevin , Picard . 
His last valet was a big , foundered , short-winded fellow of fifty-five , who was incapable of running twenty paces ; but , as he had been born at Bayonne , M. Gillenormand called him Basque . 
All the female servants in his house were called Nicolette -LRB- even the Magnon , of whom we shall hear more farther on -RRB- . 
One day , a haughty cook , a cordon bleu , of the lofty race of porters , presented herself . 
`` How much wages do you want a month ? '' 
asked M. Gillenormand . 
`` Thirty francs . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Olympie . '' 
`` You shall have fifty francs , and you shall be called Nicolette . '' 
IN WHICH MAGNON AND HER TWO CHILDREN ARE SEEN With M. Gillenormand , sorrow was converted into wrath ; he was furious at being in despair . 
He had all sorts of prejudices and took all sorts of liberties . 
One of the facts of which his exterior relief and his internal satisfaction was composed , was , as we have just hinted , that he had remained a brisk spark , and that he passed energetically for such . 
This he called having `` royal renown . '' 
This royal renown sometimes drew down upon him singular windfalls . 
One day , there was brought to him in a basket , as though it had been a basket of oysters , a stout , newly born boy , who was yelling like the deuce , and duly wrapped in swaddling-clothes , which a servant-maid , dismissed six months previously , attributed to him . 
M. Gillenormand had , at that time , fully completed his eighty-fourth year . 
Indignation and uproar in the establishment . 
And whom did that bold hussy think she could persuade to believe that ? 
What audacity ! 
What an abominable calumny ! 
M. Gillenormand himself was not at all enraged . 
He gazed at the brat with the amiable smile of a good man who is flattered by the calumny , and said in an aside : `` Well , what now ? 
What 's the matter ? 
You are finely taken aback , and really , you are excessively ignorant . 
M. le Duc d'Angouleme , the bastard of his Majesty Charles IX. , married a silly jade of fifteen when he was eighty-five ; M. Virginal , Marquis d'Alluye , brother to the Cardinal de Sourdis , Archbishop of Bordeaux , had , at the age of eighty-three , by the maid of Madame la Presidente Jacquin , a son , a real child of love , who became a Chevalier of Malta and a counsellor of state ; one of the great men of this century , the Abbe Tabaraud , is the son of a man of eighty-seven . 
There is nothing out of the ordinary in these things . 
And then , the Bible ! 
Upon that I declare that this little gentleman is none of mine . 
Let him be taken care of . 
It is not his fault . '' 
This manner of procedure was good-tempered . 
The woman , whose name was Magnon , sent him another parcel in the following year . 
It was a boy again . 
Thereupon , M. Gillenormand capitulated . 
He sent the two brats back to their mother , promising to pay eighty francs a month for their maintenance , on the condition that the said mother would not do so any more . 
He added : `` I insist upon it that the mother shall treat them well . 
I shall go to see them from time to time . '' 
And this he did . 
He had had a brother who was a priest , and who had been rector of the Academy of Poitiers for three and thirty years , and had died at seventy-nine . 
`` I lost him young , '' said he . 
This brother , of whom but little memory remains , was a peaceable miser , who , being a priest , thought himself bound to bestow alms on the poor whom he met , but he never gave them anything except bad or demonetized sous , thereby discovering a means of going to hell by way of paradise . 
As for M. Gillenormand the elder , he never haggled over his alms-giving , but gave gladly and nobly . 
He was kindly , abrupt , charitable , and if he had been rich , his turn of mind would have been magnificent . 
He desired that all which concerned him should be done in a grand manner , even his rogueries . 
One day , having been cheated by a business man in a matter of inheritance , in a gross and apparent manner , he uttered this solemn exclamation : `` That was indecently done ! 
I am really ashamed of this pilfering . 
Everything has degenerated in this century , even the rascals . 
Morbleu ! 
this is not the way to rob a man of my standing . 
I am robbed as though in a forest , but badly robbed . 
Silva , sint consule dignae ! '' 
He had had two wives , as we have already mentioned ; by the first he had had a daughter , who had remained unmarried , and by the second another daughter , who had died at about the age of thirty , who had wedded , through love , or chance , or otherwise , a soldier of fortune who had served in the armies of the Republic and of the Empire , who had won the cross at Austerlitz and had been made colonel at Waterloo . 
`` He is the disgrace of my family , '' said the old bourgeois . 
He took an immense amount of snuff , and had a particularly graceful manner of plucking at his lace ruffle with the back of one hand . 
He believed very little in God . 
RULE : RECEIVE NO ONE EXCEPT IN THE EVENING Such was M. Luc-Esprit Gillenormand , who had not lost his hair , -- which was gray rather than white , -- and which was always dressed in `` dog 's ears . '' 
To sum up , he was venerable in spite of all this . 
He had something of the eighteenth century about him ; frivolous and great . 
In 1814 and during the early years of the Restoration , M. Gillenormand , who was still young , -- he was only seventy-four , -- lived in the Faubourg Saint Germain , Rue Servandoni , near Saint-Sulpice . 
He had only retired to the Marais when he quitted society , long after attaining the age of eighty . 
And , on abandoning society , he had immured himself in his habits . 
The principal one , and that which was invariable , was to keep his door absolutely closed during the day , and never to receive any one whatever except in the evening . 
He dined at five o'clock , and after that his door was open . 
That had been the fashion of his century , and he would not swerve from it . 
`` The day is vulgar , '' said he , `` and deserves only a closed shutter . 
Fashionable people only light up their minds when the zenith lights up its stars . '' 
And he barricaded himself against every one , even had it been the king himself . 
This was the antiquated elegance of his day . 
TWO DO NOT MAKE A PAIR We have just spoken of M. Gillenormand 's two daughters . 
They had come into the world ten years apart . 
In their youth they had borne very little resemblance to each other , either in character or countenance , and had also been as little like sisters to each other as possible . 
The youngest had a charming soul , which turned towards all that belongs to the light , was occupied with flowers , with verses , with music , which fluttered away into glorious space , enthusiastic , ethereal , and was wedded from her very youth , in ideal , to a vague and heroic figure . 
The elder had also her chimera ; she espied in the azure some very wealthy purveyor , a contractor , a splendidly stupid husband , a million made man , or even a prefect ; the receptions of the Prefecture , an usher in the antechamber with a chain on his neck , official balls , the harangues of the town-hall , to be `` Madame la Prefete , '' -- all this had created a whirlwind in her imagination . 
Thus the two sisters strayed , each in her own dream , at the epoch when they were young girls . 
Both had wings , the one like an angel , the other like a goose . 
No ambition is ever fully realized , here below at least . 
No paradise becomes terrestrial in our day . 
