`` I do n't want your money , '' said she . 
THE HOUSE WITH A SECRET About the middle of the last century , a chief justice in the Parliament of Paris having a mistress and concealing the fact , for at that period the grand seignors displayed their mistresses , and the bourgeois concealed them , had `` a little house '' built in the Faubourg Saint-Germain , in the deserted Rue Blomet , which is now called Rue Plumet , not far from the spot which was then designated as Combat des Animaux . 
This house was composed of a single-storied pavilion ; two rooms on the ground floor , two chambers on the first floor , a kitchen down stairs , a boudoir up stairs , an attic under the roof , the whole preceded by a garden with a large gate opening on the street . 
This garden was about an acre and a half in extent . 
This was all that could be seen by passers-by ; but behind the pavilion there was a narrow courtyard , and at the end of the courtyard a low building consisting of two rooms and a cellar , a sort of preparation destined to conceal a child and nurse in case of need . 
This building communicated in the rear by a masked door which opened by a secret spring , with a long , narrow , paved winding corridor , open to the sky , hemmed in with two lofty walls , which , hidden with wonderful art , and lost as it were between garden enclosures and cultivated land , all of whose angles and detours it followed , ended in another door , also with a secret lock which opened a quarter of a league away , almost in another quarter , at the solitary extremity of the Rue du Babylone . 
Through this the chief justice entered , so that even those who were spying on him and following him would merely have observed that the justice betook himself every day in a mysterious way somewhere , and would never have suspected that to go to the Rue de Babylone was to go to the Rue Blomet . 
Thanks to clever purchasers of land , the magistrate had been able to make a secret , sewer-like passage on his own property , and consequently , without interference . 
Later on , he had sold in little parcels , for gardens and market gardens , the lots of ground adjoining the corridor , and the proprietors of these lots on both sides thought they had a party wall before their eyes , and did not even suspect the long , paved ribbon winding between two walls amid their flower-beds and their orchards . 
Only the birds beheld this curiosity . 
It is probable that the linnets and tomtits of the last century gossiped a great deal about the chief justice . 
The pavilion , built of stone in the taste of Mansard , wainscoted and furnished in the Watteau style , rocaille on the inside , old-fashioned on the outside , walled in with a triple hedge of flowers , had something discreet , coquettish , and solemn about it , as befits a caprice of love and magistracy . 
This house and corridor , which have now disappeared , were in existence fifteen years ago . 
In '93 a coppersmith had purchased the house with the idea of demolishing it , but had not been able to pay the price ; the nation made him bankrupt . 
So that it was the house which demolished the coppersmith . 
After that , the house remained uninhabited , and fell slowly to ruin , as does every dwelling to which the presence of man does not communicate life . 
It had remained fitted with its old furniture , was always for sale or to let , and the ten or a dozen people who passed through the Rue Plumet were warned of the fact by a yellow and illegible bit of writing which had hung on the garden wall since 1819 . 
Towards the end of the Restoration , these same passers-by might have noticed that the bill had disappeared , and even that the shutters on the first floor were open . 
The house was occupied , in fact . 
The windows had short curtains , a sign that there was a woman about . 
In the month of October , 1829 , a man of a certain age had presented himself and had hired the house just as it stood , including , of course , the back building and the lane which ended in the Rue de Babylone . 
He had had the secret openings of the two doors to this passage repaired . 
The house , as we have just mentioned , was still very nearly furnished with the justice 's old fitting ; the new tenant had ordered some repairs , had added what was lacking here and there , had replaced the paving-stones in the yard , bricks in the floors , steps in the stairs , missing bits in the inlaid floors and the glass in the lattice windows , and had finally installed himself there with a young girl and an elderly maid-servant , without commotion , rather like a person who is slipping in than like a man who is entering his own house . 
The neighbors did not gossip about him , for the reason that there were no neighbors . 
This unobtrusive tenant was Jean Valjean , the young girl was Cosette . 
The servant was a woman named Toussaint , whom Jean Valjean had saved from the hospital and from wretchedness , and who was elderly , a stammerer , and from the provinces , three qualities which had decided Jean Valjean to take her with him . 
He had hired the house under the name of M. Fauchelevent , independent gentleman . 
In all that has been related heretofore , the reader has , doubtless , been no less prompt than Thenardier to recognize Jean Valjean . 
Why had Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Petit-Picpus ? 
What had happened ? 
Nothing had happened . 
It will be remembered that Jean Valjean was happy in the convent , so happy that his conscience finally took the alarm . 
He saw Cosette every day , he felt paternity spring up and develop within him more and more , he brooded over the soul of that child , he said to himself that she was his , that nothing could take her from him , that this would last indefinitely , that she would certainly become a nun , being thereto gently incited every day , that thus the convent was henceforth the universe for her as it was for him , that he should grow old there , and that she would grow up there , that she would grow old there , and that he should die there ; that , in short , delightful hope , no separation was possible . 
On reflecting upon this , he fell into perplexity . 
He interrogated himself . 
He asked himself if all that happiness were really his , if it were not composed of the happiness of another , of the happiness of that child which he , an old man , was confiscating and stealing ; if that were not theft ? 
He said to himself , that this child had a right to know life before renouncing it , that to deprive her in advance , and in some sort without consulting her , of all joys , under the pretext of saving her from all trials , to take advantage of her ignorance of her isolation , in order to make an artificial vocation germinate in her , was to rob a human creature of its nature and to lie to God . 
And who knows if , when she came to be aware of all this some day , and found herself a nun to her sorrow , Cosette would not come to hate him ? 
A last , almost selfish thought , and less heroic than the rest , but which was intolerable to him . 
He resolved to quit the convent . 
He resolved on this ; he recognized with anguish , the fact that it was necessary . 
As for objections , there were none . 
Five years ' sojourn between these four walls and of disappearance had necessarily destroyed or dispersed the elements of fear . 
He could return tranquilly among men . 
He had grown old , and all had undergone a change . 
Who would recognize him now ? 
And then , to face the worst , there was danger only for himself , and he had no right to condemn Cosette to the cloister for the reason that he had been condemned to the galleys . 
Besides , what is danger in comparison with the right ? 
Finally , nothing prevented his being prudent and taking his precautions . 
As for Cosette 's education , it was almost finished and complete . 
His determination once taken , he awaited an opportunity . 
It was not long in presenting itself . 
Old Fauchelevent died . 
Jean Valjean demanded an audience with the revered prioress and told her that , having come into a little inheritance at the death of his brother , which permitted him henceforth to live without working , he should leave the service of the convent and take his daughter with him ; but that , as it was not just that Cosette , since she had not taken the vows , should have received her education gratuitously , he humbly begged the Reverend Prioress to see fit that he should offer to the community , as indemnity , for the five years which Cosette had spent there , the sum of five thousand francs . 
It was thus that Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Perpetual Adoration . 
On leaving the convent , he took in his own arms the little valise the key to which he still wore on his person , and would permit no porter to touch it . 
This puzzled Cosette , because of the odor of embalming which proceeded from it . 
Let us state at once , that this trunk never quitted him more . 
He always had it in his chamber . 
It was the first and only thing sometimes , that he carried off in his moving when he moved about . 
Cosette laughed at it , and called this valise his inseparable , saying : `` I am jealous of it . '' 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean did not reappear in the open air without profound anxiety . 
He discovered the house in the Rue Plumet , and hid himself from sight there . 
Henceforth he was in the possession of the name : -- Ultime Fauchelevent . 
At the same time he hired two other apartments in Paris , in order that he might attract less attention than if he were to remain always in the same quarter , and so that he could , at need , take himself off at the slightest disquietude which should assail him , and in short , so that he might not again be caught unprovided as on the night when he had so miraculously escaped from Javert . 
These two apartments were very pitiable , poor in appearance , and in two quarters which were far remote from each other , the one in the Rue de l'Ouest , the other in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
He went from time to time , now to the Rue de l'Homme Arme , now to the Rue de l'Ouest , to pass a month or six weeks , without taking Toussaint . 
He had himself served by the porters , and gave himself out as a gentleman from the suburbs , living on his funds , and having a little temporary resting-place in town . 
This lofty virtue had three domiciles in Paris for the sake of escaping from the police . 
JEAN VALJEAN AS A NATIONAL GUARD However , properly speaking , he lived in the Rue Plumet , and he had arranged his existence there in the following fashion : -- Cosette and the servant occupied the pavilion ; she had the big sleeping-room with the painted pier-glasses , the boudoir with the gilded fillets , the justice 's drawing-room furnished with tapestries and vast arm-chairs ; she had the garden . 
Jean Valjean had a canopied bed of antique damask in three colors and a beautiful Persian rug purchased in the Rue du Figuier-Saint-Paul at Mother Gaucher 's , put into Cosette 's chamber , and , in order to redeem the severity of these magnificent old things , he had amalgamated with this bric-a-brac all the gay and graceful little pieces of furniture suitable to young girls , an etagere , a bookcase filled with gilt-edged books , an inkstand , a blotting-book , paper , a work-table incrusted with mother of pearl , a silver-gilt dressing-case , a toilet service in Japanese porcelain . 
Long damask curtains with a red foundation and three colors , like those on the bed , hung at the windows of the first floor . 
On the ground floor , the curtains were of tapestry . 
All winter long , Cosette 's little house was heated from top to bottom . 
Jean Valjean inhabited the sort of porter 's lodge which was situated at the end of the back courtyard , with a mattress on a folding-bed , a white wood table , two straw chairs , an earthenware water-jug , a few old volumes on a shelf , his beloved valise in one corner , and never any fire . 
He dined with Cosette , and he had a loaf of black bread on the table for his own use . 
When Toussaint came , he had said to her : `` It is the young lady who is the mistress of this house . '' 
-- `` And you , monsieur ? '' 
Toussaint replied in amazement . 
-- `` I am a much better thing than the master , I am the father . '' 
Cosette had been taught housekeeping in the convent , and she regulated their expenditure , which was very modest . 
Every day , Jean Valjean put his arm through Cosette 's and took her for a walk . 
He led her to the Luxembourg , to the least frequented walk , and every Sunday he took her to mass at Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas , because that was a long way off . 
As it was a very poor quarter , he bestowed alms largely there , and the poor people surrounded him in church , which had drawn down upon him Thenardier 's epistle : `` To the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas . '' 
He was fond of taking Cosette to visit the poor and the sick . 
No stranger ever entered the house in the Rue Plumet . 
Toussaint brought their provisions , and Jean Valjean went himself for water to a fountain near by on the boulevard . 
Their wood and wine were put into a half-subterranean hollow lined with rock-work which lay near the Rue de Babylone and which had formerly served the chief-justice as a grotto ; for at the epoch of follies and `` Little Houses '' no love was without a grotto . 
In the door opening on the Rue de Babylone , there was a box destined for the reception of letters and papers ; only , as the three inhabitants of the pavilion in the Rue Plumet received neither papers nor letters , the entire usefulness of that box , formerly the go-between of a love affair , and the confidant of a love-lorn lawyer , was now limited to the tax-collector 's notices , and the summons of the guard . 
For M. Fauchelevent , independent gentleman , belonged to the national guard ; he had not been able to escape through the fine meshes of the census of 1831 . 
The municipal information collected at that time had even reached the convent of the Petit-Picpus , a sort of impenetrable and holy cloud , whence Jean Valjean had emerged in venerable guise , and , consequently , worthy of mounting guard in the eyes of the townhall . 
Three or four times a year , Jean Valjean donned his uniform and mounted guard ; he did this willingly , however ; it was a correct disguise which mixed him with every one , and yet left him solitary . 
Jean Valjean had just attained his sixtieth birthday , the age of legal exemption ; but he did not appear to be over fifty ; moreover , he had no desire to escape his sergeant-major nor to quibble with Comte de Lobau ; he possessed no civil status , he was concealing his name , he was concealing his identity , so he concealed his age , he concealed everything ; and , as we have just said , he willingly did his duty as a national guard ; the sum of his ambition lay in resembling any other man who paid his taxes . 
This man had for his ideal , within , the angel , without , the bourgeois . 
Let us note one detail , however ; when Jean Valjean went out with Cosette , he dressed as the reader has already seen , and had the air of a retired officer . 
When he went out alone , which was generally at night , he was always dressed in a workingman 's trousers and blouse , and wore a cap which concealed his face . 
Was this precaution or humility ? 
Both . 
Cosette was accustomed to the enigmatical side of her destiny , and hardly noticed her father 's peculiarities . 
As for Toussaint , she venerated Jean Valjean , and thought everything he did right . 
