There one could hear the termination in anche of the old Thuneurs . 
Boyanches-tu -LRB- bois-tu -RRB- , do you drink ? 
But perpetual movement remains its law , nevertheless . 
If the philosopher succeeds in fixing , for a moment , for purposes of observation , this language which is incessantly evaporating , he falls into doleful and useful meditation . 
No study is more efficacious and more fecund in instruction . 
There is not a metaphor , not an analogy , in slang , which does not contain a lesson . 
Among these men , to beat means to feign ; one beats a malady ; ruse is their strength . 
For them , the idea of the man is not separated from the idea of darkness . 
The night is called la sorgue ; man , l'orgue . 
Man is a derivative of the night . 
They have taken up the practice of considering society in the light of an atmosphere which kills them , of a fatal force , and they speak of their liberty as one would speak of his health . 
A man under arrest is a sick man ; one who is condemned is a dead man . 
The most terrible thing for the prisoner within the four walls in which he is buried , is a sort of glacial chastity , and he calls the dungeon the castus . 
In that funereal place , life outside always presents itself under its most smiling aspect . 
The prisoner has irons on his feet ; you think , perhaps , that his thought is that it is with the feet that one walks ? 
No ; he is thinking that it is with the feet that one dances ; so , when he has succeeded in severing his fetters , his first idea is that now he can dance , and he calls the saw the bastringue -LRB- public-house ball -RRB- . 
-- A name is a centre ; profound assimilation . 
-- The ruffian has two heads , one of which reasons out his actions and leads him all his life long , and the other which he has upon his shoulders on the day of his death ; he calls the head which counsels him in crime la sorbonne , and the head which expiates it la tronche . 
-- When a man has no longer anything but rags upon his body and vices in his heart , when he has arrived at that double moral and material degradation which the word blackguard characterizes in its two acceptations , he is ripe for crime ; he is like a well-whetted knife ; he has two cutting edges , his distress and his malice ; so slang does not say a blackguard , it says un reguise . 
-- What are the galleys ? 
A brazier of damnation , a hell . 
The convict calls himself a fagot . 
-- And finally , what name do malefactors give to their prison ? 
The college . 
A whole penitentiary system can be evolved from that word . 
Does the reader wish to know where the majority of the songs of the galleys , those refrains called in the special vocabulary lirlonfa , have had their birth ? 
Let him listen to what follows : -- There existed at the Chatelet in Paris a large and long cellar . 
This cellar was eight feet below the level of the Seine . 
It had neither windows nor air-holes , its only aperture was the door ; men could enter there , air could not . 
This vault had for ceiling a vault of stone , and for floor ten inches of mud . 
It was flagged ; but the pavement had rotted and cracked under the oozing of the water . 
Eight feet above the floor , a long and massive beam traversed this subterranean excavation from side to side ; from this beam hung , at short distances apart , chains three feet long , and at the end of these chains there were rings for the neck . 
In this vault , men who had been condemned to the galleys were incarcerated until the day of their departure for Toulon . 
They were thrust under this beam , where each one found his fetters swinging in the darkness and waiting for him . 
The chains , those pendant arms , and the necklets , those open hands , caught the unhappy wretches by the throat . 
They were rivetted and left there . 
As the chain was too short , they could not lie down . 
They remained motionless in that cavern , in that night , beneath that beam , almost hanging , forced to unheard-of efforts to reach their bread , jug , or their vault overhead , mud even to mid-leg , filth flowing to their very calves , broken asunder with fatigue , with thighs and knees giving way , clinging fast to the chain with their hands in order to obtain some rest , unable to sleep except when standing erect , and awakened every moment by the strangling of the collar ; some woke no more . 
In order to eat , they pushed the bread , which was flung to them in the mud , along their leg with their heel until it reached their hand . 
How long did they remain thus ? 
One month , two months , six months sometimes ; one stayed a year . 
It was the antechamber of the galleys . 
Men were put there for stealing a hare from the king . 
In this sepulchre-hell , what did they do ? 
What man can do in a sepulchre , they went through the agonies of death , and what can man do in hell , they sang ; for song lingers where there is no longer any hope . 
In the waters of Malta , when a galley was approaching , the song could be heard before the sound of the oars . 
Poor Survincent , the poacher , who had gone through the prison-cellar of the Chatelet , said : `` It was the rhymes that kept me up . '' 
Uselessness of poetry . 
What is the good of rhyme ? 
It is in this cellar that nearly all the slang songs had their birth . 
It is from the dungeon of the Grand-Chatelet of Paris that comes the melancholy refrain of the Montgomery galley : `` Timaloumisaine , timaloumison . '' 
The majority of these Icicaille est la theatre Here is the theatre Du petit dardant . 
Of the little archer -LRB- Cupid -RRB- . 
Do what you will , you can not annihilate that eternal relic in the heart of man , love . 
In this world of dismal deeds , people keep their secrets . 
The secret is the thing above all others . 
The secret , in the eyes of these wretches , is unity which serves as a base of union . 
To betray a secret is to tear from each member of this fierce community something of his own personality . 
To inform against , in the energetic slang dialect , is called : `` to eat the bit . '' 
As though the informer drew to himself a little of the substance of all and nourished himself on a bit of each one 's flesh . 
What does it signify to receive a box on the ear ? 
Commonplace metaphor replies : `` It is to see thirty-six candles . '' 
Here slang intervenes and takes it up : Candle , camoufle . 
Thereupon , the ordinary tongue gives camouflet -LSB- 42 -RSB- as the synonym for soufflet . 
Thus , by a sort of infiltration from below upwards , with the aid of metaphor , that incalculable , trajectory slang mounts from the cavern to the Academy ; and Poulailler saying : `` I light my camoufle , '' causes Voltaire to write : `` Langleviel La Beaumelle deserves a hundred camouflets . '' 
-LSB- 42 -RSB- Smoke puffed in the face of a person asleep . 
Researches in slang mean discoveries at every step . 
Study and investigation of this strange idiom lead to the mysterious point of intersection of regular society with society which is accursed . 
The thief also has his food for cannon , stealable matter , you , I , whoever passes by ; le pantre . 
-LRB- Pan , everybody . -RRB- 
Slang is language turned convict . 
That the thinking principle of man be thrust down ever so low , that it can be dragged and pinioned there by obscure tyrannies of fatality , that it can be bound by no one knows what fetters in that abyss , is sufficient to create consternation . 
Oh , poor thought of miserable wretches ! 
Alas ! 
will no one come to the succor of the human soul in that darkness ? 
Is it her destiny there to await forever the mind , the liberator , the immense rider of Pegasi and hippo-griffs , the combatant of heroes of the dawn who shall descend from the azure between two wings , the radiant knight of the future ? 
Will she forever summon in vain to her assistance the lance of light of the ideal ? 
Is she condemned to hear the fearful approach of Evil through the density of the gulf , and to catch glimpses , nearer and nearer at hand , beneath the hideous water of that dragon 's head , that maw streaked with foam , and that writhing undulation of claws , swellings , and rings ? 
Must it remain there , without a gleam of light , without hope , given over to that terrible approach , vaguely scented out by the monster , shuddering , dishevelled , wringing its arms , forever chained to the rock of night , a sombre Andromeda white and naked amid the shadows ! 
SLANG WHICH WEEPS AND SLANG WHICH LAUGHS As the reader perceives , slang in its entirety , slang of four hundred years ago , like the slang of to-day , is permeated with that sombre , symbolical spirit which gives to all words a mien which is now mournful , now menacing . 
One feels in it the wild and ancient sadness of those vagrants of the Court of Miracles who played at cards with packs of their own , some of which have come down to us . 
The eight of clubs , for instance , represented a huge tree bearing eight enormous trefoil leaves , a sort of fantastic personification of the forest . 
At the foot of this tree a fire was burning , over which three hares were roasting a huntsman on a spit , and behind him , on another fire , hung a steaming pot , whence emerged the head of a dog . 
Nothing can be more melancholy than these reprisals in painting , by a pack of cards , in the presence of stakes for the roasting of smugglers and of the cauldron for the boiling of counterfeiters . 
The diverse forms assumed by thought in the realm of slang , even song , even raillery , even menace , all partook of this powerless and dejected character . 
All the songs , the melodies of some of which have been collected , were humble and lamentable to the point of evoking tears . 
The pegre is always the poor pegre , and he is always the hare in hiding , the fugitive mouse , the flying bird . 
He hardly complains , he contents himself with sighing ; one of his moans has come down to us : `` I do not understand how God , the father of men , can torture his children and his grandchildren and hear them cry , without himself suffering torture . '' 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- The wretch , whenever he has time to think , makes himself small before the low , and frail in the presence of society ; he lies down flat on his face , he entreats , he appeals to the side of compassion ; we feel that he is conscious of his guilt . 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- Je n'entrave que le dail comment meck , le daron des orgues , peut atiger ses momes et ses momignards et les locher criblant sans etre agite lui-meme . 
Towards the middle of the last century a change took place , prison songs and thieves ' ritournelles assumed , so to speak , an insolent and jovial mien . 
The plaintive malure was replaced by the larifla . 
We find in the eighteenth century , in nearly all the songs of the galleys and prisons , a diabolical and enigmatical gayety . 
We hear this strident and lilting refrain which we should say had been lighted up by a phosphorescent gleam , and which seems to have been flung into the forest by a will-o ' - the-wisp playing the fife : -- Miralabi suslababo Mirliton ribonribette Surlababi mirlababo Mirliton ribonribo . 
This was sung in a cellar or in a nook of the forest while cutting a man 's throat . 
A serious symptom . 
In the eighteenth century , the ancient melancholy of the dejected classes vanishes . 
They began to laugh . 
They rally the grand meg and the grand dab . 
Given Louis XV . 
