Grantaire admired , loved , and venerated Enjolras . 
To whom did this anarchical scoffer unite himself in this phalanx of absolute minds ? 
To the most absolute . 
In what manner had Enjolras subjugated him ? 
By his ideas ? 
No . 
By his character . 
A phenomenon which is often observable . 
A sceptic who adheres to a believer is as simple as the law of complementary colors . 
That which we lack attracts us . 
No one loves the light like the blind man . 
The dwarf adores the drum-major . 
The toad always has his eyes fixed on heaven . 
Why ? 
In order to watch the bird in its flight . 
Grantaire , in whom writhed doubt , loved to watch faith soar in Enjolras . 
He had need of Enjolras . 
That chaste , healthy , firm , upright , hard , candid nature charmed him , without his being clearly aware of it , and without the idea of explaining it to himself having occurred to him . 
He admired his opposite by instinct . 
His soft , yielding , dislocated , sickly , shapeless ideas attached themselves to Enjolras as to a spinal column . 
His moral backbone leaned on that firmness . 
Grantaire in the presence of Enjolras became some one once more . 
He was , himself , moreover , composed of two elements , which were , to all appearance , incompatible . 
He was ironical and cordial . 
His indifference loved . 
His mind could get along without belief , but his heart could not get along without friendship . 
A profound contradiction ; for an affection is a conviction . 
His nature was thus constituted . 
There are men who seem to be born to be the reverse , the obverse , the wrong side . 
They are Pollux , Patrocles , Nisus , Eudamidas , Ephestion , Pechmeja . 
They only exist on condition that they are backed up with another man ; their name is a sequel , and is only written preceded by the conjunction and ; and their existence is not their own ; it is the other side of an existence which is not theirs . 
Grantaire was one of these men . 
He was the obverse of Enjolras . 
One might almost say that affinities begin with the letters of the alphabet . 
In the series O and P are inseparable . 
You can , at will , pronounce O and P or Orestes and Pylades . 
Grantaire , Enjolras ' true satellite , inhabited this circle of young men ; he lived there , he took no pleasure anywhere but there ; he followed them everywhere . 
His joy was to see these forms go and come through the fumes of wine . 
They tolerated him on account of his good humor . 
Enjolras , the believer , disdained this sceptic ; and , a sober man himself , scorned this drunkard . 
He accorded him a little lofty pity . 
Grantaire was an unaccepted Pylades . 
Always harshly treated by Enjolras , roughly repulsed , rejected yet ever returning to the charge , he said of Enjolras : `` What fine marble ! '' 
BLONDEAU 'S FUNERAL ORATION BY BOSSUET On a certain afternoon , which had , as will be seen hereafter , some coincidence with the events heretofore related , Laigle de Meaux was to be seen leaning in a sensual manner against the doorpost of the Cafe Musain . 
He had the air of a caryatid on a vacation ; he carried nothing but his revery , however . 
He was staring at the Place Saint-Michel . 
To lean one 's back against a thing is equivalent to lying down while standing erect , which attitude is not hated by thinkers . 
Laigle de Meaux was pondering without melancholy , over a little misadventure which had befallen him two days previously at the law-school , and which had modified his personal plans for the future , plans which were rather indistinct in any case . 
Revery does not prevent a cab from passing by , nor the dreamer from taking note of that cab . 
Laigle de Meaux , whose eyes were straying about in a sort of diffuse lounging , perceived , athwart his somnambulism , a two-wheeled vehicle proceeding through the place , at a foot pace and apparently in indecision . 
For whom was this cabriolet ? 
Why was it driving at a walk ? 
Laigle took a survey . 
In it , beside the coachman , sat a young man , and in front of the young man lay a rather bulky hand-bag . 
The bag displayed to passers-by the following name inscribed in large black letters on a card which was sewn to the stuff : MARIUS PONTMERCY . 
This name caused Laigle to change his attitude . 
He drew himself up and hurled this apostrophe at the young man in the cabriolet : -- `` Monsieur Marius Pontmercy ! '' 
The cabriolet thus addressed came to a halt . 
The young man , who also seemed deeply buried in thought , raised his eyes : -- `` Hey ? '' 
said he . 
`` You are M. Marius Pontmercy ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
`` I was looking for you , '' resumed Laigle de Meaux . 
`` How so ? '' 
demanded Marius ; for it was he : in fact , he had just quitted his grandfather 's , and had before him a face which he now beheld for the first time . 
`` I do not know you . '' 
`` Neither do I know you , '' responded Laigle . 
Marius thought he had encountered a wag , the beginning of a mystification in the open street . 
He was not in a very good humor at the moment . 
He frowned . 
Laigle de Meaux went on imperturbably : -- `` You were not at the school day before yesterday . '' 
`` That is possible . '' 
`` That is certain . '' 
`` You are a student ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
`` Yes , sir . 
Like yourself . 
Day before yesterday , I entered the school , by chance . 
You know , one does have such freaks sometimes . 
The professor was just calling the roll . 
You are not unaware that they are very ridiculous on such occasions . 
At the third call , unanswered , your name is erased from the list . 
Sixty francs in the gulf . '' 
Marius began to listen . 
`` It was Blondeau who was making the call . 
You know Blondeau , he has a very pointed and very malicious nose , and he delights to scent out the absent . 
He slyly began with the letter P. I was not listening , not being compromised by that letter . 
The call was not going badly . 
No erasures ; the universe was present . 
Blondeau was grieved . 
I said to myself : ` Blondeau , my love , you will not get the very smallest sort of an execution to-day . ' 
All at once Blondeau calls , ` Marius Pontmercy ! ' 
No one answers . 
Blondeau , filled with hope , repeats more loudly : ` Marius Pontmercy ! ' 
And he takes his pen . 
Monsieur , I have bowels of compassion . 
I said to myself hastily : ` Here 's a brave fellow who is going to get scratched out . 
Attention . 
Here is a veritable mortal who is not exact . 
He 's not a good student . 
