Former days did not recognize Yesterday . 
People no longer had the feeling for what was grand . 
There was some one who called Bonaparte Scapin . 
This Society no longer exists . 
Nothing of it , we repeat , exists to-day . 
When we select from it some one figure at random , and attempt to make it live again in thought , it seems as strange to us as the world before the Deluge . 
It is because it , too , as a matter of fact , has been engulfed in a deluge . 
It has disappeared beneath two Revolutions . 
What billows are ideas ! 
How quickly they cover all that it is their mission to destroy and to bury , and how promptly they create frightful gulfs ! 
Such was the physiognomy of the salons of those distant and candid times when M. Martainville had more wit than Voltaire . 
These salons had a literature and politics of their own . 
They believed in Fievee . 
M. Agier laid down the law in them . 
They commentated M. Colnet , the old bookseller and publicist of the Quay Malaquais . 
Napoleon was to them thoroughly the Corsican Ogre . 
Later on the introduction into history of M. le Marquis de Bonaparte , Lieutenant-General of the King 's armies , was a concession to the spirit of the age . 
These salons did not long preserve their purity . 
Beginning with 1818 , doctrinarians began to spring up in them , a disturbing shade . 
Their way was to be Royalists and to excuse themselves for being so . 
Where the ultras were very proud , the doctrinarians were rather ashamed . 
They had wit ; they had silence ; their political dogma was suitably impregnated with arrogance ; they should have succeeded . 
They indulged , and usefully too , in excesses in the matter of white neckties and tightly buttoned coats . 
The mistake or the misfortune of the doctrinarian party was to create aged youth . 
They assumed the poses of wise men . 
They dreamed of engrafting a temperate power on the absolute and excessive principle . 
They opposed , and sometimes with rare intelligence , conservative liberalism to the liberalism which demolishes . 
They were heard to say : `` Thanks for Royalism ! 
It has rendered more than one service . 
It has brought back tradition , worship , religion , respect . 
It is faithful , brave , chivalric , loving , devoted . 
It has mingled , though with regret , the secular grandeurs of the monarchy with the new grandeurs of the nation . 
Its mistake is not to understand the Revolution , the Empire , glory , liberty , young ideas , young generations , the age . 
But this mistake which it makes with regard to us , -- have we not sometimes been guilty of it towards them ? 
The Revolution , whose heirs we are , ought to be intelligent on all points . 
To attack Royalism is a misconstruction of liberalism . 
What an error ! 
And what blindness ! 
Revolutionary France is wanting in respect towards historic France , that is to say , towards its mother , that is to say , towards itself . 
After the 5th of September , the nobility of the monarchy is treated as the nobility of the Empire was treated after the 5th of July . 
They were unjust to the eagle , we are unjust to the fleur-de-lys . 
It seems that we must always have something to proscribe ! 
Does it serve any purpose to ungild the crown of Louis XIV. , to scrape the coat of arms of Henry IV . ? 
We scoff at M. de Vaublanc for erasing the N 's from the bridge of Jena ! 
What was it that he did ? 
What are we doing ? 
Bouvines belongs to us as well as Marengo . 
The fleurs-de-lys are ours as well as the N 's . 
That is our patrimony . 
To what purpose shall we diminish it ? 
We must not deny our country in the past any more than in the present . 
Why not accept the whole of history ? 
Why not love the whole of France ? 
It is thus that doctrinarians criticised and protected Royalism , which was displeased at criticism and furious at protection . 
The ultras marked the first epoch of Royalism , congregation characterized the second . 
Skill follows ardor . 
Let us confine ourselves here to this sketch . 
In the course of this narrative , the author of this book has encountered in his path this curious moment of contemporary history ; he has been forced to cast a passing glance upon it , and to trace once more some of the singular features of this society which is unknown to-day . 
But he does it rapidly and without any bitter or derisive idea . 
Souvenirs both respectful and affectionate , for they touch his mother , attach him to this past . 
Moreover , let us remark , this same petty world had a grandeur of its own . 
One may smile at it , but one can neither despise nor hate it . 
It was the France of former days . 
Marius Pontmercy pursued some studies , as all children do . 
When he emerged from the hands of Aunt Gillenormand , his grandfather confided him to a worthy professor of the most purely classic innocence . 
This young soul which was expanding passed from a prude to a vulgar pedant . 
Marius went through his years of college , then he entered the law school . 
He was a Royalist , fanatical and severe . 
He did not love his grandfather much , as the latter 's gayety and cynicism repelled him , and his feelings towards his father were gloomy . 
He was , on the whole , a cold and ardent , noble , generous , proud , religious , enthusiastic lad ; dignified to harshness , pure to shyness . 
END OF THE BRIGAND The conclusion of Marius ' classical studies coincided with M. Gillenormand 's departure from society . 
The old man bade farewell to the Faubourg Saint-Germain and to Madame de T. 's salon , and established himself in the Mardis , in his house of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
There he had for servants , in addition to the porter , that chambermaid , Nicolette , who had succeeded to Magnon , and that short-breathed and pursy Basque , who have been mentioned above . 
In 1827 , Marius had just attained his seventeenth year . 
One evening , on his return home , he saw his grandfather holding a letter in his hand . 
`` Marius , '' said M. Gillenormand , `` you will set out for Vernon to-morrow . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` To see your father . '' 
Marius was seized with a trembling fit . 
He had thought of everything except this -- that he should one day be called upon to see his father . 
Nothing could be more unexpected , more surprising , and , let us admit it , more disagreeable to him . 
It was forcing estrangement into reconciliation . 
It was not an affliction , but it was an unpleasant duty . 
Marius , in addition to his motives of political antipathy , was convinced that his father , the slasher , as M. Gillenormand called him on his amiable days , did not love him ; this was evident , since he had abandoned him to others . 
Feeling that he was not beloved , he did not love . 
`` Nothing is more simple , '' he said to himself . 
He was so astounded that he did not question M. Gillenormand . 
The grandfather resumed : -- `` It appears that he is ill . 
He demands your presence . '' 
And after a pause , he added : -- `` Set out to-morrow morning . 
I think there is a coach which leaves the Cour des Fontaines at six o'clock , and which arrives in the evening . 
Take it . 
He says that here is haste . '' 
Then he crushed the letter in his hand and thrust it into his pocket . 
Marius might have set out that very evening and have been with his father on the following morning . 
A diligence from the Rue du Bouloi took the trip to Rouen by night at that date , and passed through Vernon . 
Neither Marius nor M.Gillenormand thought of making inquiries about it . 
The next day , at twilight , Marius reached Vernon . 
People were just beginning to light their candles . 
