In the future no one will kill any one else , the earth will beam with radiance , the human race will love . 
The day will come , citizens , when all will be concord , harmony , light , joy and life ; it will come , and it is in order that it may come that we are about to die . '' 
Enjolras ceased . 
His virgin lips closed ; and he remained for some time standing on the spot where he had shed blood , in marble immobility . 
His staring eye caused those about him to speak in low tones . 
Jean Prouvaire and Combeferre pressed each other 's hands silently , and , leaning against each other in an angle of the barricade , they watched with an admiration in which there was some compassion , that grave young man , executioner and priest , composed of light , like crystal , and also of rock . 
Let us say at once that later on , after the action , when the bodies were taken to the morgue and searched , a police agent 's card was found on Le Cabuc . 
The author of this book had in his hands , in 1848 , the special report on this subject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832 . 
We will add , that if we are to believe a tradition of the police , which is strange but probably well founded , Le Cabuc was Claquesous . 
The fact is , that dating from the death of Le Cabuc , there was no longer any question of Claquesous . 
Claquesous had nowhere left any trace of his disappearance ; he would seem to have amalgamated himself with the invisible . 
His life had been all shadows , his end was night . 
The whole insurgent group was still under the influence of the emotion of that tragic case which had been so quickly tried and so quickly terminated , when Courfeyrac again beheld on the barricade , the small young man who had inquired of him that morning for Marius . 
This lad , who had a bold and reckless air , had come by night to join the insurgents . 
BOOK THIRTEENTH . 
-- MARIUS ENTERS THE SHADOW FROM THE RUE PLUMET TO THE QUARTIER SAINT-DENIS The voice which had summoned Marius through the twilight to the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , had produced on him the effect of the voice of destiny . 
He wished to die ; the opportunity presented itself ; he knocked at the door of the tomb , a hand in the darkness offered him the key . 
These melancholy openings which take place in the gloom before despair , are tempting . 
Marius thrust aside the bar which had so often allowed him to pass , emerged from the garden , and said : `` I will go . '' 
Mad with grief , no longer conscious of anything fixed or solid in his brain , incapable of accepting anything thenceforth of fate after those two months passed in the intoxication of youth and love , overwhelmed at once by all the reveries of despair , he had but one desire remaining , to make a speedy end of all . 
He set out at rapid pace . 
He found himself most opportunely armed , as he had Javert 's pistols with him . 
The young man of whom he thought that he had caught a glimpse , had vanished from his sight in the street . 
Marius , who had emerged from the Rue Plumet by the boulevard , traversed the Esplanade and the bridge of the Invalides , the Champs Elysees , the Place Louis XV. , and reached the Rue de Rivoli . 
The shops were open there , the gas was burning under the arcades , women were making their purchases in the stalls , people were eating ices in the Cafe Laiter , and nibbling small cakes at the English pastry-cook 's shop . 
Only a few posting-chaises were setting out at a gallop from the Hotel des Princes and the Hotel Meurice . 
Marius entered the Rue Saint-Honore through the Passage Delorme . 
There the shops were closed , the merchants were chatting in front of their half-open doors , people were walking about , the street lanterns were lighted , beginning with the first floor , all the windows were lighted as usual . 
There was cavalry on the Place du Palais-Royal . 
Marius followed the Rue Saint-Honore . 
In proportion as he left the Palais-Royal behind him , there were fewer lighted windows , the shops were fast shut , no one was chatting on the thresholds , the street grew sombre , and , at the same time , the crowd increased in density . 
For the passers-by now amounted to a crowd . 
No one could be seen to speak in this throng , and yet there arose from it a dull , deep murmur . 
Near the fountain of the Arbre-Sec , there were `` assemblages '' , motionless and gloomy groups which were to those who went and came as stones in the midst of running water . 
At the entrance to the Rue des Prouvaires , the crowd no longer walked . 
It formed a resisting , massive , solid , compact , almost impenetrable block of people who were huddled together , and conversing in low tones . 
There were hardly any black coats or round hats now , but smock frocks , blouses , caps , and bristling and cadaverous heads . 
This multitude undulated confusedly in the nocturnal gloom . 
Its whisperings had the hoarse accent of a vibration . 
Although not one of them was walking , a dull trampling was audible in the mire . 
Beyond this dense portion of the throng , in the Rue du Roule , in the Rue des Prouvaires , and in the extension of the Rue Saint-Honore , there was no longer a single window in which a candle was burning . 
Only the solitary and diminishing rows of lanterns could be seen vanishing into the street in the distance . 
The lanterns of that date resembled large red stars , hanging to ropes , and shed upon the pavement a shadow which had the form of a huge spider . 
These streets were not deserted . 
There could be descried piles of guns , moving bayonets , and troops bivouacking . 
No curious observer passed that limit . 
There circulation ceased . 
There the rabble ended and the army began . 
Marius willed with the will of a man who hopes no more . 
He had been summoned , he must go . 
He found a means to traverse the throng and to pass the bivouac of the troops , he shunned the patrols , he avoided the sentinels . 
He made a circuit , reached the Rue de Bethisy , and directed his course towards the Halles . 
At the corner of the Rue des Bourdonnais , there were no longer any lanterns . 
After having passed the zone of the crowd , he had passed the limits of the troops ; he found himself in something startling . 
There was no longer a passer-by , no longer a soldier , no longer a light , there was no one ; solitude , silence , night , I know not what chill which seized hold upon one . 
Entering a street was like entering a cellar . 
He continued to advance . 
He took a few steps . 
Some one passed close to him at a run . 
Was it a man ? 
Or a woman ? 
Were there many of them ? 
he could not have told . 
It had passed and vanished . 
Proceeding from circuit to circuit , he reached a lane which he judged to be the Rue de la Poterie ; near the middle of this street , he came in contact with an obstacle . 
He extended his hands . 
It was an overturned wagon ; his foot recognized pools of water , gullies , and paving-stones scattered and piled up . 
A barricade had been begun there and abandoned . 
He climbed over the stones and found himself on the other side of the barrier . 
He walked very near the street-posts , and guided himself along the walls of the houses . 
A little beyond the barricade , it seemed to him that he could make out something white in front of him . 
He approached , it took on a form . 
It was two white horses ; the horses of the omnibus harnessed by Bossuet in the morning , who had been straying at random all day from street to street , and had finally halted there , with the weary patience of brutes who no more understand the actions of men , than man understands the actions of Providence . 
Marius left the horses behind him . 
As he was approaching a street which seemed to him to be the Rue du Contrat-Social , a shot coming no one knows whence , and traversing the darkness at random , whistled close by him , and the bullet pierced a brass shaving-dish suspended above his head over a hairdresser 's shop . 
This pierced shaving-dish was still to be seen in 1848 , in the Rue du Contrat-Social , at the corner of the pillars of the market . 
This shot still betokened life . 
From that instant forth he encountered nothing more . 
The whole of this itinerary resembled a descent of black steps . 
Nevertheless , Marius pressed forward . 
AN OWL 'S VIEW OF PARIS A being who could have hovered over Paris that night with the wing of the bat or the owl would have had beneath his eyes a gloomy spectacle . 
All that old quarter of the Halles , which is like a city within a city , through which run the Rues Saint-Denis and Saint-Martin , where a thousand lanes cross , and of which the insurgents had made their redoubt and their stronghold , would have appeared to him like a dark and enormous cavity hollowed out in the centre of Paris . 
There the glance fell into an abyss . 
Thanks to the broken lanterns , thanks to the closed windows , there all radiance , all life , all sound , all movement ceased . 
The invisible police of the insurrection were on the watch everywhere , and maintained order , that is to say , night . 
The necessary tactics of insurrection are to drown small numbers in a vast obscurity , to multiply every combatant by the possibilities which that obscurity contains . 
At dusk , every window where a candle was burning received a shot . 
The light was extinguished , sometimes the inhabitant was killed . 
Hence nothing was stirring . 
There was nothing but fright , mourning , stupor in the houses ; and in the streets , a sort of sacred horror . 
Not even the long rows of windows and stores , the indentations of the chimneys , and the roofs , and the vague reflections which are cast back by the wet and muddy pavements , were visible . 
An eye cast upward at that mass of shadows might , perhaps , have caught a glimpse here and there , at intervals , of indistinct gleams which brought out broken and eccentric lines , and profiles of singular buildings , something like the lights which go and come in ruins ; it was at such points that the barricades were situated . 
The rest was a lake of obscurity , foggy , heavy , and funereal , above which , in motionless and melancholy outlines , rose the tower of Saint-Jacques , the church of Saint-Merry , and two or three more of those grand edifices of which man makes giants and the night makes phantoms . 
All around this deserted and disquieting labyrinth , in the quarters where the Parisian circulation had not been annihilated , and where a few street lanterns still burned , the aerial observer might have distinguished the metallic gleam of swords and bayonets , the dull rumble of artillery , and the swarming of silent battalions whose ranks were swelling from minute to minute ; a formidable girdle which was slowly drawing in and around the insurrection . 
The invested quarter was no longer anything more than a monstrous cavern ; everything there appeared to be asleep or motionless , and , as we have just seen , any street which one might come to offered nothing but darkness . 
A wild darkness , full of traps , full of unseen and formidable shocks , into which it was alarming to penetrate , and in which it was terrible to remain , where those who entered shivered before those whom they awaited , where those who waited shuddered before those who were coming . 
Invisible combatants were entrenched at every corner of the street ; snares of the sepulchre concealed in the density of night . 
All was over . 
No more light was to be hoped for , henceforth , except the lightning of guns , no further encounter except the abrupt and rapid apparition of death . 
Where ? 
