She inquired of Toussaint : -- `` Has my father returned yet ? '' 
`` Not yet , Mademoiselle . '' 
-LSB- We have already noted once for all the fact that Toussaint stuttered . 
May we be permitted to dispense with it for the future . 
The musical notation of an infirmity is repugnant to us . -RSB- 
Jean Valjean , a thoughtful man , and given to nocturnal strolls , often returned quite late at night . 
`` Toussaint , '' went on Cosette , `` are you careful to thoroughly barricade the shutters opening on the garden , at least with bars , in the evening , and to put the little iron things in the little rings that close them ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
be easy on that score , Miss. '' Toussaint did not fail in her duty , and Cosette was well aware of the fact , but she could not refrain from adding : -- `` It is so solitary here . '' 
`` So far as that is concerned , '' said Toussaint , `` it is true . 
We might be assassinated before we had time to say ouf ! 
And Monsieur does not sleep in the house , to boot . 
But fear nothing , Miss , I fasten the shutters up like prisons . 
Lone women ! 
That is enough to make one shudder , I believe you ! 
Just imagine , what if you were to see men enter your chamber at night and say : ` Hold your tongue ! ' 
and begin to cut your throat . 
It 's not the dying so much ; you die , for one must die , and that 's all right ; it 's the abomination of feeling those people touch you . 
And then , their knives ; they ca n't be able to cut well with them ! 
Ah , good gracious ! '' 
`` Be quiet , '' said Cosette . 
`` Fasten everything thoroughly . '' 
Cosette , terrified by the melodrama improvised by Toussaint , and possibly , also , by the recollection of the apparitions of the past week , which recurred to her memory , dared not even say to her : `` Go and look at the stone which has been placed on the bench ! '' 
for fear of opening the garden gate and allowing `` the men '' to enter . 
She saw that all the doors and windows were carefully fastened , made Toussaint go all over the house from garret to cellar , locked herself up in her own chamber , bolted her door , looked under her couch , went to bed and slept badly . 
All night long she saw that big stone , as large as a mountain and full of caverns . 
At sunrise , -- the property of the rising sun is to make us laugh at all our terrors of the past night , and our laughter is in direct proportion to our terror which they have caused , -- at sunrise Cosette , when she woke , viewed her fright as a nightmare , and said to herself : `` What have I been thinking of ? 
It is like the footsteps that I thought I heard a week or two ago in the garden at night ! 
It is like the shadow of the chimney-pot ! 
Am I becoming a coward ? '' 
The sun , which was glowing through the crevices in her shutters , and turning the damask curtains crimson , reassured her to such an extent that everything vanished from her thoughts , even the stone . 
`` There was no more a stone on the bench than there was a man in a round hat in the garden ; I dreamed about the stone , as I did all the rest . '' 
She dressed herself , descended to the garden , ran to the bench , and broke out in a cold perspiration . 
The stone was there . 
But this lasted only for a moment . 
That which is terror by night is curiosity by day . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said she , `` come , let us see what it is . '' 
She lifted the stone , which was tolerably large . 
Beneath it was something which resembled a letter . 
It was a white envelope . 
Cosette seized it . 
There was no address on one side , no seal on the other . 
Yet the envelope , though unsealed , was not empty . 
Papers could be seen inside . 
Cosette examined it . 
It was no longer alarm , it was no longer curiosity ; it was a beginning of anxiety . 
Cosette drew from the envelope its contents , a little notebook of paper , each page of which was numbered and bore a few lines in a very fine and rather pretty handwriting , as Cosette thought . 
Cosette looked for a name ; there was none . 
To whom was this addressed ? 
To her , probably , since a hand had deposited the packet on her bench . 
From whom did it come ? 
An irresistible fascination took possession of her ; she tried to turn away her eyes from the leaflets which were trembling in her hand , she gazed at the sky , the street , the acacias all bathed in light , the pigeons fluttering over a neighboring roof , and then her glance suddenly fell upon the manuscript , and she said to herself that she must know what it contained . 
This is what she read . 
A HEART BENEATH A STONE The reduction of the universe to a single being , the expansion of a single being even to God , that is love . 
Love is the salutation of the angels to the stars . 
How sad is the soul , when it is sad through love ! 
What a void in the absence of the being who , by herself alone fills the world ! 
Oh ! 
how true it is that the beloved being becomes God . 
One could comprehend that God might be jealous of this had not God the Father of all evidently made creation for the soul , and the soul for love . 
The glimpse of a smile beneath a white crape bonnet with a lilac curtain is sufficient to cause the soul to enter into the palace of dreams . 
God is behind everything , but everything hides God . 
Things are black , creatures are opaque . 
To love a being is to render that being transparent . 
Certain thoughts are prayers . 
There are moments when , whatever the attitude of the body may be , the soul is on its knees . 
Parted lovers beguile absence by a thousand chimerical devices , which possess , however , a reality of their own . 
They are prevented from seeing each other , they can not write to each other ; they discover a multitude of mysterious means to correspond . 
They send each other the song of the birds , the perfume of the flowers , the smiles of children , the light of the sun , the sighings of the breeze , the rays of stars , all creation . 
And why not ? 
All the works of God are made to serve love . 
Love is sufficiently potent to charge all nature with its messages . 
Oh Spring ! 
Thou art a letter that I write to her . 
The future belongs to hearts even more than it does to minds . 
Love , that is the only thing that can occupy and fill eternity . 
In the infinite , the inexhaustible is requisite . 
Love participates of the soul itself . 
It is of the same nature . 
Like it , it is the divine spark ; like it , it is incorruptible , indivisible , imperishable . 
It is a point of fire that exists within us , which is immortal and infinite , which nothing can confine , and which nothing can extinguish . 
We feel it burning even to the very marrow of our bones , and we see it beaming in the very depths of heaven . 
Oh Love ! 
Adorations ! 
voluptuousness of two minds which understand each other , of two hearts which exchange with each other , of two glances which penetrate each other ! 
You will come to me , will you not , bliss ! 
strolls by twos in the solitudes ! 
Blessed and radiant days ! 
I have sometimes dreamed that from time to time hours detached themselves from the lives of the angels and came here below to traverse the destinies of men . 
God can add nothing to the happiness of those who love , except to give them endless duration . 
After a life of love , an eternity of love is , in fact , an augmentation ; but to increase in intensity even the ineffable felicity which love bestows on the soul even in this world , is impossible , even to God . 
God is the plenitude of heaven ; love is the plenitude of man . 
You look at a star for two reasons , because it is luminous , and because it is impenetrable . 
You have beside you a sweeter radiance and a greater mystery , woman . 
All of us , whoever we may be , have our respirable beings . 
We lack air and we stifle . 
Then we die . 
To die for lack of love is horrible . 
Suffocation of the soul . 
