The body-guard hissed Mademoiselle Mars . 
The grand newspapers were all very small . 
Their form was restricted , but their liberty was great . 
The Constitutionnel was constitutional . 
La Minerve called Chateaubriand Chateaubriant . 
That t made the good middle-class people laugh heartily at the expense of the great writer . 
In journals which sold themselves , prostituted journalists , insulted the exiles of 1815 . 
David had no longer any talent , Arnault had no longer any wit , Carnot was no longer honest , Soult had won no battles ; it is true that Napoleon had no longer any genius . 
No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sent to an exile by post very rarely reached him , as the police made it their religious duty to intercept them . 
This is no new fact ; Descartes complained of it in his exile . 
Now David , having , in a Belgian publication , shown some displeasure at not receiving letters which had been written to him , it struck the royalist journals as amusing ; and they derided the prescribed man well on this occasion . 
What separated two men more than an abyss was to say , the regicides , or to say the voters ; to say the enemies , or to say the allies ; to say Napoleon , or to say Buonaparte . 
All sensible people were agreed that the era of revolution had been closed forever by King Louis XVIII. , surnamed `` The Immortal Author of the Charter . '' 
On the platform of the Pont-Neuf , the word Redivivus was carved on the pedestal that awaited the statue of Henry IV . 
M. Piet , in the Rue Therese , No. 4 , was making the rough draft of his privy assembly to consolidate the monarchy . 
The leaders of the Right said at grave conjunctures , `` We must write to Bacot . '' 
MM . 
Canuel , O'Mahoney , and De Chappedelaine were preparing the sketch , to some extent with Monsieur 's approval , of what was to become later on `` The Conspiracy of the Bord de l'Eau '' -- of the waterside . 
L'Epingle Noire was already plotting in his own quarter . 
Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff . 
M. Decazes , who was liberal to a degree , reigned . 
Chateaubriand stood every morning at his window at No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique , clad in footed trousers , and slippers , with a madras kerchief knotted over his gray hair , with his eyes fixed on a mirror , a complete set of dentist 's instruments spread out before him , cleaning his teeth , which were charming , while he dictated The Monarchy according to the Charter to M. Pilorge , his secretary . 
Criticism , assuming an authoritative tone , preferred Lafon to Talma . 
M. de Feletez signed himself A. ; M. Hoffmann signed himself Z. Charles Nodier wrote Therese Aubert . 
Divorce was abolished . 
Lyceums called themselves colleges . 
The collegians , decorated on the collar with a golden fleur-de-lys , fought each other apropos of the King of Rome . 
The counter-police of the chateau had denounced to her Royal Highness Madame , the portrait , everywhere exhibited , of M. the Duc d'Orleans , who made a better appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general of hussars than M. the Duc de Berri , in his uniform of colonel-general of dragoons -- a serious inconvenience . 
The city of Paris was having the dome of the Invalides regilded at its own expense . 
Serious men asked themselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such or such an occasion ; M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points from M. Clausel de Coussergues ; M. de Salaberry was not satisfied . 
The comedian Picard , who belonged to the Academy , which the comedian Moliere had not been able to do , had The Two Philiberts played at the Odeon , upon whose pediment the removal of the letters still allowed THEATRE OF THE EMPRESS to be plainly read . 
People took part for or against Cugnet de Montarlot . 
Fabvier was factious ; Bavoux was revolutionary . 
The Liberal , Pelicier , published an edition of Voltaire , with the following title : Works of Voltaire , of the French Academy . 
`` That will attract purchasers , '' said the ingenious editor . 
The general opinion was that M. Charles Loyson would be the genius of the century ; envy was beginning to gnaw at him -- a sign of glory ; and this verse was composed on him : -- `` Even when Loyson steals , one feels that he has paws . '' 
As Cardinal Fesch refused to resign , M. de Pins , Archbishop of Amasie , administered the diocese of Lyons . 
The quarrel over the valley of Dappes was begun between Switzerland and France by a memoir from Captain , afterwards General Dufour . 
Saint-Simon , ignored , was erecting his sublime dream . 
There was a celebrated Fourier at the Academy of Science , whom posterity has forgotten ; and in some garret an obscure Fourier , whom the future will recall . 
Lord Byron was beginning to make his mark ; a note to a poem by Millevoye introduced him to France in these terms : a certain Lord Baron . 
David d'Angers was trying to work in marble . 
The Abbe Caron was speaking , in terms of praise , to a private gathering of seminarists in the blind alley of Feuillantines , of an unknown priest , named Felicite-Robert , who , at a latter date , became Lamennais . 
A thing which smoked and clattered on the Seine with the noise of a swimming dog went and came beneath the windows of the Tuileries , from the Pont Royal to the Pont Louis XV. ; it was a piece of mechanism which was not good for much ; a sort of plaything , the idle dream of a dream-ridden inventor ; an utopia -- a steamboat . 
The Parisians stared indifferently at this useless thing . 
M. de Vaublanc , the reformer of the Institute by a coup d'etat , the distinguished author of numerous academicians , ordinances , and batches of members , after having created them , could not succeed in becoming one himself . 
The Faubourg Saint-Germain and the pavilion de Marsan wished to have M. Delaveau for prefect of police , on account of his piety . 
Dupuytren and Recamier entered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre of the School of Medicine , and threatened each other with their fists on the subject of the divinity of Jesus Christ . 
Cuvier , with one eye on Genesis and the other on nature , tried to please bigoted reaction by reconciling fossils with texts and by making mastodons flatter Moses . 
M. Francois de Neufchateau , the praiseworthy cultivator of the memory of Parmentier , made a thousand efforts to have pomme de terre -LSB- potato -RSB- pronounced parmentiere , and succeeded therein not at all . 
The Abbe Gregoire , ex-bishop , ex-conventionary , ex-senator , had passed , in the royalist polemics , to the state of `` Infamous Gregoire . '' 
The locution of which we have made use -- passed to the state of -- has been condemned as a neologism by M. Royer Collard . 
Under the third arch of the Pont de Jena , the new stone with which , the two years previously , the mining aperture made by Blucher to blow up the bridge had been stopped up , was still recognizable on account of its whiteness . 
Justice summoned to its bar a man who , on seeing the Comte d'Artois enter Notre Dame , had said aloud : `` Sapristi ! 
I regret the time when I saw Bonaparte and Talma enter the Bel Sauvage , arm in arm . '' 
A seditious utterance . 
Six months in prison . 
Traitors showed themselves unbuttoned ; men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve of battle made no secret of their recompense , and strutted immodestly in the light of day , in the cynicism of riches and dignities ; deserters from Ligny and Quatre-Bras , in the brazenness of their well-paid turpitude , exhibited their devotion to the monarchy in the most barefaced manner . 
This is what floats up confusedly , pell-mell , for the year 1817 , and is now forgotten . 
History neglects nearly all these particulars , and can not do otherwise ; the infinity would overwhelm it . 
Nevertheless , these details , which are wrongly called trivial , -- there are no trivial facts in humanity , nor little leaves in vegetation , -- are useful . 
It is of the physiognomy of the years that the physiognomy of the centuries is composed . 
In this year of 1817 four young Parisians arranged `` a fine farce . '' 
A DOUBLE QUARTETTE These Parisians came , one from Toulouse , another from Limoges , the third from Cahors , and the fourth from Montauban ; but they were students ; and when one says student , one says Parisian : to study in Paris is to be born in Paris . 
These young men were insignificant ; every one has seen such faces ; four specimens of humanity taken at random ; neither good nor bad , neither wise nor ignorant , neither geniuses nor fools ; handsome , with that charming April which is called twenty years . 
They were four Oscars ; for , at that epoch , Arthurs did not yet exist . 
Burn for him the perfumes of Araby ! 
exclaimed romance . 
Oscar advances . 
Oscar , I shall behold him ! 
People had just emerged from Ossian ; elegance was Scandinavian and Caledonian ; the pure English style was only to prevail later , and the first of the Arthurs , Wellington , had but just won the battle of Waterloo . 
These Oscars bore the names , one of Felix Tholomyes , of Toulouse ; the second , Listolier , of Cahors ; the next , Fameuil , of Limoges ; the last , Blachevelle , of Montauban . 
Naturally , each of them had his mistress . 
Blachevelle loved Favourite , so named because she had been in England ; Listolier adored Dahlia , who had taken for her nickname the name of a flower ; Fameuil idolized Zephine , an abridgment of Josephine ; Tholomyes had Fantine , called the Blonde , because of her beautiful , sunny hair . 
Favourite , Dahlia , Zephine , and Fantine were four ravishing young women , perfumed and radiant , still a little like working-women , and not yet entirely divorced from their needles ; somewhat disturbed by intrigues , but still retaining on their faces something of the serenity of toil , and in their souls that flower of honesty which survives the first fall in woman . 
One of the four was called the young , because she was the youngest of them , and one was called the old ; the old one was twenty-three . 
Not to conceal anything , the three first were more experienced , more heedless , and more emancipated into the tumult of life than Fantine the Blonde , who was still in her first illusions . 
Dahlia , Zephine , and especially Favourite , could not have said as much . 
There had already been more than one episode in their romance , though hardly begun ; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph in the first chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second , and Gustave in the third . 
Poverty and coquetry are two fatal counsellors ; one scolds and the other flatters , and the beautiful daughters of the people have both of them whispering in their ear , each on its own side . 
These badly guarded souls listen . 
Hence the falls which they accomplish , and the stones which are thrown at them . 
They are overwhelmed with splendor of all that is immaculate and inaccessible . 
Alas ! 
what if the Jungfrau were hungry ? 
Favourite having been in England , was admired by Dahlia and Zephine . 
She had had an establishment of her own very early in life . 
Her father was an old unmarried professor of mathematics , a brutal man and a braggart , who went out to give lessons in spite of his age . 
This professor , when he was a young man , had one day seen a chambermaid 's gown catch on a fender ; he had fallen in love in consequence of this accident . 
The result had been Favourite . 
She met her father from time to time , and he bowed to her . 
One morning an old woman with the air of a devotee , had entered her apartments , and had said to her , `` You do not know me , Mamemoiselle ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I am your mother . '' 
Then the old woman opened the sideboard , and ate and drank , had a mattress which she owned brought in , and installed herself . 
This cross and pious old mother never spoke to Favourite , remained hours without uttering a word , breakfasted , dined , and supped for four , and went down to the porter 's quarters for company , where she spoke ill of her daughter . 
It was having rosy nails that were too pretty which had drawn Dahlia to Listolier , to others perhaps , to idleness . 
How could she make such nails work ? 
She who wishes to remain virtuous must not have pity on her hands . 
As for Zephine , she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish and caressing little way of saying `` Yes , sir . '' 
