She slipped out while her husband was lavishing salutes and offering M. Leblanc a chair . 
An instant later she returned and whispered in his ear : -- '' 'T is done . '' 
The snow , which had not ceased falling since the morning , was so deep that the arrival of the fiacre had not been audible , and they did not now hear its departure . 
Meanwhile , M. Leblanc had seated himself . 
Jondrette had taken possession of the other chair , facing M. Leblanc . 
Now , in order to form an idea of the scene which is to follow , let the reader picture to himself in his own mind , a cold night , the solitudes of the Salpetriere covered with snow and white as winding-sheets in the moonlight , the taper-like lights of the street lanterns which shone redly here and there along those tragic boulevards , and the long rows of black elms , not a passer-by for perhaps a quarter of a league around , the Gorbeau hovel , at its highest pitch of silence , of horror , and of darkness ; in that building , in the midst of those solitudes , in the midst of that darkness , the vast Jondrette garret lighted by a single candle , and in that den two men seated at a table , M. Leblanc tranquil , Jondrette smiling and alarming , the Jondrette woman , the female wolf , in one corner , and , behind the partition , Marius , invisible , erect , not losing a word , not missing a single movement , his eye on the watch , and pistol in hand . 
However , Marius experienced only an emotion of horror , but no fear . 
He clasped the stock of the pistol firmly and felt reassured . 
`` I shall be able to stop that wretch whenever I please , '' he thought . 
He felt that the police were there somewhere in ambuscade , waiting for the signal agreed upon and ready to stretch out their arm . 
Moreover , he was in hopes , that this violent encounter between Jondrette and M. Leblanc would cast some light on all the things which he was interested in learning . 
OCCUPYING ONE 'S SELF WITH OBSCURE DEPTHS Hardly was M. Leblanc seated , when he turned his eyes towards the pallets , which were empty . 
`` How is the poor little wounded girl ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` Bad , '' replied Jondrette with a heart-broken and grateful smile , `` very bad , my worthy sir . 
Her elder sister has taken her to the Bourbe to have her hurt dressed . 
You will see them presently ; they will be back immediately . '' 
`` Madame Fabantou seems to me to be better , '' went on M. Leblanc , casting his eyes on the eccentric costume of the Jondrette woman , as she stood between him and the door , as though already guarding the exit , and gazed at him in an attitude of menace and almost of combat . 
`` She is dying , '' said Jondrette . 
`` But what do you expect , sir ! 
She has so much courage , that woman has ! 
She 's not a woman , she 's an ox . '' 
The Jondrette , touched by his compliment , deprecated it with the affected airs of a flattered monster . 
`` You are always too good to me , Monsieur Jondrette ! '' 
`` Jondrette ! '' 
said M. Leblanc , `` I thought your name was Fabantou ? '' 
`` Fabantou , alias Jondrette ! '' 
replied the husband hurriedly . 
`` An artistic sobriquet ! '' 
And launching at his wife a shrug of the shoulders which M. Leblanc did not catch , he continued with an emphatic and caressing inflection of voice : -- `` Ah ! 
we have had a happy life together , this poor darling and I ! 
What would there be left for us if we had not that ? 
We are so wretched , my respectable sir ! 
We have arms , but there is no work ! 
We have the will , no work ! 
I do n't know how the government arranges that , but , on my word of honor , sir , I am not Jacobin , sir , I am not a bousingot . 
-LSB- 30 -RSB- I do n't wish them any evil , but if I were the ministers , on my most sacred word , things would be different . 
Here , for instance , I wanted to have my girls taught the trade of paper-box makers . 
You will say to me : ` What ! 
a trade ? ' 
Yes ! 
A trade ! 
A simple trade ! 
A bread-winner ! 
What a fall , my benefactor ! 
What a degradation , when one has been what we have been ! 
Alas ! 
There is nothing left to us of our days of prosperity ! 
One thing only , a picture , of which I think a great deal , but which I am willing to part with , for I must live ! 
Item , one must live ! '' 
-LSB- 30 -RSB- A democrat . 
While Jondrette thus talked , with an apparent incoherence which detracted nothing from the thoughtful and sagacious expression of his physiognomy , Marius raised his eyes , and perceived at the other end of the room a person whom he had not seen before . 
A man had just entered , so softly that the door had not been heard to turn on its hinges . 
This man wore a violet knitted vest , which was old , worn , spotted , cut and gaping at every fold , wide trousers of cotton velvet , wooden shoes on his feet , no shirt , had his neck bare , his bare arms tattooed , and his face smeared with black . 
He had seated himself in silence on the nearest bed , and , as he was behind Jondrette , he could only be indistinctly seen . 
That sort of magnetic instinct which turns aside the gaze , caused M. Leblanc to turn round almost at the same moment as Marius . 
He could not refrain from a gesture of surprise which did not escape Jondrette . 
`` Ah ! 
I see ! '' 
exclaimed Jondrette , buttoning up his coat with an air of complaisance , `` you are looking at your overcoat ? 
It fits me ! 
My faith , but it fits me ! '' 
`` Who is that man ? '' 
said M. Leblanc . 
`` Him ? '' 
ejaculated Jondrette , `` he 's a neighbor of mine . 
Do n't pay any attention to him . '' 
The neighbor was a singular-looking individual . 
However , manufactories of chemical products abound in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
Many of the workmen might have black faces . 
Besides this , M. Leblanc 's whole person was expressive of candid and intrepid confidence . 
He went on : -- `` Excuse me ; what were you saying , M. Fabantou ? '' 
`` I was telling you , sir , and dear protector , '' replied Jondrette placing his elbows on the table and contemplating M. Leblanc with steady and tender eyes , not unlike the eyes of the boa-constrictor , `` I was telling you , that I have a picture to sell . '' 
A slight sound came from the door . 
A second man had just entered and seated himself on the bed , behind Jondrette . 
Like the first , his arms were bare , and he had a mask of ink or lampblack . 
Although this man had , literally , glided into the room , he had not been able to prevent M. Leblanc catching sight of him . 
`` Do n't mind them , '' said Jondrette , `` they are people who belong in the house . 
So I was saying , that there remains in my possession a valuable picture . 
But stop , sir , take a look at it . '' 
He rose , went to the wall at the foot of which stood the panel which we have already mentioned , and turned it round , still leaving it supported against the wall . 
It really was something which resembled a picture , and which the candle illuminated , somewhat . 
Marius could make nothing out of it , as Jondrette stood between the picture and him ; he only saw a coarse daub , and a sort of principal personage colored with the harsh crudity of foreign canvasses and screen paintings . 
`` What is that ? '' 
asked M. Leblanc . 
Jondrette exclaimed : -- `` A painting by a master , a picture of great value , my benefactor ! 
I am as much attached to it as I am to my two daughters ; it recalls souvenirs to me ! 
But I have told you , and I will not take it back , that I am so wretched that I will part with it . '' 
Either by chance , or because he had begun to feel a dawning uneasiness , M. Leblanc 's glance returned to the bottom of the room as he examined the picture . 
There were now four men , three seated on the bed , one standing near the door-post , all four with bare arms and motionless , with faces smeared with black . 
One of those on the bed was leaning against the wall , with closed eyes , and it might have been supposed that he was asleep . 
He was old ; his white hair contrasting with his blackened face produced a horrible effect . 
The other two seemed to be young ; one wore a beard , the other wore his hair long . 
None of them had on shoes ; those who did not wear socks were barefooted . 
Jondrette noticed that M. Leblanc 's eye was fixed on these men . 
`` They are friends . 
They are neighbors , '' said he . 
`` Their faces are black because they work in charcoal . 
They are chimney-builders . 
Do n't trouble yourself about them , my benefactor , but buy my picture . 
