`` Nineteen years . '' 
`` Nineteen years ! '' 
The Bishop sighed deeply . 
The man continued : `` I have still the whole of my money . 
In four days I have spent only twenty-five sous , which I earned by helping unload some wagons at Grasse . 
Since you are an abbe , I will tell you that we had a chaplain in the galleys . 
And one day I saw a bishop there . 
Monseigneur is what they call him . 
He was the Bishop of Majore at Marseilles . 
He is the cure who rules over the other cures , you understand . 
Pardon me , I say that very badly ; but it is such a far-off thing to me ! 
You understand what we are ! 
He said mass in the middle of the galleys , on an altar . 
He had a pointed thing , made of gold , on his head ; it glittered in the bright light of midday . 
We were all ranged in lines on the three sides , with cannons with lighted matches facing us . 
We could not see very well . 
He spoke ; but he was too far off , and we did not hear . 
That is what a bishop is like . '' 
While he was speaking , the Bishop had gone and shut the door , which had remained wide open . 
Madame Magloire returned . 
She brought a silver fork and spoon , which she placed on the table . 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` place those things as near the fire as possible . '' 
And turning to his guest : `` The night wind is harsh on the Alps . 
You must be cold , sir . '' 
Each time that he uttered the word sir , in his voice which was so gently grave and polished , the man 's face lighted up . 
Monsieur to a convict is like a glass of water to one of the shipwrecked of the Medusa . 
Ignominy thirsts for consideration . 
`` This lamp gives a very bad light , '' said the Bishop . 
Madame Magloire understood him , and went to get the two silver candlesticks from the chimney-piece in Monseigneur 's bed-chamber , and placed them , lighted , on the table . 
`` Monsieur le Cure , '' said the man , `` you are good ; you do not despise me . 
You receive me into your house . 
You light your candles for me . 
Yet I have not concealed from you whence I come and that I am an unfortunate man . '' 
The Bishop , who was sitting close to him , gently touched his hand . 
`` You could not help telling me who you were . 
This is not my house ; it is the house of Jesus Christ . 
This door does not demand of him who enters whether he has a name , but whether he has a grief . 
You suffer , you are hungry and thirsty ; you are welcome . 
And do not thank me ; do not say that I receive you in my house . 
No one is at home here , except the man who needs a refuge . 
I say to you , who are passing by , that you are much more at home here than I am myself . 
Everything here is yours . 
What need have I to know your name ? 
Besides , before you told me you had one which I knew . '' 
The man opened his eyes in astonishment . 
`` Really ? 
You knew what I was called ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the Bishop , `` you are called my brother . '' 
`` Stop , Monsieur le Cure , '' exclaimed the man . 
`` I was very hungry when I entered here ; but you are so good , that I no longer know what has happened to me . '' 
The Bishop looked at him , and said , -- `` You have suffered much ? '' 
`` Oh , the red coat , the ball on the ankle , a plank to sleep on , heat , cold , toil , the convicts , the thrashings , the double chain for nothing , the cell for one word ; even sick and in bed , still the chain ! 
Dogs , dogs are happier ! 
Nineteen years ! 
I am forty-six . 
Now there is the yellow passport . 
That is what it is like . '' 
`` Yes , '' resumed the Bishop , `` you have come from a very sad place . 
Listen . 
There will be more joy in heaven over the tear-bathed face of a repentant sinner than over the white robes of a hundred just men . 
If you emerge from that sad place with thoughts of hatred and of wrath against mankind , you are deserving of pity ; if you emerge with thoughts of good-will and of peace , you are more worthy than any one of us . '' 
In the meantime , Madame Magloire had served supper : soup , made with water , oil , bread , and salt ; a little bacon , a bit of mutton , figs , a fresh cheese , and a large loaf of rye bread . 
She had , of her own accord , added to the Bishop 's ordinary fare a bottle of his old Mauves wine . 
The Bishop 's face at once assumed that expression of gayety which is peculiar to hospitable natures . 
`` To table ! '' 
he cried vivaciously . 
As was his custom when a stranger supped with him , he made the man sit on his right . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine , perfectly peaceable and natural , took her seat at his left . 
The Bishop asked a blessing ; then helped the soup himself , according to his custom . 
The man began to eat with avidity . 
All at once the Bishop said : `` It strikes me there is something missing on this table . '' 
Madame Magloire had , in fact , only placed the three sets of forks and spoons which were absolutely necessary . 
Now , it was the usage of the house , when the Bishop had any one to supper , to lay out the whole six sets of silver on the table-cloth -- an innocent ostentation . 
This graceful semblance of luxury was a kind of child 's play , which was full of charm in that gentle and severe household , which raised poverty into dignity . 
Madame Magloire understood the remark , went out without saying a word , and a moment later the three sets of silver forks and spoons demanded by the Bishop were glittering upon the cloth , symmetrically arranged before the three persons seated at the table . 
DETAILS CONCERNING THE CHEESE-DAIRIES OF PONTARLIER . 
Now , in order to convey an idea of what passed at that table , we can not do better than to transcribe here a passage from one of Mademoiselle Baptistine 's letters to Madame Boischevron , wherein the conversation between the convict and the Bishop is described with ingenious minuteness . '' 
... This man paid no attention to any one . 
He ate with the voracity of a starving man . 
However , after supper he said : '' ` Monsieur le Cure of the good God , all this is far too good for me ; but I must say that the carters who would not allow me to eat with them keep a better table than you do . ' 
`` Between ourselves , the remark rather shocked me . 
My brother replied : -- '' ` They are more fatigued than I. ' '' ` No , ' returned the man , ` they have more money . 
You are poor ; I see that plainly . 
You can not be even a curate . 
Are you really a cure ? 
Ah , if the good God were but just , you certainly ought to be a cure ! ' '' 
` The good God is more than just , ' said my brother . 
`` A moment later he added : -- '' ` Monsieur Jean Valjean , is it to Pontarlier that you are going ? ' '' 
` With my road marked out for me . ' 
`` I think that is what the man said . 
Then he went on : -- '' ` I must be on my way by daybreak to-morrow . 
Travelling is hard . 
If the nights are cold , the days are hot . ' '' 
` You are going to a good country , ' said my brother . 
` During the Revolution my family was ruined . 
I took refuge in Franche-Comte at first , and there I lived for some time by the toil of my hands . 
My will was good . 
I found plenty to occupy me . 
One has only to choose . 
There are paper mills , tanneries , distilleries , oil factories , watch factories on a large scale , steel mills , copper works , twenty iron foundries at least , four of which , situated at Lods , at Chatillon , at Audincourt , and at Beure , are tolerably large . ' 
