We lived concealed , content , with closed doors , devouring love , that sweet forbidden fruit . 
My mouth had not uttered a thing when thy heart had already responded . 
The Sorbonne was the bucolic spot where I adored thee from eve till morn . 
'T is thus that an amorous soul applies the chart of the Tender to the Latin country . 
O Place Maubert ! 
O Place Dauphine ! 
When in the fresh spring-like hut thou didst draw thy stocking on thy delicate leg , I saw a star in the depths of the garret . 
I have read a great deal of Plato , but nothing of it remains by me ; better than Malebranche and then Lamennais thou didst demonstrate to me celestial goodness with a flower which thou gavest to me , I obeyed thee , thou didst submit to me ; oh gilded garret ! 
to lace thee ! 
to behold thee going and coming from dawn in thy chemise , gazing at thy young brow in thine ancient mirror ! 
And who , then , would forego the memory of those days of aurora and the firmament , of flowers , of gauze and of moire , when love stammers a charming slang ? 
Our gardens consisted of a pot of tulips ; thou didst mask the window with thy petticoat ; I took the earthenware bowl and I gave thee the Japanese cup . 
And those great misfortunes which made us laugh ! 
Thy cuff scorched , thy boa lost ! 
And that dear portrait of the divine Shakespeare which we sold one evening that we might sup ! 
I was a beggar and thou wert charitable . 
I kissed thy fresh round arms in haste . 
A folio Dante served us as a table on which to eat merrily a centime 's worth of chestnuts . 
The first time that , in my joyous den , I snatched a kiss from thy fiery lip , when thou wentest forth , dishevelled and blushing , I turned deathly pale and I believed in God . 
Dost thou recall our innumerable joys , and all those fichus changed to rags ? 
Oh ! 
what sighs from our hearts full of gloom fluttered forth to the heavenly depths ! 
The hour , the spot , these souvenirs of youth recalled , a few stars which began to twinkle in the sky , the funeral repose of those deserted streets , the imminence of the inexorable adventure , which was in preparation , gave a pathetic charm to these verses murmured in a low tone in the dusk by Jean Prouvaire , who , as we have said , was a gentle poet . 
In the meantime , a lamp had been lighted in the small barricade , and in the large one , one of those wax torches such as are to be met with on Shrove-Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks , on their way to la Courtille . 
These torches , as the reader has seen , came from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The torch had been placed in a sort of cage of paving-stones closed on three sides to shelter it from the wind , and disposed in such a fashion that all the light fell on the flag . 
The street and the barricade remained sunk in gloom , and nothing was to be seen except the red flag formidably illuminated as by an enormous dark-lantern . 
This light enhanced the scarlet of the flag , with an indescribable and terrible purple . 
THE MAN RECRUITED IN THE RUE DES BILLETTES Night was fully come , nothing made its appearance . 
All that they heard was confused noises , and at intervals , fusillades ; but these were rare , badly sustained and distant . 
This respite , which was thus prolonged , was a sign that the Government was taking its time , and collecting its forces . 
These fifty men were waiting for sixty thousand . 
Enjolras felt attacked by that impatience which seizes on strong souls on the threshold of redoubtable events . 
He went in search of Gavroche , who had set to making cartridges in the tap-room , by the dubious light of two candles placed on the counter by way of precaution , on account of the powder which was scattered on the tables . 
These two candles cast no gleam outside . 
The insurgents had , moreover , taken pains not to have any light in the upper stories . 
Gavroche was deeply preoccupied at that moment , but not precisely with his cartridges . 
The man of the Rue des Billettes had just entered the tap-room and had seated himself at the table which was the least lighted . 
A musket of large model had fallen to his share , and he held it between his legs . 
Gavroche , who had been , up to that moment , distracted by a hundred `` amusing '' things , had not even seen this man . 
When he entered , Gavroche followed him mechanically with his eyes , admiring his gun ; then , all at once , when the man was seated , the street urchin sprang to his feet . 
Any one who had spied upon that man up to that moment , would have seen that he was observing everything in the barricade and in the band of insurgents , with singular attention ; but , from the moment when he had entered this room , he had fallen into a sort of brown study , and no longer seemed to see anything that was going on . 
The gamin approached this pensive personage , and began to step around him on tiptoe , as one walks in the vicinity of a person whom one is afraid of waking . 
At the same time , over his childish countenance which was , at once so impudent and so serious , so giddy and so profound , so gay and so heart-breaking , passed all those grimaces of an old man which signify : Ah bah ! 
impossible ! 
My sight is bad ! 
I am dreaming ! 
can this be ? 
no , it is not ! 
but yes ! 
why , no ! 
etc. . 
Gavroche balanced on his heels , clenched both fists in his pockets , moved his neck around like a bird , expended in a gigantic pout all the sagacity of his lower lip . 
He was astounded , uncertain , incredulous , convinced , dazzled . 
He had the mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart , discovering a Venus among the blowsy females , and the air of an amateur recognizing a Raphael in a heap of daubs . 
His whole being was at work , the instinct which scents out , and the intelligence which combines . 
It was evident that a great event had happened in Gavroche 's life . 
It was at the most intense point of this preoccupation that Enjolras accosted him . 
`` You are small , '' said Enjolras , `` you will not be seen . 
Go out of the barricade , slip along close to the houses , skirmish about a bit in the streets , and come back and tell me what is going on . '' 
Gavroche raised himself on his haunches . 
`` So the little chaps are good for something ! 
that 's very lucky ! 
I 'll go ! 
In the meanwhile , trust to the little fellows , and distrust the big ones . '' 
And Gavroche , raising his head and lowering his voice , added , as he indicated the man of the Rue des Billettes : `` Do you see that big fellow there ? '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He 's a police spy . '' 
`` Are you sure of it ? '' 
`` It is n't two weeks since he pulled me off the cornice of the Port Royal , where I was taking the air , by my ear . '' 
Enjolras hastily quitted the urchin and murmured a few words in a very low tone to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be at hand . 
The man left the room , and returned almost immediately , accompanied by three others . 
The four men , four porters with broad shoulders , went and placed themselves without doing anything to attract his attention , behind the table on which the man of the Rue des Billettes was leaning with his elbows . 
They were evidently ready to hurl themselves upon him . 
Then Enjolras approached the man and demanded of him : -- `` Who are you ? '' 
At this abrupt query , the man started . 
He plunged his gaze deep into Enjolras ' clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter 's meaning . 
He smiled with a smile than which nothing more disdainful , more energetic , and more resolute could be seen in the world , and replied with haughty gravity : -- `` I see what it is . 
Well , yes ! '' 
`` You are a police spy ? '' 
`` I am an agent of the authorities . '' 
`` And your name ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Enjolras made a sign to the four men . 
In the twinkling of an eye , before Javert had time to turn round , he was collared , thrown down , pinioned and searched . 
They found on him a little round card pasted between two pieces of glass , and bearing on one side the arms of France , engraved , and with this motto : Supervision and vigilance , and on the other this note : `` JAVERT , inspector of police , aged fifty-two , '' and the signature of the Prefect of Police of that day , M. Gisquet . 
Besides this , he had his watch and his purse , which contained several gold pieces . 
They left him his purse and his watch . 
Under the watch , at the bottom of his fob , they felt and seized a paper in an envelope , which Enjolras unfolded , and on which he read these five lines , written in the very hand of the Prefect of Police : -- `` As soon as his political mission is accomplished , Inspector Javert will make sure , by special supervision , whether it is true that the malefactors have instituted intrigues on the right bank of the Seine , near the Jena bridge . '' 
The search ended , they lifted Javert to his feet , bound his arms behind his back , and fastened him to that celebrated post in the middle of the room which had formerly given the wine-shop its name . 
Gavroche , who had looked on at the whole of this scene and had approved of everything with a silent toss of his head , stepped up to Javert and said to him : -- `` It 's the mouse who has caught the cat . '' 
All this was so rapidly executed , that it was all over when those about the wine-shop noticed it . 
Javert had not uttered a single cry . 
At the sight of Javert bound to the post , Courfeyrac , Bossuet , Joly , Combeferre , and the men scattered over the two barricades came running up . 
Javert , with his back to the post , and so surrounded with ropes that he could not make a movement , raised his head with the intrepid serenity of the man who has never lied . 
`` He is a police spy , '' said Enjolras . 
And turning to Javert : `` You will be shot ten minutes before the barricade is taken . '' 
Javert replied in his most imperious tone : -- `` Why not at once ? '' 
`` We are saving our powder . '' 
`` Then finish the business with a blow from a knife . '' 
