Before Father Mabeuf , who was easily terrified , and who was , as we have said , quick to take alarm , was able to reply by a single syllable , this being , whose movements had a sort of odd abruptness in the darkness , had unhooked the chain , plunged in and withdrawn the bucket , and filled the watering-pot , and the goodman beheld this apparition , which had bare feet and a tattered petticoat , running about among the flower-beds distributing life around her . 
The sound of the watering-pot on the leaves filled Father Mabeuf 's soul with ecstasy . 
It seemed to him that the rhododendron was happy now . 
The first bucketful emptied , the girl drew a second , then a third . 
She watered the whole garden . 
There was something about her , as she thus ran about among paths , where her outline appeared perfectly black , waving her angular arms , and with her fichu all in rags , that resembled a bat . 
When she had finished , Father Mabeuf approached her with tears in his eyes , and laid his hand on her brow . 
`` God will bless you , '' said he , `` you are an angel since you take care of the flowers . '' 
`` No , '' she replied . 
`` I am the devil , but that 's all the same to me . '' 
The old man exclaimed , without either waiting for or hearing her response : -- `` What a pity that I am so unhappy and so poor , and that I can do nothing for you ! '' 
`` You can do something , '' said she . 
`` What ? '' 
`` Tell me where M. Marius lives . '' 
The old man did not understand . 
`` What Monsieur Marius ? '' 
He raised his glassy eyes and seemed to be seeking something that had vanished . 
`` A young man who used to come here . '' 
In the meantime , M. Mabeuf had searched his memory . 
`` Ah ! 
yes -- '' he exclaimed . 
`` I know what you mean . 
Wait ! 
Monsieur Marius -- the Baron Marius Pontmercy , parbleu ! 
He lives , -- or rather , he no longer lives , -- ah well , I do n't know . '' 
As he spoke , he had bent over to train a branch of rhododendron , and he continued : -- `` Hold , I know now . 
He very often passes along the boulevard , and goes in the direction of the Glaciere , Rue Croulebarbe . 
The meadow of the Lark . 
Go there . 
It is not hard to meet him . '' 
When M. Mabeuf straightened himself up , there was no longer any one there ; the girl had disappeared . 
He was decidedly terrified . 
`` Really , '' he thought , `` if my garden had not been watered , I should think that she was a spirit . '' 
An hour later , when he was in bed , it came back to him , and as he fell asleep , at that confused moment when thought , like that fabulous bird which changes itself into a fish in order to cross the sea , little by little assumes the form of a dream in order to traverse slumber , he said to himself in a bewildered way : -- `` In sooth , that greatly resembles what Rubaudiere narrates of the goblins . 
Could it have been a goblin ? '' 
AN APPARITION TO MARIUS Some days after this visit of a `` spirit '' to Farmer Mabeuf , one morning , -- it was on a Monday , the day when Marius borrowed the hundred-sou piece from Courfeyrac for Thenardier -- Marius had put this coin in his pocket , and before carrying it to the clerk 's office , he had gone `` to take a little stroll , '' in the hope that this would make him work on his return . 
It was always thus , however . 
As soon as he rose , he seated himself before a book and a sheet of paper in order to scribble some translation ; his task at that epoch consisted in turning into French a celebrated quarrel between Germans , the Gans and Savigny controversy ; he took Savigny , he took Gans , read four lines , tried to write one , could not , saw a star between him and his paper , and rose from his chair , saying : `` I shall go out . 
That will put me in spirits . '' 
And off he went to the Lark 's meadow . 
There he beheld more than ever the star , and less than ever Savigny and Gans . 
He returned home , tried to take up his work again , and did not succeed ; there was no means of re-knotting a single one of the threads which were broken in his brain ; then he said to himself : `` I will not go out to-morrow . 
It prevents my working . '' 
And he went out every day . 
He lived in the Lark 's meadow more than in Courfeyrac 's lodgings . 
That was his real address : Boulevard de la Sante , at the seventh tree from the Rue Croulebarbe . 
That morning he had quitted the seventh tree and had seated himself on the parapet of the River des Gobelins . 
A cheerful sunlight penetrated the freshly unfolded and luminous leaves . 
He was dreaming of `` Her . '' 
And his meditation turning to a reproach , fell back upon himself ; he reflected dolefully on his idleness , his paralysis of soul , which was gaining on him , and of that night which was growing more dense every moment before him , to such a point that he no longer even saw the sun . 
Nevertheless , athwart this painful extrication of indistinct ideas which was not even a monologue , so feeble had action become in him , and he had no longer the force to care to despair , athwart this melancholy absorption , sensations from without did reach him . 
He heard behind him , beneath him , on both banks of the river , the laundresses of the Gobelins beating their linen , and above his head , the birds chattering and singing in the elm-trees . 
On the one hand , the sound of liberty , the careless happiness of the leisure which has wings ; on the other , the sound of toil . 
What caused him to meditate deeply , and almost reflect , were two cheerful sounds . 
All at once , in the midst of his dejected ecstasy , he heard a familiar voice saying : -- `` Come ! 
Here he is ! '' 
He raised his eyes , and recognized that wretched child who had come to him one morning , the elder of the Thenardier daughters , Eponine ; he knew her name now . 
Strange to say , she had grown poorer and prettier , two steps which it had not seemed within her power to take . 
She had accomplished a double progress , towards the light and towards distress . 
She was barefooted and in rags , as on the day when she had so resolutely entered his chamber , only her rags were two months older now , the holes were larger , the tatters more sordid . 
It was the same harsh voice , the same brow dimmed and wrinkled with tan , the same free , wild , and vacillating glance . 
She had besides , more than formerly , in her face that indescribably terrified and lamentable something which sojourn in a prison adds to wretchedness . 
She had bits of straw and hay in her hair , not like Ophelia through having gone mad from the contagion of Hamlet 's madness , but because she had slept in the loft of some stable . 
And in spite of it all , she was beautiful . 
What a star art thou , O youth ! 
In the meantime , she had halted in front of Marius with a trace of joy in her livid countenance , and something which resembled a smile . 
She stood for several moments as though incapable of speech . 
`` So I have met you at last ! '' 
she said at length . 
`` Father Mabeuf was right , it was on this boulevard ! 
How I have hunted for you ! 
If you only knew ! 
Do you know ? 
I have been in the jug . 
A fortnight ! 
They let me out ! 
seeing that there was nothing against me , and that , moreover , I had not reached years of discretion . 
I lack two months of it . 
Oh ! 
how I have hunted for you ! 
These six weeks ! 
So you do n't live down there any more ? '' 
`` No , '' said Marius . 
`` Ah ! 
I understand . 
Because of that affair . 
Those take-downs are disagreeable . 
You cleared out . 
Come now ! 
Why do you wear old hats like this ! 
A young man like you ought to have fine clothes . 
Do you know , Monsieur Marius , Father Mabeuf calls you Baron Marius , I do n't know what . 
It is n't true that you are a baron ? 
Barons are old fellows , they go to the Luxembourg , in front of the chateau , where there is the most sun , and they read the Quotidienne for a sou . 
I once carried a letter to a baron of that sort . 
He was over a hundred years old . 
Say , where do you live now ? '' 
Marius made no reply . 
`` Ah ! '' 
she went on , `` you have a hole in your shirt . 
