`` Pontmercy , '' suggested Marius , turning pale . 
`` Precisely , Pontmercy . 
Did you know him ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Marius , `` he was my father . '' 
The old warden clasped his hands and exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
you are the child ! 
Yes , that 's true , he must be a man by this time . 
Well ! 
poor child , you may say that you had a father who loved you dearly ! '' 
Marius offered his arm to the old man and conducted him to his lodgings . 
On the following day , he said to M. Gillenormand : -- `` I have arranged a hunting-party with some friends . 
Will you permit me to be absent for three days ? '' 
`` Four ! '' 
replied his grandfather . 
`` Go and amuse yourself . '' 
And he said to his daughter in a low tone , and with a wink , `` Some love affair ! '' 
THE CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING MET A WARDEN Where it was that Marius went will be disclosed a little further on . 
Marius was absent for three days , then he returned to Paris , went straight to the library of the law-school and asked for the files of the Moniteur . 
He read the Moniteur , he read all the histories of the Republic and the Empire , the Memorial de Sainte-Helene , all the memoirs , all the newspapers , the bulletins , the proclamations ; he devoured everything . 
The first time that he came across his father 's name in the bulletins of the grand army , he had a fever for a week . 
He went to see the generals under whom Georges Pontmercy had served , among others , Comte H. Church-warden Mabeuf , whom he went to see again , told him about the life at Vernon , the colonel 's retreat , his flowers , his solitude . 
Marius came to a full knowledge of that rare , sweet , and sublime man , that species of lion-lamb who had been his father . 
In the meanwhile , occupied as he was with this study which absorbed all his moments as well as his thoughts , he hardly saw the Gillenormands at all . 
He made his appearance at meals ; then they searched for him , and he was not to be found . 
Father Gillenormand smiled . 
`` Bah ! 
bah ! 
He is just of the age for the girls ! '' 
Sometimes the old man added : `` The deuce ! 
I thought it was only an affair of gallantry , It seems that it is an affair of passion ! '' 
It was a passion , in fact . 
Marius was on the high road to adoring his father . 
At the same time , his ideas underwent an extraordinary change . 
The phases of this change were numerous and successive . 
As this is the history of many minds of our day , we think it will prove useful to follow these phases step by step and to indicate them all . 
That history upon which he had just cast his eyes appalled him . 
The first effect was to dazzle him . 
Up to that time , the Republic , the Empire , had been to him only monstrous words . 
The Republic , a guillotine in the twilight ; the Empire , a sword in the night . 
He had just taken a look at it , and where he had expected to find only a chaos of shadows , he had beheld , with a sort of unprecedented surprise , mingled with fear and joy , stars sparkling , Mirabeau , Vergniaud , Saint-Just , Robespierre , Camille , Desmoulins , Danton , and a sun arise , Napoleon . 
He did not know where he stood . 
He recoiled , blinded by the brilliant lights . 
Little by little , when his astonishment had passed off , he grew accustomed to this radiance , he contemplated these deeds without dizziness , he examined these personages without terror ; the Revolution and the Empire presented themselves luminously , in perspective , before his mind 's eye ; he beheld each of these groups of events and of men summed up in two tremendous facts : the Republic in the sovereignty of civil right restored to the masses , the Empire in the sovereignty of the French idea imposed on Europe ; he beheld the grand figure of the people emerge from the Revolution , and the grand figure of France spring forth from the Empire . 
He asserted in his conscience , that all this had been good . 
What his dazzled state neglected in this , his first far too synthetic estimation , we do not think it necessary to point out here . 
It is the state of a mind on the march that we are recording . 
Progress is not accomplished in one stage . 
That stated , once for all , in connection with what precedes as well as with what is to follow , we continue . 
He then perceived that , up to that moment , he had comprehended his country no more than he had comprehended his father . 
He had not known either the one or the other , and a sort of voluntary night had obscured his eyes . 
Now he saw , and on the one hand he admired , while on the other he adored . 
He was filled with regret and remorse , and he reflected in despair that all he had in his soul could now be said only to the tomb . 
Oh ! 
if his father had still been in existence , if he had still had him , if God , in his compassion and his goodness , had permitted his father to be still among the living , how he would have run , how he would have precipitated himself , how he would have cried to his father : `` Father ! 
Here I am ! 
It is I ! 
I have the same heart as thou ! 
I am thy son ! '' 
How he would have embraced that white head , bathed his hair in tears , gazed upon his scar , pressed his hands , adored his garment , kissed his feet ! 
Oh ! 
Why had his father died so early , before his time , before the justice , the love of his son had come to him ? 
Marius had a continual sob in his heart , which said to him every moment : `` Alas ! '' 
At the same time , he became more truly serious , more truly grave , more sure of his thought and his faith . 
At each instant , gleams of the true came to complete his reason . 
An inward growth seemed to be in progress within him . 
He was conscious of a sort of natural enlargement , which gave him two things that were new to him -- his father and his country . 
As everything opens when one has a key , so he explained to himself that which he had hated , he penetrated that which he had abhorred ; henceforth he plainly perceived the providential , divine and human sense of the great things which he had been taught to detest , and of the great men whom he had been instructed to curse . 
When he reflected on his former opinions , which were but those of yesterday , and which , nevertheless , seemed to him already so very ancient , he grew indignant , yet he smiled . 
From the rehabilitation of his father , he naturally passed to the rehabilitation of Napoleon . 
But the latter , we will confess , was not effected without labor . 
From his infancy , he had been imbued with the judgments of the party of 1814 , on Bonaparte . 
Now , all the prejudices of the Restoration , all its interests , all its instincts tended to disfigure Napoleon . 
It execrated him even more than it did Robespierre . 
It had very cleverly turned to sufficiently good account the fatigue of the nation , and the hatred of mothers . 
Bonaparte had become an almost fabulous monster , and in order to paint him to the imagination of the people , which , as we lately pointed out , resembles the imagination of children , the party of 1814 made him appear under all sorts of terrifying masks in succession , from that which is terrible though it remains grandiose to that which is terrible and becomes grotesque , from Tiberius to the bugaboo . 
Thus , in speaking of Bonaparte , one was free to sob or to puff up with laughter , provided that hatred lay at the bottom . 
Marius had never entertained -- about that man , as he was called -- any other ideas in his mind . 
They had combined with the tenacity which existed in his nature . 
There was in him a headstrong little man who hated Napoleon . 
On reading history , on studying him , especially in the documents and materials for history , the veil which concealed Napoleon from the eyes of Marius was gradually rent . 
He caught a glimpse of something immense , and he suspected that he had been deceived up to that moment , on the score of Bonaparte as about all the rest ; each day he saw more distinctly ; and he set about mounting , slowly , step by step , almost regretfully in the beginning , then with intoxication and as though attracted by an irresistible fascination , first the sombre steps , then the vaguely illuminated steps , at last the luminous and splendid steps of enthusiasm . 
One night , he was alone in his little chamber near the roof . 
His candle was burning ; he was reading , with his elbows resting on his table close to the open window . 
All sorts of reveries reached him from space , and mingled with his thoughts . 
What a spectacle is the night ! 
One hears dull sounds , without knowing whence they proceed ; one beholds Jupiter , which is twelve hundred times larger than the earth , glowing like a firebrand , the azure is black , the stars shine ; it is formidable . 
He was perusing the bulletins of the grand army , those heroic strophes penned on the field of battle ; there , at intervals , he beheld his father 's name , always the name of the Emperor ; the whole of that great Empire presented itself to him ; he felt a flood swelling and rising within him ; it seemed to him at moments that his father passed close to him like a breath , and whispered in his ear ; he gradually got into a singular state ; he thought that he heard drums , cannon , trumpets , the measured tread of battalions , the dull and distant gallop of the cavalry ; from time to time , his eyes were raised heavenward , and gazed upon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measureless depths of space , then they fell upon his book once more , and there they beheld other colossal things moving confusedly . 
His heart contracted within him . 
He was in a transport , trembling , panting . 
All at once , without himself knowing what was in him , and what impulse he was obeying , he sprang to his feet , stretched both arms out of the window , gazed intently into the gloom , the silence , the infinite darkness , the eternal immensity , and exclaimed : `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
From that moment forth , all was over ; the Ogre of Corsica , -- the usurper , -- the tyrant , -- the monster who was the lover of his own sisters , -- the actor who took lessons of Talma , -- the poisoner of Jaffa , -- the tiger , -- Buonaparte , -- all this vanished , and gave place in his mind to a vague and brilliant radiance in which shone , at an inaccessible height , the pale marble phantom of Caesar . 
The Emperor had been for his father only the well-beloved captain whom one admires , for whom one sacrifices one 's self ; he was something more to Marius . 
He was the predestined constructor of the French group , succeeding the Roman group in the domination of the universe . 
He was a prodigious architect , of a destruction , the continuer of Charlemagne , of Louis XI. , of Henry IV. , of Richelieu , of Louis XIV. , and of the Committee of Public Safety , having his spots , no doubt , his faults , his crimes even , being a man , that is to say ; but august in his faults , brilliant in his spots , powerful in his crime . 
He was the predestined man , who had forced all nations to say : `` The great nation ! '' 
He was better than that , he was the very incarnation of France , conquering Europe by the sword which he grasped , and the world by the light which he shed . 
Marius saw in Bonaparte the dazzling spectre which will always rise upon the frontier , and which will guard the future . 
Despot but dictator ; a despot resulting from a republic and summing up a revolution . 
Napoleon became for him the man-people as Jesus Christ is the man-God . 
It will be perceived , that like all new converts to a religion , his conversion intoxicated him , he hurled himself headlong into adhesion and he went too far . 
