In the second place , are you the discharged convict , Jean Valjean -- yes or no ? '' 
The prisoner shook his head with a capable air , like a man who has thoroughly understood , and who knows what answer he is going to make . 
He opened his mouth , turned towards the President , and said : -- `` In the first place -- '' Then he stared at his cap , stared at the ceiling , and held his peace . 
`` Prisoner , '' said the district-attorney , in a severe voice ; `` pay attention . 
You are not answering anything that has been asked of you . 
Your embarrassment condemns you . 
It is evident that your name is not Champmathieu ; that you are the convict , Jean Valjean , concealed first under the name of Jean Mathieu , which was the name of his mother ; that you went to Auvergne ; that you were born at Faverolles , where you were a pruner of trees . 
It is evident that you have been guilty of entering , and of the theft of ripe apples from the Pierron orchard . 
The gentlemen of the jury will form their own opinion . '' 
The prisoner had finally resumed his seat ; he arose abruptly when the district-attorney had finished , and exclaimed : -- `` You are very wicked ; that you are ! 
This what I wanted to say ; I could not find words for it at first . 
I have stolen nothing . 
I am a man who does not have something to eat every day . 
I was coming from Ailly ; I was walking through the country after a shower , which had made the whole country yellow : even the ponds were overflowed , and nothing sprang from the sand any more but the little blades of grass at the wayside . 
I found a broken branch with apples on the ground ; I picked up the branch without knowing that it would get me into trouble . 
I have been in prison , and they have been dragging me about for the last three months ; more than that I can not say ; people talk against me , they tell me , ` Answer ! ' 
The gendarme , who is a good fellow , nudges my elbow , and says to me in a low voice , ` Come , answer ! ' 
I do n't know how to explain ; I have no education ; I am a poor man ; that is where they wrong me , because they do not see this . 
I have not stolen ; I picked up from the ground things that were lying there . 
You say , Jean Valjean , Jean Mathieu ! 
I do n't know those persons ; they are villagers . 
I worked for M. Baloup , Boulevard de l'Hopital ; my name is Champmathieu . 
You are very clever to tell me where I was born ; I do n't know myself : it 's not everybody who has a house in which to come into the world ; that would be too convenient . 
I think that my father and mother were people who strolled along the highways ; I know nothing different . 
When I was a child , they called me young fellow ; now they call me old fellow ; those are my baptismal names ; take that as you like . 
I have been in Auvergne ; I have been at Faverolles . 
Pardi . 
Well ! 
ca n't a man have been in Auvergne , or at Faverolles , without having been in the galleys ? 
I tell you that I have not stolen , and that I am Father Champmathieu ; I have been with M. Baloup ; I have had a settled residence . 
You worry me with your nonsense , there ! 
Why is everybody pursuing me so furiously ? '' 
The district-attorney had remained standing ; he addressed the President : -- `` Monsieur le President , in view of the confused but exceedingly clever denials of the prisoner , who would like to pass himself off as an idiot , but who will not succeed in so doing , -- we shall attend to that , -- we demand that it shall please you and that it shall please the court to summon once more into this place the convicts Brevet , Cochepaille , and Chenildieu , and Police-Inspector Javert , and question them for the last time as to the identity of the prisoner with the convict Jean Valjean . '' 
`` I would remind the district-attorney , '' said the President , `` that Police-Inspector Javert , recalled by his duties to the capital of a neighboring arrondissement , left the court-room and the town as soon as he had made his deposition ; we have accorded him permission , with the consent of the district-attorney and of the counsel for the prisoner . '' 
`` That is true , Mr. President , '' responded the district-attorney . 
`` In the absence of sieur Javert , I think it my duty to remind the gentlemen of the jury of what he said here a few hours ago . 
Javert is an estimable man , who does honor by his rigorous and strict probity to inferior but important functions . 
These are the terms of his deposition : ` I do not even stand in need of circumstantial proofs and moral presumptions to give the lie to the prisoner 's denial . 
I recognize him perfectly . 
The name of this man is not Champmathieu ; he is an ex-convict named Jean Valjean , and is very vicious and much to be feared . 
It is only with extreme regret that he was released at the expiration of his term . 
He underwent nineteen years of penal servitude for theft . 
He made five or six attempts to escape . 
Besides the theft from Little Gervais , and from the Pierron orchard , I suspect him of a theft committed in the house of His Grace the late Bishop of D -- I often saw him at the time when I was adjutant of the galley-guard at the prison in Toulon . 
I repeat that I recognize him perfectly . ' '' 
This extremely precise statement appeared to produce a vivid impression on the public and on the jury . 
The district-attorney concluded by insisting , that in default of Javert , the three witnesses Brevet , Chenildieu , and Cochepaille should be heard once more and solemnly interrogated . 
The President transmitted the order to an usher , and , a moment later , the door of the witnesses ' room opened . 
The usher , accompanied by a gendarme ready to lend him armed assistance , introduced the convict Brevet . 
The audience was in suspense ; and all breasts heaved as though they had contained but one soul . 
The ex-convict Brevet wore the black and gray waistcoat of the central prisons . 
Brevet was a person sixty years of age , who had a sort of business man 's face , and the air of a rascal . 
The two sometimes go together . 
In prison , whither fresh misdeeds had led him , he had become something in the nature of a turnkey . 
He was a man of whom his superiors said , `` He tries to make himself of use . '' 
The chaplains bore good testimony as to his religious habits . 
It must not be forgotten that this passed under the Restoration . 
`` Brevet , '' said the President , `` you have undergone an ignominious sentence , and you can not take an oath . '' 
Brevet dropped his eyes . 
`` Nevertheless , '' continued the President , `` even in the man whom the law has degraded , there may remain , when the divine mercy permits it , a sentiment of honor and of equity . 
It is to this sentiment that I appeal at this decisive hour . 
If it still exists in you , -- and I hope it does , -- reflect before replying to me : consider on the one hand , this man , whom a word from you may ruin ; on the other hand , justice , which a word from you may enlighten . 
The instant is solemn ; there is still time to retract if you think you have been mistaken . 
Rise , prisoner . 
Brevet , take a good look at the accused , recall your souvenirs , and tell us on your soul and conscience , if you persist in recognizing this man as your former companion in the galleys , Jean Valjean ? '' 
Brevet looked at the prisoner , then turned towards the court . 
`` Yes , Mr. President , I was the first to recognize him , and I stick to it ; that man is Jean Valjean , who entered at Toulon in 1796 , and left in 1815 . 
I left a year later . 
He has the air of a brute now ; but it must be because age has brutalized him ; he was sly at the galleys : I recognize him positively . '' 
`` Take your seat , '' said the President . 
`` Prisoner , remain standing . '' 
Chenildieu was brought in , a prisoner for life , as was indicated by his red cassock and his green cap . 
He was serving out his sentence at the galleys of Toulon , whence he had been brought for this case . 
He was a small man of about fifty , brisk , wrinkled , frail , yellow , brazen-faced , feverish , who had a sort of sickly feebleness about all his limbs and his whole person , and an immense force in his glance . 
His companions in the galleys had nicknamed him I-deny-God -LRB- Je-nie Dieu , Chenildieu -RRB- . 
The President addressed him in nearly the same words which he had used to Brevet . 
At the moment when he reminded him of his infamy which deprived him of the right to take an oath , Chenildieu raised his head and looked the crowd in the face . 
The President invited him to reflection , and asked him as he had asked Brevet , if he persisted in recognition of the prisoner . 
Chenildieu burst out laughing . 
`` Pardieu , as if I did n't recognize him ! 
We were attached to the same chain for five years . 
So you are sulking , old fellow ? '' 
`` Go take your seat , '' said the President . 
The usher brought in Cochepaille . 
He was another convict for life , who had come from the galleys , and was dressed in red , like Chenildieu , was a peasant from Lourdes , and a half-bear of the Pyrenees . 
He had guarded the flocks among the mountains , and from a shepherd he had slipped into a brigand . 
Cochepaille was no less savage and seemed even more stupid than the prisoner . 
He was one of those wretched men whom nature has sketched out for wild beasts , and on whom society puts the finishing touches as convicts in the galleys . 
The President tried to touch him with some grave and pathetic words , and asked him , as he had asked the other two , if he persisted , without hesitation or trouble , in recognizing the man who was standing before him . 
`` He is Jean Valjean , '' said Cochepaille . 
`` He was even called Jean-the-Screw , because he was so strong . '' 
Each of these affirmations from these three men , evidently sincere and in good faith , had raised in the audience a murmur of bad augury for the prisoner , -- a murmur which increased and lasted longer each time that a fresh declaration was added to the proceeding . 
The prisoner had listened to them , with that astounded face which was , according to the accusation , his principal means of defence ; at the first , the gendarmes , his neighbors , had heard him mutter between his teeth : `` Ah , well , he 's a nice one ! '' 
after the second , he said , a little louder , with an air that was almost that of satisfaction , `` Good ! '' 
at the third , he cried , `` Famous ! '' 
The President addressed him : -- `` Have you heard , prisoner ? 
What have you to say ? '' 
He replied : -- `` I say , ` Famous ! ' '' 
An uproar broke out among the audience , and was communicated to the jury ; it was evident that the man was lost . 
`` Ushers , '' said the President , `` enforce silence ! 
