He asked the first person whom be met for `` M. Pontmercy 's house . '' 
For in his own mind , he agreed with the Restoration , and like it , did not recognize his father 's claim to the title of either colonel or baron . 
The house was pointed out to him . 
He rang ; a woman with a little lamp in her hand opened the door . 
`` M. Pontmercy ? '' 
said Marius . 
The woman remained motionless . 
`` Is this his house ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
The woman nodded affirmatively . 
`` Can I speak with him ? '' 
The woman shook her head . 
`` But I am his son ! '' 
persisted Marius . 
`` He is expecting me . '' 
`` He no longer expects you , '' said the woman . 
Then he perceived that she was weeping . 
She pointed to the door of a room on the ground-floor ; he entered . 
In that room , which was lighted by a tallow candle standing on the chimney-piece , there were three men , one standing erect , another kneeling , and one lying at full length , on the floor in his shirt . 
The one on the floor was the colonel . 
The other two were the doctor , and the priest , who was engaged in prayer . 
The colonel had been attacked by brain fever three days previously . 
As he had a foreboding of evil at the very beginning of his illness , he had written to M. Gillenormand to demand his son . 
The malady had grown worse . 
On the very evening of Marius ' arrival at Vernon , the colonel had had an attack of delirium ; he had risen from his bed , in spite of the servant 's efforts to prevent him , crying : `` My son is not coming ! 
I shall go to meet him ! '' 
Then he ran out of his room and fell prostrate on the floor of the antechamber . 
He had just expired . 
The doctor had been summoned , and the cure . 
The doctor had arrived too late . 
The son had also arrived too late . 
By the dim light of the candle , a large tear could be distinguished on the pale and prostrate colonel 's cheek , where it had trickled from his dead eye . 
The eye was extinguished , but the tear was not yet dry . 
That tear was his son 's delay . 
Marius gazed upon that man whom he beheld for the first time , on that venerable and manly face , on those open eyes which saw not , on those white locks , those robust limbs , on which , here and there , brown lines , marking sword-thrusts , and a sort of red stars , which indicated bullet-holes , were visible . 
He contemplated that gigantic sear which stamped heroism on that countenance upon which God had imprinted goodness . 
He reflected that this man was his father , and that this man was dead , and a chill ran over him . 
The sorrow which he felt was the sorrow which he would have felt in the presence of any other man whom he had chanced to behold stretched out in death . 
Anguish , poignant anguish , was in that chamber . 
The servant-woman was lamenting in a corner , the cure was praying , and his sobs were audible , the doctor was wiping his eyes ; the corpse itself was weeping . 
The doctor , the priest , and the woman gazed at Marius in the midst of their affliction without uttering a word ; he was the stranger there . 
Marius , who was far too little affected , felt ashamed and embarrassed at his own attitude ; he held his hat in his hand ; and he dropped it on the floor , in order to produce the impression that grief had deprived him of the strength to hold it . 
At the same time , he experienced remorse , and he despised himself for behaving in this manner . 
But was it his fault ? 
He did not love his father ? 
Why should he ! 
The colonel had left nothing . 
The sale of big furniture barely paid the expenses of his burial . 
The servant found a scrap of paper , which she handed to Marius . 
It contained the following , in the colonel 's handwriting : -- `` For my son . 
-- The Emperor made me a Baron on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I purchased with my blood , my son shall take it and bear it . 
That he will be worthy of it is a matter of course . '' 
Below , the colonel had added : `` At that same battle of Waterloo , a sergeant saved my life . 
The man 's name was Thenardier . 
I think that he has recently been keeping a little inn , in a village in the neighborhood of Paris , at Chelles or Montfermeil . 
If my son meets him , he will do all the good he can to Thenardier . '' 
Marius took this paper and preserved it , not out of duty to his father , but because of that vague respect for death which is always imperious in the heart of man . 
Nothing remained of the colonel . 
M. Gillenormand had his sword and uniform sold to an old-clothes dealer . 
The neighbors devastated the garden and pillaged the rare flowers . 
The other plants turned to nettles and weeds , and died . 
Marius remained only forty-eight hours at Vernon . 
After the interment he returned to Paris , and applied himself again to his law studies , with no more thought of his father than if the latter had never lived . 
In two days the colonel was buried , and in three forgotten . 
Marius wore crape on his hat . 
That was all . 
THE UTILITY OF GOING TO MASS , IN ORDER TO BECOME A REVOLUTIONIST Marius had preserved the religious habits of his childhood . 
One Sunday , when he went to hear mass at Saint-Sulpice , at that same chapel of the Virgin whither his aunt had led him when a small lad , he placed himself behind a pillar , being more absent-minded and thoughtful than usual on that occasion , and knelt down , without paying any special heed , upon a chair of Utrecht velvet , on the back of which was inscribed this name : Monsieur Mabeuf , warden . 
Mass had hardly begun when an old man presented himself and said to Marius : -- `` This is my place , sir . '' 
Marius stepped aside promptly , and the old man took possession of his chair . 
The mass concluded , Marius still stood thoughtfully a few paces distant ; the old man approached him again and said : -- `` I beg your pardon , sir , for having disturbed you a while ago , and for again disturbing you at this moment ; you must have thought me intrusive , and I will explain myself . '' 
`` There is no need of that , Sir , '' said Marius . 
`` Yes ! '' 
went on the old man , `` I do not wish you to have a bad opinion of me . 
You see , I am attached to this place . 
It seems to me that the mass is better from here . 
Why ? 
I will tell you . 
It is from this place , that I have watched a poor , brave father come regularly , every two or three months , for the last ten years , since he had no other opportunity and no other way of seeing his child , because he was prevented by family arrangements . 
He came at the hour when he knew that his son would be brought to mass . 
The little one never suspected that his father was there . 
Perhaps he did not even know that he had a father , poor innocent ! 
The father kept behind a pillar , so that he might not be seen . 
He gazed at his child and he wept . 
He adored that little fellow , poor man ! 
I could see that . 
This spot has become sanctified in my sight , and I have contracted a habit of coming hither to listen to the mass . 
I prefer it to the stall to which I have a right , in my capacity of warden . 
I knew that unhappy gentleman a little , too . 
He had a father-in-law , a wealthy aunt , relatives , I do n't know exactly what all , who threatened to disinherit the child if he , the father , saw him . 
He sacrificed himself in order that his son might be rich and happy some day . 
He was separated from him because of political opinions . 
Certainly , I approve of political opinions , but there are people who do not know where to stop . 
Mon Dieu ! 
a man is not a monster because he was at Waterloo ; a father is not separated from his child for such a reason as that . 
He was one of Bonaparte 's colonels . 
He is dead , I believe . 
He lived at Vernon , where I have a brother who is a cure , and his name was something like Pontmarie or Montpercy . 
He had a fine sword-cut , on my honor . '' 
