The battle had , for Wellington , two bases of action , Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte ; Hougomont still held out , but was on fire ; La Haie-Sainte was taken . 
Of the German battalion which defended it , only forty-two men survived ; all the officers , except five , were either dead or captured . 
Three thousand combatants had been massacred in that barn . 
A sergeant of the English Guards , the foremost boxer in England , reputed invulnerable by his companions , had been killed there by a little French drummer-boy . 
Baring had been dislodged , Alten put to the sword . 
Many flags had been lost , one from Alten 's division , and one from the battalion of Lunenburg , carried by a prince of the house of Deux-Ponts . 
The Scotch Grays no longer existed ; Ponsonby 's great dragoons had been hacked to pieces . 
That valiant cavalry had bent beneath the lancers of Bro and beneath the cuirassiers of Travers ; out of twelve hundred horses , six hundred remained ; out of three lieutenant-colonels , two lay on the earth , -- Hamilton wounded , Mater slain . 
Ponsonby had fallen , riddled by seven lance-thrusts . 
Gordon was dead . 
Marsh was dead . 
Two divisions , the fifth and the sixth , had been annihilated . 
Hougomont injured , La Haie-Sainte taken , there now existed but one rallying-point , the centre . 
That point still held firm . 
Wellington reinforced it . 
He summoned thither Hill , who was at Merle-Braine ; he summoned Chasse , who was at Braine-l'Alleud . 
The centre of the English army , rather concave , very dense , and very compact , was strongly posted . 
It occupied the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , having behind it the village , and in front of it the slope , which was tolerably steep then . 
It rested on that stout stone dwelling which at that time belonged to the domain of Nivelles , and which marks the intersection of the roads -- a pile of the sixteenth century , and so robust that the cannon-balls rebounded from it without injuring it . 
All about the plateau the English had cut the hedges here and there , made embrasures in the hawthorn-trees , thrust the throat of a cannon between two branches , embattled the shrubs . 
There artillery was ambushed in the brushwood . 
This punic labor , incontestably authorized by war , which permits traps , was so well done , that Haxo , who had been despatched by the Emperor at nine o'clock in the morning to reconnoitre the enemy 's batteries , had discovered nothing of it , and had returned and reported to Napoleon that there were no obstacles except the two barricades which barred the road to Nivelles and to Genappe . 
It was at the season when the grain is tall ; on the edge of the plateau a battalion of Kempt 's brigade , the 95th , armed with carabines , was concealed in the tall wheat . 
Thus assured and buttressed , the centre of the Anglo-Dutch army was well posted . 
The peril of this position lay in the forest of Soignes , then adjoining the field of battle , and intersected by the ponds of Groenendael and Boitsfort . 
An army could not retreat thither without dissolving ; the regiments would have broken up immediately there . 
The artillery would have been lost among the morasses . 
The retreat , according to many a man versed in the art , -- though it is disputed by others , -- would have been a disorganized flight . 
To this centre , Wellington added one of Chasse 's brigades taken from the right wing , and one of Wincke 's brigades taken from the left wing , plus Clinton 's division . 
To his English , to the regiments of Halkett , to the brigades of Mitchell , to the guards of Maitland , he gave as reinforcements and aids , the infantry of Brunswick , Nassau 's contingent , Kielmansegg 's Hanoverians , and Ompteda 's Germans . 
This placed twenty-six battalions under his hand . 
The right wing , as Charras says , was thrown back on the centre . 
An enormous battery was masked by sacks of earth at the spot where there now stands what is called the `` Museum of Waterloo . '' 
Besides this , Wellington had , behind a rise in the ground , Somerset 's Dragoon Guards , fourteen hundred horse strong . 
It was the remaining half of the justly celebrated English cavalry . 
Ponsonby destroyed , Somerset remained . 
The battery , which , if completed , would have been almost a redoubt , was ranged behind a very low garden wall , backed up with a coating of bags of sand and a large slope of earth . 
This work was not finished ; there had been no time to make a palisade for it . 
Wellington , uneasy but impassive , was on horseback , and there remained the whole day in the same attitude , a little in advance of the old mill of Mont-Saint-Jean , which is still in existence , beneath an elm , which an Englishman , an enthusiastic vandal , purchased later on for two hundred francs , cut down , and carried off . 
Wellington was coldly heroic . 
The bullets rained about him . 
His aide-de-camp , Gordon , fell at his side . 
Lord Hill , pointing to a shell which had burst , said to him : `` My lord , what are your orders in case you are killed ? '' 
`` To do like me , '' replied Wellington . 
To Clinton he said laconically , `` To hold this spot to the last man . '' 
The day was evidently turning out ill . 
Wellington shouted to his old companions of Talavera , of Vittoria , of Salamanca : `` Boys , can retreat be thought of ? 
Think of old England ! '' 
Towards four o'clock , the English line drew back . 
Suddenly nothing was visible on the crest of the plateau except the artillery and the sharpshooters ; the rest had disappeared : the regiments , dislodged by the shells and the French bullets , retreated into the bottom , now intersected by the back road of the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean ; a retrograde movement took place , the English front hid itself , Wellington drew back . 
`` The beginning of retreat ! '' 
cried Napoleon . 
NAPOLEON IN A GOOD HUMOR The Emperor , though ill and discommoded on horseback by a local trouble , had never been in a better humor than on that day . 
His impenetrability had been smiling ever since the morning . 
On the 18th of June , that profound soul masked by marble beamed blindly . 
The man who had been gloomy at Austerlitz was gay at Waterloo . 
The greatest favorites of destiny make mistakes . 
Our joys are composed of shadow . 
The supreme smile is God 's alone . 
Ridet Caesar , Pompeius flebit , said the legionaries of the Fulminatrix Legion . 
Pompey was not destined to weep on that occasion , but it is certain that Caesar laughed . 
While exploring on horseback at one o'clock on the preceding night , in storm and rain , in company with Bertrand , the communes in the neighborhood of Rossomme , satisfied at the sight of the long line of the English camp-fires illuminating the whole horizon from Frischemont to Braine-l'Alleud , it had seemed to him that fate , to whom he had assigned a day on the field of Waterloo , was exact to the appointment ; he stopped his horse , and remained for some time motionless , gazing at the lightning and listening to the thunder ; and this fatalist was heard to cast into the darkness this mysterious saying , `` We are in accord . '' 
Napoleon was mistaken . 
They were no longer in accord . 
He took not a moment for sleep ; every instant of that night was marked by a joy for him . 
He traversed the line of the principal outposts , halting here and there to talk to the sentinels . 
At half-past two , near the wood of Hougomont , he heard the tread of a column on the march ; he thought at the moment that it was a retreat on the part of Wellington . 
He said : `` It is the rear-guard of the English getting under way for the purpose of decamping . 
I will take prisoners the six thousand English who have just arrived at Ostend . '' 
He conversed expansively ; he regained the animation which he had shown at his landing on the first of March , when he pointed out to the Grand-Marshal the enthusiastic peasant of the Gulf Juan , and cried , `` Well , Bertrand , here is a reinforcement already ! '' 
On the night of the 17th to the 18th of June he rallied Wellington . 
`` That little Englishman needs a lesson , '' said Napoleon . 
The rain redoubled in violence ; the thunder rolled while the Emperor was speaking . 
At half-past three o'clock in the morning , he lost one illusion ; officers who had been despatched to reconnoitre announced to him that the enemy was not making any movement . 
Nothing was stirring ; not a bivouac-fire had been extinguished ; the English army was asleep . 
The silence on earth was profound ; the only noise was in the heavens . 
At four o'clock , a peasant was brought in to him by the scouts ; this peasant had served as guide to a brigade of English cavalry , probably Vivian 's brigade , which was on its way to take up a position in the village of Ohain , at the extreme left . 
At five o'clock , two Belgian deserters reported to him that they had just quitted their regiment , and that the English army was ready for battle . 
`` So much the better ! '' 
exclaimed Napoleon . 
`` I prefer to overthrow them rather than to drive them back . '' 
In the morning he dismounted in the mud on the slope which forms an angle with the Plancenoit road , had a kitchen table and a peasant 's chair brought to him from the farm of Rossomme , seated himself , with a truss of straw for a carpet , and spread out on the table the chart of the battle-field , saying to Soult as he did so , `` A pretty checker-board . '' 
In consequence of the rains during the night , the transports of provisions , embedded in the soft roads , had not been able to arrive by morning ; the soldiers had had no sleep ; they were wet and fasting . 
This did not prevent Napoleon from exclaiming cheerfully to Ney , `` We have ninety chances out of a hundred . '' 
At eight o'clock the Emperor 's breakfast was brought to him . 
He invited many generals to it . 
During breakfast , it was said that Wellington had been to a ball two nights before , in Brussels , at the Duchess of Richmond 's ; and Soult , a rough man of war , with a face of an archbishop , said , `` The ball takes place to-day . '' 
The Emperor jested with Ney , who said , `` Wellington will not be so simple as to wait for Your Majesty . '' 
That was his way , however . 
`` He was fond of jesting , '' says Fleury de Chaboulon . 
`` A merry humor was at the foundation of his character , '' says Gourgaud . 
`` He abounded in pleasantries , which were more peculiar than witty , '' says Benjamin Constant . 
These gayeties of a giant are worthy of insistence . 
It was he who called his grenadiers `` his grumblers '' ; he pinched their ears ; he pulled their mustaches . 
`` The Emperor did nothing but play pranks on us , '' is the remark of one of them . 
During the mysterious trip from the island of Elba to France , on the 27th of February , on the open sea , the French brig of war , Le Zephyr , having encountered the brig L'Inconstant , on which Napoleon was concealed , and having asked the news of Napoleon from L'Inconstant , the Emperor , who still wore in his hat the white and amaranthine cockade sown with bees , which he had adopted at the isle of Elba , laughingly seized the speaking-trumpet , and answered for himself , `` The Emperor is well . '' 
A man who laughs like that is on familiar terms with events . 
Napoleon indulged in many fits of this laughter during the breakfast at Waterloo . 
After breakfast he meditated for a quarter of an hour ; then two generals seated themselves on the truss of straw , pen in hand and their paper on their knees , and the Emperor dictated to them the order of battle . 
At nine o'clock , at the instant when the French army , ranged in echelons and set in motion in five columns , had deployed -- the divisions in two lines , the artillery between the brigades , the music at their head ; as they beat the march , with rolls on the drums and the blasts of trumpets , mighty , vast , joyous , a sea of casques , of sabres , and of bayonets on the horizon , the Emperor was touched , and twice exclaimed , `` Magnificent ! 
