She has cut herself breaking that pane for you ! '' 
`` So much the better ! '' 
said the man . 
`` I foresaw that . '' 
`` What ? 
So much the better ? '' 
retorted his wife . 
`` Peace ! '' 
replied the father , `` I suppress the liberty of the press . '' 
Then tearing the woman 's chemise which he was wearing , he made a strip of cloth with which he hastily swathed the little girl 's bleeding wrist . 
That done , his eye fell with a satisfied expression on his torn chemise . 
`` And the chemise too , '' said he , `` this has a good appearance . '' 
An icy breeze whistled through the window and entered the room . 
The outer mist penetrated thither and diffused itself like a whitish sheet of wadding vaguely spread by invisible fingers . 
Through the broken pane the snow could be seen falling . 
The snow promised by the Candlemas sun of the preceding day had actually come . 
The father cast a glance about him as though to make sure that he had forgotten nothing . 
He seized an old shovel and spread ashes over the wet brands in such a manner as to entirely conceal them . 
Then drawing himself up and leaning against the chimney-piece : -- `` Now , '' said he , `` we can receive the philanthropist . '' 
THE RAY OF LIGHT IN THE HOVEL The big girl approached and laid her hand in her father 's . 
`` Feel how cold I am , '' said she . 
`` Bah ! '' 
replied the father , `` I am much colder than that . '' 
The mother exclaimed impetuously : -- `` You always have something better than any one else , so you do ! 
even bad things . '' 
`` Down with you ! '' 
said the man . 
The mother , being eyed after a certain fashion , held her tongue . 
Silence reigned for a moment in the hovel . 
The elder girl was removing the mud from the bottom of her mantle , with a careless air ; her younger sister continued to sob ; the mother had taken the latter 's head between her hands , and was covering it with kisses , whispering to her the while : -- `` My treasure , I entreat you , it is nothing of consequence , do n't cry , you will anger your father . '' 
`` No ! '' 
exclaimed the father , `` quite the contrary ! 
sob ! 
sob ! 
that 's right . '' 
Then turning to the elder : -- `` There now ! 
He is not coming ! 
What if he were not to come ! 
I shall have extinguished my fire , wrecked my chair , torn my shirt , and broken my pane all for nothing . '' 
`` And wounded the child ! '' 
murmured the mother . 
`` Do you know , '' went on the father , `` that it 's beastly cold in this devil 's garret ! 
What if that man should not come ! 
Oh ! 
See there , you ! 
He makes us wait ! 
He says to himself : ` Well ! 
they will wait for me ! 
That 's what they 're there for . ' 
Oh ! 
how I hate them , and with what joy , jubilation , enthusiasm , and satisfaction I could strangle all those rich folks ! 
all those rich folks ! 
These men who pretend to be charitable , who put on airs , who go to mass , who make presents to the priesthood , preachy , preachy , in their skullcaps , and who think themselves above us , and who come for the purpose of humiliating us , and to bring us ` clothes , ' as they say ! 
old duds that are not worth four sous ! 
And bread ! 
That 's not what I want , pack of rascals that they are , it 's money ! 
Ah ! 
money ! 
Never ! 
Because they say that we would go off and drink it up , and that we are drunkards and idlers ! 
And they ! 
What are they , then , and what have they been in their time ! 
Thieves ! 
They never could have become rich otherwise ! 
Oh ! 
Society ought to be grasped by the four corners of the cloth and tossed into the air , all of it ! 
It would all be smashed , very likely , but at least , no one would have anything , and there would be that much gained ! 
But what is that blockhead of a benevolent gentleman doing ? 
Will he come ? 
Perhaps the animal has forgotten the address ! 
I 'll bet that that old beast -- '' At that moment there came a light tap at the door , the man rushed to it and opened it , exclaiming , amid profound bows and smiles of adoration : -- `` Enter , sir ! 
Deign to enter , most respected benefactor , and your charming young lady , also . '' 
A man of ripe age and a young girl made their appearance on the threshold of the attic . 
Marius had not quitted his post . 
His feelings for the moment surpassed the powers of the human tongue . 
It was She ! 
Whoever has loved knows all the radiant meanings contained in those three letters of that word : She . 
It was certainly she . 
Marius could hardly distinguish her through the luminous vapor which had suddenly spread before his eyes . 
It was that sweet , absent being , that star which had beamed upon him for six months ; it was those eyes , that brow , that mouth , that lovely vanished face which had created night by its departure . 
The vision had been eclipsed , now it reappeared . 
It reappeared in that gloom , in that garret , in that misshapen attic , in all that horror . 
Marius shuddered in dismay . 
What ! 
It was she ! 
The palpitations of his heart troubled his sight . 
He felt that he was on the brink of bursting into tears ! 
What ! 
He beheld her again at last , after having sought her so long ! 
It seemed to him that he had lost his soul , and that he had just found it again . 
She was the same as ever , only a little pale ; her delicate face was framed in a bonnet of violet velvet , her figure was concealed beneath a pelisse of black satin . 
Beneath her long dress , a glimpse could be caught of her tiny foot shod in a silken boot . 
She was still accompanied by M. Leblanc . 
She had taken a few steps into the room , and had deposited a tolerably bulky parcel on the table . 
The eldest Jondrette girl had retired behind the door , and was staring with sombre eyes at that velvet bonnet , that silk mantle , and that charming , happy face . 
JONDRETTE COMES NEAR WEEPING The hovel was so dark , that people coming from without felt on entering it the effect produced on entering a cellar . 
The two new-comers advanced , therefore , with a certain hesitation , being hardly able to distinguish the vague forms surrounding them , while they could be clearly seen and scrutinized by the eyes of the inhabitants of the garret , who were accustomed to this twilight . 
M. Leblanc approached , with his sad but kindly look , and said to Jondrette the father : -- `` Monsieur , in this package you will find some new clothes and some woollen stockings and blankets . '' 
`` Our angelic benefactor overwhelms us , '' said Jondrette , bowing to the very earth . 
Then , bending down to the ear of his eldest daughter , while the two visitors were engaged in examining this lamentable interior , he added in a low and rapid voice : -- `` Hey ? 
