Villon would no longer meet with his ancient temporary provisional lodging . 
This net-work of cellars has its immemorial population of prowlers , rodents , swarming in greater numbers than ever ; from time to time , an aged and veteran rat risks his head at the window of the sewer and surveys the Parisians ; but even these vermin grow tame , so satisfied are they with their subterranean palace . 
The cesspool no longer retains anything of its primitive ferocity . 
The rain , which in former days soiled the sewer , now washes it . 
Nevertheless , do not trust yourself too much to it . 
Miasmas still inhabit it . 
It is more hypocritical than irreproachable . 
The prefecture of police and the commission of health have done their best . 
But , in spite of all the processes of disinfection , it exhales , a vague , suspicious odor like Tartuffe after confession . 
Let us confess , that , taking it all in all , this sweeping is a homage which the sewer pays to civilization , and as , from this point of view , Tartuffe 's conscience is a progress over the Augean stables , it is certain that the sewers of Paris have been improved . 
It is more than progress ; it is transmutation . 
Between the ancient and the present sewer there is a revolution . 
What has effected this revolution ? 
The man whom all the world forgets , and whom we have mentioned , Bruneseau . 
FUTURE PROGRESS The excavation of the sewer of Paris has been no slight task . 
The last ten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a termination , any more than they have been able to finish Paris . 
The sewer , in fact , receives all the counter-shocks of the growth of Paris . 
Within the bosom of the earth , it is a sort of mysterious polyp with a thousand antennae , which expands below as the city expands above . 
Every time that the city cuts a street , the sewer stretches out an arm . 
The old monarchy had constructed only twenty-three thousand three hundred metres of sewers ; that was where Paris stood in this respect on the first of January , 1806 . 
Beginning with this epoch , of which we shall shortly speak , the work was usefully and energetically resumed and prosecuted ; Napoleon built -- the figures are curious -- four thousand eight hundred and four metres ; Louis XVIII. , five thousand seven hundred and nine ; Charles X. , ten thousand eight hundred and thirty-six ; Louis-Philippe , eighty-nine thousand and twenty ; the Republic of 1848 , twenty-three thousand three hundred and eighty-one ; the present government , seventy thousand five hundred ; in all , at the present time , two hundred and twenty-six thousand six hundred and ten metres ; sixty leagues of sewers ; the enormous entrails of Paris . 
An obscure ramification ever at work ; a construction which is immense and ignored . 
As the reader sees , the subterranean labyrinth of Paris is to-day more than ten times what it was at the beginning of the century . 
It is difficult to form any idea of all the perseverance and the efforts which have been required to bring this cess-pool to the point of relative perfection in which it now is . 
It was with great difficulty that the ancient monarchical provostship and , during the last ten years of the eighteenth century , the revolutionary mayoralty , had succeeded in perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to 1806 . 
All sorts of obstacles hindered this operation , some peculiar to the soil , others inherent in the very prejudices of the laborious population of Paris . 
Paris is built upon a soil which is singularly rebellious to the pick , the hoe , the bore , and to human manipulation . 
There is nothing more difficult to pierce and to penetrate than the geological formation upon which is superposed the marvellous historical formation called Paris ; as soon as work in any form whatsoever is begun and adventures upon this stretch of alluvium , subterranean resistances abound . 
There are liquid clays , springs , hard rocks , and those soft and deep quagmires which special science calls moutardes . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- The pick advances laboriously through the calcareous layers alternating with very slender threads of clay , and schistose beds in plates incrusted with oyster-shells , the contemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans . 
Sometimes a rivulet suddenly bursts through a vault that has been begun , and inundates the laborers ; or a layer of marl is laid bare , and rolls down with the fury of a cataract , breaking the stoutest supporting beams like glass . 
Quite recently , at Villette , when it became necessary to pass the collecting sewer under the Saint-Martin canal without interrupting navigation or emptying the canal , a fissure appeared in the basin of the canal , water suddenly became abundant in the subterranean tunnel , which was beyond the power of the pumping engines ; it was necessary to send a diver to explore the fissure which had been made in the narrow entrance of the grand basin , and it was not without great difficulty that it was stopped up . 
Elsewhere near the Seine , and even at a considerable distance from the river , as for instance , at Belleville , Grand-Rue and Lumiere Passage , quicksands are encountered in which one sticks fast , and in which a man sinks visibly . 
Add suffocation by miasmas , burial by slides , and sudden crumbling of the earth . 
Add the typhus , with which the workmen become slowly impregnated . 
In our own day , after having excavated the gallery of Clichy , with a banquette to receive the principal water-conduit of Ourcq , a piece of work which was executed in a trench ten metres deep ; after having , in the midst of land-slides , and with the aid of excavations often putrid , and of shoring up , vaulted the Bievre from the Boulevard de l'Hopital , as far as the Seine ; after having , in order to deliver Paris from the floods of Montmartre and in order to provide an outlet for that river-like pool nine hectares in extent , which crouched near the Barriere des Martyrs , after having , let us state , constructed the line of sewers from the Barriere Blanche to the road of Aubervilliers , in four months , working day and night , at a depth of eleven metres ; after having -- a thing heretofore unseen -- made a subterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec , without a trench , six metres below the surface , the superintendent , Monnot , died . 
After having vaulted three thousand metres of sewer in all quarters of the city , from the Rue Traversiere-Saint-Antoine to the Rue de l'Ourcine , after having freed the Carrefour Censier-Mouffetard from inundations of rain by means of the branch of the Arbalete , after having built the Saint-Georges sewer , on rock and concrete in the fluid sands , after having directed the formidable lowering of the flooring of the vault timber in the Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth branch , Duleau the engineer died . 
There are no bulletins for such acts of bravery as these , which are more useful , nevertheless , than the brutal slaughter of the field of battle . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- Mustards . 
The sewers of Paris in 1832 were far from being what they are to-day . 
Bruneseau had given the impulse , but the cholera was required to bring about the vast reconstruction which took place later on . 
It is surprising to say , for example , that in 1821 , a part of the belt sewer , called the Grand Canal , as in Venice , still stood stagnating uncovered to the sky , in the Rue des Gourdes . 
It was only in 1821 that the city of Paris found in its pocket the two hundred and sixty-thousand eighty francs and six centimes required for covering this mass of filth . 
The three absorbing wells , of the Combat , the Cunette , and Saint-Mande , with their discharging mouths , their apparatus , their cesspools , and their depuratory branches , only date from 1836 . 
The intestinal sewer of Paris has been made over anew , and , as we have said , it has been extended more than tenfold within the last quarter of a century . 
Thirty years ago , at the epoch of the insurrection of the 5th and 6th of June , it was still , in many localities , nearly the same ancient sewer . 
A very great number of streets which are now convex were then sunken causeways . 
At the end of a slope , where the tributaries of a street or cross-roads ended , there were often to be seen large , square gratings with heavy bars , whose iron , polished by the footsteps of the throng , gleamed dangerous and slippery for vehicles , and caused horses to fall . 
The official language of the Roads and Bridges gave to these gratings the expressive name of Cassis . 
-LSB- 60 -RSB- -LSB- 60 -RSB- From casser , to break : break-necks . 
In 1832 , in a number of streets , in the Rue de l'Etoile , the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue du Temple , the Rue Vielle-duTemple , the Rue Notre-Dame de Nazareth , the Rue Folie-Mericourt , the Quai aux Fleurs , the Rue du Petit-Muse , the Rue du Normandie , the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches , the Rue des Marais , the Faubourg Saint-Martin , the Rue Notre Dame des-Victoires , the Faubourg Montmartre , the Rue Grange-Bateliere , in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Jacob , the Rue de Tournon , the ancient gothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw . 
It consisted of enormous voids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stone posts , with monumental effrontery . 
Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in 1663 ; five thousand three hundred fathoms . 
After Bruneseau , on the 1st of January , 1832 , it had forty thousand three hundred metres . 
Between 1806 and 1831 , there had been built , on an average , seven hundred and fifty metres annually , afterwards eight and even ten thousand metres of galleries were constructed every year , in masonry , of small stones , with hydraulic mortar which hardens under water , on a cement foundation . 
At two hundred francs the metre , the sixty leagues of Paris ' sewers of the present day represent forty-eight millions . 
In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at the beginning , grave problems of public hygiene are connected with that immense question : the sewers of Paris . 
Paris is the centre of two sheets , a sheet of water and a sheet of air . 
The sheet of water , lying at a tolerably great depth underground , but already sounded by two bores , is furnished by the layer of green clay situated between the chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone ; this layer may be represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference ; a multitude of rivers and brooks ooze there ; one drinks the Seine , the Marne , the Yonne , the Oise , the Aisne , the Cher , the Vienne and the Loire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle . 
The sheet of water is healthy , it comes from heaven in the first place and next from the earth ; the sheet of air is unhealthy , it comes from the sewer . 
All the miasms of the cess-pool are mingled with the breath of the city ; hence this bad breath . 
The air taken from above a dung-heap , as has been scientifically proved , is purer than the air taken from above Paris . 
In a given time , with the aid of progress , mechanisms become perfected , and as light increases , the sheet of water will be employed to purify the sheet of air ; that is to say , to wash the sewer . 
The reader knows , that by `` washing the sewer '' we mean : the restitution of the filth to the earth ; the return to the soil of dung and of manure to the fields . 
Through this simple act , the entire social community will experience a diminution of misery and an augmentation of health . 
At the present hour , the radiation of diseases from Paris extends to fifty leagues around the Louvre , taken as the hub of this pestilential wheel . 
We might say that , for ten centuries , the cess-pool has been the disease of Paris . 
The sewer is the blemish which Paris has in her blood . 
The popular instinct has never been deceived in it . 
The occupation of sewermen was formerly almost as perilous , and almost as repugnant to the people , as the occupation of knacker , which was so long held in horror and handed over to the executioner . 
High wages were necessary to induce a mason to disappear in that fetid mine ; the ladder of the cess-pool cleaner hesitated to plunge into it ; it was said , in proverbial form : `` to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave ; '' and all sorts of hideous legends , as we have said , covered this colossal sink with terror ; a dread sink-hole which bears the traces of the revolutions of the globe as of the revolutions of man , and where are to be found vestiges of all cataclysms from the shells of the Deluge to the rag of Marat . 
THE SEWER AND ITS SURPRISES It was in the sewers of Paris that Jean Valjean found himself . 
Still another resemblance between Paris and the sea . 
As in the ocean , the diver may disappear there . 
The transition was an unheard-of one . 
In the very heart of the city , Jean Valjean had escaped from the city , and , in the twinkling of an eye , in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it , he had passed from broad daylight to complete obscurity , from midday to midnight , from tumult to silence , from the whirlwind of thunders to the stagnation of the tomb , and , by a vicissitude far more tremendous even than that of the Rue Polonceau , from the most extreme peril to the most absolute obscurity . 
An abrupt fall into a cavern ; a disappearance into the secret trap-door of Paris ; to quit that street where death was on every side , for that sort of sepulchre where there was life , was a strange instant . 
He remained for several seconds as though bewildered ; listening , stupefied . 
The waste-trap of safety had suddenly yawned beneath him . 
Celestial goodness had , in a manner , captured him by treachery . 
Adorable ambuscades of providence ! 
Only , the wounded man did not stir , and Jean Valjean did not know whether that which he was carrying in that grave was a living being or a dead corpse . 
His first sensation was one of blindness . 
All of a sudden , he could see nothing . 
It seemed to him too , that , in one instant , he had become deaf . 
He no longer heard anything . 
The frantic storm of murder which had been let loose a few feet above his head did not reach him , thanks to the thickness of the earth which separated him from it , as we have said , otherwise than faintly and indistinctly , and like a rumbling , in the depths . 
He felt that the ground was solid under his feet ; that was all ; but that was enough . 
He extended one arm and then the other , touched the walls on both sides , and perceived that the passage was narrow ; he slipped , and thus perceived that the pavement was wet . 
He cautiously put forward one foot , fearing a hole , a sink , some gulf ; he discovered that the paving continued . 
A gust of fetidness informed him of the place in which he stood . 
After the lapse of a few minutes , he was no longer blind . 
A little light fell through the man-hole through which he had descended , and his eyes became accustomed to this cavern . 
He began to distinguish something . 
The passage in which he had burrowed -- no other word can better express the situation -- was walled in behind him . 
It was one of those blind alleys , which the special jargon terms branches . 
In front of him there was another wall , a wall like night . 
The light of the air-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjean stood , and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp walls of the sewer . 
Beyond , the opaqueness was massive ; to penetrate thither seemed horrible , an entrance into it appeared like an engulfment . 
A man could , however , plunge into that wall of fog and it was necessary so to do . 
