Father and son halted near the fountain where two swans were sporting . 
This bourgeois appeared to cherish a special admiration for the swans . 
He resembled them in this sense , that he walked like them . 
For the moment , the swans were swimming , which is their principal talent , and they were superb . 
If the two poor little beings had listened and if they had been of an age to understand , they might have gathered the words of this grave man . 
The father was saying to his son : `` The sage lives content with little . 
Look at me , my son . 
I do not love pomp . 
I am never seen in clothes decked with gold lace and stones ; I leave that false splendor to badly organized souls . '' 
Here the deep shouts which proceeded from the direction of the Halles burst out with fresh force of bell and uproar . 
`` What is that ? '' 
inquired the child . 
The father replied : `` It is the Saturnalia . '' 
All at once , he caught sight of the two little ragged boys behind the green swan-hutch . 
`` There is the beginning , '' said he . 
And , after a pause , he added : `` Anarchy is entering this garden . '' 
In the meanwhile , his son took a bite of his brioche , spit it out , and , suddenly burst out crying . 
`` What are you crying about ? '' 
demanded his father . 
`` I am not hungry any more , '' said the child . 
The father 's smile became more accentuated . 
`` One does not need to be hungry in order to eat a cake . '' 
`` My cake tires me . 
It is stale . '' 
`` Do n't you want any more of it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
The father pointed to the swans . 
`` Throw it to those palmipeds . '' 
The child hesitated . 
A person may not want any more of his cake ; but that is no reason for giving it away . 
The father went on : `` Be humane . 
You must have compassion on animals . '' 
And , taking the cake from his son , he flung it into the basin . 
The cake fell very near the edge . 
The swans were far away , in the centre of the basin , and busy with some prey . 
They had seen neither the bourgeois nor the brioche . 
The bourgeois , feeling that the cake was in danger of being wasted , and moved by this useless shipwreck , entered upon a telegraphic agitation , which finally attracted the attention of the swans . 
They perceived something floating , steered for the edge like ships , as they are , and slowly directed their course toward the brioche , with the stupid majesty which befits white creatures . 
`` The swans -LSB- cygnes -RSB- understand signs -LSB- signes -RSB- , '' said the bourgeois , delighted to make a jest . 
At that moment , the distant tumult of the city underwent another sudden increase . 
This time it was sinister . 
There are some gusts of wind which speak more distinctly than others . 
The one which was blowing at that moment brought clearly defined drum-beats , clamors , platoon firing , and the dismal replies of the tocsin and the cannon . 
This coincided with a black cloud which suddenly veiled the sun . 
The swans had not yet reached the brioche . 
`` Let us return home , '' said the father , `` they are attacking the Tuileries . '' 
He grasped his son 's hand again . 
Then he continued : `` From the Tuileries to the Luxembourg , there is but the distance which separates Royalty from the peerage ; that is not far . 
Shots will soon rain down . '' 
He glanced at the cloud . 
`` Perhaps it is rain itself that is about to shower down ; the sky is joining in ; the younger branch is condemned . 
Let us return home quickly . '' 
`` I should like to see the swans eat the brioche , '' said the child . 
The father replied : `` That would be imprudent . '' 
And he led his little bourgeois away . 
The son , regretting the swans , turned his head back toward the basin until a corner of the quincunxes concealed it from him . 
In the meanwhile , the two little waifs had approached the brioche at the same time as the swans . 
It was floating on the water . 
The smaller of them stared at the cake , the elder gazed after the retreating bourgeois . 
Father and son entered the labyrinth of walks which leads to the grand flight of steps near the clump of trees on the side of the Rue Madame . 
As soon as they had disappeared from view , the elder child hastily flung himself flat on his stomach on the rounding curb of the basin , and clinging to it with his left hand , and leaning over the water , on the verge of falling in , he stretched out his right hand with his stick towards the cake . 
The swans , perceiving the enemy , made haste , and in so doing , they produced an effect of their breasts which was of service to the little fisher ; the water flowed back before the swans , and one of these gentle concentric undulations softly floated the brioche towards the child 's wand . 
Just as the swans came up , the stick touched the cake . 
The child gave it a brisk rap , drew in the brioche , frightened away the swans , seized the cake , and sprang to his feet . 
The cake was wet ; but they were hungry and thirsty . 
The elder broke the cake into two portions , a large one and a small one , took the small one for himself , gave the large one to his brother , and said to him : `` Ram that into your muzzle . '' 
MORTUUS PATER FILIUM MORITURUM EXPECTAT Marius dashed out of the barricade , Combeferre followed him . 
But he was too late . 
Gavroche was dead . 
Combeferre brought back the basket of cartridges ; Marius bore the child . 
`` Alas ! '' 
he thought , `` that which the father had done for his father , he was requiting to the son ; only , Thenardier had brought back his father alive ; he was bringing back the child dead . '' 
When Marius re-entered the redoubt with Gavroche in his arms , his face , like the child , was inundated with blood . 
At the moment when he had stooped to lift Gavroche , a bullet had grazed his head ; he had not noticed it . 
Courfeyrac untied his cravat and with it bandaged Marius ' brow . 
They laid Gavroche on the same table with Mabeuf , and spread over the two corpses the black shawl . 
There was enough of it for both the old man and the child . 
Combeferre distributed the cartridges from the basket which he had brought in . 
This gave each man fifteen rounds to fire . 
Jean Valjean was still in the same place , motionless on his stone post . 
When Combeferre offered him his fifteen cartridges , he shook his head . 
`` Here 's a rare eccentric , '' said Combeferre in a low voice to Enjolras . 
`` He finds a way of not fighting in this barricade . '' 
`` Which does not prevent him from defending it , '' responded Enjolras . 
`` Heroism has its originals , '' resumed Combeferre . 
And Courfeyrac , who had overheard , added : `` He is another sort from Father Mabeuf . '' 
One thing which must be noted is , that the fire which was battering the barricade hardly disturbed the interior . 
Those who have never traversed the whirlwind of this sort of war can form no idea of the singular moments of tranquillity mingled with these convulsions . 
Men go and come , they talk , they jest , they lounge . 
Some one whom we know heard a combatant say to him in the midst of the grape-shot : `` We are here as at a bachelor breakfast . '' 
The redoubt of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , we repeat , seemed very calm within . 
All mutations and all phases had been , or were about to be , exhausted . 
The position , from critical , had become menacing , and , from menacing , was probably about to become desperate . 
In proportion as the situation grew gloomy , the glow of heroism empurpled the barricade more and more . 
Enjolras , who was grave , dominated it , in the attitude of a young Spartan sacrificing his naked sword to the sombre genius , Epidotas . 
Combeferre , wearing an apron , was dressing the wounds : Bossuet and Feuilly were making cartridges with the powder-flask picked up by Gavroche on the dead corporal , and Bossuet said to Feuilly : `` We are soon to take the diligence for another planet '' ; Courfeyrac was disposing and arranging on some paving-stones which he had reserved for himself near Enjolras , a complete arsenal , his sword-cane , his gun , two holster pistols , and a cudgel , with the care of a young girl setting a small dunkerque in order . 
Jean Valjean stared silently at the wall opposite him . 
An artisan was fastening Mother Hucheloup 's big straw hat on his head with a string , `` for fear of sun-stroke , '' as he said . 
The young men from the Cougourde d'Aix were chatting merrily among themselves , as though eager to speak patois for the last time . 
Joly , who had taken Widow Hucheloup 's mirror from the wall , was examining his tongue in it . 
