There is no insurrection except in a forward direction . 
Any other sort of rising is bad ; every violent step towards the rear is a revolt ; to retreat is to commit a deed of violence against the human race . 
Insurrection is a fit of rage on the part of truth ; the pavements which the uprising disturbs give forth the spark of right . 
These pavements bequeath to the uprising only their mud . 
Danton against Louis XIV . 
is insurrection ; Hebert against Danton is revolt . 
Hence it results that if insurrection in given cases may be , as Lafayette says , the most holy of duties , an uprising may be the most fatal of crimes . 
There is also a difference in the intensity of heat ; insurrection is often a volcano , revolt is often only a fire of straw . 
Revolt , as we have said , is sometimes found among those in power . 
Polignac is a rioter ; Camille Desmoulins is one of the governing powers . 
Insurrection is sometimes resurrection . 
The solution of everything by universal suffrage being an absolutely modern fact , and all history anterior to this fact being , for the space of four thousand years , filled with violated right , and the suffering of peoples , each epoch of history brings with it that protest of which it is capable . 
Under the Caesars , there was no insurrection , but there was Juvenal . 
The facit indignatio replaces the Gracchi . 
Under the Caesars , there is the exile to Syene ; there is also the man of the Annales . 
We do not speak of the immense exile of Patmos who , on his part also , overwhelms the real world with a protest in the name of the ideal world , who makes of his vision an enormous satire and casts on Rome-Nineveh , on Rome-Babylon , on Rome-Sodom , the flaming reflection of the Apocalypse . 
John on his rock is the sphinx on its pedestal ; we may understand him , he is a Jew , and it is Hebrew ; but the man who writes the Annales is of the Latin race , let us rather say he is a Roman . 
As the Neros reign in a black way , they should be painted to match . 
The work of the graving-tool alone would be too pale ; there must be poured into the channel a concentrated prose which bites . 
Despots count for something in the question of philosophers . 
A word that is chained is a terrible word . 
The writer doubles and trebles his style when silence is imposed on a nation by its master . 
From this silence there arises a certain mysterious plenitude which filters into thought and there congeals into bronze . 
The compression of history produces conciseness in the historian . 
The granite solidity of such and such a celebrated prose is nothing but the accumulation effected by the tyrant . 
Tyranny constrains the writer to conditions of diameter which are augmentations of force . 
The Ciceronian period , which hardly sufficed for Verres , would be blunted on Caligula . 
The less spread of sail in the phrase , the more intensity in the blow . 
Tacitus thinks with all his might . 
The honesty of a great heart , condensed in justice and truth , overwhelms as with lightning . 
Be it remarked , in passing , that Tacitus is not historically superposed upon Caesar . 
The Tiberii were reserved for him . 
Caesar and Tacitus are two successive phenomena , a meeting between whom seems to be mysteriously avoided , by the One who , when He sets the centuries on the stage , regulates the entrances and the exits . 
Caesar is great , Tacitus is great ; God spares these two greatnesses by not allowing them to clash with one another . 
The guardian of justice , in striking Caesar , might strike too hard and be unjust . 
God does not will it . 
The great wars of Africa and Spain , the pirates of Sicily destroyed , civilization introduced into Gaul , into Britanny , into Germany , -- all this glory covers the Rubicon . 
There is here a sort of delicacy of the divine justice , hesitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper the formidable historian , sparing Caesar Tacitus , and according extenuating circumstances to genius . 
Certainly , despotism remains despotism , even under the despot of genius . 
There is corruption under all illustrious tyrants , but the moral pest is still more hideous under infamous tyrants . 
In such reigns , nothing veils the shame ; and those who make examples , Tacitus as well as Juvenal , slap this ignominy which can not reply , in the face , more usefully in the presence of all humanity . 
Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sylla . 
Under Claudius and under Domitian , there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the repulsiveness of the tyrant . 
The villainy of slaves is a direct product of the despot ; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences wherein the master is reflected ; public powers are unclean ; hearts are small ; consciences are dull , souls are like vermin ; thus it is under Caracalla , thus it is under Commodus , thus it is under Heliogabalus , while , from the Roman Senate , under Caesar , there comes nothing but the odor of the dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the eagles . 
Hence the advent , apparently tardy , of the Tacituses and the Juvenals ; it is in the hour for evidence , that the demonstrator makes his appearance . 
But Juvenal and Tacitus , like Isaiah in Biblical times , like Dante in the Middle Ages , is man ; riot and insurrection are the multitude , which is sometimes right and sometimes wrong . 
In the majority of cases , riot proceeds from a material fact ; insurrection is always a moral phenomenon . 
Riot is Masaniello ; insurrection , Spartacus . 
Insurrection borders on mind , riot on the stomach ; Gaster grows irritated ; but Gaster , assuredly , is not always in the wrong . 
In questions of famine , riot , Buzancais , for example , holds a true , pathetic , and just point of departure . 
Nevertheless , it remains a riot . 
Why ? 
It is because , right at bottom , it was wrong in form . 
Shy although in the right , violent although strong , it struck at random ; it walked like a blind elephant ; it left behind it the corpses of old men , of women , and of children ; it wished the blood of inoffensive and innocent persons without knowing why . 
The nourishment of the people is a good object ; to massacre them is a bad means . 
All armed protests , even the most legitimate , even that of the 10th of August , even that of July 14th , begin with the same troubles . 
Before the right gets set free , there is foam and tumult . 
In the beginning , the insurrection is a riot , just as a river is a torrent . 
Ordinarily it ends in that ocean : revolution . 
Sometimes , however , coming from those lofty mountains which dominate the moral horizon , justice , wisdom , reason , right , formed of the pure snow of the ideal , after a long fall from rock to rock , after having reflected the sky in its transparency and increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of triumph , insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire , as the Rhine is in a swamp . 
All this is of the past , the future is another thing . 
Universal suffrage has this admirable property , that it dissolves riot in its inception , and , by giving the vote to insurrection , it deprives it of its arms . 
The disappearance of wars , of street wars as well as of wars on the frontiers , such is the inevitable progression . 
Whatever To-day may be , To-morrow will be peace . 
However , insurrection , riot , and points of difference between the former and the latter , -- the bourgeois , properly speaking , knows nothing of such shades . 
In his mind , all is sedition , rebellion pure and simple , the revolt of the dog against his master , an attempt to bite whom must be punished by the chain and the kennel , barking , snapping , until such day as the head of the dog , suddenly enlarged , is outlined vaguely in the gloom face to face with the lion . 
Then the bourgeois shouts : `` Long live the people ! '' 
This explanation given , what does the movement of June , 1832 , signify , so far as history is concerned ? 
Is it a revolt ? 
Is it an insurrection ? 
It may happen to us , in placing this formidable event on the stage , to say revolt now and then , but merely to distinguish superficial facts , and always preserving the distinction between revolt , the form , and insurrection , the foundation . 
This movement of 1832 had , in its rapid outbreak and in its melancholy extinction , so much grandeur , that even those who see in it only an uprising , never refer to it otherwise than with respect . 
For them , it is like a relic of 1830 . 
Excited imaginations , say they , are not to be calmed in a day . 
A revolution can not be cut off short . 
It must needs undergo some undulations before it returns to a state of rest , like a mountain sinking into the plain . 
There are no Alps without their Jura , nor Pyrenees without the Asturias . 
This pathetic crisis of contemporary history which the memory of Parisians calls `` the epoch of the riots , '' is certainly a characteristic hour amid the stormy hours of this century . 
A last word , before we enter on the recital . 
The facts which we are about to relate belong to that dramatic and living reality , which the historian sometimes neglects for lack of time and space . 
There , nevertheless , we insist upon it , is life , palpitation , human tremor . 
Petty details , as we think we have already said , are , so to speak , the foliage of great events , and are lost in the distance of history . 
The epoch , surnamed `` of the riots , '' abounds in details of this nature . 
Judicial inquiries have not revealed , and perhaps have not sounded the depths , for another reason than history . 
We shall therefore bring to light , among the known and published peculiarities , things which have not heretofore been known , about facts over which have passed the forgetfulness of some , and the death of others . 
The majority of the actors in these gigantic scenes have disappeared ; beginning with the very next day they held their peace ; but of what we shall relate , we shall be able to say : `` We have seen this . '' 
We alter a few names , for history relates and does not inform against , but the deed which we shall paint will be genuine . 
In accordance with the conditions of the book which we are now writing , we shall show only one side and one episode , and certainly , the least known at that , of the two days , the 5th and the 6th of June , 1832 , but we shall do it in such wise that the reader may catch a glimpse , beneath the gloomy veil which we are about to lift , of the real form of this frightful public adventure . 
A BURIAL ; AN OCCASION TO BE BORN AGAIN In the spring of 1832 , although the cholera had been chilling all minds for the last three months and had cast over their agitation an indescribable and gloomy pacification , Paris had already long been ripe for commotion . 
As we have said , the great city resembles a piece of artillery ; when it is loaded , it suffices for a spark to fall , and the shot is discharged . 
In June , 1832 , the spark was the death of General Lamarque . 
Lamarque was a man of renown and of action . 
He had had in succession , under the Empire and under the Restoration , the sorts of bravery requisite for the two epochs , the bravery of the battle-field and the bravery of the tribune . 
He was as eloquent as he had been valiant ; a sword was discernible in his speech . 
Like Foy , his predecessor , after upholding the command , he upheld liberty ; he sat between the left and the extreme left , beloved of the people because he accepted the chances of the future , beloved of the populace because he had served the Emperor well ; he was , in company with Comtes Gerard and Drouet , one of Napoleon 's marshals in petto . 
The treaties of 1815 removed him as a personal offence . 
He hated Wellington with a downright hatred which pleased the multitude ; and , for seventeen years , he majestically preserved the sadness of Waterloo , paying hardly any attention to intervening events . 
In his death agony , at his last hour , he clasped to his breast a sword which had been presented to him by the officers of the Hundred Days . 
Napoleon had died uttering the word army , Lamarque uttering the word country . 
His death , which was expected , was dreaded by the people as a loss , and by the government as an occasion . 
