An immense curse , the gnashing of teeth , hatred , desperate viciousness , a cry of rage against human society , a sarcasm against heaven . 
What results flowed from the second ? 
Blessings and love . 
And in these two places , so similar yet so unlike , these two species of beings who were so very unlike , were undergoing the same work , expiation . 
Jean Valjean understood thoroughly the expiation of the former ; that personal expiation , the expiation for one 's self . 
But he did not understand that of these last , that of creatures without reproach and without stain , and he trembled as he asked himself : The expiation of what ? 
What expiation ? 
A voice within his conscience replied : `` The most divine of human generosities , the expiation for others . '' 
Here all personal theory is withheld ; we are only the narrator ; we place ourselves at Jean Valjean 's point of view , and we translate his impressions . 
Before his eyes he had the sublime summit of abnegation , the highest possible pitch of virtue ; the innocence which pardons men their faults , and which expiates in their stead ; servitude submitted to , torture accepted , punishment claimed by souls which have not sinned , for the sake of sparing it to souls which have fallen ; the love of humanity swallowed up in the love of God , but even there preserving its distinct and mediatorial character ; sweet and feeble beings possessing the misery of those who are punished and the smile of those who are recompensed . 
And he remembered that he had dared to murmur ! 
Often , in the middle of the night , he rose to listen to the grateful song of those innocent creatures weighed down with severities , and the blood ran cold in his veins at the thought that those who were justly chastised raised their voices heavenward only in blasphemy , and that he , wretch that he was , had shaken his fist at God . 
There was one striking thing which caused him to meditate deeply , like a warning whisper from Providence itself : the scaling of that wall , the passing of those barriers , the adventure accepted even at the risk of death , the painful and difficult ascent , all those efforts even , which he had made to escape from that other place of expiation , he had made in order to gain entrance into this one . 
Was this a symbol of his destiny ? 
This house was a prison likewise and bore a melancholy resemblance to that other one whence he had fled , and yet he had never conceived an idea of anything similar . 
Again he beheld gratings , bolts , iron bars -- to guard whom ? 
Angels . 
These lofty walls which he had seen around tigers , he now beheld once more around lambs . 
This was a place of expiation , and not of punishment ; and yet , it was still more austere , more gloomy , and more pitiless than the other . 
These virgins were even more heavily burdened than the convicts . 
A cold , harsh wind , that wind which had chilled his youth , traversed the barred and padlocked grating of the vultures ; a still harsher and more biting breeze blew in the cage of these doves . 
Why ? 
When he thought on these things , all that was within him was lost in amazement before this mystery of sublimity . 
In these meditations , his pride vanished . 
He scrutinized his own heart in all manner of ways ; he felt his pettiness , and many a time he wept . 
All that had entered into his life for the last six months had led him back towards the Bishop 's holy injunctions ; Cosette through love , the convent through humility . 
Sometimes at eventide , in the twilight , at an hour when the garden was deserted , he could be seen on his knees in the middle of the walk which skirted the chapel , in front of the window through which he had gazed on the night of his arrival , and turned towards the spot where , as he knew , the sister was making reparation , prostrated in prayer . 
Thus he prayed as he knelt before the sister . 
It seemed as though he dared not kneel directly before God . 
Everything that surrounded him , that peaceful garden , those fragrant flowers , those children who uttered joyous cries , those grave and simple women , that silent cloister , slowly permeated him , and little by little , his soul became compounded of silence like the cloister , of perfume like the flowers , of simplicity like the women , of joy like the children . 
And then he reflected that these had been two houses of God which had received him in succession at two critical moments in his life : the first , when all doors were closed and when human society rejected him ; the second , at a moment when human society had again set out in pursuit of him , and when the galleys were again yawning ; and that , had it not been for the first , he should have relapsed into crime , and had it not been for the second , into torment . 
His whole heart melted in gratitude , and he loved more and more . 
Many years passed in this manner ; Cosette was growing up . 
-LSB- The end of Volume II . 
`` Cosette '' -RSB- MARIUS . 
PARVULUS Paris has a child , and the forest has a bird ; the bird is called the sparrow ; the child is called the gamin . 
Couple these two ideas which contain , the one all the furnace , the other all the dawn ; strike these two sparks together , Paris , childhood ; there leaps out from them a little being . 
Homuncio , Plautus would say . 
This little being is joyous . 
He has not food every day , and he goes to the play every evening , if he sees good . 
He has no shirt on his body , no shoes on his feet , no roof over his head ; he is like the flies of heaven , who have none of these things . 
He is from seven to thirteen years of age , he lives in bands , roams the streets , lodges in the open air , wears an old pair of trousers of his father 's , which descend below his heels , an old hat of some other father , which descends below his ears , a single suspender of yellow listing ; he runs , lies in wait , rummages about , wastes time , blackens pipes , swears like a convict , haunts the wine-shop , knows thieves , calls gay women thou , talks slang , sings obscene songs , and has no evil in his heart . 
This is because he has in his heart a pearl , innocence ; and pearls are not to be dissolved in mud . 
So long as man is in his childhood , God wills that he shall be innocent . 
If one were to ask that enormous city : `` What is this ? '' 
she would reply : `` It is my little one . '' 
SOME OF HIS PARTICULAR CHARACTERISTICS The gamin -- the street Arab -- of Paris is the dwarf of the giant . 
Let us not exaggerate , this cherub of the gutter sometimes has a shirt , but , in that case , he owns but one ; he sometimes has shoes , but then they have no soles ; he sometimes has a lodging , and he loves it , for he finds his mother there ; but he prefers the street , because there he finds liberty . 
He has his own games , his own bits of mischief , whose foundation consists of hatred for the bourgeois ; his peculiar metaphors : to be dead is to eat dandelions by the root ; his own occupations , calling hackney-coaches , letting down carriage-steps , establishing means of transit between the two sides of a street in heavy rains , which he calls making the bridge of arts , crying discourses pronounced by the authorities in favor of the French people , cleaning out the cracks in the pavement ; he has his own coinage , which is composed of all the little morsels of worked copper which are found on the public streets . 
This curious money , which receives the name of loques -- rags -- has an invariable and well-regulated currency in this little Bohemia of children . 
Lastly , he has his own fauna , which he observes attentively in the corners ; the lady-bird , the death 's - head plant-louse , the daddy-long-legs , `` the devil , '' a black insect , which menaces by twisting about its tail armed with two horns . 
He has his fabulous monster , which has scales under its belly , but is not a lizard , which has pustules on its back , but is not a toad , which inhabits the nooks of old lime-kilns and wells that have run dry , which is black , hairy , sticky , which crawls sometimes slowly , sometimes rapidly , which has no cry , but which has a look , and is so terrible that no one has ever beheld it ; he calls this monster `` the deaf thing . '' 
The search for these `` deaf things '' among the stones is a joy of formidable nature . 
Another pleasure consists in suddenly prying up a paving-stone , and taking a look at the wood-lice . 
Each region of Paris is celebrated for the interesting treasures which are to be found there . 
There are ear-wigs in the timber-yards of the Ursulines , there are millepeds in the Pantheon , there are tadpoles in the ditches of the Champs-de-Mars . 
As far as sayings are concerned , this child has as many of them as Talleyrand . 
He is no less cynical , but he is more honest . 
He is endowed with a certain indescribable , unexpected joviality ; he upsets the composure of the shopkeeper with his wild laughter . 
He ranges boldly from high comedy to farce . 
A funeral passes by . 
Among those who accompany the dead there is a doctor . 
`` Hey there ! '' 
shouts some street Arab , `` how long has it been customary for doctors to carry home their own work ? '' 
Another is in a crowd . 
A grave man , adorned with spectacles and trinkets , turns round indignantly : `` You good-for-nothing , you have seized my wife 's waist ! '' 
-- `` I , sir ? 
Search me ! '' 
HE IS AGREEABLE In the evening , thanks to a few sous , which he always finds means to procure , the homuncio enters a theatre . 
On crossing that magic threshold , he becomes transfigured ; he was the street Arab , he becomes the titi . 
-LSB- 18 -RSB- Theatres are a sort of ship turned upside down with the keel in the air . 
It is in that keel that the titi huddle together . 
The titi is to the gamin what the moth is to the larva ; the same being endowed with wings and soaring . 
It suffices for him to be there , with his radiance of happiness , with his power of enthusiasm and joy , with his hand-clapping , which resembles a clapping of wings , to confer on that narrow , dark , fetid , sordid , unhealthy , hideous , abominable keel , the name of Paradise . 
-LSB- 18 -RSB- Chicken : slang allusion to the noise made in calling poultry . 
Bestow on an individual the useless and deprive him of the necessary , and you have the gamin . 
The gamin is not devoid of literary intuition . 
His tendency , and we say it with the proper amount of regret , would not constitute classic taste . 
He is not very academic by nature . 
Thus , to give an example , the popularity of Mademoiselle Mars among that little audience of stormy children was seasoned with a touch of irony . 
The gamin called her Mademoiselle Muche -- `` hide yourself . '' 
This being bawls and scoffs and ridicules and fights , has rags like a baby and tatters like a philosopher , fishes in the sewer , hunts in the cesspool , extracts mirth from foulness , whips up the squares with his wit , grins and bites , whistles and sings , shouts , and shrieks , tempers Alleluia with Matantur-lurette , chants every rhythm from the De Profundis to the Jack-pudding , finds without seeking , knows what he is ignorant of , is a Spartan to the point of thieving , is mad to wisdom , is lyrical to filth , would crouch down on Olympus , wallows in the dunghill and emerges from it covered with stars . 
The gamin of Paris is Rabelais in this youth . 
He is not content with his trousers unless they have a watch-pocket . 
He is not easily astonished , he is still less easily terrified , he makes songs on superstitions , he takes the wind out of exaggerations , he twits mysteries , he thrusts out his tongue at ghosts , he takes the poetry out of stilted things , he introduces caricature into epic extravaganzas . 
It is not that he is prosaic ; far from that ; but he replaces the solemn vision by the farcical phantasmagoria . 
If Adamastor were to appear to him , the street Arab would say : `` Hi there ! 
The bugaboo ! '' 
HE MAY BE OF USE Paris begins with the lounger and ends with the street Arab , two beings of which no other city is capable ; the passive acceptance , which contents itself with gazing , and the inexhaustible initiative ; Prudhomme and Fouillou . 
Paris alone has this in its natural history . 
The whole of the monarchy is contained in the lounger ; the whole of anarchy in the gamin . 
This pale child of the Parisian faubourgs lives and develops , makes connections , `` grows supple '' in suffering , in the presence of social realities and of human things , a thoughtful witness . 
He thinks himself heedless ; and he is not . 
He looks and is on the verge of laughter ; he is on the verge of something else also . 
Whoever you may be , if your name is Prejudice , Abuse , Ignorance , Oppression , Iniquity , Despotism , Injustice , Fanaticism , Tyranny , beware of the gaping gamin . 
The little fellow will grow up . 
Of what clay is he made ? 
Of the first mud that comes to hand . 
A handful of dirt , a breath , and behold Adam . 
It suffices for a God to pass by . 
