Condemn the victim and to spare the assassin ! 
Could one be held to any gratitude towards so miserable a wretch ? 
All the ideas which Marius had cherished for the last four years were pierced through and through , as it were , by this unforeseen blow . 
He shuddered . 
Everything depended on him . 
Unknown to themselves , he held in his hand all those beings who were moving about there before his eyes . 
If he fired his pistol , M. Leblanc was saved , and Thenardier lost ; if he did not fire , M. Leblanc would be sacrificed , and , who knows ? 
Thenardier would escape . 
Should he dash down the one or allow the other to fall ? 
Remorse awaited him in either case . 
What was he to do ? 
What should he choose ? 
Be false to the most imperious souvenirs , to all those solemn vows to himself , to the most sacred duty , to the most venerated text ! 
Should he ignore his father 's testament , or allow the perpetration of a crime ! 
On the one hand , it seemed to him that he heard `` his Ursule '' supplicating for her father and on the other , the colonel commending Thenardier to his care . 
He felt that he was going mad . 
His knees gave way beneath him . 
And he had not even the time for deliberation , so great was the fury with which the scene before his eyes was hastening to its catastrophe . 
It was like a whirlwind of which he had thought himself the master , and which was now sweeping him away . 
He was on the verge of swooning . 
In the meantime , Thenardier , whom we shall henceforth call by no other name , was pacing up and down in front of the table in a sort of frenzy and wild triumph . 
He seized the candle in his fist , and set it on the chimney-piece with so violent a bang that the wick came near being extinguished , and the tallow bespattered the wall . 
Then he turned to M. Leblanc with a horrible look , and spit out these words : -- `` Done for ! 
Smoked brown ! 
Cooked ! 
Spitchcocked ! '' 
And again he began to march back and forth , in full eruption . 
`` Ah ! '' 
he cried , `` so I 've found you again at last , Mister philanthropist ! 
Mister threadbare millionnaire ! 
Mister giver of dolls ! 
you old ninny ! 
Ah ! 
so you do n't recognize me ! 
No , it was n't you who came to Montfermeil , to my inn , eight years ago , on Christmas eve , 1823 ! 
It was n't you who carried off that Fantine 's child from me ! 
The Lark ! 
It was n't you who had a yellow great-coat ! 
No ! 
Nor a package of duds in your hand , as you had this morning here ! 
Say , wife , it seems to be his mania to carry packets of woollen stockings into houses ! 
Old charity monger , get out with you ! 
Are you a hosier , Mister millionnaire ? 
You give away your stock in trade to the poor , holy man ! 
What bosh ! 
merry Andrew ! 
Ah ! 
and you do n't recognize me ? 
Well , I recognize you , that I do ! 
I recognized you the very moment you poked your snout in here . 
Ah ! 
you 'll find out presently , that it is n't all roses to thrust yourself in that fashion into people 's houses , under the pretext that they are taverns , in wretched clothes , with the air of a poor man , to whom one would give a sou , to deceive persons , to play the generous , to take away their means of livelihood , and to make threats in the woods , and you ca n't call things quits because afterwards , when people are ruined , you bring a coat that is too large , and two miserable hospital blankets , you old blackguard , you child-stealer ! '' 
He paused , and seemed to be talking to himself for a moment . 
One would have said that his wrath had fallen into some hole , like the Rhone ; then , as though he were concluding aloud the things which he had been saying to himself in a whisper , he smote the table with his fist , and shouted : -- `` And with his goody-goody air ! '' 
And , apostrophizing M. Leblanc : -- `` Parbleu ! 
You made game of me in the past ! 
You are the cause of all my misfortunes ! 
For fifteen hundred francs you got a girl whom I had , and who certainly belonged to rich people , and who had already brought in a great deal of money , and from whom I might have extracted enough to live on all my life ! 
A girl who would have made up to me for everything that I lost in that vile cook-shop , where there was nothing but one continual row , and where , like a fool , I ate up my last farthing ! 
Oh ! 
I wish all the wine folks drank in my house had been poison to those who drank it ! 
Well , never mind ! 
Say , now ! 
You must have thought me ridiculous when you went off with the Lark ! 
You had your cudgel in the forest . 
You were the stronger . 
Revenge . 
I 'm the one to hold the trumps to-day ! 
You 're in a sorry case , my good fellow ! 
Oh , but I can laugh ! 
Really , I laugh ! 
Did n't he fall into the trap ! 
I told him that I was an actor , that my name was Fabantou , that I had played comedy with Mamselle Mars , with Mamselle Muche , that my landlord insisted on being paid tomorrow , the 4th of February , and he did n't even notice that the 8th of January , and not the 4th of February is the time when the quarter runs out ! 
Absurd idiot ! 
And the four miserable Philippes which he has brought me ! 
Scoundrel ! 
He had n't the heart even to go as high as a hundred francs ! 
And how he swallowed my platitudes ! 
That did amuse me . 
I said to myself : ` Blockhead ! 
Come , I 've got you ! 
I lick your paws this morning , but I 'll gnaw your heart this evening ! ' '' 
Thenardier paused . 
He was out of breath . 
His little , narrow chest panted like a forge bellows . 
His eyes were full of the ignoble happiness of a feeble , cruel , and cowardly creature , which finds that it can , at last , harass what it has feared , and insult what it has flattered , the joy of a dwarf who should be able to set his heel on the head of Goliath , the joy of a jackal which is beginning to rend a sick bull , so nearly dead that he can no longer defend himself , but sufficiently alive to suffer still . 
M. Leblanc did not interrupt him , but said to him when he paused : -- `` I do not know what you mean to say . 
You are mistaken in me . 
I am a very poor man , and anything but a millionnaire . 
I do not know you . 
You are mistaking me for some other person . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
roared Thenardier hoarsely , `` a pretty lie ! 
You stick to that pleasantry , do you ! 
You 're floundering , my old buck ! 
Ah ! 
You do n't remember ! 
You do n't see who I am ? '' 
`` Excuse me , sir , '' said M. Leblanc with a politeness of accent , which at that moment seemed peculiarly strange and powerful , `` I see that you are a villain ! '' 
Who has not remarked the fact that odious creatures possess a susceptibility of their own , that monsters are ticklish ! 
