to you , my dearly beloved , my children , to you , my innocent creatures ! 
Is it nothing to hold one 's peace ? 
is it a simple matter to keep silence ? 
No , it is not simple . 
There is a silence which lies . 
And my lie , and my fraud and my indignity , and my cowardice and my treason and my crime , I should have drained drop by drop , I should have spit it out , then swallowed it again , I should have finished at midnight and have begun again at midday , and my ` good morning ' would have lied , and my ` good night ' would have lied , and I should have slept on it , I should have eaten it , with my bread , and I should have looked Cosette in the face , and I should have responded to the smile of the angel by the smile of the damned soul , and I should have been an abominable villain ! 
Why should I do it ? 
in order to be happy . 
In order to be happy . 
Have I the right to be happy ? 
I stand outside of life , Sir . '' 
Jean Valjean paused . 
Marius listened . 
Such chains of ideas and of anguishes can not be interrupted . 
Jean Valjean lowered his voice once more , but it was no longer a dull voice -- it was a sinister voice . 
`` You ask why I speak ? 
I am neither denounced , nor pursued , nor tracked , you say . 
Yes ! 
I am denounced ! 
yes ! 
I am tracked ! 
By whom ? 
By myself . 
It is I who bar the passage to myself , and I drag myself , and I push myself , and I arrest myself , and I execute myself , and when one holds oneself , one is firmly held . '' 
And , seizing a handful of his own coat by the nape of the neck and extending it towards Marius : `` Do you see that fist ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Do n't you think that it holds that collar in such a wise as not to release it ? 
Well ! 
conscience is another grasp ! 
If one desires to be happy , sir , one must never understand duty ; for , as soon as one has comprehended it , it is implacable . 
One would say that it punished you for comprehending it ; but no , it rewards you ; for it places you in a hell , where you feel God beside you . 
One has no sooner lacerated his own entrails than he is at peace with himself . '' 
And , with a poignant accent , he added : `` Monsieur Pontmercy , this is not common sense , I am an honest man . 
It is by degrading myself in your eyes that I elevate myself in my own . 
This has happened to me once before , but it was less painful then ; it was a mere nothing . 
Yes , an honest man . 
I should not be so if , through my fault , you had continued to esteem me ; now that you despise me , I am so . 
I have that fatality hanging over me that , not being able to ever have anything but stolen consideration , that consideration humiliates me , and crushes me inwardly , and , in order that I may respect myself , it is necessary that I should be despised . 
Then I straighten up again . 
I am a galley-slave who obeys his conscience . 
I know well that that is most improbable . 
But what would you have me do about it ? 
it is the fact . 
I have entered into engagements with myself ; I keep them . 
There are encounters which bind us , there are chances which involve us in duties . 
You see , Monsieur Pontmercy , various things have happened to me in the course of my life . '' 
Again Jean Valjean paused , swallowing his saliva with an effort , as though his words had a bitter after-taste , and then he went on : `` When one has such a horror hanging over one , one has not the right to make others share it without their knowledge , one has not the right to make them slip over one 's own precipice without their perceiving it , one has not the right to let one 's red blouse drag upon them , one has no right to slyly encumber with one 's misery the happiness of others . 
It is hideous to approach those who are healthy , and to touch them in the dark with one 's ulcer . 
In spite of the fact that Fauchelevent lent me his name , I have no right to use it ; he could give it to me , but I could not take it . 
A name is an I . 
You see , sir , that I have thought somewhat , I have read a little , although I am a peasant ; and you see that I express myself properly . 
I understand things . 
I have procured myself an education . 
Well , yes , to abstract a name and to place oneself under it is dishonest . 
Letters of the alphabet can be filched , like a purse or a watch . 
To be a false signature in flesh and blood , to be a living false key , to enter the house of honest people by picking their lock , never more to look straightforward , to forever eye askance , to be infamous within the I , no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
no ! 
It is better to suffer , to bleed , to weep , to tear one 's skin from the flesh with one 's nails , to pass nights writhing in anguish , to devour oneself body and soul . 
That is why I have just told you all this . 
Wantonly , as you say . '' 
He drew a painful breath , and hurled this final word : `` In days gone by , I stole a loaf of bread in order to live ; to-day , in order to live , I will not steal a name . '' 
`` To live ! '' 
interrupted Marius . 
`` You do not need that name in order to live ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
I understand the matter , '' said Jean Valjean , raising and lowering his head several times in succession . 
A silence ensued . 
Both held their peace , each plunged in a gulf of thoughts . 
Marius was sitting near a table and resting the corner of his mouth on one of his fingers , which was folded back . 
Jean Valjean was pacing to and fro . 
He paused before a mirror , and remained motionless . 
Then , as though replying to some inward course of reasoning , he said , as he gazed at the mirror , which he did not see : `` While , at present , I am relieved . '' 
He took up his march again , and walked to the other end of the drawing-room . 
At the moment when he turned round , he perceived that Marius was watching his walk . 
Then he said , with an inexpressible intonation : `` I drag my leg a little . 
Now you understand why ! '' 
Then he turned fully round towards Marius : `` And now , sir , imagine this : I have said nothing , I have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent , I have taken my place in your house , I am one of you , I am in my chamber , I come to breakfast in the morning in slippers , in the evening all three of us go to the play , I accompany Madame Pontmercy to the Tuileries , and to the Place Royale , we are together , you think me your equal ; one fine day you are there , and I am there , we are conversing , we are laughing ; all at once , you hear a voice shouting this name : ` Jean Valjean ! ' 
and behold , that terrible hand , the police , darts from the darkness , and abruptly tears off my mask ! '' 
Again he paused ; Marius had sprung to his feet with a shudder . 
Jean Valjean resumed : `` What do you say to that ? '' 
Marius ' silence answered for him . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` You see that I am right in not holding my peace . 
Be happy , be in heaven , be the angel of an angel , exist in the sun , be content therewith , and do not trouble yourself about the means which a poor damned wretch takes to open his breast and force his duty to come forth ; you have before you , sir , a wretched man . '' 
Marius slowly crossed the room , and , when he was quite close to Jean Valjean , he offered the latter his hand . 
But Marius was obliged to step up and take that hand which was not offered , Jean Valjean let him have his own way , and it seemed to Marius that he pressed a hand of marble . 
`` My grandfather has friends , '' said Marius ; `` I will procure your pardon . '' 
`` It is useless , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` I am believed to be dead , and that suffices . 
The dead are not subjected to surveillance . 
They are supposed to rot in peace . 
Death is the same thing as pardon . '' 
And , disengaging the hand which Marius held , he added , with a sort of inexorable dignity : `` Moreover , the friend to whom I have recourse is the doing of my duty ; and I need but one pardon , that of my conscience . '' 
At that moment , a door at the other end of the drawing-room opened gently half way , and in the opening Cosette 's head appeared . 
They saw only her sweet face , her hair was in charming disorder , her eyelids were still swollen with sleep . 
She made the movement of a bird , which thrusts its head out of its nest , glanced first at her husband , then at Jean Valjean , and cried to them with a smile , so that they seemed to behold a smile at the heart of a rose : `` I will wager that you are talking politics . 
How stupid that is , instead of being with me ! '' 
Jean Valjean shuddered . 
