This note jotted down on the margin of Angles ' report , we will return to our four couples . 
The dinner , as we have said , was drawing to its close . 
A CHAPTER IN WHICH THEY ADORE EACH OTHER Chat at table , the chat of love ; it is as impossible to reproduce one as the other ; the chat of love is a cloud ; the chat at table is smoke . 
Fameuil and Dahlia were humming . 
Tholomyes was drinking . 
Zephine was laughing , Fantine smiling , Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which he had purchased at Saint-Cloud . 
Favourite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said : -- `` Blachevelle , I adore you . '' 
This called forth a question from Blachevelle : -- `` What would you do , Favourite , if I were to cease to love you ? '' 
`` I ! '' 
cried Favourite . 
`` Ah ! 
Do not say that even in jest ! 
If you were to cease to love me , I would spring after you , I would scratch you , I should rend you , I would throw you into the water , I would have you arrested . '' 
Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who is tickled in his self-love . 
Favourite resumed : -- `` Yes , I would scream to the police ! 
Ah ! 
I should not restrain myself , not at all ! 
Rabble ! '' 
Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair , in an ecstasy , and closed both eyes proudly . 
Dahlia , as she ate , said in a low voice to Favourite , amid the uproar : -- `` So you really idolize him deeply , that Blachevelle of yours ? '' 
`` I ? 
I detest him , '' replied Favourite in the same tone , seizing her fork again . 
`` He is avaricious . 
I love the little fellow opposite me in my house . 
He is very nice , that young man ; do you know him ? 
One can see that he is an actor by profession . 
I love actors . 
As soon as he comes in , his mother says to him : ` Ah ! 
mon Dieu ! 
my peace of mind is gone . 
There he goes with his shouting . 
But , my dear , you are splitting my head ! ' 
So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets , to black holes , as high as he can mount , and there he sets to singing , declaiming , how do I know what ? 
so that he can be heard down stairs ! 
He earns twenty sous a day at an attorney 's by penning quibbles . 
He is the son of a former precentor of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas . 
Ah ! 
he is very nice . 
He idolizes me so , that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes , he said to me : ` Mamselle , make your gloves into fritters , and I will eat them . ' 
It is only artists who can say such things as that . 
Ah ! 
he is very nice . 
I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow . 
Never mind ; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him -- how I lie ! 
Hey ! 
How I do lie ! '' 
Favourite paused , and then went on : -- `` I am sad , you see , Dahlia . 
It has done nothing but rain all summer ; the wind irritates me ; the wind does not abate . 
Blachevelle is very stingy ; there are hardly any green peas in the market ; one does not know what to eat . 
I have the spleen , as the English say , butter is so dear ! 
and then you see it is horrible , here we are dining in a room with a bed in it , and that disgusts me with life . '' 
THE WISDOM OF THOLOMYES In the meantime , while some sang , the rest talked together tumultuously all at once ; it was no longer anything but noise . 
Tholomyes intervened . 
`` Let us not talk at random nor too fast , '' he exclaimed . 
`` Let us reflect , if we wish to be brilliant . 
Too much improvisation empties the mind in a stupid way . 
Running beer gathers no froth . 
No haste , gentlemen . 
Let us mingle majesty with the feast . 
Let us eat with meditation ; let us make haste slowly . 
Let us not hurry . 
Consider the springtime ; if it makes haste , it is done for ; that is to say , it gets frozen . 
Excess of zeal ruins peach-trees and apricot-trees . 
Excess of zeal kills the grace and the mirth of good dinners . 
No zeal , gentlemen ! 
Grimod de la Reyniere agrees with Talleyrand . '' 
A hollow sound of rebellion rumbled through the group . 
`` Leave us in peace , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` Down with the tyrant ! '' 
said Fameuil . 
`` Bombarda , Bombance , and Bambochel ! '' 
cried Listolier . 
`` Sunday exists , '' resumed Fameuil . 
`` We are sober , '' added Listolier . 
`` Tholomyes , '' remarked Blachevelle , `` contemplate my calmness -LSB- mon calme -RSB- . '' 
`` You are the Marquis of that , '' retorted Tholomyes . 
This mediocre play upon words produced the effect of a stone in a pool . 
The Marquis de Montcalm was at that time a celebrated royalist . 
All the frogs held their peace . 
`` Friends , '' cried Tholomyes , with the accent of a man who had recovered his empire , `` Come to yourselves . 
This pun which has fallen from the skies must not be received with too much stupor . 
Everything which falls in that way is not necessarily worthy of enthusiasm and respect . 
The pun is the dung of the mind which soars . 
The jest falls , no matter where ; and the mind after producing a piece of stupidity plunges into the azure depths . 
A whitish speck flattened against the rock does not prevent the condor from soaring aloft . 
Far be it from me to insult the pun ! 
I honor it in proportion to its merits ; nothing more . 
All the most august , the most sublime , the most charming of humanity , and perhaps outside of humanity , have made puns . 
Jesus Christ made a pun on St. Peter , Moses on Isaac , AEschylus on Polynices , Cleopatra on Octavius . 
And observe that Cleopatra 's pun preceded the battle of Actium , and that had it not been for it , no one would have remembered the city of Toryne , a Greek name which signifies a ladle . 
That once conceded , I return to my exhortation . 
I repeat , brothers , I repeat , no zeal , no hubbub , no excess ; even in witticisms , gayety , jollities , or plays on words . 
Listen to me . 
I have the prudence of Amphiaraus and the baldness of Caesar . 
There must be a limit , even to rebuses . 
Est modus in rebus . 
`` There must be a limit , even to dinners . 
You are fond of apple turnovers , ladies ; do not indulge in them to excess . 
Even in the matter of turnovers , good sense and art are requisite . 
Gluttony chastises the glutton , Gula punit Gulax . 
