This is what it was , in fact . 
The charge had been aimed at the cut in the redoubt , and had there rebounded from the wall ; and this terrible rebound had produced two dead and three wounded . 
If this were continued , the barricade was no longer tenable . 
The grape-shot made its way in . 
A murmur of consternation arose . 
`` Let us prevent the second discharge , '' said Enjolras . 
And , lowering his rifle , he took aim at the captain of the gun , who , at that moment , was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifying and definitely fixing its pointing . 
The captain of the piece was a handsome sergeant of artillery , very young , blond , with a very gentle face , and the intelligent air peculiar to that predestined and redoubtable weapon which , by dint of perfecting itself in horror , must end in killing war . 
Combeferre , who was standing beside Enjolras , scrutinized this young man . 
`` What a pity ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` What hideous things these butcheries are ! 
Come , when there are no more kings , there will be no more war . 
Enjolras , you are taking aim at that sergeant , you are not looking at him . 
Fancy , he is a charming young man ; he is intrepid ; it is evident that he is thoughtful ; those young artillery-men are very well educated ; he has a father , a mother , a family ; he is probably in love ; he is not more than five and twenty at the most ; he might be your brother . '' 
`` He is , '' said Enjolras . 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` he is mine too . 
Well , let us not kill him . '' 
`` Let me alone . 
It must be done . '' 
And a tear trickled slowly down Enjolras ' marble cheek . 
At the same moment , he pressed the trigger of his rifle . 
The flame leaped forth . 
The artillery-man turned round twice , his arms extended in front of him , his head uplifted , as though for breath , then he fell with his side on the gun , and lay there motionless . 
They could see his back , from the centre of which there flowed directly a stream of blood . 
The ball had traversed his breast from side to side . 
He was dead . 
He had to be carried away and replaced by another . 
Several minutes were thus gained , in fact . 
EMPLOYMENT OF THE OLD TALENTS OF A POACHER AND THAT INFALLIBLE MARKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 1796 Opinions were exchanged in the barricade . 
The firing from the gun was about to begin again . 
Against that grape-shot , they could not hold out a quarter of an hour longer . 
It was absolutely necessary to deaden the blows . 
Enjolras issued this command : `` We must place a mattress there . '' 
`` We have none , '' said Combeferre , `` the wounded are lying on them . '' 
Jean Valjean , who was seated apart on a stone post , at the corner of the tavern , with his gun between his knees , had , up to that moment , taken no part in anything that was going on . 
He did not appear to hear the combatants saying around him : `` Here is a gun that is doing nothing . '' 
At the order issued by Enjolras , he rose . 
It will be remembered that , on the arrival of the rabble in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , an old woman , foreseeing the bullets , had placed her mattress in front of her window . 
This window , an attic window , was on the roof of a six-story house situated a little beyond the barricade . 
The mattress , placed cross-wise , supported at the bottom on two poles for drying linen , was upheld at the top by two ropes , which , at that distance , looked like two threads , and which were attached to two nails planted in the window frames . 
These ropes were distinctly visible , like hairs , against the sky . 
`` Can some one lend me a double-barrelled rifle ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
Enjolras , who had just re-loaded his , handed it to him . 
Jean Valjean took aim at the attic window and fired . 
One of the mattress ropes was cut . 
The mattress now hung by one thread only . 
Jean Valjean fired the second charge . 
The second rope lashed the panes of the attic window . 
The mattress slipped between the two poles and fell into the street . 
The barricade applauded . 
All voices cried : `` Here is a mattress ! '' 
`` Yes , '' said Combeferre , `` but who will go and fetch it ? '' 
The mattress had , in fact , fallen outside the barricade , between besiegers and besieged . 
Now , the death of the sergeant of artillery having exasperated the troop , the soldiers had , for several minutes , been lying flat on their stomachs behind the line of paving-stones which they had erected , and , in order to supply the forced silence of the piece , which was quiet while its service was in course of reorganization , they had opened fire on the barricade . 
The insurgents did not reply to this musketry , in order to spare their ammunition The fusillade broke against the barricade ; but the street , which it filled , was terrible . 
Jean Valjean stepped out of the cut , entered the street , traversed the storm of bullets , walked up to the mattress , hoisted it upon his back , and returned to the barricade . 
He placed the mattress in the cut with his own hands . 
He fixed it there against the wall in such a manner that the artillery-men should not see it . 
That done , they awaited the next discharge of grape-shot . 
It was not long in coming . 
The cannon vomited forth its package of buck-shot with a roar . 
But there was no rebound . 
The effect which they had foreseen had been attained . 
The barricade was saved . 
`` Citizen , '' said Enjolras to Jean Valjean , `` the Republic thanks you . '' 
Bossuet admired and laughed . 
He exclaimed : `` It is immoral that a mattress should have so much power . 
Triumph of that which yields over that which strikes with lightning . 
But never mind , glory to the mattress which annuls a cannon ! '' 
DAWN At that moment , Cosette awoke . 
Her chamber was narrow , neat , unobtrusive , with a long sash-window , facing the East on the back court-yard of the house . 
Cosette knew nothing of what was going on in Paris . 
She had not been there on the preceding evening , and she had already retired to her chamber when Toussaint had said : `` It appears that there is a row . '' 
Cosette had slept only a few hours , but soundly . 
She had had sweet dreams , which possibly arose from the fact that her little bed was very white . 
Some one , who was Marius , had appeared to her in the light . 
She awoke with the sun in her eyes , which , at first , produced on her the effect of being a continuation of her dream . 
Her first thought on emerging from this dream was a smiling one . 
Cosette felt herself thoroughly reassured . 
Like Jean Valjean , she had , a few hours previously , passed through that reaction of the soul which absolutely will not hear of unhappiness . 
She began to cherish hope , with all her might , without knowing why . 
Then she felt a pang at her heart . 
It was three days since she had seen Marius . 
But she said to herself that he must have received her letter , that he knew where she was , and that he was so clever that he would find means of reaching her . 
-- And that certainly to-day , and perhaps that very morning . 
-- It was broad daylight , but the rays of light were very horizontal ; she thought that it was very early , but that she must rise , nevertheless , in order to receive Marius . 
She felt that she could not live without Marius , and that , consequently , that was sufficient and that Marius would come . 
No objection was valid . 
All this was certain . 
It was monstrous enough already to have suffered for three days . 
Marius absent three days , this was horrible on the part of the good God . 
Now , this cruel teasing from on high had been gone through with . 
Marius was about to arrive , and he would bring good news . 
Youth is made thus ; it quickly dries its eyes ; it finds sorrow useless and does not accept it . 
Youth is the smile of the future in the presence of an unknown quantity , which is itself . 
It is natural to it to be happy . 
It seems as though its respiration were made of hope . 
Moreover , Cosette could not remember what Marius had said to her on the subject of this absence which was to last only one day , and what explanation of it he had given her . 
