The girl whom he could no longer call Ursule was evidently somewhere ; nothing warned Marius in what direction he should seek her . 
His whole life was now summed up in two words ; absolute uncertainty within an impenetrable fog . 
To see her once again ; he still aspired to this , but he no longer expected it . 
To crown all , his poverty had returned . 
He felt that icy breath close to him , on his heels . 
In the midst of his torments , and long before this , he had discontinued his work , and nothing is more dangerous than discontinued work ; it is a habit which vanishes . 
A habit which is easy to get rid of , and difficult to take up again . 
A certain amount of dreaming is good , like a narcotic in discreet doses . 
It lulls to sleep the fevers of the mind at labor , which are sometimes severe , and produces in the spirit a soft and fresh vapor which corrects the over-harsh contours of pure thought , fills in gaps here and there , binds together and rounds off the angles of the ideas . 
But too much dreaming sinks and drowns . 
Woe to the brain-worker who allows himself to fall entirely from thought into revery ! 
He thinks that he can re-ascend with equal ease , and he tells himself that , after all , it is the same thing . 
Error ! 
Thought is the toil of the intelligence , revery its voluptuousness . 
To replace thought with revery is to confound a poison with a food . 
Marius had begun in that way , as the reader will remember . 
Passion had supervened and had finished the work of precipitating him into chimaeras without object or bottom . 
One no longer emerges from one 's self except for the purpose of going off to dream . 
Idle production . 
Tumultuous and stagnant gulf . 
And , in proportion as labor diminishes , needs increase . 
This is a law . 
Man , in a state of revery , is generally prodigal and slack ; the unstrung mind can not hold life within close bounds . 
There is , in that mode of life , good mingled with evil , for if enervation is baleful , generosity is good and healthful . 
But the poor man who is generous and noble , and who does not work , is lost . 
Resources are exhausted , needs crop up . 
Fatal declivity down which the most honest and the firmest as well as the most feeble and most vicious are drawn , and which ends in one of two holds , suicide or crime . 
By dint of going outdoors to think , the day comes when one goes out to throw one 's self in the water . 
Excess of revery breeds men like Escousse and Lebras . 
Marius was descending this declivity at a slow pace , with his eyes fixed on the girl whom he no longer saw . 
What we have just written seems strange , and yet it is true . 
The memory of an absent being kindles in the darkness of the heart ; the more it has disappeared , the more it beams ; the gloomy and despairing soul sees this light on its horizon ; the star of the inner night . 
She -- that was Marius ' whole thought . 
He meditated of nothing else ; he was confusedly conscious that his old coat was becoming an impossible coat , and that his new coat was growing old , that his shirts were wearing out , that his hat was wearing out , that his boots were giving out , and he said to himself : `` If I could but see her once again before I die ! '' 
One sweet idea alone was left to him , that she had loved him , that her glance had told him so , that she did not know his name , but that she did know his soul , and that , wherever she was , however mysterious the place , she still loved him perhaps . 
Who knows whether she were not thinking of him as he was thinking of her ? 
Sometimes , in those inexplicable hours such as are experienced by every heart that loves , though he had no reasons for anything but sadness and yet felt an obscure quiver of joy , he said to himself : `` It is her thoughts that are coming to me ! '' 
Then he added : `` Perhaps my thoughts reach her also . '' 
This illusion , at which he shook his head a moment later , was sufficient , nevertheless , to throw beams , which at times resembled hope , into his soul . 
From time to time , especially at that evening hour which is the most depressing to even the dreamy , he allowed the purest , the most impersonal , the most ideal of the reveries which filled his brain , to fall upon a notebook which contained nothing else . 
He called this `` writing to her . '' 
It must not be supposed that his reason was deranged . 
Quite the contrary . 
He had lost the faculty of working and of moving firmly towards any fixed goal , but he was endowed with more clear-sightedness and rectitude than ever . 
Marius surveyed by a calm and real , although peculiar light , what passed before his eyes , even the most indifferent deeds and men ; he pronounced a just criticism on everything with a sort of honest dejection and candid disinterestedness . 
His judgment , which was almost wholly disassociated from hope , held itself aloof and soared on high . 
In this state of mind nothing escaped him , nothing deceived him , and every moment he was discovering the foundation of life , of humanity , and of destiny . 
Happy , even in the midst of anguish , is he to whom God has given a soul worthy of love and of unhappiness ! 
He who has not viewed the things of this world and the heart of man under this double light has seen nothing and knows nothing of the true . 
The soul which loves and suffers is in a state of sublimity . 
However , day followed day , and nothing new presented itself . 
It merely seemed to him , that the sombre space which still remained to be traversed by him was growing shorter with every instant . 
He thought that he already distinctly perceived the brink of the bottomless abyss . 
`` What ! '' 
he repeated to himself , `` shall I not see her again before then ! '' 
When you have ascended the Rue Saint-Jacques , left the barrier on one side and followed the old inner boulevard for some distance , you reach the Rue de la Sante , then the Glaciere , and , a little while before arriving at the little river of the Gobelins , you come to a sort of field which is the only spot in the long and monotonous chain of the boulevards of Paris , where Ruysdeel would be tempted to sit down . 
There is something indescribable there which exhales grace , a green meadow traversed by tightly stretched lines , from which flutter rags drying in the wind , and an old market-gardener 's house , built in the time of Louis XIII. , with its great roof oddly pierced with dormer windows , dilapidated palisades , a little water amid poplar-trees , women , voices , laughter ; on the horizon the Pantheon , the pole of the Deaf-Mutes , the Val-de-Grace , black , squat , fantastic , amusing , magnificent , and in the background , the severe square crests of the towers of Notre Dame . 
As the place is worth looking at , no one goes thither . 
Hardly one cart or wagoner passes in a quarter of an hour . 
It chanced that Marius ' solitary strolls led him to this plot of ground , near the water . 
That day , there was a rarity on the boulevard , a passer-by . 
Marius , vaguely impressed with the almost savage beauty of the place , asked this passer-by : -- `` What is the name of this spot ? '' 
The person replied : `` It is the Lark 's meadow . '' 
And he added : `` It was here that Ulbach killed the shepherdess of Ivry . '' 
But after the word `` Lark '' Marius heard nothing more . 
These sudden congealments in the state of revery , which a single word suffices to evoke , do occur . 
The entire thought is abruptly condensed around an idea , and it is no longer capable of perceiving anything else . 
The Lark was the appellation which had replaced Ursule in the depths of Marius ' melancholy . 
-- `` Stop , '' said he with a sort of unreasoning stupor peculiar to these mysterious asides , `` this is her meadow . 
I shall know where she lives now . '' 
It was absurd , but irresistible . 
And every day he returned to that meadow of the Lark . 
EMBRYONIC FORMATION OF CRIMES IN THE INCUBATION OF PRISONS Javert 's triumph in the Gorbeau hovel seemed complete , but had not been so . 
In the first place , and this constituted the principal anxiety , Javert had not taken the prisoner prisoner . 
The assassinated man who flees is more suspicious than the assassin , and it is probable that this personage , who had been so precious a capture for the ruffians , would be no less fine a prize for the authorities . 
And then , Montparnasse had escaped Javert . 
Another opportunity of laying hands on that `` devil 's dandy '' must be waited for . 
Montparnasse had , in fact , encountered Eponine as she stood on the watch under the trees of the boulevard , and had led her off , preferring to play Nemorin with the daughter rather than Schinderhannes with the father . 
It was well that he did so . 
He was free . 
As for Eponine , Javert had caused her to be seized ; a mediocre consolation . 
Eponine had joined Azelma at Les Madelonettes . 
And finally , on the way from the Gorbeau house to La Force , one of the principal prisoners , Claquesous , had been lost . 
It was not known how this had been effected , the police agents and the sergeants `` could not understand it at all . '' 
He had converted himself into vapor , he had slipped through the handcuffs , he had trickled through the crevices of the carriage , the fiacre was cracked , and he had fled ; all that they were able to say was , that on arriving at the prison , there was no Claquesous . 
Either the fairies or the police had had a hand in it . 
Had Claquesous melted into the shadows like a snow-flake in water ? 
Had there been unavowed connivance of the police agents ? 
Did this man belong to the double enigma of order and disorder ? 
Was he concentric with infraction and repression ? 
Had this sphinx his fore paws in crime and his hind paws in authority ? 
Javert did not accept such comminations , and would have bristled up against such compromises ; but his squad included other inspectors besides himself , who were more initiated than he , perhaps , although they were his subordinates in the secrets of the Prefecture , and Claquesous had been such a villain that he might make a very good agent . 
It is an excellent thing for ruffianism and an admirable thing for the police to be on such intimate juggling terms with the night . 
These double-edged rascals do exist . 
However that may be , Claquesous had gone astray and was not found again . 
Javert appeared to be more irritated than amazed at this . 
As for Marius , `` that booby of a lawyer , '' who had probably become frightened , and whose name Javert had forgotten , Javert attached very little importance to him . 
Moreover , a lawyer can be hunted up at any time . 
But was he a lawyer after all ? 
The investigation had begun . 
