Adye moistened his lips again . 
He glanced away from the barrel of the revolver and saw the sea far off very blue and dark under the midday sun , the smooth green down , the white cliff of the Head , and the multitudinous town , and suddenly he knew that life was very sweet . 
His eyes came back to this little metal thing hanging between heaven and earth , six yards away . 
`` What am I to do ? '' 
he said sullenly . 
`` What am I to do ? '' 
asked the Invisible Man . 
`` You will get help . 
The only thing is for you to go back . '' 
`` I will try . 
If he lets me in will you promise not to rush the door ? '' 
`` I 've got no quarrel with you , '' said the Voice . 
Kemp had hurried upstairs after letting Adye out , and now crouching among the broken glass and peering cautiously over the edge of the study window sill , he saw Adye stand parleying with the Unseen . 
`` Why does n't he fire ? '' 
whispered Kemp to himself . 
Then the revolver moved a little and the glint of the sunlight flashed in Kemp 's eyes . 
He shaded his eyes and tried to see the source of the blinding beam . 
`` Surely ! '' 
he said , `` Adye has given up the revolver . '' 
`` Promise not to rush the door , '' Adye was saying . 
`` Do n't push a winning game too far . 
Give a man a chance . '' 
`` You go back to the house . 
I tell you flatly I will not promise anything . '' 
Adye 's decision seemed suddenly made . 
He turned towards the house , walking slowly with his hands behind him . 
Kemp watched him -- puzzled . 
The revolver vanished , flashed again into sight , vanished again , and became evident on a closer scrutiny as a little dark object following Adye . 
Then things happened very quickly . 
Adye leapt backwards , swung around , clutched at this little object , missed it , threw up his hands and fell forward on his face , leaving a little puff of blue in the air . 
Kemp did not hear the sound of the shot . 
Adye writhed , raised himself on one arm , fell forward , and lay still . 
For a space Kemp remained staring at the quiet carelessness of Adye 's attitude . 
The afternoon was very hot and still , nothing seemed stirring in all the world save a couple of yellow butterflies chasing each other through the shrubbery between the house and the road gate . 
Adye lay on the lawn near the gate . 
The blinds of all the villas down the hill-road were drawn , but in one little green summer-house was a white figure , apparently an old man asleep . 
Kemp scrutinised the surroundings of the house for a glimpse of the revolver , but it had vanished . 
His eyes came back to Adye . 
The game was opening well . 
Then came a ringing and knocking at the front door , that grew at last tumultuous , but pursuant to Kemp 's instructions the servants had locked themselves into their rooms . 
This was followed by a silence . 
Kemp sat listening and then began peering cautiously out of the three windows , one after another . 
He went to the staircase head and stood listening uneasily . 
He armed himself with his bedroom poker , and went to examine the interior fastenings of the ground-floor windows again . 
Everything was safe and quiet . 
He returned to the belvedere . 
Adye lay motionless over the edge of the gravel just as he had fallen . 
Coming along the road by the villas were the housemaid and two policemen . 
Everything was deadly still . 
The three people seemed very slow in approaching . 
