It was last December . 
I had taken a room in London , a large unfurnished room in a big ill-managed lodging-house in a slum near Great Portland Street . 
The room was soon full of the appliances I had bought with his money ; the work was going on steadily , successfully , drawing near an end . 
I was like a man emerging from a thicket , and suddenly coming on some unmeaning tragedy . 
I went to bury him . 
My mind was still on this research , and I did not lift a finger to save his character . 
I remember the funeral , the cheap hearse , the scant ceremony , the windy frost-bitten hillside , and the old college friend of his who read the service over him -- a shabby , black , bent old man with a snivelling cold . 
`` I remember walking back to the empty house , through the place that had once been a village and was now patched and tinkered by the jerry builders into the ugly likeness of a town . 
Every way the roads ran out at last into the desecrated fields and ended in rubble heaps and rank wet weeds . 
I remember myself as a gaunt black figure , going along the slippery , shiny pavement , and the strange sense of detachment I felt from the squalid respectability , the sordid commercialism of the place . 
`` I did not feel a bit sorry for my father . 
He seemed to me to be the victim of his own foolish sentimentality . 
The current cant required my attendance at his funeral , but it was really not my affair . 
`` But going along the High Street , my old life came back to me for a space , for I met the girl I had known ten years since . 
Our eyes met . 
`` Something moved me to turn back and talk to her . 
She was a very ordinary person . 
`` It was all like a dream , that visit to the old places . 
I did not feel then that I was lonely , that I had come out from the world into a desolate place . 
I appreciated my loss of sympathy , but I put it down to the general inanity of things . 
Re-entering my room seemed like the recovery of reality . 
There were the things I knew and loved . 
There stood the apparatus , the experiments arranged and waiting . 
And now there was scarcely a difficulty left , beyond the planning of details . 
`` I will tell you , Kemp , sooner or later , all the complicated processes . 
We need not go into that now . 
For the most part , saving certain gaps I chose to remember , they are written in cypher in those books that tramp has hidden . 
We must hunt him down . 
We must get those books again . 
But the essential phase was to place the transparent object whose refractive index was to be lowered between two radiating centres of a sort of ethereal vibration , of which I will tell you more fully later . 
No , not those Roentgen vibrations -- I do n't know that these others of mine have been described . 
Yet they are obvious enough . 
I needed two little dynamos , and these I worked with a cheap gas engine . 
My first experiment was with a bit of white wool fabric . 
It was the strangest thing in the world to see it in the flicker of the flashes soft and white , and then to watch it fade like a wreath of smoke and vanish . 
`` I could scarcely believe I had done it . 
I put my hand into the emptiness , and there was the thing as solid as ever . 
I felt it awkwardly , and threw it on the floor . 
I had a little trouble finding it again . 
`` And then came a curious experience . 
I heard a miaow behind me , and turning , saw a lean white cat , very dirty , on the cistern cover outside the window . 
A thought came into my head . 
` Everything ready for you , ' I said , and went to the window , opened it , and called softly . 
She came in , purring -- the poor beast was starving -- and I gave her some milk . 
All my food was in a cupboard in the corner of the room . 
After that she went smelling round the room , evidently with the idea of making herself at home . 
The invisible rag upset her a bit ; you should have seen her spit at it ! 
But I made her comfortable on the pillow of my truckle-bed . 
And I gave her butter to get her to wash . '' 
`` And you processed her ? '' 
