This looked out upon the street , two lace curtains brown with dirt guarding the window . 
I went and peered out through their interstices . 
Outside the day was bright -- by contrast with the brown shadows of the dismal house in which I found myself , dazzlingly bright . 
A brisk traffic was going by , fruit carts , a hansom , a four-wheeler with a pile of boxes , a fishmonger 's cart . 
I turned with spots of colour swimming before my eyes to the shadowy fixtures behind me . 
My excitement was giving place to a clear apprehension of my position again . 
The room was full of a faint scent of benzoline , used , I suppose , in cleaning the garments . 
`` I began a systematic search of the place . 
I should judge the hunchback had been alone in the house for some time . 
He was a curious person . 
Everything that could possibly be of service to me I collected in the clothes storeroom , and then I made a deliberate selection . 
I found a handbag I thought a suitable possession , and some powder , rouge , and sticking-plaster . 
`` I had thought of painting and powdering my face and all that there was to show of me , in order to render myself visible , but the disadvantage of this lay in the fact that I should require turpentine and other appliances and a considerable amount of time before I could vanish again . 
Finally I chose a mask of the better type , slightly grotesque but not more so than many human beings , dark glasses , greyish whiskers , and a wig . 
I could find no underclothing , but that I could buy subsequently , and for the time I swathed myself in calico dominoes and some white cashmere scarfs . 
I could find no socks , but the hunchback 's boots were rather a loose fit and sufficed . 
In a desk in the shop were three sovereigns and about thirty shillings ' worth of silver , and in a locked cupboard I burst in the inner room were eight pounds in gold . 
I could go forth into the world again , equipped . 
`` Then came a curious hesitation . 
Was my appearance really credible ? 
I tried myself with a little bedroom looking-glass , inspecting myself from every point of view to discover any forgotten chink , but it all seemed sound . 
I was grotesque to the theatrical pitch , a stage miser , but I was certainly not a physical impossibility . 
Gathering confidence , I took my looking-glass down into the shop , pulled down the shop blinds , and surveyed myself from every point of view with the help of the cheval glass in the corner . 
`` I spent some minutes screwing up my courage and then unlocked the shop door and marched out into the street , leaving the little man to get out of his sheet again when he liked . 
In five minutes a dozen turnings intervened between me and the costumier 's shop . 
No one appeared to notice me very pointedly . 
My last difficulty seemed overcome . '' 
He stopped again . 
`` And you troubled no more about the hunchback ? '' 
said Kemp . 
`` No , '' said the Invisible Man . 
`` Nor have I heard what became of him . 
I suppose he untied himself or kicked himself out . 
The knots were pretty tight . '' 
He became silent and went to the window and stared out . 
`` What happened when you went out into the Strand ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
-- disillusionment again . 
I thought my troubles were over . 
Practically I thought I had impunity to do whatever I chose , everything -- save to give away my secret . 
So I thought . 
Whatever I did , whatever the consequences might be , was nothing to me . 
I had merely to fling aside my garments and vanish . 
No person could hold me . 
I could take my money where I found it . 
I decided to treat myself to a sumptuous feast , and then put up at a good hotel , and accumulate a new outfit of property . 
I felt amazingly confident ; it 's not particularly pleasant recalling that I was an ass . 
I went into a place and was already ordering lunch , when it occurred to me that I could not eat unless I exposed my invisible face . 
I finished ordering the lunch , told the man I should be back in ten minutes , and went out exasperated . 
I do n't know if you have ever been disappointed in your appetite . '' 
