`` They do , '' he said through his muffler , eyeing her quietly through his impenetrable glasses . 
`` But they take long enough to get well , do n't they ? 
... There was my sister 's son , Tom , jest cut his arm with a scythe , tumbled on it in the ` ayfield , and , bless me ! 
he was three months tied up sir . 
You 'd hardly believe it . 
It 's regular given me a dread of a scythe , sir . '' 
`` I can quite understand that , '' said the visitor . 
`` He was afraid , one time , that he 'd have to have an op ` ration -- he was that bad , sir . '' 
The visitor laughed abruptly , a bark of a laugh that he seemed to bite and kill in his mouth . 
`` Was he ? '' 
he said . 
`` He was , sir . 
And no laughing matter to them as had the doing for him , as I had -- my sister being took up with her little ones so much . 
There was bandages to do , sir , and bandages to undo . 
So that if I may make so bold as to say it , sir -- '' `` Will you get me some matches ? '' 
said the visitor , quite abruptly . 
`` My pipe is out . '' 
Mrs. Hall was pulled up suddenly . 
It was certainly rude of him , after telling him all she had done . 
She gasped at him for a moment , and remembered the two sovereigns . 
She went for the matches . 
`` Thanks , '' he said concisely , as she put them down , and turned his shoulder upon her and stared out of the window again . 
It was altogether too discouraging . 
Evidently he was sensitive on the topic of operations and bandages . 
She did not `` make so bold as to say , '' however , after all . 
But his snubbing way had irritated her , and Millie had a hot time of it that afternoon . 
The visitor remained in the parlour until four o'clock , without giving the ghost of an excuse for an intrusion . 
For the most part he was quite still during that time ; it would seem he sat in the growing darkness smoking in the firelight -- perhaps dozing . 
Once or twice a curious listener might have heard him at the coals , and for the space of five minutes he was audible pacing the room . 
He seemed to be talking to himself . 
Then the armchair creaked as he sat down again . 
MR. TEDDY HENFREY 'S FIRST IMPRESSIONS At four o'clock , when it was fairly dark and Mrs. Hall was screwing up her courage to go in and ask her visitor if he would take some tea , Teddy Henfrey , the clock-jobber , came into the bar . 
`` My sakes ! 
Mrs. Hall , '' said he , `` but this is terrible weather for thin boots ! '' 
The snow outside was falling faster . 
Mrs. Hall agreed , and then noticed he had his bag with him . 
`` Now you 're here , Mr. Teddy , '' said she , `` I 'd be glad if you 'd give th ' old clock in the parlour a bit of a look . 
'T is going , and it strikes well and hearty ; but the hour-hand wo n't do nuthin ' but point at six . '' 
And leading the way , she went across to the parlour door and rapped and entered . 
Her visitor , she saw as she opened the door , was seated in the armchair before the fire , dozing it would seem , with his bandaged head drooping on one side . 
The only light in the room was the red glow from the fire -- which lit his eyes like adverse railway signals , but left his downcast face in darkness -- and the scanty vestiges of the day that came in through the open door . 
Everything was ruddy , shadowy , and indistinct to her , the more so since she had just been lighting the bar lamp , and her eyes were dazzled . 
But for a second it seemed to her that the man she looked at had an enormous mouth wide open -- a vast and incredible mouth that swallowed the whole of the lower portion of his face . 
It was the sensation of a moment : the white-bound head , the monstrous goggle eyes , and this huge yawn below it . 
Then he stirred , started up in his chair , put up his hand . 
She opened the door wide , so that the room was lighter , and she saw him more clearly , with the muffler held up to his face just as she had seen him hold the serviette before . 
The shadows , she fancied , had tricked her . 
`` Would you mind , sir , this man a-coming to look at the clock , sir ? '' 
she said , recovering from the momentary shock . 
`` Look at the clock ? '' 
