His side -- ugh ! '' 
Suddenly an old woman , peering under the arm of the big navvy , screamed sharply . 
`` Looky there ! '' 
she said , and thrust out a wrinkled finger . 
And looking where she pointed , everyone saw , faint and transparent as though it was made of glass , so that veins and arteries and bones and nerves could be distinguished , the outline of a hand , a hand limp and prone . 
It grew clouded and opaque even as they stared . 
`` Hullo ! '' 
cried the constable . 
`` Here 's his feet a-showing ! '' 
And so , slowly , beginning at his hands and feet and creeping along his limbs to the vital centres of his body , that strange change continued . 
It was like the slow spreading of a poison . 
First came the little white nerves , a hazy grey sketch of a limb , then the glassy bones and intricate arteries , then the flesh and skin , first a faint fogginess , and then growing rapidly dense and opaque . 
Presently they could see his crushed chest and his shoulders , and the dim outline of his drawn and battered features . 
When at last the crowd made way for Kemp to stand erect , there lay , naked and pitiful on the ground , the bruised and broken body of a young man about thirty . 
His hair and brow were white -- not grey with age , but white with the whiteness of albinism -- and his eyes were like garnets . 
His hands were clenched , his eyes wide open , and his expression was one of anger and dismay . 
`` Cover his face ! '' 
said a man . 
`` For Gawd 's sake , cover that face ! '' 
and three little children , pushing forward through the crowd , were suddenly twisted round and sent packing off again . 
Someone brought a sheet from the `` Jolly Cricketers , '' and having covered him , they carried him into that house . 
And there it was , on a shabby bed in a tawdry , ill-lighted bedroom , surrounded by a crowd of ignorant and excited people , broken and wounded , betrayed and unpitied , that Griffin , the first of all men to make himself invisible , Griffin , the most gifted physicist the world has ever seen , ended in infinite disaster his strange and terrible career . 
THE EPILOGUE So ends the story of the strange and evil experiments of the Invisible Man . 
And if you would learn more of him you must go to a little inn near Port Stowe and talk to the landlord . 
The sign of the inn is an empty board save for a hat and boots , and the name is the title of this story . 
The landlord is a short and corpulent little man with a nose of cylindrical proportions , wiry hair , and a sporadic rosiness of visage . 
Drink generously , and he will tell you generously of all the things that happened to him after that time , and of how the lawyers tried to do him out of the treasure found upon him . 
`` When they found they could n't prove who 's money was which , I 'm blessed , '' he says , `` if they did n't try to make me out a blooming treasure trove ! 
Do I look like a Treasure Trove ? 
And then a gentleman gave me a guinea a night to tell the story at the Empire Music ` All -- just to tell 'em in my own words -- barring one . '' 
And if you want to cut off the flow of his reminiscences abruptly , you can always do so by asking if there were n't three manuscript books in the story . 
He admits there were and proceeds to explain , with asseverations that everybody thinks he has 'em ! 
But bless you ! 
he has n't . 
`` The Invisible Man it was took 'em off to hide 'em when I cut and ran for Port Stowe . 
It 's that Mr. Kemp put people on with the idea of my having 'em . '' 
And then he subsides into a pensive state , watches you furtively , bustles nervously with glasses , and presently leaves the bar . 
He is a bachelor man -- his tastes were ever bachelor , and there are no women folk in the house . 
Outwardly he buttons -- it is expected of him -- but in his more vital privacies , in the matter of braces for example , he still turns to string . 
He conducts his house without enterprise , but with eminent decorum . 
His movements are slow , and he is a great thinker . 
But he has a reputation for wisdom and for a respectable parsimony in the village , and his knowledge of the roads of the South of England would beat Cobbett . 
And on Sunday mornings , every Sunday morning , all the year round , while he is closed to the outer world , and every night after ten , he goes into his bar parlour , bearing a glass of gin faintly tinged with water , and having placed this down , he locks the door and examines the blinds , and even looks under the table . 
And then , being satisfied of his solitude , he unlocks the cupboard and a box in the cupboard and a drawer in that box , and produces three volumes bound in brown leather , and places them solemnly in the middle of the table . 
The covers are weather-worn and tinged with an algal green -- for once they sojourned in a ditch and some of the pages have been washed blank by dirty water . 
The landlord sits down in an armchair , fills a long clay pipe slowly -- gloating over the books the while . 
Then he pulls one towards him and opens it , and begins to study it -- turning over the leaves backwards and forwards . 
His brows are knit and his lips move painfully . 
`` Hex , little two up in the air , cross and a fiddle-de-dee . 
Lord ! 
