`` Only a runaway ring , sir , '' she answered . 
`` I 'm restless to-night , '' he said to himself . 
He went back to his study , and this time attacked his work resolutely . 
In a little while he was hard at work again , and the only sounds in the room were the ticking of the clock and the subdued shrillness of his quill , hurrying in the very centre of the circle of light his lampshade threw on his table . 
It was two o'clock before Dr. Kemp had finished his work for the night . 
He rose , yawned , and went downstairs to bed . 
He had already removed his coat and vest , when he noticed that he was thirsty . 
He took a candle and went down to the dining-room in search of a syphon and whiskey . 
Dr. Kemp 's scientific pursuits have made him a very observant man , and as he recrossed the hall , he noticed a dark spot on the linoleum near the mat at the foot of the stairs . 
He went on upstairs , and then it suddenly occurred to him to ask himself what the spot on the linoleum might be . 
Apparently some subconscious element was at work . 
At any rate , he turned with his burden , went back to the hall , put down the syphon and whiskey , and bending down , touched the spot . 
Without any great surprise he found it had the stickiness and colour of drying blood . 
He took up his burden again , and returned upstairs , looking about him and trying to account for the blood-spot . 
On the landing he saw something and stopped astonished . 
The door-handle of his own room was blood-stained . 
He looked at his own hand . 
It was quite clean , and then he remembered that the door of his room had been open when he came down from his study , and that consequently he had not touched the handle at all . 
He went straight into his room , his face quite calm -- perhaps a trifle more resolute than usual . 
His glance , wandering inquisitively , fell on the bed . 
On the counterpane was a mess of blood , and the sheet had been torn . 
He had not noticed this before because he had walked straight to the dressing-table . 
On the further side the bedclothes were depressed as if someone had been recently sitting there . 
Then he had an odd impression that he had heard a low voice say , `` Good Heavens ! 
-- Kemp ! '' 
But Dr. Kemp was no believer in voices . 
He stood staring at the tumbled sheets . 
Was that really a voice ? 
He looked about again , but noticed nothing further than the disordered and blood-stained bed . 
Then he distinctly heard a movement across the room , near the wash-hand stand . 
All men , however highly educated , retain some superstitious inklings . 
The feeling that is called `` eerie '' came upon him . 
He closed the door of the room , came forward to the dressing-table , and put down his burdens . 
Suddenly , with a start , he perceived a coiled and blood-stained bandage of linen rag hanging in mid-air , between him and the wash-hand stand . 
He stared at this in amazement . 
It was an empty bandage , a bandage properly tied but quite empty . 
He would have advanced to grasp it , but a touch arrested him , and a voice speaking quite close to him . 
`` Kemp ! '' 
said the Voice . 
`` Eh ? '' 
said Kemp , with his mouth open . 
`` Keep your nerve , '' said the Voice . 
`` I 'm an Invisible Man . '' 
Kemp made no answer for a space , simply stared at the bandage . 
`` Invisible Man , '' he said . 
`` I am an Invisible Man , '' repeated the Voice . 
The story he had been active to ridicule only that morning rushed through Kemp 's brain . 
He does not appear to have been either very much frightened or very greatly surprised at the moment . 
Realisation came later . 
`` I thought it was all a lie , '' he said . 
