Sniffed again . 
Kept on sniffing all the time ; evidently recently caught an infernal cold . 
No wonder , wrapped up like that ! 
I developed the nurse idea , and all the while kept my eyes open . 
Bottles -- chemicals -- everywhere . 
Balance , test-tubes in stands , and a smell of -- evening primrose . 
Would he subscribe ? 
Said he 'd consider it . 
Asked him , point-blank , was he researching . 
Said he was . 
A long research ? 
Got quite cross . ' 
A damnable long research , ' said he , blowing the cork out , so to speak . 
` Oh , ' said I. And out came the grievance . 
The man was just on the boil , and my question boiled him over . 
He had been given a prescription , most valuable prescription -- what for he would n't say . 
Was it medical ? 
` Damn you ! 
What are you fishing after ? ' 
I apologised . 
Dignified sniff and cough . 
He resumed . 
He 'd read it . 
Five ingredients . 
Put it down ; turned his head . 
Draught of air from window lifted the paper . 
Swish , rustle . 
He was working in a room with an open fireplace , he said . 
Saw a flicker , and there was the prescription burning and lifting chimneyward . 
Rushed towards it just as it whisked up the chimney . 
So ! 
Just at that point , to illustrate his story , out came his arm . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` No hand -- just an empty sleeve . 
Lord ! 
I thought , _ that 's _ a deformity ! 
Got a cork arm , I suppose , and has taken it off . 
Then , I thought , there 's something odd in that . 
What the devil keeps that sleeve up and open , if there 's nothing in it ? 
There was nothing in it , I tell you . 
Nothing down it , right down to the joint . 
I could see right down it to the elbow , and there was a glimmer of light shining through a tear of the cloth . 
` Good God ! ' 
I said . 
Then he stopped . 
Stared at me with those black goggles of his , and then at his sleeve . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` That 's all . 
He never said a word ; just glared , and put his sleeve back in his pocket quickly . ' 
I was saying , ' said he , ` that there was the prescription burning , was n't I ? ' 
