And with a flash of inspiration he connected this with the stranger 's room upstairs and the suggestions of Mr. Teddy Henfrey . 
He distinctly remembered holding the candle while Mrs. Hall shot these bolts overnight . 
At the sight he stopped , gaping , then with the bottle still in his hand went upstairs again . 
He rapped at the stranger 's door . 
There was no answer . 
He rapped again ; then pushed the door wide open and entered . 
It was as he expected . 
The bed , the room also , was empty . 
And what was stranger , even to his heavy intelligence , on the bedroom chair and along the rail of the bed were scattered the garments , the only garments so far as he knew , and the bandages of their guest . 
His big slouch hat even was cocked jauntily over the bed-post . 
As Hall stood there he heard his wife 's voice coming out of the depth of the cellar , with that rapid telescoping of the syllables and interrogative cocking up of the final words to a high note , by which the West Sussex villager is wont to indicate a brisk impatience . 
`` George ! 
You gart whad a wand ? '' 
At that he turned and hurried down to her . 
`` Janny , '' he said , over the rail of the cellar steps , '' ` tas the truth what Henfrey sez . 
` E 's not in uz room , ' e e n't . 
And the front door 's onbolted . '' 
At first Mrs. Hall did not understand , and as soon as she did she resolved to see the empty room for herself . 
Hall , still holding the bottle , went first . 
`` If ' e e n't there , '' he said , '' ` is close are . 
And what 's ' e doin ' ` ithout ` is close , then ? 
` Tas a most curious business . '' 
As they came up the cellar steps they both , it was afterwards ascertained , fancied they heard the front door open and shut , but seeing it closed and nothing there , neither said a word to the other about it at the time . 
Mrs. Hall passed her husband in the passage and ran on first upstairs . 
Someone sneezed on the staircase . 
Hall , following six steps behind , thought that he heard her sneeze . 
She , going on first , was under the impression that Hall was sneezing . 
She flung open the door and stood regarding the room . 
`` Of all the curious ! '' 
she said . 
She heard a sniff close behind her head as it seemed , and turning , was surprised to see Hall a dozen feet off on the topmost stair . 
But in another moment he was beside her . 
She bent forward and put her hand on the pillow and then under the clothes . 
`` Cold , '' she said . 
`` He 's been up this hour or more . '' 
As she did so , a most extraordinary thing happened . 
The bed-clothes gathered themselves together , leapt up suddenly into a sort of peak , and then jumped headlong over the bottom rail . 
It was exactly as if a hand had clutched them in the centre and flung them aside . 
Immediately after , the stranger 's hat hopped off the bed-post , described a whirling flight in the air through the better part of a circle , and then dashed straight at Mrs. Hall 's face . 
Then as swiftly came the sponge from the washstand ; and then the chair , flinging the stranger 's coat and trousers carelessly aside , and laughing drily in a voice singularly like the stranger 's , turned itself up with its four legs at Mrs. Hall , seemed to take aim at her for a moment , and charged at her . 
She screamed and turned , and then the chair legs came gently but firmly against her back and impelled her and Hall out of the room . 
The door slammed violently and was locked . 
The chair and bed seemed to be executing a dance of triumph for a moment , and then abruptly everything was still . 
Mrs. Hall was left almost in a fainting condition in Mr. Hall 's arms on the landing . 
It was with the greatest difficulty that Mr. Hall and Millie , who had been roused by her scream of alarm , succeeded in getting her downstairs , and applying the restoratives customary in such cases . '' 
` Tas sperits , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` I know ` tas sperits . 
I 've read in papers of en . 
Tables and chairs leaping and dancing ... '' `` Take a drop more , Janny , '' said Hall . '' 
` Twill steady ye . '' 
