If there 's damage done , put it down in the bill , '' and he went on ticking a list in the exercise book before him . 
`` I 'll tell you something , '' said Fearenside , mysteriously . 
It was late in the afternoon , and they were in the little beer-shop of Iping Hanger . 
`` Well ? '' 
said Teddy Henfrey . 
`` This chap you 're speaking of , what my dog bit . 
Well -- he 's black . 
Leastways , his legs are . 
I seed through the tear of his trousers and the tear of his glove . 
You 'd have expected a sort of pinky to show , would n't you ? 
Well -- there was n't none . 
Just blackness . 
I tell you , he 's as black as my hat . '' 
`` My sakes ! '' 
said Henfrey . 
`` It 's a rummy case altogether . 
Why , his nose is as pink as paint ! '' 
`` That 's true , '' said Fearenside . 
`` I knows that . 
And I tell ` ee what I 'm thinking . 
That marn 's a piebald , Teddy . 
Black here and white there -- in patches . 
And he 's ashamed of it . 
He 's a kind of half-breed , and the colour 's come off patchy instead of mixing . 
I 've heard of such things before . 
And it 's the common way with horses , as any one can see . '' 
MR. CUSS INTERVIEWS THE STRANGER I have told the circumstances of the stranger 's arrival in Iping with a certain fulness of detail , in order that the curious impression he created may be understood by the reader . 
But excepting two odd incidents , the circumstances of his stay until the extraordinary day of the club festival may be passed over very cursorily . 
There were a number of skirmishes with Mrs. Hall on matters of domestic discipline , but in every case until late April , when the first signs of penury began , he over-rode her by the easy expedient of an extra payment . 
Hall did not like him , and whenever he dared he talked of the advisability of getting rid of him ; but he showed his dislike chiefly by concealing it ostentatiously , and avoiding his visitor as much as possible . 
`` Wait till the summer , '' said Mrs. Hall sagely , `` when the artisks are beginning to come . 
Then we 'll see . 
He may be a bit overbearing , but bills settled punctual is bills settled punctual , whatever you 'd like to say . '' 
The stranger did not go to church , and indeed made no difference between Sunday and the irreligious days , even in costume . 
He worked , as Mrs. Hall thought , very fitfully . 
Some days he would come down early and be continuously busy . 
On others he would rise late , pace his room , fretting audibly for hours together , smoke , sleep in the armchair by the fire . 
Communication with the world beyond the village he had none . 
His temper continued very uncertain ; for the most part his manner was that of a man suffering under almost unendurable provocation , and once or twice things were snapped , torn , crushed , or broken in spasmodic gusts of violence . 
He seemed under a chronic irritation of the greatest intensity . 
His habit of talking to himself in a low voice grew steadily upon him , but though Mrs. Hall listened conscientiously she could make neither head nor tail of what she heard . 
He rarely went abroad by daylight , but at twilight he would go out muffled up invisibly , whether the weather were cold or not , and he chose the loneliest paths and those most overshadowed by trees and banks . 
His goggling spectacles and ghastly bandaged face under the penthouse of his hat , came with a disagreeable suddenness out of the darkness upon one or two home-going labourers , and Teddy Henfrey , tumbling out of the `` Scarlet Coat '' one night , at half-past nine , was scared shamefully by the stranger 's skull-like head -LRB- he was walking hat in hand -RRB- lit by the sudden light of the opened inn door . 
Such children as saw him at nightfall dreamt of bogies , and it seemed doubtful whether he disliked boys more than they disliked him , or the reverse ; but there was certainly a vivid enough dislike on either side . 
It was inevitable that a person of so remarkable an appearance and bearing should form a frequent topic in such a village as Iping . 
Opinion was greatly divided about his occupation . 
Mrs. Hall was sensitive on the point . 
When questioned , she explained very carefully that he was an `` experimental investigator , '' going gingerly over the syllables as one who dreads pitfalls . 
When asked what an experimental investigator was , she would say with a touch of superiority that most educated people knew such things as that , and would thus explain that he `` discovered things . '' 
Her visitor had had an accident , she said , which temporarily discoloured his face and hands , and being of a sensitive disposition , he was averse to any public notice of the fact . 
