Mr. Heelas stood up , exclaiming vaguely and vehemently at all these wonderful things . 
He saw Kemp stand on the sill , spring from the window , and reappear almost instantaneously running along a path in the shrubbery and stooping as he ran , like a man who evades observation . 
He vanished behind a laburnum , and appeared again clambering over a fence that abutted on the open down . 
In a second he had tumbled over and was running at a tremendous pace down the slope towards Mr. Heelas . 
`` Lord ! '' 
cried Mr. Heelas , struck with an idea ; `` it 's that Invisible Man brute ! 
It 's right , after all ! '' 
With Mr. Heelas to think things like that was to act , and his cook watching him from the top window was amazed to see him come pelting towards the house at a good nine miles an hour . 
There was a slamming of doors , a ringing of bells , and the voice of Mr. Heelas bellowing like a bull . 
`` Shut the doors , shut the windows , shut everything ! 
-- the Invisible Man is coming ! '' 
Instantly the house was full of screams and directions , and scurrying feet . 
He ran himself to shut the French windows that opened on the veranda ; as he did so Kemp 's head and shoulders and knee appeared over the edge of the garden fence . 
In another moment Kemp had ploughed through the asparagus , and was running across the tennis lawn to the house . 
`` You ca n't come in , '' said Mr. Heelas , shutting the bolts . 
`` I 'm very sorry if he 's after you , but you ca n't come in ! '' 
Kemp appeared with a face of terror close to the glass , rapping and then shaking frantically at the French window . 
Then , seeing his efforts were useless , he ran along the veranda , vaulted the end , and went to hammer at the side door . 
Then he ran round by the side gate to the front of the house , and so into the hill-road . 
And Mr. Heelas staring from his window -- a face of horror -- had scarcely witnessed Kemp vanish , ere the asparagus was being trampled this way and that by feet unseen . 
At that Mr. Heelas fled precipitately upstairs , and the rest of the chase is beyond his purview . 
But as he passed the staircase window , he heard the side gate slam . 
Emerging into the hill-road , Kemp naturally took the downward direction , and so it was he came to run in his own person the very race he had watched with such a critical eye from the belvedere study only four days ago . 
He ran it well , for a man out of training , and though his face was white and wet , his wits were cool to the last . 
He ran with wide strides , and wherever a patch of rough ground intervened , wherever there came a patch of raw flints , or a bit of broken glass shone dazzling , he crossed it and left the bare invisible feet that followed to take what line they would . 
For the first time in his life Kemp discovered that the hill-road was indescribably vast and desolate , and that the beginnings of the town far below at the hill foot were strangely remote . 
Never had there been a slower or more painful method of progression that running . 
All the gaunt villas , sleeping in the afternoon sun , looked locked and barred ; no doubt they were locked and barred -- by his own orders . 
But at any rate they might have kept a lookout for an eventuality like this ! 
The town was rising up now , the sea had dropped out of sight behind it , and people down below were stirring . 
A tram was just arriving at the hill foot . 
Beyond that was the police station . 
Was that footsteps he heard behind him ? 
Spurt . 
The people below were staring at him , one or two were running , and his breath was beginning to saw in his throat . 
The tram was quite near now , and the `` Jolly Cricketers '' was noisily barring its doors . 
Beyond the tram were posts and heaps of gravel -- the drainage works . 
He had a transitory idea of jumping into the tram and slamming the doors , and then he resolved to go for the police station . 
In another moment he had passed the door of the `` Jolly Cricketers , '' and was in the blistering fag end of the street , with human beings about him . 
The tram driver and his helper -- arrested by the sight of his furious haste -- stood staring with the tram horses unhitched . 
Further on the astonished features of navvies appeared above the mounds of gravel . 
His pace broke a little , and then he heard the swift pad of his pursuer , and leapt forward again . 
`` The Invisible Man ! '' 
he cried to the navvies , with a vague indicative gesture , and by an inspiration leapt the excavation and placed a burly group between him and the chase . 
Then abandoning the idea of the police station he turned into a little side street , rushed by a greengrocer 's cart , hesitated for the tenth of a second at the door of a sweetstuff shop , and then made for the mouth of an alley that ran back into the main Hill Street again . 
Two or three little children were playing here , and shrieked and scattered at his apparition , and forthwith doors and windows opened and excited mothers revealed their hearts . 
Out he shot into Hill Street again , three hundred yards from the tram-line end , and immediately he became aware of a tumultuous vociferation and running people . 
He glanced up the street towards the hill . 
Hardly a dozen yards off ran a huge navvy , cursing in fragments and slashing viciously with a spade , and hard behind him came the tram conductor with his fists clenched . 
Up the street others followed these two , striking and shouting . 
