`` Nor had I. And the snow had warned me of other dangers . 
I could not go abroad in snow -- it would settle on me and expose me . 
Rain , too , would make me a watery outline , a glistening surface of a man -- a bubble . 
And fog -- I should be like a fainter bubble in a fog , a surface , a greasy glimmer of humanity . 
Moreover , as I went abroad -- in the London air -- I gathered dirt about my ankles , floating smuts and dust upon my skin . 
I did not know how long it would be before I should become visible from that cause also . 
But I saw clearly it could not be for long . 
`` Not in London at any rate . 
`` I went into the slums towards Great Portland Street , and found myself at the end of the street in which I had lodged . 
I did not go that way , because of the crowd halfway down it opposite to the still smoking ruins of the house I had fired . 
My most immediate problem was to get clothing . 
What to do with my face puzzled me . 
Then I saw in one of those little miscellaneous shops -- news , sweets , toys , stationery , belated Christmas tomfoolery , and so forth -- an array of masks and noses . 
I realised that problem was solved . 
In a flash I saw my course . 
I turned about , no longer aimless , and went -- circuitously in order to avoid the busy ways , towards the back streets north of the Strand ; for I remembered , though not very distinctly where , that some theatrical costumiers had shops in that district . 
`` The day was cold , with a nipping wind down the northward running streets . 
I walked fast to avoid being overtaken . 
Every crossing was a danger , every passenger a thing to watch alertly . 
One man as I was about to pass him at the top of Bedford Street , turned upon me abruptly and came into me , sending me into the road and almost under the wheel of a passing hansom . 
The verdict of the cab-rank was that he had had some sort of stroke . 
I was so unnerved by this encounter that I went into Covent Garden Market and sat down for some time in a quiet corner by a stall of violets , panting and trembling . 
I found I had caught a fresh cold , and had to turn out after a time lest my sneezes should attract attention . 
`` At last I reached the object of my quest , a dirty , fly-blown little shop in a by-way near Drury Lane , with a window full of tinsel robes , sham jewels , wigs , slippers , dominoes and theatrical photographs . 
The shop was old-fashioned and low and dark , and the house rose above it for four storeys , dark and dismal . 
I peered through the window and , seeing no one within , entered . 
The opening of the door set a clanking bell ringing . 
I left it open , and walked round a bare costume stand , into a corner behind a cheval glass . 
For a minute or so no one came . 
Then I heard heavy feet striding across a room , and a man appeared down the shop . 
`` My plans were now perfectly definite . 
I proposed to make my way into the house , secrete myself upstairs , watch my opportunity , and when everything was quiet , rummage out a wig , mask , spectacles , and costume , and go into the world , perhaps a grotesque but still a credible figure . 
And incidentally of course I could rob the house of any available money . 
`` The man who had just entered the shop was a short , slight , hunched , beetle-browed man , with long arms and very short bandy legs . 
Apparently I had interrupted a meal . 
He stared about the shop with an expression of expectation . 
This gave way to surprise , and then to anger , as he saw the shop empty . 
` Damn the boys ! ' 
he said . 
He went to stare up and down the street . 
He came in again in a minute , kicked the door to with his foot spitefully , and went muttering back to the house door . 
`` I came forward to follow him , and at the noise of my movement he stopped dead . 
I did so too , startled by his quickness of ear . 
He slammed the house door in my face . 
`` I stood hesitating . 
Suddenly I heard his quick footsteps returning , and the door reopened . 
He stood looking about the shop like one who was still not satisfied . 
Then , murmuring to himself , he examined the back of the counter and peered behind some fixtures . 
Then he stood doubtful . 
He had left the house door open and I slipped into the inner room . 
