Then , as recollection came back to me , I heard voices in conversation . 
`` Then far down the place , in the brighter light of some department which had already raised its blinds , I saw two men approaching . 
I scrambled to my feet , looking about me for some way of escape , and even as I did so the sound of my movement made them aware of me . 
I suppose they saw merely a figure moving quietly and quickly away . 
` Who 's that ? ' 
cried one , and ` Stop , there ! ' 
shouted the other . 
I dashed around a corner and came full tilt -- a faceless figure , mind you ! 
-- on a lanky lad of fifteen . 
He yelled and I bowled him over , rushed past him , turned another corner , and by a happy inspiration threw myself behind a counter . 
In another moment feet went running past and I heard voices shouting , ` All hands to the doors ! ' 
asking what was ` up , ' and giving one another advice how to catch me . 
`` Lying on the ground , I felt scared out of my wits . 
But -- odd as it may seem -- it did not occur to me at the moment to take off my clothes as I should have done . 
I had made up my mind , I suppose , to get away in them , and that ruled me . 
And then down the vista of the counters came a bawling of ` Here he is ! ' 
`` I sprang to my feet , whipped a chair off the counter , and sent it whirling at the fool who had shouted , turned , came into another round a corner , sent him spinning , and rushed up the stairs . 
He kept his footing , gave a view hallo , and came up the staircase hot after me . 
Up the staircase were piled a multitude of those bright-coloured pot things -- what are they ? '' 
`` Art pots , '' suggested Kemp . 
`` That 's it ! 
Art pots . 
Well , I turned at the top step and swung round , plucked one out of a pile and smashed it on his silly head as he came at me . 
The whole pile of pots went headlong , and I heard shouting and footsteps running from all parts . 
I made a mad rush for the refreshment place , and there was a man in white like a man cook , who took up the chase . 
I made one last desperate turn and found myself among lamps and ironmongery . 
I went behind the counter of this , and waited for my cook , and as he bolted in at the head of the chase , I doubled him up with a lamp . 
Down he went , and I crouched down behind the counter and began whipping off my clothes as fast as I could . 
Coat , jacket , trousers , shoes were all right , but a lambswool vest fits a man like a skin . 
I heard more men coming , my cook was lying quiet on the other side of the counter , stunned or scared speechless , and I had to make another dash for it , like a rabbit hunted out of a wood-pile . '' 
` This way , policeman ! ' 
I heard someone shouting . 
I found myself in my bedstead storeroom again , and at the end of a wilderness of wardrobes . 
I rushed among them , went flat , got rid of my vest after infinite wriggling , and stood a free man again , panting and scared , as the policeman and three of the shopmen came round the corner . 
They made a rush for the vest and pants , and collared the trousers . 
` He 's dropping his plunder , ' said one of the young men . 
` He must be somewhere here . ' 
`` But they did not find me all the same . 
`` I stood watching them hunt for me for a time , and cursing my ill-luck in losing the clothes . 
Then I went into the refreshment-room , drank a little milk I found there , and sat down by the fire to consider my position . 
`` In a little while two assistants came in and began to talk over the business very excitedly and like the fools they were . 
I heard a magnified account of my depredations , and other speculations as to my whereabouts . 
Then I fell to scheming again . 
The insurmountable difficulty of the place , especially now it was alarmed , was to get any plunder out of it . 
I went down into the warehouse to see if there was any chance of packing and addressing a parcel , but I could not understand the system of checking . 
About eleven o'clock , the snow having thawed as it fell , and the day being finer and a little warmer than the previous one , I decided that the Emporium was hopeless , and went out again , exasperated at my want of success , with only the vaguest plans of action in my mind . '' 
IN DRURY LANE `` But you begin now to realise , '' said the Invisible Man , `` the full disadvantage of my condition . 
I had no shelter -- no covering -- to get clothing was to forego all my advantage , to make myself a strange and terrible thing . 
I was fasting ; for to eat , to fill myself with unassimilated matter , would be to become grotesquely visible again . '' 
`` I never thought of that , '' said Kemp . 
