He stopped this quiet man , going quietly home to his midday meal , attacked him , beat down his feeble defences , broke his arm , felled him , and smashed his head to a jelly . 
Of course , he must have dragged this rod out of the fencing before he met his victim -- he must have been carrying it ready in his hand . 
Only two details beyond what has already been stated seem to bear on the matter . 
One is the circumstance that the gravel pit was not in Mr. Wicksteed 's direct path home , but nearly a couple of hundred yards out of his way . 
The other is the assertion of a little girl to the effect that , going to her afternoon school , she saw the murdered man `` trotting '' in a peculiar manner across a field towards the gravel pit . 
Her pantomime of his action suggests a man pursuing something on the ground before him and striking at it ever and again with his walking-stick . 
She was the last person to see him alive . 
He passed out of her sight to his death , the struggle being hidden from her only by a clump of beech trees and a slight depression in the ground . 
Now this , to the present writer 's mind at least , lifts the murder out of the realm of the absolutely wanton . 
We may imagine that Griffin had taken the rod as a weapon indeed , but without any deliberate intention of using it in murder . 
Wicksteed may then have come by and noticed this rod inexplicably moving through the air . 
Without any thought of the Invisible Man -- for Port Burdock is ten miles away -- he may have pursued it . 
It is quite conceivable that he may not even have heard of the Invisible Man . 
One can then imagine the Invisible Man making off -- quietly in order to avoid discovering his presence in the neighbourhood , and Wicksteed , excited and curious , pursuing this unaccountably locomotive object -- finally striking at it . 
No doubt the Invisible Man could easily have distanced his middle-aged pursuer under ordinary circumstances , but the position in which Wicksteed 's body was found suggests that he had the ill luck to drive his quarry into a corner between a drift of stinging nettles and the gravel pit . 
To those who appreciate the extraordinary irascibility of the Invisible Man , the rest of the encounter will be easy to imagine . 
But this is pure hypothesis . 
The only undeniable facts -- for stories of children are often unreliable -- are the discovery of Wicksteed 's body , done to death , and of the blood-stained iron rod flung among the nettles . 
The abandonment of the rod by Griffin , suggests that in the emotional excitement of the affair , the purpose for which he took it -- if he had a purpose -- was abandoned . 
He was certainly an intensely egotistical and unfeeling man , but the sight of his victim , his first victim , bloody and pitiful at his feet , may have released some long pent fountain of remorse which for a time may have flooded whatever scheme of action he had contrived . 
After the murder of Mr. Wicksteed , he would seem to have struck across the country towards the downland . 
There is a story of a voice heard about sunset by a couple of men in a field near Fern Bottom . 
It was wailing and laughing , sobbing and groaning , and ever and again it shouted . 
It must have been queer hearing . 
It drove up across the middle of a clover field and died away towards the hills . 
That afternoon the Invisible Man must have learnt something of the rapid use Kemp had made of his confidences . 
He must have found houses locked and secured ; he may have loitered about railway stations and prowled about inns , and no doubt he read the proclamations and realised something of the nature of the campaign against him . 
And as the evening advanced , the fields became dotted here and there with groups of three or four men , and noisy with the yelping of dogs . 
These men-hunters had particular instructions in the case of an encounter as to the way they should support one another . 
But he avoided them all . 
We may understand something of his exasperation , and it could have been none the less because he himself had supplied the information that was being used so remorselessly against him . 
For that day at least he lost heart ; for nearly twenty-four hours , save when he turned on Wicksteed , he was a hunted man . 
In the night , he must have eaten and slept ; for in the morning he was himself again , active , powerful , angry , and malignant , prepared for his last great struggle against the world . 
THE SIEGE OF KEMP 'S HOUSE Kemp read a strange missive , written in pencil on a greasy sheet of paper . 
`` You have been amazingly energetic and clever , '' this letter ran , `` though what you stand to gain by it I can not imagine . 
You are against me . 
For a whole day you have chased me ; you have tried to rob me of a night 's rest . 
But I have had food in spite of you , I have slept in spite of you , and the game is only beginning . 
The game is only beginning . 
There is nothing for it , but to start the Terror . 
This announces the first day of the Terror . 
Port Burdock is no longer under the Queen , tell your Colonel of Police , and the rest of them ; it is under me -- the Terror ! 
This is day one of year one of the new epoch -- the Epoch of the Invisible Man . 
I am Invisible Man the First . 
To begin with the rule will be easy . 
The first day there will be one execution for the sake of example -- a man named Kemp . 
Death starts for him to-day . 
He may lock himself away , hide himself away , get guards about him , put on armour if he likes -- Death , the unseen Death , is coming . 
Let him take precautions ; it will impress my people . 
Death starts from the pillar box by midday . 
