He hesitated and advanced with outstretched hand . 
A man pulled up short to see what he was catching , and then a girl . 
In another moment he would have touched me . 
Then I saw what to do . 
I made a step , the boy started back with an exclamation , and with a rapid movement I swung myself over into the portico of the next house . 
But the smaller boy was sharp-eyed enough to follow the movement , and before I was well down the steps and upon the pavement , he had recovered from his momentary astonishment and was shouting out that the feet had gone over the wall . 
`` They rushed round and saw my new footmarks flash into being on the lower step and upon the pavement . 
` What 's up ? ' 
asked someone . 
` Feet ! 
Look ! 
Feet running ! ' 
`` Everybody in the road , except my three pursuers , was pouring along after the Salvation Army , and this blow not only impeded me but them . 
There was an eddy of surprise and interrogation . 
At the cost of bowling over one young fellow I got through , and in another moment I was rushing headlong round the circuit of Russell Square , with six or seven astonished people following my footmarks . 
There was no time for explanation , or else the whole host would have been after me . 
`` Twice I doubled round corners , thrice I crossed the road and came back upon my tracks , and then , as my feet grew hot and dry , the damp impressions began to fade . 
At last I had a breathing space and rubbed my feet clean with my hands , and so got away altogether . 
The last I saw of the chase was a little group of a dozen people perhaps , studying with infinite perplexity a slowly drying footprint that had resulted from a puddle in Tavistock Square , a footprint as isolated and incomprehensible to them as Crusoe 's solitary discovery . 
`` This running warmed me to a certain extent , and I went on with a better courage through the maze of less frequented roads that runs hereabouts . 
My back had now become very stiff and sore , my tonsils were painful from the cabman 's fingers , and the skin of my neck had been scratched by his nails ; my feet hurt exceedingly and I was lame from a little cut on one foot . 
I saw in time a blind man approaching me , and fled limping , for I feared his subtle intuitions . 
Once or twice accidental collisions occurred and I left people amazed , with unaccountable curses ringing in their ears . 
Then came something silent and quiet against my face , and across the Square fell a thin veil of slowly falling flakes of snow . 
I had caught a cold , and do as I would I could not avoid an occasional sneeze . 
And every dog that came in sight , with its pointing nose and curious sniffing , was a terror to me . 
`` Then came men and boys running , first one and then others , and shouting as they ran . 
It was a fire . 
They ran in the direction of my lodging , and looking back down a street I saw a mass of black smoke streaming up above the roofs and telephone wires . 
It was my lodging burning ; my clothes , my apparatus , all my resources indeed , except my cheque-book and the three volumes of memoranda that awaited me in Great Portland Street , were there . 
Burning ! 
I had burnt my boats -- if ever a man did ! 
The place was blazing . '' 
The Invisible Man paused and thought . 
Kemp glanced nervously out of the window . 
`` Yes ? '' 
he said . 
`` Go on . '' 
IN THE EMPORIUM `` So last January , with the beginning of a snowstorm in the air about me -- and if it settled on me it would betray me ! 
-- weary , cold , painful , inexpressibly wretched , and still but half convinced of my invisible quality , I began this new life to which I am committed . 
I had no refuge , no appliances , no human being in the world in whom I could confide . 
To have told my secret would have given me away -- made a mere show and rarity of me . 
Nevertheless , I was half-minded to accost some passer-by and throw myself upon his mercy . 
But I knew too clearly the terror and brutal cruelty my advances would evoke . 
I made no plans in the street . 
My sole object was to get shelter from the snow , to get myself covered and warm ; then I might hope to plan . 
But even to me , an Invisible Man , the rows of London houses stood latched , barred , and bolted impregnably . 
`` Only one thing could I see clearly before me -- the cold exposure and misery of the snowstorm and the night . 
`` And then I had a brilliant idea . 
I turned down one of the roads leading from Gower Street to Tottenham Court Road , and found myself outside Omniums , the big establishment where everything is to be bought -- you know the place : meat , grocery , linen , furniture , clothing , oil paintings even -- a huge meandering collection of shops rather than a shop . 
