`` Good Heavens ! '' 
said Kemp , reading eagerly an incredulous account of the events in Iping , of the previous afternoon , that have already been described . 
Over the leaf the report in the morning paper had been reprinted . 
He re-read it . 
`` Ran through the streets striking right and left . 
Jaffers insensible . 
Mr. Huxter in great pain -- still unable to describe what he saw . 
Painful humiliation -- vicar . 
Woman ill with terror ! 
Windows smashed . 
This extraordinary story probably a fabrication . 
Too good not to print -- cum grano ! '' 
He dropped the paper and stared blankly in front of him . 
`` Probably a fabrication ! '' 
He caught up the paper again , and re-read the whole business . 
`` But when does the Tramp come in ? 
Why the deuce was he chasing a tramp ? '' 
He sat down abruptly on the surgical bench . 
`` He 's not only invisible , '' he said , `` but he 's mad ! 
Homicidal ! '' 
When dawn came to mingle its pallor with the lamp-light and cigar smoke of the dining-room , Kemp was still pacing up and down , trying to grasp the incredible . 
He was altogether too excited to sleep . 
His servants , descending sleepily , discovered him , and were inclined to think that over-study had worked this ill on him . 
He gave them extraordinary but quite explicit instructions to lay breakfast for two in the belvedere study -- and then to confine themselves to the basement and ground-floor . 
Then he continued to pace the dining-room until the morning 's paper came . 
That had much to say and little to tell , beyond the confirmation of the evening before , and a very badly written account of another remarkable tale from Port Burdock . 
This gave Kemp the essence of the happenings at the `` Jolly Cricketers , '' and the name of Marvel . 
`` He has made me keep with him twenty-four hours , '' Marvel testified . 
Certain minor facts were added to the Iping story , notably the cutting of the village telegraph-wire . 
But there was nothing to throw light on the connexion between the Invisible Man and the Tramp ; for Mr. Marvel had supplied no information about the three books , or the money with which he was lined . 
The incredulous tone had vanished and a shoal of reporters and inquirers were already at work elaborating the matter . 
Kemp read every scrap of the report and sent his housemaid out to get everyone of the morning papers she could . 
These also he devoured . 
`` He is invisible ! '' 
he said . 
`` And it reads like rage growing to mania ! 
The things he may do ! 
The things he may do ! 
And he 's upstairs free as the air . 
What on earth ought I to do ? '' 
`` For instance , would it be a breach of faith if -- ? 
No . '' 
He went to a little untidy desk in the corner , and began a note . 
He tore this up half written , and wrote another . 
He read it over and considered it . 
Then he took an envelope and addressed it to `` Colonel Adye , Port Burdock . '' 
The Invisible Man awoke even as Kemp was doing this . 
He awoke in an evil temper , and Kemp , alert for every sound , heard his pattering feet rush suddenly across the bedroom overhead . 
Then a chair was flung over and the wash-hand stand tumbler smashed . 
Kemp hurried upstairs and rapped eagerly . 
