I might proceed with several more examples , one way or another known to me , of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale . 
In more than one instance , he has been known , not only to chase the assailing boats back to their ships , but to pursue the ship itself , and long withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks . 
The English ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head ; and , as for his strength , let me say , that there have been examples where the lines attached to a running sperm whale have , in a calm , been transferred to the ship , and secured there ; the whale towing her great hull through the water , as a horse walks off with a cart . 
Again , it is very often observed that , if the sperm whale , once struck , is allowed time to rally , he then acts , not so often with blind rage , as with wilful , deliberate designs of destruction to his pursuers ; nor is it without conveying some eloquent indication of his character , that upon being attacked he will frequently open his mouth , and retain it in that dread expansion for several consecutive minutes . 
But I must be content with only one more and a concluding illustration ; a remarkable and most significant one , by which you will not fail to see , that not only is the most marvellous event in this book corroborated by plain facts of the present day , but that these marvels -LRB- like all marvels -RRB- are mere repetitions of the ages ; so that for the millionth time we say amen with Solomon -- Verily there is nothing new under the sun . 
In the sixth Christian century lived Procopius , a Christian magistrate of Constantinople , in the days when Justinian was Emperor and Belisarius general . 
As many know , he wrote the history of his own times , a work every way of uncommon value . 
By the best authorities , he has always been considered a most trustworthy and unexaggerating historian , except in some one or two particulars , not at all affecting the matter presently to be mentioned . 
Now , in this history of his , Procopius mentions that , during the term of his prefecture at Constantinople , a great sea-monster was captured in the neighboring Propontis , or Sea of Marmora , after having destroyed vessels at intervals in those waters for a period of more than fifty years . 
A fact thus set down in substantial history can not easily be gainsaid . 
Nor is there any reason it should be . 
Of what precise species this sea-monster was , is not mentioned . 
But as he destroyed ships , as well as for other reasons , he must have been a whale ; and I am strongly inclined to think a sperm whale . 
And I will tell you why . 
For a long time I fancied that the sperm whale had been always unknown in the Mediterranean and the deep waters connecting with it . 
Even now I am certain that those seas are not , and perhaps never can be , in the present constitution of things , a place for his habitual gregarious resort . 
But further investigations have recently proved to me , that in modern times there have been isolated instances of the presence of the sperm whale in the Mediterranean . 
I am told , on good authority , that on the Barbary coast , a Commodore Davis of the British navy found the skeleton of a sperm whale . 
Now , as a vessel of war readily passes through the Dardanelles , hence a sperm whale could , by the same route , pass out of the Mediterranean into the Propontis . 
In the Propontis , as far as I can learn , none of that peculiar substance called BRIT is to be found , the aliment of the right whale . 
But I have every reason to believe that the food of the sperm whale -- squid or cuttle-fish -- lurks at the bottom of that sea , because large creatures , but by no means the largest of that sort , have been found at its surface . 
If , then , you properly put these statements together , and reason upon them a bit , you will clearly perceive that , according to all human reasoning , Procopius 's sea-monster , that for half a century stove the ships of a Roman Emperor , must in all probability have been a sperm whale . 
Though , consumed with the hot fire of his purpose , Ahab in all his thoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of Moby Dick ; though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests to that one passion ; nevertheless it may have been that he was by nature and long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman 's ways , altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage . 
Or at least if this were otherwise , there were not wanting other motives much more influential with him . 
It would be refining too much , perhaps , even considering his monomania , to hint that his vindictiveness towards the White Whale might have possibly extended itself in some degree to all sperm whales , and that the more monsters he slew by so much the more he multiplied the chances that each subsequently encountered whale would prove to be the hated one he hunted . 
But if such an hypothesis be indeed exceptionable , there were still additional considerations which , though not so strictly according with the wildness of his ruling passion , yet were by no means incapable of swaying him . 
To accomplish his object Ahab must use tools ; and of all tools used in the shadow of the moon , men are most apt to get out of order . 
He knew , for example , that however magnetic his ascendency in some respects was over Starbuck , yet that ascendency did not cover the complete spiritual man any more than mere corporeal superiority involves intellectual mastership ; for to the purely spiritual , the intellectual but stand in a sort of corporeal relation . 
Starbuck 's body and Starbuck 's coerced will were Ahab 's , so long as Ahab kept his magnet at Starbuck 's brain ; still he knew that for all this the chief mate , in his soul , abhorred his captain 's quest , and could he , would joyfully disintegrate himself from it , or even frustrate it . 
It might be that a long interval would elapse ere the White Whale was seen . 
During that long interval Starbuck would ever be apt to fall into open relapses of rebellion against his captain 's leadership , unless some ordinary , prudential , circumstantial influences were brought to bear upon him . 
Not only that , but the subtle insanity of Ahab respecting Moby Dick was noways more significantly manifested than in his superlative sense and shrewdness in foreseeing that , for the present , the hunt should in some way be stripped of that strange imaginative impiousness which naturally invested it ; that the full terror of the voyage must be kept withdrawn into the obscure background -LRB- for few men 's courage is proof against protracted meditation unrelieved by action -RRB- ; that when they stood their long night watches , his officers and men must have some nearer things to think of than Moby Dick . 
For however eagerly and impetuously the savage crew had hailed the announcement of his quest ; yet all sailors of all sorts are more or less capricious and unreliable -- they live in the varying outer weather , and they inhale its fickleness -- and when retained for any object remote and blank in the pursuit , however promissory of life and passion in the end , it is above all things requisite that temporary interests and employments should intervene and hold them healthily suspended for the final dash . 
Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing . 
In times of strong emotion mankind disdain all base considerations ; but such times are evanescent . 
The permanent constitutional condition of the manufactured man , thought Ahab , is sordidness . 
Granting that the White Whale fully incites the hearts of this my savage crew , and playing round their savageness even breeds a certain generous knight-errantism in them , still , while for the love of it they give chase to Moby Dick , they must also have food for their more common , daily appetites . 
For even the high lifted and chivalric Crusaders of old times were not content to traverse two thousand miles of land to fight for their holy sepulchre , without committing burglaries , picking pockets , and gaining other pious perquisites by the way . 
Had they been strictly held to their one final and romantic object -- that final and romantic object , too many would have turned from in disgust . 
I will not strip these men , thought Ahab , of all hopes of cash -- aye , cash . 
They may scorn cash now ; but let some months go by , and no perspective promise of it to them , and then this same quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them , this same cash would soon cashier Ahab . 
Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more related to Ahab personally . 
Having impulsively , it is probable , and perhaps somewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private purpose of the Pequod 's voyage , Ahab was now entirely conscious that , in so doing , he had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable charge of usurpation ; and with perfect impunity , both moral and legal , his crew if so disposed , and to that end competent , could refuse all further obedience to him , and even violently wrest from him the command . 
From even the barely hinted imputation of usurpation , and the possible consequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground , Ahab must of course have been most anxious to protect himself . 
That protection could only consist in his own predominating brain and heart and hand , backed by a heedful , closely calculating attention to every minute atmospheric influence which it was possible for his crew to be subjected to . 
For all these reasons then , and others perhaps too analytic to be verbally developed here , Ahab plainly saw that he must still in a good degree continue true to the natural , nominal purpose of the Pequod 's voyage ; observe all customary usages ; and not only that , but force himself to evince all his well known passionate interest in the general pursuit of his profession . 
Be all this as it may , his voice was now often heard hailing the three mast-heads and admonishing them to keep a bright look-out , and not omit reporting even a porpoise . 
This vigilance was not long without reward . 
It was a cloudy , sultry afternoon ; the seamen were lazily lounging about the decks , or vacantly gazing over into the lead-coloured waters . 
Queequeg and I were mildly employed weaving what is called a sword-mat , for an additional lashing to our boat . 
So still and subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene , and such an incantation of reverie lurked in the air , that each silent sailor seemed resolved into his own invisible self . 
I was the attendant or page of Queequeg , while busy at the mat . 
As I kept passing and repassing the filling or woof of marline between the long yarns of the warp , using my own hand for the shuttle , and as Queequeg , standing sideways , ever and anon slid his heavy oaken sword between the threads , and idly looking off upon the water , carelessly and unthinkingly drove home every yarn : I say so strange a dreaminess did there then reign all over the ship and all over the sea , only broken by the intermitting dull sound of the sword , that it seemed as if this were the Loom of Time , and I myself were a shuttle mechanically weaving and weaving away at the Fates . 
There lay the fixed threads of the warp subject to but one single , ever returning , unchanging vibration , and that vibration merely enough to admit of the crosswise interblending of other threads with its own . 
This warp seemed necessity ; and here , thought I , with my own hand I ply my own shuttle and weave my own destiny into these unalterable threads . 
Meantime , Queequeg 's impulsive , indifferent sword , sometimes hitting the woof slantingly , or crookedly , or strongly , or weakly , as the case might be ; and by this difference in the concluding blow producing a corresponding contrast in the final aspect of the completed fabric ; this savage 's sword , thought I , which thus finally shapes and fashions both warp and woof ; this easy , indifferent sword must be chance -- aye , chance , free will , and necessity -- nowise incompatible -- all interweavingly working together . 
The straight warp of necessity , not to be swerved from its ultimate course -- its every alternating vibration , indeed , only tending to that ; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads ; and chance , though restrained in its play within the right lines of necessity , and sideways in its motions directed by free will , though thus prescribed to by both , chance by turns rules either , and has the last featuring blow at events . 
Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I started at a sound so strange , long drawn , and musically wild and unearthly , that the ball of free will dropped from my hand , and I stood gazing up at the clouds whence that voice dropped like a wing . 
High aloft in the cross-trees was that mad Gay-Header , Tashtego . 
His body was reaching eagerly forward , his hand stretched out like a wand , and at brief sudden intervals he continued his cries . 
To be sure the same sound was that very moment perhaps being heard all over the seas , from hundreds of whalemen 's look-outs perched as high in the air ; but from few of those lungs could that accustomed old cry have derived such a marvellous cadence as from Tashtego the Indian 's . 
As he stood hovering over you half suspended in air , so wildly and eagerly peering towards the horizon , you would have thought him some prophet or seer beholding the shadows of Fate , and by those wild cries announcing their coming . 
`` There she blows ! 
there ! 
there ! 
there ! 
she blows ! 
she blows ! '' 
`` Where-away ? '' 
`` On the lee-beam , about two miles off ! 
a school of them ! '' 
Instantly all was commotion . 
The Sperm Whale blows as a clock ticks , with the same undeviating and reliable uniformity . 
And thereby whalemen distinguish this fish from other tribes of his genus . 
`` There go flukes ! '' 
was now the cry from Tashtego ; and the whales disappeared . 
`` Quick , steward ! '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Time ! 
time ! '' 
Dough-Boy hurried below , glanced at the watch , and reported the exact minute to Ahab . 
The ship was now kept away from the wind , and she went gently rolling before it . 
Tashtego reporting that the whales had gone down heading to leeward , we confidently looked to see them again directly in advance of our bows . 
For that singular craft at times evinced by the Sperm Whale when , sounding with his head in one direction , he nevertheless , while concealed beneath the surface , mills round , and swiftly swims off in the opposite quarter -- this deceitfulness of his could not now be in action ; for there was no reason to suppose that the fish seen by Tashtego had been in any way alarmed , or indeed knew at all of our vicinity . 
One of the men selected for shipkeepers -- that is , those not appointed to the boats , by this time relieved the Indian at the main-mast head . 
The sailors at the fore and mizzen had come down ; the line tubs were fixed in their places ; the cranes were thrust out ; the mainyard was backed , and the three boats swung over the sea like three samphire baskets over high cliffs . 
Outside of the bulwarks their eager crews with one hand clung to the rail , while one foot was expectantly poised on the gunwale . 
So look the long line of man-of-war 's men about to throw themselves on board an enemy 's ship . 
But at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was heard that took every eye from the whale . 
With a start all glared at dark Ahab , who was surrounded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of air . 
The phantoms , for so they then seemed , were flitting on the other side of the deck , and , with a noiseless celerity , were casting loose the tackles and bands of the boat which swung there . 
This boat had always been deemed one of the spare boats , though technically called the captain 's , on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter . 
The figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart , with one white tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips . 
A rumpled Chinese jacket of black cotton funereally invested him , with wide black trowsers of the same dark stuff . 
But strangely crowning this ebonness was a glistening white plaited turban , the living hair braided and coiled round and round upon his head . 
Less swart in aspect , the companions of this figure were of that vivid , tiger-yellow complexion peculiar to some of the aboriginal natives of the Manillas ; -- a race notorious for a certain diabolism of subtilty , and by some honest white mariners supposed to be the paid spies and secret confidential agents on the water of the devil , their lord , whose counting-room they suppose to be elsewhere . 
While yet the wondering ship 's company were gazing upon these strangers , Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at their head , `` All ready there , Fedallah ? '' 
`` Ready , '' was the half-hissed reply . 
`` Lower away then ; d'ye hear ? '' 
shouting across the deck . 
`` Lower away there , I say . '' 
Such was the thunder of his voice , that spite of their amazement the men sprang over the rail ; the sheaves whirled round in the blocks ; with a wallow , the three boats dropped into the sea ; while , with a dexterous , off-handed daring , unknown in any other vocation , the sailors , goat-like , leaped down the rolling ship 's side into the tossed boats below . 
Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship 's lee , when a fourth keel , coming from the windward side , pulled round under the stern , and showed the five strangers rowing Ahab , who , standing erect in the stern , loudly hailed Starbuck , Stubb , and Flask , to spread themselves widely , so as to cover a large expanse of water . 
But with all their eyes again riveted upon the swart Fedallah and his crew , the inmates of the other boats obeyed not the command . 
`` Captain Ahab ? 
-- '' said Starbuck . 
`` Spread yourselves , '' cried Ahab ; `` give way , all four boats . 
Thou , Flask , pull out more to leeward ! '' 
`` Aye , aye , sir , '' cheerily cried little King-Post , sweeping round his great steering oar . 
`` Lay back ! '' 
addressing his crew . 
`` There ! 
-- there ! 
-- there again ! 
There she blows right ahead , boys ! 
-- lay back ! '' 
`` Never heed yonder yellow boys , Archy . '' 
`` Oh , I do n't mind 'em , sir , '' said Archy ; `` I knew it all before now . 
Did n't I hear 'em in the hold ? 
And did n't I tell Cabaco here of it ? 
What say ye , Cabaco ? 
They are stowaways , Mr. Flask . '' 
`` Pull , pull , my fine hearts-alive ; pull , my children ; pull , my little ones , '' drawlingly and soothingly sighed Stubb to his crew , some of whom still showed signs of uneasiness . 
`` Why do n't you break your backbones , my boys ? 
What is it you stare at ? 
Those chaps in yonder boat ? 
Tut ! 
They are only five more hands come to help us -- never mind from where -- the more the merrier . 
Pull , then , do pull ; never mind the brimstone -- devils are good fellows enough . 
So , so ; there you are now ; that 's the stroke for a thousand pounds ; that 's the stroke to sweep the stakes ! 
Hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil , my heroes ! 
Three cheers , men -- all hearts alive ! 
Easy , easy ; do n't be in a hurry -- do n't be in a hurry . 
Why do n't you snap your oars , you rascals ? 
Bite something , you dogs ! 
So , so , so , then : -- softly , softly ! 
That 's it -- that 's it ! 
long and strong . 
Give way there , give way ! 
The devil fetch ye , ye ragamuffin rapscallions ; ye are all asleep . 
Stop snoring , ye sleepers , and pull . 
Pull , will ye ? 
pull , ca n't ye ? 
pull , wo n't ye ? 
Why in the name of gudgeons and ginger-cakes do n't ye pull ? 
-- pull and break something ! 
pull , and start your eyes out ! 
Here ! '' 
whipping out the sharp knife from his girdle ; `` every mother 's son of ye draw his knife , and pull with the blade between his teeth . 
That 's it -- that 's it . 
Now ye do something ; that looks like it , my steel-bits . 
Start her -- start her , my silver-spoons ! 
Start her , marling-spikes ! '' 
Stubb 's exordium to his crew is given here at large , because he had rather a peculiar way of talking to them in general , and especially in inculcating the religion of rowing . 
But you must not suppose from this specimen of his sermonizings that he ever flew into downright passions with his congregation . 
Not at all ; and therein consisted his chief peculiarity . 
He would say the most terrific things to his crew , in a tone so strangely compounded of fun and fury , and the fury seemed so calculated merely as a spice to the fun , that no oarsman could hear such queer invocations without pulling for dear life , and yet pulling for the mere joke of the thing . 
Besides he all the time looked so easy and indolent himself , so loungingly managed his steering-oar , and so broadly gaped -- open-mouthed at times -- that the mere sight of such a yawning commander , by sheer force of contrast , acted like a charm upon the crew . 
Then again , Stubb was one of those odd sort of humorists , whose jollity is sometimes so curiously ambiguous , as to put all inferiors on their guard in the matter of obeying them . 
In obedience to a sign from Ahab , Starbuck was now pulling obliquely across Stubb 's bow ; and when for a minute or so the two boats were pretty near to each other , Stubb hailed the mate . 
`` Mr. Starbuck ! 
larboard boat there , ahoy ! 
a word with ye , sir , if ye please ! '' 
`` Halloa ! '' 
returned Starbuck , turning round not a single inch as he spoke ; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew ; his face set like a flint from Stubb 's . 
`` What think ye of those yellow boys , sir ! '' 
`` Smuggled on board , somehow , before the ship sailed . 
-LRB- Strong , strong , boys ! -RRB- '' 
in a whisper to his crew , then speaking out loud again : `` A sad business , Mr. Stubb ! 
-LRB- seethe her , seethe her , my lads ! -RRB- 
but never mind , Mr. Stubb , all for the best . 
Let all your crew pull strong , come what will . 
-LRB- Spring , my men , spring ! -RRB- 
There 's hogsheads of sperm ahead , Mr. Stubb , and that 's what ye came for . 
-LRB- Pull , my boys ! -RRB- 
Sperm , sperm 's the play ! 
This at least is duty ; duty and profit hand in hand . '' 
`` Aye , aye , I thought as much , '' soliloquized Stubb , when the boats diverged , `` as soon as I clapt eye on 'em , I thought so . 
Aye , and that 's what he went into the after hold for , so often , as Dough-Boy long suspected . 
They were hidden down there . 
The White Whale 's at the bottom of it . 
Well , well , so be it ! 
Ca n't be helped ! 
All right ! 
Give way , men ! 
It ai n't the White Whale to-day ! 
Give way ! '' 
Now the advent of these outlandish strangers at such a critical instant as the lowering of the boats from the deck , this had not unreasonably awakened a sort of superstitious amazement in some of the ship 's company ; but Archy 's fancied discovery having some time previous got abroad among them , though indeed not credited then , this had in some small measure prepared them for the event . 
It took off the extreme edge of their wonder ; and so what with all this and Stubb 's confident way of accounting for their appearance , they were for the time freed from superstitious surmisings ; though the affair still left abundant room for all manner of wild conjectures as to dark Ahab 's precise agency in the matter from the beginning . 
For me , I silently recalled the mysterious shadows I had seen creeping on board the Pequod during the dim Nantucket dawn , as well as the enigmatical hintings of the unaccountable Elijah . 
Meantime , Ahab , out of hearing of his officers , having sided the furthest to windward , was still ranging ahead of the other boats ; a circumstance bespeaking how potent a crew was pulling him . 
Those tiger yellow creatures of his seemed all steel and whalebone ; like five trip-hammers they rose and fell with regular strokes of strength , which periodically started the boat along the water like a horizontal burst boiler out of a Mississippi steamer . 
As for Fedallah , who was seen pulling the harpooneer oar , he had thrown aside his black jacket , and displayed his naked chest with the whole part of his body above the gunwale , clearly cut against the alternating depressions of the watery horizon ; while at the other end of the boat Ahab , with one arm , like a fencer 's , thrown half backward into the air , as if to counterbalance any tendency to trip ; Ahab was seen steadily managing his steering oar as in a thousand boat lowerings ere the White Whale had torn him . 
All at once the outstretched arm gave a peculiar motion and then remained fixed , while the boat 's five oars were seen simultaneously peaked . 
Boat and crew sat motionless on the sea . 
Instantly the three spread boats in the rear paused on their way . 
The whales had irregularly settled bodily down into the blue , thus giving no distantly discernible token of the movement , though from his closer vicinity Ahab had observed it . 
`` Every man look out along his oars ! '' 
cried Starbuck . 
`` Thou , Queequeg , stand up ! '' 
Nimbly springing up on the triangular raised box in the bow , the savage stood erect there , and with intensely eager eyes gazed off towards the spot where the chase had last been descried . 
Likewise upon the extreme stern of the boat where it was also triangularly platformed level with the gunwale , Starbuck himself was seen coolly and adroitly balancing himself to the jerking tossings of his chip of a craft , and silently eyeing the vast blue eye of the sea . 
Not very far distant Flask 's boat was also lying breathlessly still ; its commander recklessly standing upon the top of the loggerhead , a stout sort of post rooted in the keel , and rising some two feet above the level of the stern platform . 
It is used for catching turns with the whale line . 
Its top is not more spacious than the palm of a man 's hand , and standing upon such a base as that , Flask seemed perched at the mast-head of some ship which had sunk to all but her trucks . 
But little King-Post was small and short , and at the same time little King-Post was full of a large and tall ambition , so that this loggerhead stand-point of his did by no means satisfy King-Post . 
`` I ca n't see three seas off ; tip us up an oar there , and let me on to that . '' 
Upon this , Daggoo , with either hand upon the gunwale to steady his way , swiftly slid aft , and then erecting himself volunteered his lofty shoulders for a pedestal . 
`` Good a mast-head as any , sir . 
Will you mount ? '' 
`` That I will , and thank ye very much , my fine fellow ; only I wish you fifty feet taller . '' 
Whereupon planting his feet firmly against two opposite planks of the boat , the gigantic negro , stooping a little , presented his flat palm to Flask 's foot , and then putting Flask 's hand on his hearse-plumed head and bidding him spring as he himself should toss , with one dexterous fling landed the little man high and dry on his shoulders . 
And here was Flask now standing , Daggoo with one lifted arm furnishing him with a breastband to lean against and steady himself by . 
At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with what wondrous habitude of unconscious skill the whaleman will maintain an erect posture in his boat , even when pitched about by the most riotously perverse and cross-running seas . 
Still more strange to see him giddily perched upon the loggerhead itself , under such circumstances . 
But the sight of little Flask mounted upon gigantic Daggoo was yet more curious ; for sustaining himself with a cool , indifferent , easy , unthought of , barbaric majesty , the noble negro to every roll of the sea harmoniously rolled his fine form . 
On his broad back , flaxen-haired Flask seemed a snow-flake . 
The bearer looked nobler than the rider . 
Though truly vivacious , tumultuous , ostentatious little Flask would now and then stamp with impatience ; but not one added heave did he thereby give to the negro 's lordly chest . 
So have I seen Passion and Vanity stamping the living magnanimous earth , but the earth did not alter her tides and her seasons for that . 
Meanwhile Stubb , the third mate , betrayed no such far-gazing solicitudes . 
The whales might have made one of their regular soundings , not a temporary dive from mere fright ; and if that were the case , Stubb , as his wont in such cases , it seems , was resolved to solace the languishing interval with his pipe . 
He withdrew it from his hatband , where he always wore it aslant like a feather . 
He loaded it , and rammed home the loading with his thumb-end ; but hardly had he ignited his match across the rough sandpaper of his hand , when Tashtego , his harpooneer , whose eyes had been setting to windward like two fixed stars , suddenly dropped like light from his erect attitude to his seat , crying out in a quick phrensy of hurry , `` Down , down all , and give way ! 
-- there they are ! '' 
To a landsman , no whale , nor any sign of a herring , would have been visible at that moment ; nothing but a troubled bit of greenish white water , and thin scattered puffs of vapour hovering over it , and suffusingly blowing off to leeward , like the confused scud from white rolling billows . 
The air around suddenly vibrated and tingled , as it were , like the air over intensely heated plates of iron . 
Beneath this atmospheric waving and curling , and partially beneath a thin layer of water , also , the whales were swimming . 
Seen in advance of all the other indications , the puffs of vapour they spouted , seemed their forerunning couriers and detached flying outriders . 
All four boats were now in keen pursuit of that one spot of troubled water and air . 
But it bade fair to outstrip them ; it flew on and on , as a mass of interblending bubbles borne down a rapid stream from the hills . 
`` Pull , pull , my good boys , '' said Starbuck , in the lowest possible but intensest concentrated whisper to his men ; while the sharp fixed glance from his eyes darted straight ahead of the bow , almost seemed as two visible needles in two unerring binnacle compasses . 
He did not say much to his crew , though , nor did his crew say anything to him . 
Only the silence of the boat was at intervals startlingly pierced by one of his peculiar whispers , now harsh with command , now soft with entreaty . 
How different the loud little King-Post . 
`` Sing out and say something , my hearties . 
Roar and pull , my thunderbolts ! 
Beach me , beach me on their black backs , boys ; only do that for me , and I 'll sign over to you my Martha 's Vineyard plantation , boys ; including wife and children , boys . 
Lay me on -- lay me on ! 
O Lord , Lord ! 
but I shall go stark , staring mad ! 
See ! 
see that white water ! '' 
And so shouting , he pulled his hat from his head , and stamped up and down on it ; then picking it up , flirted it far off upon the sea ; and finally fell to rearing and plunging in the boat 's stern like a crazed colt from the prairie . 
`` Look at that chap now , '' philosophically drawled Stubb , who , with his unlighted short pipe , mechanically retained between his teeth , at a short distance , followed after -- `` He 's got fits , that Flask has . 
Fits ? 
yes , give him fits -- that 's the very word -- pitch fits into 'em . 
Merrily , merrily , hearts-alive . 
Pudding for supper , you know ; -- merry 's the word . 
Pull , babes -- pull , sucklings -- pull , all . 
But what the devil are you hurrying about ? 
Softly , softly , and steadily , my men . 
Only pull , and keep pulling ; nothing more . 
Crack all your backbones , and bite your knives in two -- that 's all . 
Take it easy -- why do n't ye take it easy , I say , and burst all your livers and lungs ! '' 
But what it was that inscrutable Ahab said to that tiger-yellow crew of his -- these were words best omitted here ; for you live under the blessed light of the evangelical land . 
Only the infidel sharks in the audacious seas may give ear to such words , when , with tornado brow , and eyes of red murder , and foam-glued lips , Ahab leaped after his prey . 
Meanwhile , all the boats tore on . 
The repeated specific allusions of Flask to `` that whale , '' as he called the fictitious monster which he declared to be incessantly tantalizing his boat 's bow with its tail -- these allusions of his were at times so vivid and life-like , that they would cause some one or two of his men to snatch a fearful look over the shoulder . 
But this was against all rule ; for the oarsmen must put out their eyes , and ram a skewer through their necks ; usage pronouncing that they must have no organs but ears , and no limbs but arms , in these critical moments . 
It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe ! 
The vast swells of the omnipotent sea ; the surging , hollow roar they made , as they rolled along the eight gunwales , like gigantic bowls in a boundless bowling-green ; the brief suspended agony of the boat , as it would tip for an instant on the knife-like edge of the sharper waves , that almost seemed threatening to cut it in two ; the sudden profound dip into the watery glens and hollows ; the keen spurrings and goadings to gain the top of the opposite hill ; the headlong , sled-like slide down its other side ; -- all these , with the cries of the headsmen and harpooneers , and the shuddering gasps of the oarsmen , with the wondrous sight of the ivory Pequod bearing down upon her boats with outstretched sails , like a wild hen after her screaming brood ; -- all this was thrilling . 
Not the raw recruit , marching from the bosom of his wife into the fever heat of his first battle ; not the dead man 's ghost encountering the first unknown phantom in the other world ; -- neither of these can feel stranger and stronger emotions than that man does , who for the first time finds himself pulling into the charmed , churned circle of the hunted sperm whale . 
The dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more and more visible , owing to the increasing darkness of the dun cloud-shadows flung upon the sea . 
The jets of vapour no longer blended , but tilted everywhere to right and left ; the whales seemed separating their wakes . 
The boats were pulled more apart ; Starbuck giving chase to three whales running dead to leeward . 
Our sail was now set , and , with the still rising wind , we rushed along ; the boat going with such madness through the water , that the lee oars could scarcely be worked rapidly enough to escape being torn from the row-locks . 
Soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of mist ; neither ship nor boat to be seen . 
`` Give way , men , '' whispered Starbuck , drawing still further aft the sheet of his sail ; `` there is time to kill a fish yet before the squall comes . 
There 's white water again ! 
-- close to ! 
Spring ! '' 
Soon after , two cries in quick succession on each side of us denoted that the other boats had got fast ; but hardly were they overheard , when with a lightning-like hurtling whisper Starbuck said : `` Stand up ! '' 
and Queequeg , harpoon in hand , sprang to his feet . 
Though not one of the oarsmen was then facing the life and death peril so close to them ahead , yet with their eyes on the intense countenance of the mate in the stern of the boat , they knew that the imminent instant had come ; they heard , too , an enormous wallowing sound as of fifty elephants stirring in their litter . 
Meanwhile the boat was still booming through the mist , the waves curling and hissing around us like the erected crests of enraged serpents . 
`` That 's his hump . 
THERE , THERE , give it to him ! '' 
whispered Starbuck . 
A short rushing sound leaped out of the boat ; it was the darted iron of Queequeg . 
Then all in one welded commotion came an invisible push from astern , while forward the boat seemed striking on a ledge ; the sail collapsed and exploded ; a gush of scalding vapour shot up near by ; something rolled and tumbled like an earthquake beneath us . 
The whole crew were half suffocated as they were tossed helter-skelter into the white curdling cream of the squall . 
Squall , whale , and harpoon had all blended together ; and the whale , merely grazed by the iron , escaped . 
Though completely swamped , the boat was nearly unharmed . 
Swimming round it we picked up the floating oars , and lashing them across the gunwale , tumbled back to our places . 
There we sat up to our knees in the sea , the water covering every rib and plank , so that to our downward gazing eyes the suspended craft seemed a coral boat grown up to us from the bottom of the ocean . 
The wind increased to a howl ; the waves dashed their bucklers together ; the whole squall roared , forked , and crackled around us like a white fire upon the prairie , in which , unconsumed , we were burning ; immortal in these jaws of death ! 
In vain we hailed the other boats ; as well roar to the live coals down the chimney of a flaming furnace as hail those boats in that storm . 
Meanwhile the driving scud , rack , and mist , grew darker with the shadows of night ; no sign of the ship could be seen . 
The rising sea forbade all attempts to bale out the boat . 
The oars were useless as propellers , performing now the office of life-preservers . 
So , cutting the lashing of the waterproof match keg , after many failures Starbuck contrived to ignite the lamp in the lantern ; then stretching it on a waif pole , handed it to Queequeg as the standard-bearer of this forlorn hope . 
There , then , he sat , holding up that imbecile candle in the heart of that almighty forlornness . 
There , then , he sat , the sign and symbol of a man without faith , hopelessly holding up hope in the midst of despair . 
Wet , drenched through , and shivering cold , despairing of ship or boat , we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on . 
The mist still spread over the sea , the empty lantern lay crushed in the bottom of the boat . 
Suddenly Queequeg started to his feet , hollowing his hand to his ear . 
We all heard a faint creaking , as of ropes and yards hitherto muffled by the storm . 
The sound came nearer and nearer ; the thick mists were dimly parted by a huge , vague form . 
Affrighted , we all sprang into the sea as the ship at last loomed into view , bearing right down upon us within a distance of not much more than its length . 
Floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat , as for one instant it tossed and gaped beneath the ship 's bows like a chip at the base of a cataract ; and then the vast hull rolled over it , and it was seen no more till it came up weltering astern . 
Again we swam for it , were dashed against it by the seas , and were at last taken up and safely landed on board . 
Ere the squall came close to , the other boats had cut loose from their fish and returned to the ship in good time . 
The ship had given us up , but was still cruising , if haply it might light upon some token of our perishing , -- an oar or a lance pole . 
There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed affair we call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke , though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns , and more than suspects that the joke is at nobody 's expense but his own . 
However , nothing dispirits , and nothing seems worth while disputing . 
He bolts down all events , all creeds , and beliefs , and persuasions , all hard things visible and invisible , never mind how knobby ; as an ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints . 
And as for small difficulties and worryings , prospects of sudden disaster , peril of life and limb ; all these , and death itself , seem to him only sly , good-natured hits , and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the unseen and unaccountable old joker . 
That odd sort of wayward mood I am speaking of , comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation ; it comes in the very midst of his earnestness , so that what just before might have seemed to him a thing most momentous , now seems but a part of the general joke . 
There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy sort of genial , desperado philosophy ; and with it I now regarded this whole voyage of the Pequod , and the great White Whale its object . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , when they had dragged me , the last man , to the deck , and I was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the water ; `` Queequeg , my fine friend , does this sort of thing often happen ? '' 
Without much emotion , though soaked through just like me , he gave me to understand that such things did often happen . 
`` Mr. Stubb , '' said I , turning to that worthy , who , buttoned up in his oil-jacket , was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain ; `` Mr. Stubb , I think I have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met , our chief mate , Mr. Starbuck , is by far the most careful and prudent . 
I suppose then , that going plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy squall is the height of a whaleman 's discretion ? '' 
`` Certain . 
I 've lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off Cape Horn . '' 
`` Mr. Flask , '' said I , turning to little King-Post , who was standing close by ; `` you are experienced in these things , and I am not . 
Will you tell me whether it is an unalterable law in this fishery , Mr. Flask , for an oarsman to break his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death 's jaws ? '' 
`` Ca n't you twist that smaller ? '' 
said Flask . 
`` Yes , that 's the law . 
I should like to see a boat 's crew backing water up to a whale face foremost . 
Ha , ha ! 
the whale would give them squint for squint , mind that ! '' 
Here then , from three impartial witnesses , I had a deliberate statement of the entire case . 
Considering , therefore , that squalls and capsizings in the water and consequent bivouacks on the deep , were matters of common occurrence in this kind of life ; considering that at the superlatively critical instant of going on to the whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who steered the boat -- oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his impetuousness upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings ; considering that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck 's driving on to his whale almost in the teeth of a squall , and considering that Starbuck , notwithstanding , was famous for his great heedfulness in the fishery ; considering that I belonged to this uncommonly prudent Starbuck 's boat ; and finally considering in what a devil 's chase I was implicated , touching the White Whale : taking all things together , I say , I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of my will . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , `` come along , you shall be my lawyer , executor , and legatee . '' 
It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at their last wills and testaments , but there are no people in the world more fond of that diversion . 
This was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done the same thing . 
After the ceremony was concluded upon the present occasion , I felt all the easier ; a stone was rolled away from my heart . 
Besides , all the days I should now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his resurrection ; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the case might be . 
I survived myself ; my death and burial were locked up in my chest . 
I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly , like a quiet ghost with a clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault . 
Now then , thought I , unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock , here goes for a cool , collected dive at death and destruction , and the devil fetch the hindmost . 
`` Who would have thought it , Flask ! '' 
cried Stubb ; `` if I had but one leg you would not catch me in a boat , unless maybe to stop the plug-hole with my timber toe . 
Oh ! 
he 's a wonderful old man ! '' 
`` I do n't think it so strange , after all , on that account , '' said Flask . 
`` If his leg were off at the hip , now , it would be a different thing . 
That would disable him ; but he has one knee , and good part of the other left , you know . '' 
`` I do n't know that , my little man ; I never yet saw him kneel . '' 
Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether , considering the paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage , it is right for a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active perils of the chase . 
So Tamerlane 's soldiers often argued with tears in their eyes , whether that invaluable life of his ought to be carried into the thickest of the fight . 
But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect . 
Considering that with two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger ; considering that the pursuit of whales is always under great and extraordinary difficulties ; that every individual moment , indeed , then comprises a peril ; under these circumstances is it wise for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt ? 
As a general thing , the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought not . 
Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of his entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes of the chase , for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in person , yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually apportioned to him as a regular headsman in the hunt -- above all for Captain Ahab to be supplied with five extra men , as that same boat 's crew , he well knew that such generous conceits never entered the heads of the owners of the Pequod . 
Therefore he had not solicited a boat 's crew from them , nor had he in any way hinted his desires on that head . 
Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own touching all that matter . 
Until Cabaco 's published discovery , the sailors had little foreseen it , though to be sure when , after being a little while out of port , all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the whaleboats for service ; when some time after this Ahab was now and then found bestirring himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for what was thought to be one of the spare boats , and even solicitously cutting the small wooden skewers , which when the line is running out are pinned over the groove in the bow : when all this was observed in him , and particularly his solicitude in having an extra coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat , as if to make it better withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb ; and also the anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board , or clumsy cleat , as it is sometimes called , the horizontal piece in the boat 's bow for bracing the knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale ; when it was observed how often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the semi-circular depression in the cleat , and with the carpenter 's chisel gouged out a little here and straightened it a little there ; all these things , I say , had awakened much interest and curiosity at the time . 
But almost everybody supposed that this particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be with a view to the ultimate chase of Moby Dick ; for he had already revealed his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person . 
But such a supposition did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat 's crew being assigned to that boat . 
Now , with the subordinate phantoms , what wonder remained soon waned away ; for in a whaler wonders soon wane . 
Besides , now and then such unaccountable odds and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown nooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these floating outlaws of whalers ; and the ships themselves often pick up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea on planks , bits of wreck , oars , whaleboats , canoes , blown-off Japanese junks , and what not ; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down into the cabin to chat with the captain , and it would not create any unsubduable excitement in the forecastle . 
But be all this as it may , certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms soon found their place among the crew , though still as it were somehow distinct from them , yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery to the last . 
Whence he came in a mannerly world like this , by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab 's peculiar fortunes ; nay , so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence ; Heaven knows , but it might have been even authority over him ; all this none knew . 
But one can not sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah . 
He was such a creature as civilized , domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their dreams , and that but dimly ; but the like of whom now and then glide among the unchanging Asiatic communities , especially the Oriental isles to the east of the continent -- those insulated , immemorial , unalterable countries , which even in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of earth 's primal generations , when the memory of the first man was a distinct recollection , and all men his descendants , unknowing whence he came , eyed each other as real phantoms , and asked of the sun and the moon why they were created and to what end ; when though , according to Genesis , the angels indeed consorted with the daughters of men , the devils also , add the uncanonical Rabbins , indulged in mundane amours . 
Days , weeks passed , and under easy sail , the ivory Pequod had slowly swept across four several cruising-grounds ; that off the Azores ; off the Cape de Verdes ; on the Plate -LRB- so called -RRB- , being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata ; and the Carrol Ground , an unstaked , watery locality , southerly from St. Helena . 
It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight night , when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver ; and , by their soft , suffusing seethings , made what seemed a silvery silence , not a solitude ; on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white bubbles at the bow . 
Lit up by the moon , it looked celestial ; seemed some plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea . 
Fedallah first descried this jet . 
For of these moonlight nights , it was his wont to mount to the main-mast head , and stand a look-out there , with the same precision as if it had been day . 
And yet , though herds of whales were seen by night , not one whaleman in a hundred would venture a lowering for them . 
You may think with what emotions , then , the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours ; his turban and the moon , companions in one sky . 
But when , after spending his uniform interval there for several successive nights without uttering a single sound ; when , after all this silence , his unearthly voice was heard announcing that silvery , moon-lit jet , every reclining mariner started to his feet as if some winged spirit had lighted in the rigging , and hailed the mortal crew . 
`` There she blows ! '' 
Had the trump of judgment blown , they could not have quivered more ; yet still they felt no terror ; rather pleasure . 
For though it was a most unwonted hour , yet so impressive was the cry , and so deliriously exciting , that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a lowering . 
Walking the deck with quick , side-lunging strides , Ahab commanded the t ` gallant sails and royals to be set , and every stunsail spread . 
The best man in the ship must take the helm . 
Then , with every mast-head manned , the piled-up craft rolled down before the wind . 
The strange , upheaving , lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows of so many sails , made the buoyant , hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet ; while still she rushed along , as if two antagonistic influences were struggling in her -- one to mount direct to heaven , the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal . 
And had you watched Ahab 's face that night , you would have thought that in him also two different things were warring . 
While his one live leg made lively echoes along the deck , every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a coffin-tap . 
On life and death this old man walked . 
But though the ship so swiftly sped , and though from every eye , like arrows , the eager glances shot , yet the silvery jet was no more seen that night . 
Every sailor swore he saw it once , but not a second time . 
This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing , when , some days after , lo ! 
at the same silent hour , it was again announced : again it was descried by all ; but upon making sail to overtake it , once more it disappeared as if it had never been . 
And so it served us night after night , till no one heeded it but to wonder at it . 
Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight , or starlight , as the case might be ; disappearing again for one whole day , or two days , or three ; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be advancing still further and further in our van , this solitary jet seemed for ever alluring us on . 
Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race , and in accordance with the preternaturalness , as it seemed , which in many things invested the Pequod , were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever and wherever descried ; at however remote times , or in however far apart latitudes and longitudes , that unnearable spout was cast by one self-same whale ; and that whale , Moby Dick . 
For a time , there reigned , too , a sense of peculiar dread at this flitting apparition , as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on , in order that the monster might turn round upon us , and rend us at last in the remotest and most savage seas . 
These temporary apprehensions , so vague but so awful , derived a wondrous potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather , in which , beneath all its blue blandness , some thought there lurked a devilish charm , as for days and days we voyaged along , through seas so wearily , lonesomely mild , that all space , in repugnance to our vengeful errand , seemed vacating itself of life before our urn-like prow . 
But , at last , when turning to the eastward , the Cape winds began howling around us , and we rose and fell upon the long , troubled seas that are there ; when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast , and gored the dark waves in her madness , till , like showers of silver chips , the foam-flakes flew over her bulwarks ; then all this desolate vacuity of life went away , but gave place to sights more dismal than before . 
Close to our bows , strange forms in the water darted hither and thither before us ; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens . 
And every morning , perched on our stays , rows of these birds were seen ; and spite of our hootings , for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp , as though they deemed our ship some drifting , uninhabited craft ; a thing appointed to desolation , and therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves . 
And heaved and heaved , still unrestingly heaved the black sea , as if its vast tides were a conscience ; and the great mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the long sin and suffering it had bred . 
Cape of Good Hope , do they call ye ? 
Rather Cape Tormentoto , as called of yore ; for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had attended us , we found ourselves launched into this tormented sea , where guilty beings transformed into those fowls and these fish , seemed condemned to swim on everlastingly without any haven in store , or beat that black air without any horizon . 
But calm , snow-white , and unvarying ; still directing its fountain of feathers to the sky ; still beckoning us on from before , the solitary jet would at times be descried . 
During all this blackness of the elements , Ahab , though assuming for the time the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous deck , manifested the gloomiest reserve ; and more seldom than ever addressed his mates . 
In tempestuous times like these , after everything above and aloft has been secured , nothing more can be done but passively to await the issue of the gale . 
Then Captain and crew become practical fatalists . 
So , with his ivory leg inserted into its accustomed hole , and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud , Ahab for hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward , while an occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very eyelashes together . 
Meantime , the crew driven from the forward part of the ship by the perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows , stood in a line along the bulwarks in the waist ; and the better to guard against the leaping waves , each man had slipped himself into a sort of bowline secured to the rail , in which he swung as in a loosened belt . 
Few or no words were spoken ; and the silent ship , as if manned by painted sailors in wax , day after day tore on through all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves . 
By night the same muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed ; still in silence the men swung in the bowlines ; still wordless Ahab stood up to the blast . 
