But , as yet we have not to do with such an one , but with quite another ; and still a man , who , if indeed peculiar , it only results again from another phase of the Quaker , modified by individual circumstances . 
Like Captain Peleg , Captain Bildad was a well-to-do , retired whaleman . 
But unlike Captain Peleg -- who cared not a rush for what are called serious things , and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest of all trifles -- Captain Bildad had not only been originally educated according to the strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism , but all his subsequent ocean life , and the sight of many unclad , lovely island creatures , round the Horn -- all that had not moved this native born Quaker one single jot , had not so much as altered one angle of his vest . 
Still , for all this immutableness , was there some lack of common consistency about worthy Captain Peleg . 
Though refusing , from conscientious scruples , to bear arms against land invaders , yet himself had illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific ; and though a sworn foe to human bloodshed , yet had he in his straight-bodied coat , spilled tuns upon tuns of leviathan gore . 
How now in the contemplative evening of his days , the pious Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence , I do not know ; but it did not seem to concern him much , and very probably he had long since come to the sage and sensible conclusion that a man 's religion is one thing , and this practical world quite another . 
This world pays dividends . 
Rising from a little cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab , to a harpooneer in a broad shad-bellied waistcoat ; from that becoming boat-header , chief-mate , and captain , and finally a ship owner ; Bildad , as I hinted before , had concluded his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age of sixty , and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his well-earned income . 
Now , Bildad , I am sorry to say , had the reputation of being an incorrigible old hunks , and in his sea-going days , a bitter , hard task-master . 
They told me in Nantucket , though it certainly seems a curious story , that when he sailed the old Categut whaleman , his crew , upon arriving home , were mostly all carried ashore to the hospital , sore exhausted and worn out . 
For a pious man , especially for a Quaker , he was certainly rather hard-hearted , to say the least . 
He never used to swear , though , at his men , they said ; but somehow he got an inordinate quantity of cruel , unmitigated hard work out of them . 
When Bildad was a chief-mate , to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking at you , made you feel completely nervous , till you could clutch something -- a hammer or a marling-spike , and go to work like mad , at something or other , never mind what . 
Indolence and idleness perished before him . 
His own person was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian character . 
On his long , gaunt body , he carried no spare flesh , no superfluous beard , his chin having a soft , economical nap to it , like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat . 
Such , then , was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I followed Captain Peleg down into the cabin . 
The space between the decks was small ; and there , bolt-upright , sat old Bildad , who always sat so , and never leaned , and this to save his coat tails . 
His broad-brim was placed beside him ; his legs were stiffly crossed ; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin ; and spectacles on nose , he seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume . 
`` Bildad , '' cried Captain Peleg , `` at it again , Bildad , eh ? 
Ye have been studying those Scriptures , now , for the last thirty years , to my certain knowledge . 
How far ye got , Bildad ? '' 
As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate , Bildad , without noticing his present irreverence , quietly looked up , and seeing me , glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg . 
`` He says he 's our man , Bildad , '' said Peleg , `` he wants to ship . '' 
`` Dost thee ? '' 
said Bildad , in a hollow tone , and turning round to me . 
`` I dost , '' said I unconsciously , he was so intense a Quaker . 
`` What do ye think of him , Bildad ? '' 
said Peleg . 
`` He 'll do , '' said Bildad , eyeing me , and then went on spelling away at his book in a mumbling tone quite audible . 
I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw , especially as Peleg , his friend and old shipmate , seemed such a blusterer . 
But I said nothing , only looking round me sharply . 
Peleg now threw open a chest , and drawing forth the ship 's articles , placed pen and ink before him , and seated himself at a little table . 
I began to think it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I would be willing to engage for the voyage . 
I was already aware that in the whaling business they paid no wages ; but all hands , including the captain , received certain shares of the profits called lays , and that these lays were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to the respective duties of the ship 's company . 
I was also aware that being a green hand at whaling , my own lay would not be very large ; but considering that I was used to the sea , could steer a ship , splice a rope , and all that , I made no doubt that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay -- that is , the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage , whatever that might eventually amount to . 
And though the 275th lay was what they call a rather LONG LAY , yet it was better than nothing ; and if we had a lucky voyage , might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it , not to speak of my three years ' beef and board , for which I would not have to pay one stiver . 
It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely fortune -- and so it was , a very poor way indeed . 
But I am one of those that never take on about princely fortunes , and am quite content if the world is ready to board and lodge me , while I am putting up at this grim sign of the Thunder Cloud . 
Upon the whole , I thought that the 275th lay would be about the fair thing , but would not have been surprised had I been offered the 200th , considering I was of a broad-shouldered make . 
But one thing , nevertheless , that made me a little distrustful about receiving a generous share of the profits was this : Ashore , I had heard something of both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad ; how that they being the principal proprietors of the Pequod , therefore the other and more inconsiderable and scattered owners , left nearly the whole management of the ship 's affairs to these two . 
And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad might have a mighty deal to say about shipping hands , especially as I now found him on board the Pequod , quite at home there in the cabin , and reading his Bible as if at his own fireside . 
Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend a pen with his jack-knife , old Bildad , to my no small surprise , considering that he was such an interested party in these proceedings ; Bildad never heeded us , but went on mumbling to himself out of his book , `` LAY not up for yourselves treasures upon earth , where moth -- '' `` Well , Captain Bildad , '' interrupted Peleg , `` what d'ye say , what lay shall we give this young man ? '' 
`` Thou knowest best , '' was the sepulchral reply , `` the seven hundred and seventy-seventh would n't be too much , would it ? 
-- ` where moth and rust do corrupt , but LAY -- ' '' LAY , indeed , thought I , and such a lay ! 
the seven hundred and seventy-seventh ! 
Well , old Bildad , you are determined that I , for one , shall not LAY up many LAYS here below , where moth and rust do corrupt . 
It was an exceedingly LONG LAY that , indeed ; and though from the magnitude of the figure it might at first deceive a landsman , yet the slightest consideration will show that though seven hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large number , yet , when you come to make a TEENTH of it , you will then see , I say , that the seven hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal less than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons ; and so I thought at the time . 
`` Why , blast your eyes , Bildad , '' cried Peleg , `` thou dost not want to swindle this young man ! 
he must have more than that . '' 
`` Seven hundred and seventy-seventh , '' again said Bildad , without lifting his eyes ; and then went on mumbling -- `` for where your treasure is , there will your heart be also . '' 
`` I am going to put him down for the three hundredth , '' said Peleg , `` do ye hear that , Bildad ! 
The three hundredth lay , I say . '' 
Bildad laid down his book , and turning solemnly towards him said , `` Captain Peleg , thou hast a generous heart ; but thou must consider the duty thou owest to the other owners of this ship -- widows and orphans , many of them -- and that if we too abundantly reward the labors of this young man , we may be taking the bread from those widows and those orphans . 
The seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay , Captain Peleg . '' 
`` Thou Bildad ! '' 
roared Peleg , starting up and clattering about the cabin . 
`` Blast ye , Captain Bildad , if I had followed thy advice in these matters , I would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape Horn . '' 
`` Captain Peleg , '' said Bildad steadily , `` thy conscience may be drawing ten inches of water , or ten fathoms , I ca n't tell ; but as thou art still an impenitent man , Captain Peleg , I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but a leaky one ; and will in the end sink thee foundering down to the fiery pit , Captain Peleg . '' 
`` Fiery pit ! 
fiery pit ! 
ye insult me , man ; past all natural bearing , ye insult me . 
It 's an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that he 's bound to hell . 
Flukes and flames ! 
Bildad , say that again to me , and start my soul-bolts , but I 'll -- I 'll -- yes , I 'll swallow a live goat with all his hair and horns on . 
Out of the cabin , ye canting , drab-coloured son of a wooden gun -- a straight wake with ye ! '' 
As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad , but with a marvellous oblique , sliding celerity , Bildad for that time eluded him . 
Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and responsible owners of the ship , and feeling half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily commanded , I stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad , who , I made no doubt , was all eagerness to vanish from before the awakened wrath of Peleg . 
But to my astonishment , he sat down again on the transom very quietly , and seemed to have not the slightest intention of withdrawing . 
He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his ways . 
As for Peleg , after letting off his rage as he had , there seemed no more left in him , and he , too , sat down like a lamb , though he twitched a little as if still nervously agitated . 
`` Whew ! '' 
he whistled at last -- `` the squall 's gone off to leeward , I think . 
Bildad , thou used to be good at sharpening a lance , mend that pen , will ye . 
My jack-knife here needs the grindstone . 
That 's he ; thank ye , Bildad . 
Now then , my young man , Ishmael 's thy name , did n't ye say ? 
Well then , down ye go here , Ishmael , for the three hundredth lay . '' 
`` Captain Peleg , '' said I , `` I have a friend with me who wants to ship too -- shall I bring him down to-morrow ? '' 
`` To be sure , '' said Peleg . 
`` Fetch him along , and we 'll look at him . '' 
`` What lay does he want ? '' 
groaned Bildad , glancing up from the book in which he had again been burying himself . 
`` Oh ! 
never thee mind about that , Bildad , '' said Peleg . 
`` Has he ever whaled it any ? '' 
turning to me . 
`` Killed more whales than I can count , Captain Peleg . '' 
`` Well , bring him along then . '' 
And , after signing the papers , off I went ; nothing doubting but that I had done a good morning 's work , and that the Pequod was the identical ship that Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape . 
But I had not proceeded far , when I began to bethink me that the Captain with whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me ; though , indeed , in many cases , a whale-ship will be completely fitted out , and receive all her crew on board , ere the captain makes himself visible by arriving to take command ; for sometimes these voyages are so prolonged , and the shore intervals at home so exceedingly brief , that if the captain have a family , or any absorbing concernment of that sort , he does not trouble himself much about his ship in port , but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea . 
However , it is always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself into his hands . 
Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg , inquiring where Captain Ahab was to be found . 
`` And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab ? 
It 's all right enough ; thou art shipped . '' 
`` Yes , but I should like to see him . '' 
`` But I do n't think thou wilt be able to at present . 
I do n't know exactly what 's the matter with him ; but he keeps close inside the house ; a sort of sick , and yet he do n't look so . 
In fact , he ai n't sick ; but no , he is n't well either . 
Any how , young man , he wo n't always see me , so I do n't suppose he will thee . 
He 's a queer man , Captain Ahab -- so some think -- but a good one . 
Oh , thou ` lt like him well enough ; no fear , no fear . 
He 's a grand , ungodly , god-like man , Captain Ahab ; does n't speak much ; but , when he does speak , then you may well listen . 
Mark ye , be forewarned ; Ahab 's above the common ; Ahab 's been in colleges , as well as ` mong the cannibals ; been used to deeper wonders than the waves ; fixed his fiery lance in mightier , stranger foes than whales . 
His lance ! 
aye , the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle ! 
Oh ! 
he ai n't Captain Bildad ; no , and he ai n't Captain Peleg ; HE 'S AHAB , boy ; and Ahab of old , thou knowest , was a crowned king ! '' 
`` And a very vile one . 
When that wicked king was slain , the dogs , did they not lick his blood ? '' 
`` Come hither to me -- hither , hither , '' said Peleg , with a significance in his eye that almost startled me . 
`` Look ye , lad ; never say that on board the Pequod . 
Never say it anywhere . 
Captain Ahab did not name himself . 
'T was a foolish , ignorant whim of his crazy , widowed mother , who died when he was only a twelvemonth old . 
And yet the old squaw Tistig , at Gayhead , said that the name would somehow prove prophetic . 
And , perhaps , other fools like her may tell thee the same . 
I wish to warn thee . 
It 's a lie . 
I know Captain Ahab well ; I 've sailed with him as mate years ago ; I know what he is -- a good man -- not a pious , good man , like Bildad , but a swearing good man -- something like me -- only there 's a good deal more of him . 
Aye , aye , I know that he was never very jolly ; and I know that on the passage home , he was a little out of his mind for a spell ; but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that about , as any one might see . 
I know , too , that ever since he lost his leg last voyage by that accursed whale , he 's been a kind of moody -- desperate moody , and savage sometimes ; but that will all pass off . 
And once for all , let me tell thee and assure thee , young man , it 's better to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing bad one . 
So good-bye to thee -- and wrong not Captain Ahab , because he happens to have a wicked name . 
Besides , my boy , he has a wife -- not three voyages wedded -- a sweet , resigned girl . 
Think of that ; by that sweet girl that old man has a child : hold ye then there can be any utter , hopeless harm in Ahab ? 
No , no , my lad ; stricken , blasted , if he be , Ahab has his humanities ! '' 
As I walked away , I was full of thoughtfulness ; what had been incidentally revealed to me of Captain Ahab , filled me with a certain wild vagueness of painfulness concerning him . 
And somehow , at the time , I felt a sympathy and a sorrow for him , but for I do n't know what , unless it was the cruel loss of his leg . 
And yet I also felt a strange awe of him ; but that sort of awe , which I can not at all describe , was not exactly awe ; I do not know what it was . 
But I felt it ; and it did not disincline me towards him ; though I felt impatience at what seemed like mystery in him , so imperfectly as he was known to me then . 
However , my thoughts were at length carried in other directions , so that for the present dark Ahab slipped my mind . 
As Queequeg 's Ramadan , or Fasting and Humiliation , was to continue all day , I did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall ; for I cherish the greatest respect towards everybody 's religious obligations , never mind how comical , and could not find it in my heart to undervalue even a congregation of ants worshipping a toad-stool ; or those other creatures in certain parts of our earth , who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other planets , bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name . 
I say , we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things , and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals , pagans and what not , because of their half-crazy conceits on these subjects . 
There was Queequeg , now , certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan ; -- but what of that ? 
Queequeg thought he knew what he was about , I suppose ; he seemed to be content ; and there let him rest . 
All our arguing with him would not avail ; let him be , I say : and Heaven have mercy on us all -- Presbyterians and Pagans alike -- for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked about the head , and sadly need mending . 
Towards evening , when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals must be over , I went up to his room and knocked at the door ; but no answer . 
I tried to open it , but it was fastened inside . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I softly through the key-hole : -- all silent . 
`` I say , Queequeg ! 
why do n't you speak ? 
It 's I -- Ishmael . '' 
But all remained still as before . 
I began to grow alarmed . 
I had allowed him such abundant time ; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit . 
I looked through the key-hole ; but the door opening into an odd corner of the room , the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one . 
I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall , but nothing more . 
I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of Queequeg 's harpoon , which the landlady the evening previous had taken from him , before our mounting to the chamber . 
That 's strange , thought I ; but at any rate , since the harpoon stands yonder , and he seldom or never goes abroad without it , therefore he must be inside here , and no possible mistake . 
`` Queequeg ! 
-- Queequeg ! '' 
-- all still . 
Something must have happened . 
Apoplexy ! 
I tried to burst open the door ; but it stubbornly resisted . 
Running down stairs , I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met -- the chamber-maid . 
`` La ! 
la ! '' 
she cried , `` I thought something must be the matter . 
I went to make the bed after breakfast , and the door was locked ; and not a mouse to be heard ; and it 's been just so silent ever since . 
But I thought , may be , you had both gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping . 
La ! 
la , ma'am ! 
-- Mistress ! 
murder ! 
Mrs. Hussey ! 
apoplexy ! '' 
-- and with these cries , she ran towards the kitchen , I following . 
Mrs. Hussey soon appeared , with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet in the other , having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the castors , and scolding her little black boy meantime . 
`` Wood-house ! '' 
cried I , `` which way to it ? 
Run for God 's sake , and fetch something to pry open the door -- the axe ! 
-- the axe ! 
he 's had a stroke ; depend upon it ! '' 
-- and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-handed , when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet , and the entire castor of her countenance . 
`` What 's the matter with you , young man ? '' 
`` Get the axe ! 
For God 's sake , run for the doctor , some one , while I pry it open ! '' 
`` Look here , '' said the landlady , quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet , so as to have one hand free ; `` look here ; are you talking about prying open any of my doors ? '' 
-- and with that she seized my arm . 
`` What 's the matter with you ? 
What 's the matter with you , shipmate ? '' 
In as calm , but rapid a manner as possible , I gave her to understand the whole case . 
Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose , she ruminated for an instant ; then exclaimed -- `` No ! 
I have n't seen it since I put it there . '' 
Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs , she glanced in , and returning , told me that Queequeg 's harpoon was missing . 
`` He 's killed himself , '' she cried . 
`` It 's unfort ` nate Stiggs done over again -- there goes another counterpane -- God pity his poor mother ! 
-- it will be the ruin of my house . 
Has the poor lad a sister ? 
Where 's that girl ? 
-- there , Betty , go to Snarles the Painter , and tell him to paint me a sign , with -- `` no suicides permitted here , and no smoking in the parlor ; '' -- might as well kill both birds at once . 
Kill ? 
The Lord be merciful to his ghost ! 
What 's that noise there ? 
You , young man , avast there ! '' 
And running up after me , she caught me as I was again trying to force open the door . 
`` I do n't allow it ; I wo n't have my premises spoiled . 
Go for the locksmith , there 's one about a mile from here . 
But avast ! '' 
putting her hand in her side-pocket , `` here 's a key that 'll fit , I guess ; let 's see . '' 
And with that , she turned it in the lock ; but , alas ! 
Queequeg 's supplemental bolt remained unwithdrawn within . 
`` Have to burst it open , '' said I , and was running down the entry a little , for a good start , when the landlady caught at me , again vowing I should not break down her premises ; but I tore from her , and with a sudden bodily rush dashed myself full against the mark . 
With a prodigious noise the door flew open , and the knob slamming against the wall , sent the plaster to the ceiling ; and there , good heavens ! 
there sat Queequeg , altogether cool and self-collected ; right in the middle of the room ; squatting on his hams , and holding Yojo on top of his head . 
He looked neither one way nor the other way , but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of active life . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , going up to him , `` Queequeg , what 's the matter with you ? '' 
`` He hai n't been a sittin ' so all day , has he ? '' 
said the landlady . 
But all we said , not a word could we drag out of him ; I almost felt like pushing him over , so as to change his position , for it was almost intolerable , it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained ; especially , as in all probability he had been sitting so for upwards of eight or ten hours , going too without his regular meals . 
`` Mrs. Hussey , '' said I , `` he 's ALIVE at all events ; so leave us , if you please , and I will see to this strange affair myself . '' 
Closing the door upon the landlady , I endeavored to prevail upon Queequeg to take a chair ; but in vain . 
There he sat ; and all he could do -- for all my polite arts and blandishments -- he would not move a peg , nor say a single word , nor even look at me , nor notice my presence in the slightest way . 
I wonder , thought I , if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan ; do they fast on their hams that way in his native island . 
It must be so ; yes , it 's part of his creed , I suppose ; well , then , let him rest ; he 'll get up sooner or later , no doubt . 
It ca n't last for ever , thank God , and his Ramadan only comes once a year ; and I do n't believe it 's very punctual then . 
I went down to supper . 
After sitting a long time listening to the long stories of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage , as they called it -LRB- that is , a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or brig , confined to the north of the line , in the Atlantic Ocean only -RRB- ; after listening to these plum-puddingers till nearly eleven o'clock , I went up stairs to go to bed , feeling quite sure by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a termination . 
But no ; there he was just where I had left him ; he had not stirred an inch . 
I began to grow vexed with him ; it seemed so downright senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and half the night on his hams in a cold room , holding a piece of wood on his head . 
`` For heaven 's sake , Queequeg , get up and shake yourself ; get up and have some supper . 
You 'll starve ; you 'll kill yourself , Queequeg . '' 
But not a word did he reply . 
Despairing of him , therefore , I determined to go to bed and to sleep ; and no doubt , before a great while , he would follow me . 
But previous to turning in , I took my heavy bearskin jacket , and threw it over him , as it promised to be a very cold night ; and he had nothing but his ordinary round jacket on . 
For some time , do all I would , I could not get into the faintest doze . 
I had blown out the candle ; and the mere thought of Queequeg -- not four feet off -- sitting there in that uneasy position , stark alone in the cold and dark ; this made me really wretched . 
Think of it ; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide awake pagan on his hams in this dreary , unaccountable Ramadan ! 
But somehow I dropped off at last , and knew nothing more till break of day ; when , looking over the bedside , there squatted Queequeg , as if he had been screwed down to the floor . 
But as soon as the first glimpse of sun entered the window , up he got , with stiff and grating joints , but with a cheerful look ; limped towards me where I lay ; pressed his forehead again against mine ; and said his Ramadan was over . 
Now , as I before hinted , I have no objection to any person 's religion , be it what it may , so long as that person does not kill or insult any other person , because that other person do n't believe it also . 
But when a man 's religion becomes really frantic ; when it is a positive torment to him ; and , in fine , makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to lodge in ; then I think it high time to take that individual aside and argue the point with him . 
And just so I now did with Queequeg . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , `` get into bed now , and lie and listen to me . '' 
I then went on , beginning with the rise and progress of the primitive religions , and coming down to the various religions of the present time , during which time I labored to show Queequeg that all these Lents , Ramadans , and prolonged ham-squattings in cold , cheerless rooms were stark nonsense ; bad for the health ; useless for the soul ; opposed , in short , to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense . 
I told him , too , that he being in other things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage , it pained me , very badly pained me , to see him now so deplorably foolish about this ridiculous Ramadan of his . 
Besides , argued I , fasting makes the body cave in ; hence the spirit caves in ; and all thoughts born of a fast must necessarily be half-starved . 
This is the reason why most dyspeptic religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters . 
In one word , Queequeg , said I , rather digressively ; hell is an idea first born on an undigested apple-dumpling ; and since then perpetuated through the hereditary dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans . 
I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with dyspepsia ; expressing the idea very plainly , so that he could take it in . 
He said no ; only upon one memorable occasion . 
It was after a great feast given by his father the king , on the gaining of a great battle wherein fifty of the enemy had been killed by about two o'clock in the afternoon , and all cooked and eaten that very evening . 
`` No more , Queequeg , '' said I , shuddering ; `` that will do ; '' for I knew the inferences without his further hinting them . 
I had seen a sailor who had visited that very island , and he told me that it was the custom , when a great battle had been gained there , to barbecue all the slain in the yard or garden of the victor ; and then , one by one , they were placed in great wooden trenchers , and garnished round like a pilau , with breadfruit and cocoanuts ; and with some parsley in their mouths , were sent round with the victor 's compliments to all his friends , just as though these presents were so many Christmas turkeys . 
After all , I do not think that my remarks about religion made much impression upon Queequeg . 
Because , in the first place , he somehow seemed dull of hearing on that important subject , unless considered from his own point of view ; and , in the second place , he did not more than one third understand me , couch my ideas simply as I would ; and , finally , he no doubt thought he knew a good deal more about the true religion than I did . 
He looked at me with a sort of condescending concern and compassion , as though he thought it a great pity that such a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical pagan piety . 
At last we rose and dressed ; and Queequeg , taking a prodigiously hearty breakfast of chowders of all sorts , so that the landlady should not make much profit by reason of his Ramadan , we sallied out to board the Pequod , sauntering along , and picking our teeth with halibut bones . 
As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship , Queequeg carrying his harpoon , Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from his wigwam , saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal , and furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that craft , unless they previously produced their papers . 
`` What do you mean by that , Captain Peleg ? '' 
said I , now jumping on the bulwarks , and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf . 
`` I mean , '' he replied , `` he must show his papers . '' 
`` Yes , '' said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice , sticking his head from behind Peleg 's , out of the wigwam . 
`` He must show that he 's converted . 
Son of darkness , '' he added , turning to Queequeg , `` art thou at present in communion with any Christian church ? '' 
`` Why , '' said I , `` he 's a member of the first Congregational Church . '' 
Here be it said , that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be converted into the churches . 
`` First Congregational Church , '' cried Bildad , `` what ! 
that worships in Deacon Deuteronomy Coleman 's meeting-house ? '' 
and so saying , taking out his spectacles , he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief , and putting them on very carefully , came out of the wigwam , and leaning stiffly over the bulwarks , took a good long look at Queequeg . 
`` How long hath he been a member ? '' 
he then said , turning to me ; `` not very long , I rather guess , young man . '' 
`` No , '' said Peleg , `` and he has n't been baptized right either , or it would have washed some of that devil 's blue off his face . '' 
`` Do tell , now , '' cried Bildad , `` is this Philistine a regular member of Deacon Deuteronomy 's meeting ? 
I never saw him going there , and I pass it every Lord 's day . '' 
`` I do n't know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting , '' said I ; `` all I know is , that Queequeg here is a born member of the First Congregational Church . 
He is a deacon himself , Queequeg is . '' 
`` Young man , '' said Bildad sternly , `` thou art skylarking with me -- explain thyself , thou young Hittite . 
What church dost thee mean ? 
answer me . '' 
Finding myself thus hard pushed , I replied . 
`` I mean , sir , the same ancient Catholic Church to which you and I , and Captain Peleg there , and Queequeg here , and all of us , and every mother 's son and soul of us belong ; the great and everlasting First Congregation of this whole worshipping world ; we all belong to that ; only some of us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching the grand belief ; in THAT we all join hands . '' 
`` Splice , thou mean ` st SPLICE hands , '' cried Peleg , drawing nearer . 
`` Young man , you 'd better ship for a missionary , instead of a fore-mast hand ; I never heard a better sermon . 
Deacon Deuteronomy -- why Father Mapple himself could n't beat it , and he 's reckoned something . 
Come aboard , come aboard ; never mind about the papers . 
I say , tell Quohog there -- what 's that you call him ? 
tell Quohog to step along . 
By the great anchor , what a harpoon he 's got there ! 
looks like good stuff that ; and he handles it about right . 
I say , Quohog , or whatever your name is , did you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat ? 
did you ever strike a fish ? '' 
Without saying a word , Queequeg , in his wild sort of way , jumped upon the bulwarks , from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the side ; and then bracing his left knee , and poising his harpoon , cried out in some such way as this : -- `` Cap ` ain , you see him small drop tar on water dere ? 
You see him ? 
well , spose him one whale eye , well , den ! '' 
and taking sharp aim at it , he darted the iron right over old Bildad 's broad brim , clean across the ship 's decks , and struck the glistening tar spot out of sight . 
`` Now , '' said Queequeg , quietly hauling in the line , `` spos-ee him whale-e eye ; why , dad whale dead . '' 
`` Quick , Bildad , '' said Peleg , his partner , who , aghast at the close vicinity of the flying harpoon , had retreated towards the cabin gangway . 
`` Quick , I say , you Bildad , and get the ship 's papers . 
We must have Hedgehog there , I mean Quohog , in one of our boats . 
Look ye , Quohog , we 'll give ye the ninetieth lay , and that 's more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket . '' 
So down we went into the cabin , and to my great joy Queequeg was soon enrolled among the same ship 's company to which I myself belonged . 
When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for signing , he turned to me and said , `` I guess , Quohog there do n't know how to write , does he ? 
I say , Quohog , blast ye ! 
dost thou sign thy name or make thy mark ? '' 
But at this question , Queequeg , who had twice or thrice before taken part in similar ceremonies , looked no ways abashed ; but taking the offered pen , copied upon the paper , in the proper place , an exact counterpart of a queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm ; so that through Captain Peleg 's obstinate mistake touching his appellative , it stood something like this : -- Quohog . 
his X mark . 
Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg , and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted drab coat , took out a bundle of tracts , and selecting one entitled `` The Latter Day Coming ; or No Time to Lose , '' placed it in Queequeg 's hands , and then grasping them and the book with both his , looked earnestly into his eyes , and said , `` Son of darkness , I must do my duty by thee ; I am part owner of this ship , and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew ; if thou still clingest to thy Pagan ways , which I sadly fear , I beseech thee , remain not for aye a Belial bondsman . 
Spurn the idol Bell , and the hideous dragon ; turn from the wrath to come ; mind thine eye , I say ; oh ! 
goodness gracious ! 
steer clear of the fiery pit ! '' 
Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad 's language , heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases . 
`` Avast there , avast there , Bildad , avast now spoiling our harpooneer , '' cried Peleg . 
`` Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers -- it takes the shark out of 'em ; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish . 
There was young Nat Swaine , once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and the Vineyard ; he joined the meeting , and never came to good . 
He got so frightened about his plaguy soul , that he shrinked and sheered away from whales , for fear of after-claps , in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones . '' 
`` Peleg ! 
Peleg ! '' 
said Bildad , lifting his eyes and hands , `` thou thyself , as I myself , hast seen many a perilous time ; thou knowest , Peleg , what it is to have the fear of death ; how , then , can ` st thou prate in this ungodly guise . 
Thou beliest thine own heart , Peleg . 
Tell me , when this same Pequod here had her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan , that same voyage when thou went mate with Captain Ahab , did ` st thou not think of Death and the Judgment then ? '' 
`` Hear him , hear him now , '' cried Peleg , marching across the cabin , and thrusting his hands far down into his pockets , -- `` hear him , all of ye . 
Think of that ! 
When every moment we thought the ship would sink ! 
Death and the Judgment then ? 
What ? 
With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against the side ; and every sea breaking over us , fore and aft . 
Think of Death and the Judgment then ? 
No ! 
no time to think about Death then . 
Life was what Captain Ahab and I was thinking of ; and how to save all hands -- how to rig jury-masts -- how to get into the nearest port ; that was what I was thinking of . '' 
Bildad said no more , but buttoning up his coat , stalked on deck , where we followed him . 
There he stood , very quietly overlooking some sailmakers who were mending a top-sail in the waist . 
Now and then he stooped to pick up a patch , or save an end of tarred twine , which otherwise might have been wasted . 
`` Shipmates , have ye shipped in that ship ? '' 
Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod , and were sauntering away from the water , for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts , when the above words were put to us by a stranger , who , pausing before us , levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question . 
He was but shabbily apparelled in faded jacket and patched trowsers ; a rag of a black handkerchief investing his neck . 
A confluent small-pox had in all directions flowed over his face , and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent , when the rushing waters have been dried up . 
`` Have ye shipped in her ? '' 
he repeated . 
`` You mean the ship Pequod , I suppose , '' said I , trying to gain a little more time for an uninterrupted look at him . 
`` Aye , the Pequod -- that ship there , '' he said , drawing back his whole arm , and then rapidly shoving it straight out from him , with the fixed bayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the object . 
`` Yes , '' said I , `` we have just signed the articles . '' 
`` Anything down there about your souls ? '' 
`` About what ? '' 
`` Oh , perhaps you hav 'n' t got any , '' he said quickly . 
`` No matter though , I know many chaps that hav 'n' t got any , -- good luck to 'em ; and they are all the better off for it . 
A soul 's a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon . '' 
`` What are you jabbering about , shipmate ? '' 
said I. `` HE 'S got enough , though , to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in other chaps , '' abruptly said the stranger , placing a nervous emphasis upon the word HE . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , `` let 's go ; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere ; he 's talking about something and somebody we do n't know . '' 
`` Stop ! '' 
cried the stranger . 
`` Ye said true -- ye hav 'n' t seen Old Thunder yet , have ye ? '' 
`` Who 's Old Thunder ? '' 
said I , again riveted with the insane earnestness of his manner . 
`` Captain Ahab . '' 
`` What ! 
the captain of our ship , the Pequod ? '' 
`` Aye , among some of us old sailor chaps , he goes by that name . 
Ye hav 'n' t seen him yet , have ye ? '' 
`` No , we hav 'n' t. He 's sick they say , but is getting better , and will be all right again before long . '' 
`` All right again before long ! '' 
laughed the stranger , with a solemnly derisive sort of laugh . 
`` Look ye ; when Captain Ahab is all right , then this left arm of mine will be all right ; not before . '' 
`` What do you know about him ? '' 
`` What did they TELL you about him ? 
Say that ! '' 
`` They did n't tell much of anything about him ; only I 've heard that he 's a good whale-hunter , and a good captain to his crew . '' 
`` That 's true , that 's true -- yes , both true enough . 
But you must jump when he gives an order . 
Step and growl ; growl and go -- that 's the word with Captain Ahab . 
But nothing about that thing that happened to him off Cape Horn , long ago , when he lay like dead for three days and nights ; nothing about that deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa ? 
-- heard nothing about that , eh ? 
Nothing about the silver calabash he spat into ? 
And nothing about his losing his leg last voyage , according to the prophecy . 
Did n't ye hear a word about them matters and something more , eh ? 
No , I do n't think ye did ; how could ye ? 
Who knows it ? 
Not all Nantucket , I guess . 
But hows ` ever , mayhap , ye 've heard tell about the leg , and how he lost it ; aye , ye have heard of that , I dare say . 
Oh yes , THAT every one knows a ` most -- I mean they know he 's only one leg ; and that a parmacetti took the other off . '' 
`` My friend , '' said I , `` what all this gibberish of yours is about , I do n't know , and I do n't much care ; for it seems to me that you must be a little damaged in the head . 
But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab , of that ship there , the Pequod , then let me tell you , that I know all about the loss of his leg . '' 
`` ALL about it , eh -- sure you do ? 
-- all ? '' 
`` Pretty sure . '' 
With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod , the beggar-like stranger stood a moment , as if in a troubled reverie ; then starting a little , turned and said : -- `` Ye 've shipped , have ye ? 
Names down on the papers ? 
Well , well , what 's signed , is signed ; and what 's to be , will be ; and then again , perhaps it wo n't be , after all . 
Anyhow , it 's all fixed and arranged a ` ready ; and some sailors or other must go with him , I suppose ; as well these as any other men , God pity 'em ! 
Morning to ye , shipmates , morning ; the ineffable heavens bless ye ; I 'm sorry I stopped ye . '' 
`` Look here , friend , '' said I , `` if you have anything important to tell us , out with it ; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us , you are mistaken in your game ; that 's all I have to say . '' 
`` And it 's said very well , and I like to hear a chap talk up that way ; you are just the man for him -- the likes of ye . 
Morning to ye , shipmates , morning ! 
Oh ! 
when ye get there , tell 'em I 've concluded not to make one of 'em . '' 
`` Ah , my dear fellow , you ca n't fool us that way -- you ca n't fool us . 
It is the easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a great secret in him . '' 
`` Morning to ye , shipmates , morning . '' 
`` Morning it is , '' said I. `` Come along , Queequeg , let 's leave this crazy man . 
But stop , tell me your name , will you ? '' 
`` Elijah . '' 
Elijah ! 
thought I , and we walked away , both commenting , after each other 's fashion , upon this ragged old sailor ; and agreed that he was nothing but a humbug , trying to be a bugbear . 
But we had not gone perhaps above a hundred yards , when chancing to turn a corner , and looking back as I did so , who should be seen but Elijah following us , though at a distance . 
Somehow , the sight of him struck me so , that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being behind , but passed on with my comrade , anxious to see whether the stranger would turn the same corner that we did . 
He did ; and then it seemed to me that he was dogging us , but with what intent I could not for the life of me imagine . 
