-- chiefly known to me by Thy rod -- mortal or immortal , here I die . 
I have striven to be Thine , more than to be this world 's , or mine own . 
Yet this is nothing : I leave eternity to Thee ; for what is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God ? '' 
He said no more , but slowly waving a benediction , covered his face with his hands , and so remained kneeling , till all the people had departed , and he was left alone in the place . 
Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel , I found Queequeg there quite alone ; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some time . 
He was sitting on a bench before the fire , with his feet on the stove hearth , and in one hand was holding close up to his face that little negro idol of his ; peering hard into its face , and with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its nose , meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way . 
But being now interrupted , he put up the image ; and pretty soon , going to the table , took up a large book there , and placing it on his lap began counting the pages with deliberate regularity ; at every fiftieth page -- as I fancied -- stopping a moment , looking vacantly around him , and giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment . 
He would then begin again at the next fifty ; seeming to commence at number one each time , as though he could not count more than fifty , and it was only by such a large number of fifties being found together , that his astonishment at the multitude of pages was excited . 
With much interest I sat watching him . 
Savage though he was , and hideously marred about the face -- at least to my taste -- his countenance yet had a something in it which was by no means disagreeable . 
You can not hide the soul . 
Through all his unearthly tattooings , I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest heart ; and in his large , deep eyes , fiery black and bold , there seemed tokens of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils . 
And besides all this , there was a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan , which even his uncouthness could not altogether maim . 
He looked like a man who had never cringed and never had had a creditor . 
Whether it was , too , that his head being shaved , his forehead was drawn out in freer and brighter relief , and looked more expansive than it otherwise would , this I will not venture to decide ; but certain it was his head was phrenologically an excellent one . 
It may seem ridiculous , but it reminded me of General Washington 's head , as seen in the popular busts of him . 
It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows , which were likewise very projecting , like two long promontories thickly wooded on top . 
Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed . 
Whilst I was thus closely scanning him , half-pretending meanwhile to be looking out at the storm from the casement , he never heeded my presence , never troubled himself with so much as a single glance ; but appeared wholly occupied with counting the pages of the marvellous book . 
Considering how sociably we had been sleeping together the night previous , and especially considering the affectionate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the morning , I thought this indifference of his very strange . 
But savages are strange beings ; at times you do not know exactly how to take them . 
At first they are overawing ; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic wisdom . 
I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all , or but very little , with the other seamen in the inn . 
He made no advances whatever ; appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances . 
All this struck me as mighty singular ; yet , upon second thoughts , there was something almost sublime in it . 
Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from home , by the way of Cape Horn , that is -- which was the only way he could get there -- thrown among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet Jupiter ; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease ; preserving the utmost serenity ; content with his own companionship ; always equal to himself . 
Surely this was a touch of fine philosophy ; though no doubt he had never heard there was such a thing as that . 
But , perhaps , to be true philosophers , we mortals should not be conscious of so living or so striving . 
So soon as I hear that such or such a man gives himself out for a philosopher , I conclude that , like the dyspeptic old woman , he must have `` broken his digester . '' 
As I sat there in that now lonely room ; the fire burning low , in that mild stage when , after its first intensity has warmed the air , it then only glows to be looked at ; the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the casements , and peering in upon us silent , solitary twain ; the storm booming without in solemn swells ; I began to be sensible of strange feelings . 
I felt a melting in me . 
No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned against the wolfish world . 
This soothing savage had redeemed it . 
There he sat , his very indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized hypocrisies and bland deceits . 
Wild he was ; a very sight of sights to see ; yet I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him . 
And those same things that would have repelled most others , they were the very magnets that thus drew me . 
I 'll try a pagan friend , thought I , since Christian kindness has proved but hollow courtesy . 
I drew my bench near him , and made some friendly signs and hints , doing my best to talk with him meanwhile . 
At first he little noticed these advances ; but presently , upon my referring to his last night 's hospitalities , he made out to ask me whether we were again to be bedfellows . 
I told him yes ; whereat I thought he looked pleased , perhaps a little complimented . 
We then turned over the book together , and I endeavored to explain to him the purpose of the printing , and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it . 
Thus I soon engaged his interest ; and from that we went to jabbering the best we could about the various outer sights to be seen in this famous town . 
Soon I proposed a social smoke ; and , producing his pouch and tomahawk , he quietly offered me a puff . 
And then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of his , and keeping it regularly passing between us . 
If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan 's breast , this pleasant , genial smoke we had , soon thawed it out , and left us cronies . 
He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him ; and when our smoke was over , he pressed his forehead against mine , clasped me round the waist , and said that henceforth we were married ; meaning , in his country 's phrase , that we were bosom friends ; he would gladly die for me , if need should be . 
In a countryman , this sudden flame of friendship would have seemed far too premature , a thing to be much distrusted ; but in this simple savage those old rules would not apply . 
After supper , and another social chat and smoke , we went to our room together . 
He made me a present of his embalmed head ; took out his enormous tobacco wallet , and groping under the tobacco , drew out some thirty dollars in silver ; then spreading them on the table , and mechanically dividing them into two equal portions , pushed one of them towards me , and said it was mine . 
I was going to remonstrate ; but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers ' pockets . 
I let them stay . 
He then went about his evening prayers , took out his idol , and removed the paper fireboard . 
By certain signs and symptoms , I thought he seemed anxious for me to join him ; but well knowing what was to follow , I deliberated a moment whether , in case he invited me , I would comply or otherwise . 
I was a good Christian ; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible Presbyterian Church . 
How then could I unite with this wild idolator in worshipping his piece of wood ? 
But what is worship ? 
thought I. Do you suppose now , Ishmael , that the magnanimous God of heaven and earth -- pagans and all included -- can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood ? 
Impossible ! 
But what is worship ? 
-- to do the will of God -- THAT is worship . 
And what is the will of God ? 
-- to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow man to do to me -- THAT is the will of God . 
Now , Queequeg is my fellow man . 
And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me ? 
Why , unite with me in my particular Presbyterian form of worship . 
Consequently , I must then unite with him in his ; ergo , I must turn idolator . 
So I kindled the shavings ; helped prop up the innocent little idol ; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg ; salamed before him twice or thrice ; kissed his nose ; and that done , we undressed and went to bed , at peace with our own consciences and all the world . 
But we did not go to sleep without some little chat . 
How it is I know not ; but there is no place like a bed for confidential disclosures between friends . 
Man and wife , they say , there open the very bottom of their souls to each other ; and some old couples often lie and chat over old times till nearly morning . 
Thus , then , in our hearts ' honeymoon , lay I and Queequeg -- a cosy , loving pair . 
We had lain thus in bed , chatting and napping at short intervals , and Queequeg now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine , and then drawing them back ; so entirely sociable and free and easy were we ; when , at last , by reason of our confabulations , what little nappishness remained in us altogether departed , and we felt like getting up again , though day-break was yet some way down the future . 
Yes , we became very wakeful ; so much so that our recumbent position began to grow wearisome , and by little and little we found ourselves sitting up ; the clothes well tucked around us , leaning against the head-board with our four knees drawn up close together , and our two noses bending over them , as if our kneepans were warming-pans . 
We felt very nice and snug , the more so since it was so chilly out of doors ; indeed out of bed-clothes too , seeing that there was no fire in the room . 
The more so , I say , because truly to enjoy bodily warmth , some small part of you must be cold , for there is no quality in this world that is not what it is merely by contrast . 
Nothing exists in itself . 
If you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable , and have been so a long time , then you can not be said to be comfortable any more . 
But if , like Queequeg and me in the bed , the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be slightly chilled , why then , indeed , in the general consciousness you feel most delightfully and unmistakably warm . 
For this reason a sleeping apartment should never be furnished with a fire , which is one of the luxurious discomforts of the rich . 
For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to have nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness and the cold of the outer air . 
Then there you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an arctic crystal . 
We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time , when all at once I thought I would open my eyes ; for when between sheets , whether by day or by night , and whether asleep or awake , I have a way of always keeping my eyes shut , in order the more to concentrate the snugness of being in bed . 
Because no man can ever feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed ; as if darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences , though light be more congenial to our clayey part . 
Upon opening my eyes then , and coming out of my own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom of the unilluminated twelve-o'clock-at-night , I experienced a disagreeable revulsion . 
Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it were best to strike a light , seeing that we were so wide awake ; and besides he felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk . 
Be it said , that though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the night before , yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once comes to bend them . 
For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg smoking by me , even in bed , because he seemed to be full of such serene household joy then . 
I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord 's policy of insurance . 
I was only alive to the condensed confidential comfortableness of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend . 
With our shaggy jackets drawn about our shoulders , we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other , till slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke , illuminated by the flame of the new-lit lamp . 
Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to far distant scenes , I know not , but he now spoke of his native island ; and , eager to hear his history , I begged him to go on and tell it . 
He gladly complied . 
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of his words , yet subsequent disclosures , when I had become more familiar with his broken phraseology , now enable me to present the whole story such as it may prove in the mere skeleton I give . 
Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko , an island far away to the West and South . 
It is not down in any map ; true places never are . 
When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a grass clout , followed by the nibbling goats , as if he were a green sapling ; even then , in Queequeg 's ambitious soul , lurked a strong desire to see something more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or two . 
His father was a High Chief , a King ; his uncle a High Priest ; and on the maternal side he boasted aunts who were the wives of unconquerable warriors . 
There was excellent blood in his veins -- royal stuff ; though sadly vitiated , I fear , by the cannibal propensity he nourished in his untutored youth . 
A Sag Harbor ship visited his father 's bay , and Queequeg sought a passage to Christian lands . 
But the ship , having her full complement of seamen , spurned his suit ; and not all the King his father 's influence could prevail . 
But Queequeg vowed a vow . 
Alone in his canoe , he paddled off to a distant strait , which he knew the ship must pass through when she quitted the island . 
On one side was a coral reef ; on the other a low tongue of land , covered with mangrove thickets that grew out into the water . 
Hiding his canoe , still afloat , among these thickets , with its prow seaward , he sat down in the stern , paddle low in hand ; and when the ship was gliding by , like a flash he darted out ; gained her side ; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his canoe ; climbed up the chains ; and throwing himself at full length upon the deck , grappled a ring-bolt there , and swore not to let it go , though hacked in pieces . 
In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard ; suspended a cutlass over his naked wrists ; Queequeg was the son of a King , and Queequeg budged not . 
Struck by his desperate dauntlessness , and his wild desire to visit Christendom , the captain at last relented , and told him he might make himself at home . 
But this fine young savage -- this sea Prince of Wales , never saw the Captain 's cabin . 
They put him down among the sailors , and made a whaleman of him . 
But like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities , Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy , if thereby he might happily gain the power of enlightening his untutored countrymen . 
For at bottom -- so he told me -- he was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians , the arts whereby to make his people still happier than they were ; and more than that , still better than they were . 
But , alas ! 
the practices of whalemen soon convinced him that even Christians could be both miserable and wicked ; infinitely more so , than all his father 's heathens . 
Arrived at last in old Sag Harbor ; and seeing what the sailors did there ; and then going on to Nantucket , and seeing how they spent their wages in that place also , poor Queequeg gave it up for lost . 
Thought he , it 's a wicked world in all meridians ; I 'll die a pagan . 
And thus an old idolator at heart , he yet lived among these Christians , wore their clothes , and tried to talk their gibberish . 
Hence the queer ways about him , though now some time from home . 
By hints , I asked him whether he did not propose going back , and having a coronation ; since he might now consider his father dead and gone , he being very old and feeble at the last accounts . 
He answered no , not yet ; and added that he was fearful Christianity , or rather Christians , had unfitted him for ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty pagan Kings before him . 
But by and by , he said , he would return , -- as soon as he felt himself baptized again . 
For the nonce , however , he proposed to sail about , and sow his wild oats in all four oceans . 
They had made a harpooneer of him , and that barbed iron was in lieu of a sceptre now . 
I asked him what might be his immediate purpose , touching his future movements . 
He answered , to go to sea again , in his old vocation . 
Upon this , I told him that whaling was my own design , and informed him of my intention to sail out of Nantucket , as being the most promising port for an adventurous whaleman to embark from . 
He at once resolved to accompany me to that island , ship aboard the same vessel , get into the same watch , the same boat , the same mess with me , in short to share my every hap ; with both my hands in his , boldly dip into the Potluck of both worlds . 
To all this I joyously assented ; for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg , he was an experienced harpooneer , and as such , could not fail to be of great usefulness to one , who , like me , was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling , though well acquainted with the sea , as known to merchant seamen . 
His story being ended with his pipe 's last dying puff , Queequeg embraced me , pressed his forehead against mine , and blowing out the light , we rolled over from each other , this way and that , and very soon were sleeping . 
Next morning , Monday , after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber , for a block , I settled my own and comrade 's bill ; using , however , my comrade 's money . 
The grinning landlord , as well as the boarders , seemed amazingly tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between me and Queequeg -- especially as Peter Coffin 's cock and bull stories about him had previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now companied with . 
We borrowed a wheelbarrow , and embarking our things , including my own poor carpet-bag , and Queequeg 's canvas sack and hammock , away we went down to `` the Moss , '' the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the wharf . 
As we were going along the people stared ; not at Queequeg so much -- for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in their streets , -- but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms . 
But we heeded them not , going along wheeling the barrow by turns , and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon barbs . 
I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore , and whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons . 
To this , in substance , he replied , that though what I hinted was true enough , yet he had a particular affection for his own harpoon , because it was of assured stuff , well tried in many a mortal combat , and deeply intimate with the hearts of whales . 
In short , like many inland reapers and mowers , who go into the farmers ' meadows armed with their own scythes -- though in no wise obliged to furnish them -- even so , Queequeg , for his own private reasons , preferred his own harpoon . 
Shifting the barrow from my hand to his , he told me a funny story about the first wheelbarrow he had ever seen . 
It was in Sag Harbor . 
The owners of his ship , it seems , had lent him one , in which to carry his heavy chest to his boarding house . 
Not to seem ignorant about the thing -- though in truth he was entirely so , concerning the precise way in which to manage the barrow -- Queequeg puts his chest upon it ; lashes it fast ; and then shoulders the barrow and marches up the wharf . 
`` Why , '' said I , `` Queequeg , you might have known better than that , one would think . 
Did n't the people laugh ? '' 
Upon this , he told me another story . 
The people of his island of Rokovoko , it seems , at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoanuts into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl ; and this punchbowl always forms the great central ornament on the braided mat where the feast is held . 
Now a certain grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko , and its commander -- from all accounts , a very stately punctilious gentleman , at least for a sea captain -- this commander was invited to the wedding feast of Queequeg 's sister , a pretty young princess just turned of ten . 
Well ; when all the wedding guests were assembled at the bride 's bamboo cottage , this Captain marches in , and being assigned the post of honour , placed himself over against the punchbowl , and between the High Priest and his majesty the King , Queequeg 's father . 
Grace being said , -- for those people have their grace as well as we -- though Queequeg told me that unlike us , who at such times look downwards to our platters , they , on the contrary , copying the ducks , glance upwards to the great Giver of all feasts -- Grace , I say , being said , the High Priest opens the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the island ; that is , dipping his consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage circulates . 
Seeing himself placed next the Priest , and noting the ceremony , and thinking himself -- being Captain of a ship -- as having plain precedence over a mere island King , especially in the King 's own house -- the Captain coolly proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl ; -- taking it I suppose for a huge finger-glass . 
`` Now , '' said Queequeg , `` what you tink now ? 
-- Did n't our people laugh ? '' 
At last , passage paid , and luggage safe , we stood on board the schooner . 
Hoisting sail , it glided down the Acushnet river . 
On one side , New Bedford rose in terraces of streets , their ice-covered trees all glittering in the clear , cold air . 
Huge hills and mountains of casks on casks were piled upon her wharves , and side by side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and safely moored at last ; while from others came a sound of carpenters and coopers , with blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch , all betokening that new cruises were on the start ; that one most perilous and long voyage ended , only begins a second ; and a second ended , only begins a third , and so on , for ever and for aye . 
Such is the endlessness , yea , the intolerableness of all earthly effort . 
Gaining the more open water , the bracing breeze waxed fresh ; the little Moss tossed the quick foam from her bows , as a young colt his snortings . 
How I snuffed that Tartar air ! 
-- how I spurned that turnpike earth ! 
-- that common highway all over dented with the marks of slavish heels and hoofs ; and turned me to admire the magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records . 
At the same foam-fountain , Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me . 
His dusky nostrils swelled apart ; he showed his filed and pointed teeth . 
On , on we flew ; and our offing gained , the Moss did homage to the blast ; ducked and dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan . 
Sideways leaning , we sideways darted ; every ropeyarn tingling like a wire ; the two tall masts buckling like Indian canes in land tornadoes . 
So full of this reeling scene were we , as we stood by the plunging bowsprit , that for some time we did not notice the jeering glances of the passengers , a lubber-like assembly , who marvelled that two fellow beings should be so companionable ; as though a white man were anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro . 
But there were some boobies and bumpkins there , who , by their intense greenness , must have come from the heart and centre of all verdure . 
Queequeg caught one of these young saplings mimicking him behind his back . 
I thought the bumpkin 's hour of doom was come . 
Dropping his harpoon , the brawny savage caught him in his arms , and by an almost miraculous dexterity and strength , sent him high up bodily into the air ; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset , the fellow landed with bursting lungs upon his feet , while Queequeg , turning his back upon him , lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a puff . 
`` Capting ! 
Capting ! '' 
yelled the bumpkin , running towards that officer ; `` Capting , Capting , here 's the devil . '' 
`` Hallo , you sir , '' cried the Captain , a gaunt rib of the sea , stalking up to Queequeg , `` what in thunder do you mean by that ? 
Do n't you know you might have killed that chap ? '' 
`` What him say ? '' 
said Queequeg , as he mildly turned to me . 
`` He say , '' said I , `` that you came near kill-e that man there , '' pointing to the still shivering greenhorn . 
`` Kill-e , '' cried Queequeg , twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly expression of disdain , `` ah ! 
him bevy small-e fish-e ; Queequeg no kill-e so small-e fish-e ; Queequeg kill-e big whale ! '' 
`` Look you , '' roared the Captain , `` I 'll kill-e YOU , you cannibal , if you try any more of your tricks aboard here ; so mind your eye . '' 
But it so happened just then , that it was high time for the Captain to mind his own eye . 
The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted the weather-sheet , and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to side , completely sweeping the entire after part of the deck . 
The poor fellow whom Queequeg had handled so roughly , was swept overboard ; all hands were in a panic ; and to attempt snatching at the boom to stay it , seemed madness . 
It flew from right to left , and back again , almost in one ticking of a watch , and every instant seemed on the point of snapping into splinters . 
Nothing was done , and nothing seemed capable of being done ; those on deck rushed towards the bows , and stood eyeing the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale . 
In the midst of this consternation , Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees , and crawling under the path of the boom , whipped hold of a rope , secured one end to the bulwarks , and then flinging the other like a lasso , caught it round the boom as it swept over his head , and at the next jerk , the spar was that way trapped , and all was safe . 
The schooner was run into the wind , and while the hands were clearing away the stern boat , Queequeg , stripped to the waist , darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap . 
For three minutes or more he was seen swimming like a dog , throwing his long arms straight out before him , and by turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing foam . 
I looked at the grand and glorious fellow , but saw no one to be saved . 
The greenhorn had gone down . 
Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water , Queequeg , now took an instant 's glance around him , and seeming to see just how matters were , dived down and disappeared . 
A few minutes more , and he rose again , one arm still striking out , and with the other dragging a lifeless form . 
The boat soon picked them up . 
The poor bumpkin was restored . 
All hands voted Queequeg a noble trump ; the captain begged his pardon . 
From that hour I clove to Queequeg like a barnacle ; yea , till poor Queequeg took his last long dive . 
Was there ever such unconsciousness ? 
He did not seem to think that he at all deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies . 
He only asked for water -- fresh water -- something to wipe the brine off ; that done , he put on dry clothes , lighted his pipe , and leaning against the bulwarks , and mildly eyeing those around him , seemed to be saying to himself -- `` It 's a mutual , joint-stock world , in all meridians . 
We cannibals must help these Christians . '' 
Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning ; so , after a fine run , we safely arrived in Nantucket . 
Nantucket ! 
Take out your map and look at it . 
See what a real corner of the world it occupies ; how it stands there , away off shore , more lonely than the Eddystone lighthouse . 
Look at it -- a mere hillock , and elbow of sand ; all beach , without a background . 
There is more sand there than you would use in twenty years as a substitute for blotting paper . 
Some gamesome wights will tell you that they have to plant weeds there , they do n't grow naturally ; that they import Canada thistles ; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop a leak in an oil cask ; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like bits of the true cross in Rome ; that people there plant toadstools before their houses , to get under the shade in summer time ; that one blade of grass makes an oasis , three blades in a day 's walk a prairie ; that they wear quicksand shoes , something like Laplander snow-shoes ; that they are so shut up , belted about , every way inclosed , surrounded , and made an utter island of by the ocean , that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes be found adhering , as to the backs of sea turtles . 
But these extravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois . 
Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by the red-men . 
Thus goes the legend . 
In olden times an eagle swooped down upon the New England coast , and carried off an infant Indian in his talons . 
With loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide waters . 
They resolved to follow in the same direction . 
Setting out in their canoes , after a perilous passage they discovered the island , and there they found an empty ivory casket , -- the poor little Indian 's skeleton . 
What wonder , then , that these Nantucketers , born on a beach , should take to the sea for a livelihood ! 
They first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand ; grown bolder , they waded out with nets for mackerel ; more experienced , they pushed off in boats and captured cod ; and at last , launching a navy of great ships on the sea , explored this watery world ; put an incessant belt of circumnavigations round it ; peeped in at Behring 's Straits ; and in all seasons and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that has survived the flood ; most monstrous and most mountainous ! 
That Himmalehan , salt-sea Mastodon , clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power , that his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious assaults ! 
And thus have these naked Nantucketers , these sea hermits , issuing from their ant-hill in the sea , overrun and conquered the watery world like so many Alexanders ; parcelling out among them the Atlantic , Pacific , and Indian oceans , as the three pirate powers did Poland . 
Let America add Mexico to Texas , and pile Cuba upon Canada ; let the English overswarm all India , and hang out their blazing banner from the sun ; two thirds of this terraqueous globe are the Nantucketer 's . 
For the sea is his ; he owns it , as Emperors own empires ; other seamen having but a right of way through it . 
Merchant ships are but extension bridges ; armed ones but floating forts ; even pirates and privateers , though following the sea as highwaymen the road , they but plunder other ships , other fragments of the land like themselves , without seeking to draw their living from the bottomless deep itself . 
The Nantucketer , he alone resides and riots on the sea ; he alone , in Bible language , goes down to it in ships ; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation . 
THERE is his home ; THERE lies his business , which a Noah 's flood would not interrupt , though it overwhelmed all the millions in China . 
He lives on the sea , as prairie cocks in the prairie ; he hides among the waves , he climbs them as chamois hunters climb the Alps . 
For years he knows not the land ; so that when he comes to it at last , it smells like another world , more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman . 
With the landless gull , that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep between billows ; so at nightfall , the Nantucketer , out of sight of land , furls his sails , and lays him to his rest , while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales . 
It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor , and Queequeg and I went ashore ; so we could attend to no business that day , at least none but a supper and a bed . 
The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots , whom he asserted to be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket , and moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea , as he called him , was famous for his chowders . 
In short , he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better than try pot-luck at the Try Pots . 
But the directions he had given us about keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church to the larboard , and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a corner three points to the starboard , and that done , then ask the first man we met where the place was : these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us at first , especially as , at the outset , Queequeg insisted that the yellow warehouse -- our first point of departure -- must be left on the larboard hand , whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard . 
However , by dint of beating about a little in the dark , and now and then knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way , we at last came to something which there was no mistaking . 
Two enormous wooden pots painted black , and suspended by asses ' ears , swung from the cross-trees of an old top-mast , planted in front of an old doorway . 
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side , so that this old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows . 
Perhaps I was over sensitive to such impressions at the time , but I could not help staring at this gallows with a vague misgiving . 
A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the two remaining horns ; yes , TWO of them , one for Queequeg , and one for me . 
It 's ominous , thinks I . 
A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling port ; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen 's chapel ; and here a gallows ! 
and a pair of prodigious black pots too ! 
Are these last throwing out oblique hints touching Tophet ? 
I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with yellow hair and a yellow gown , standing in the porch of the inn , under a dull red lamp swinging there , that looked much like an injured eye , and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt . 
`` Get along with ye , '' said she to the man , `` or I 'll be combing ye ! '' 
`` Come on , Queequeg , '' said I , `` all right . 
There 's Mrs. Hussey . '' 
And so it turned out ; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home , but leaving Mrs. Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs . 
Upon making known our desires for a supper and a bed , Mrs. Hussey , postponing further scolding for the present , ushered us into a little room , and seating us at a table spread with the relics of a recently concluded repast , turned round to us and said -- `` Clam or Cod ? '' 
`` What 's that about Cods , ma'am ? '' 
said I , with much politeness . 
`` Clam or Cod ? '' 
she repeated . 
`` A clam for supper ? 
a cold clam ; is THAT what you mean , Mrs. Hussey ? '' 
says I , `` but that 's a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time , ai n't it , Mrs. Hussey ? '' 
But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple Shirt , who was waiting for it in the entry , and seeming to hear nothing but the word `` clam , '' Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen , and bawling out `` clam for two , '' disappeared . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , `` do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on one clam ? '' 
However , a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently cheerless prospect before us . 
But when that smoking chowder came in , the mystery was delightfully explained . 
Oh , sweet friends ! 
hearken to me . 
It was made of small juicy clams , scarcely bigger than hazel nuts , mixed with pounded ship biscuit , and salted pork cut up into little flakes ; the whole enriched with butter , and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt . 
Our appetites being sharpened by the frosty voyage , and in particular , Queequeg seeing his favourite fishing food before him , and the chowder being surpassingly excellent , we despatched it with great expedition : when leaning back a moment and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey 's clam and cod announcement , I thought I would try a little experiment . 
Stepping to the kitchen door , I uttered the word `` cod '' with great emphasis , and resumed my seat . 
In a few moments the savoury steam came forth again , but with a different flavor , and in good time a fine cod-chowder was placed before us . 
We resumed business ; and while plying our spoons in the bowl , thinks I to myself , I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head ? 
What 's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people ? 
`` But look , Queequeg , ai n't that a live eel in your bowl ? 
Where 's your harpoon ? '' 
Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots , which well deserved its name ; for the pots there were always boiling chowders . 
Chowder for breakfast , and chowder for dinner , and chowder for supper , till you began to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes . 
The area before the house was paved with clam-shells . 
Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra ; and Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin . 
There was a fishy flavor to the milk , too , which I could not at all account for , till one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen 's boats , I saw Hosea 's brindled cow feeding on fish remnants , and marching along the sand with each foot in a cod 's decapitated head , looking very slip-shod , I assure ye . 
Supper concluded , we received a lamp , and directions from Mrs. Hussey concerning the nearest way to bed ; but , as Queequeg was about to precede me up the stairs , the lady reached forth her arm , and demanded his harpoon ; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers . 
`` Why not ? '' 
said I ; `` every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon -- but why not ? '' 
`` Because it 's dangerous , '' says she . 
`` Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort ` nt v ` y' ge of his , when he was gone four years and a half , with only three barrels of ile , was found dead in my first floor back , with his harpoon in his side ; ever since then I allow no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night . 
So , Mr. Queequeg '' -LRB- for she had learned his name -RRB- , `` I will just take this here iron , and keep it for you till morning . 
But the chowder ; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast , men ? '' 
`` Both , '' says I ; `` and let 's have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety . '' 
In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow . 
But to my surprise and no small concern , Queequeg now gave me to understand , that he had been diligently consulting Yojo -- the name of his black little god -- and Yojo had told him two or three times over , and strongly insisted upon it everyway , that instead of our going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor , and in concert selecting our craft ; instead of this , I say , Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest wholly with me , inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us ; and , in order to do so , had already pitched upon a vessel , which , if left to myself , I , Ishmael , should infallibly light upon , for all the world as though it had turned out by chance ; and in that vessel I must immediately ship myself , for the present irrespective of Queequeg . 
I have forgotten to mention that , in many things , Queequeg placed great confidence in the excellence of Yojo 's judgment and surprising forecast of things ; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem , as a rather good sort of god , who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole , but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs . 
Now , this plan of Queequeg 's , or rather Yojo 's , touching the selection of our craft ; I did not like that plan at all . 
I had not a little relied upon Queequeg 's sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely . 
But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon Queequeg , I was obliged to acquiesce ; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor , that should quickly settle that trifling little affair . 
Next morning early , leaving Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom -- for it seemed that it was some sort of Lent or Ramadan , or day of fasting , humiliation , and prayer with Queequeg and Yojo that day ; HOW it was I never could find out , for , though I applied myself to it several times , I never could master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles -- leaving Queequeg , then , fasting on his tomahawk pipe , and Yojo warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings , I sallied out among the shipping . 
After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries , I learnt that there were three ships up for three-years ' voyages -- The Devil-dam , the Tit-bit , and the Pequod . 
DEVIL-DAM , I do not know the origin of ; TIT-BIT is obvious ; PEQUOD , you will no doubt remember , was the name of a celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians ; now extinct as the ancient Medes . 
I peered and pryed about the Devil-dam ; from her , hopped over to the Tit-bit ; and finally , going on board the Pequod , looked around her for a moment , and then decided that this was the very ship for us . 
You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day , for aught I know ; -- square-toed luggers ; mountainous Japanese junks ; butter-box galliots , and what not ; but take my word for it , you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare old Pequod . 
She was a ship of the old school , rather small if anything ; with an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her . 
Long seasoned and weather-stained in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans , her old hull 's complexion was darkened like a French grenadier 's , who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia . 
Her venerable bows looked bearded . 
Her masts -- cut somewhere on the coast of Japan , where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale -- her masts stood stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne . 
Her ancient decks were worn and wrinkled , like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled . 
But to all these her old antiquities , were added new and marvellous features , pertaining to the wild business that for more than half a century she had followed . 
Old Captain Peleg , many years her chief-mate , before he commanded another vessel of his own , and now a retired seaman , and one of the principal owners of the Pequod , -- this old Peleg , during the term of his chief-mateship , had built upon her original grotesqueness , and inlaid it , all over , with a quaintness both of material and device , unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake 's carved buckler or bedstead . 
She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor , his neck heavy with pendants of polished ivory . 
She was a thing of trophies . 
A cannibal of a craft , tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies . 
All round , her unpanelled , open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw , with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale , inserted there for pins , to fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to . 
Those thews ran not through base blocks of land wood , but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory . 
Scorning a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm , she sported there a tiller ; and that tiller was in one mass , curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe . 
The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest , felt like the Tartar , when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw . 
A noble craft , but somehow a most melancholy ! 
All noble things are touched with that . 
Now when I looked about the quarter-deck , for some one having authority , in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage , at first I saw nobody ; but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent , or rather wigwam , pitched a little behind the main-mast . 
It seemed only a temporary erection used in port . 
It was of a conical shape , some ten feet high ; consisting of the long , huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jaws of the right-whale . 
Planted with their broad ends on the deck , a circle of these slabs laced together , mutually sloped towards each other , and at the apex united in a tufted point , where the loose hairy fibres waved to and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem 's head . 
A triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship , so that the insider commanded a complete view forward . 
And half concealed in this queer tenement , I at length found one who by his aspect seemed to have authority ; and who , it being noon , and the ship 's work suspended , was now enjoying respite from the burden of command . 
He was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair , wriggling all over with curious carving ; and the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam was constructed . 
There was nothing so very particular , perhaps , about the appearance of the elderly man I saw ; he was brown and brawny , like most old seamen , and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth , cut in the Quaker style ; only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his eyes , which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales , and always looking to windward ; -- for this causes the muscles about the eyes to become pursed together . 
Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl . 
`` Is this the Captain of the Pequod ? '' 
said I , advancing to the door of the tent . 
`` Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod , what dost thou want of him ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` I was thinking of shipping . '' 
`` Thou wast , wast thou ? 
I see thou art no Nantucketer -- ever been in a stove boat ? '' 
`` No , Sir , I never have . '' 
`` Dost know nothing at all about whaling , I dare say -- eh ? 
`` Nothing , Sir ; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn . 
I 've been several voyages in the merchant service , and I think that -- '' `` Merchant service be damned . 
Talk not that lingo to me . 
Dost see that leg ? 
-- I 'll take that leg away from thy stern , if ever thou talkest of the marchant service to me again . 
Marchant service indeed ! 
I suppose now ye feel considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships . 
But flukes ! 
man , what makes thee want to go a whaling , eh ? 
-- it looks a little suspicious , do n't it , eh ? 
-- Hast not been a pirate , hast thou ? 
-- Didst not rob thy last Captain , didst thou ? 
-- Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to sea ? '' 
I protested my innocence of these things . 
I saw that under the mask of these half humorous innuendoes , this old seaman , as an insulated Quakerish Nantucketer , was full of his insular prejudices , and rather distrustful of all aliens , unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard . 
`` But what takes thee a-whaling ? 
I want to know that before I think of shipping ye . '' 
`` Well , sir , I want to see what whaling is . 
I want to see the world . '' 
`` Want to see what whaling is , eh ? 
Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab ? '' 
`` Who is Captain Ahab , sir ? '' 
`` Aye , aye , I thought so . 
Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship . '' 
`` I am mistaken then . 
I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself . '' 
`` Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg -- that 's who ye are speaking to , young man . 
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the voyage , and supplied with all her needs , including crew . 
We are part owners and agents . 
But as I was going to say , if thou wantest to know what whaling is , as thou tellest ye do , I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it , past backing out . 
Clap eye on Captain Ahab , young man , and thou wilt find that he has only one leg . '' 
`` What do you mean , sir ? 
Was the other one lost by a whale ? '' 
`` Lost by a whale ! 
Young man , come nearer to me : it was devoured , chewed up , crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat ! 
-- ah , ah ! '' 
I was a little alarmed by his energy , perhaps also a little touched at the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation , but said as calmly as I could , `` What you say is no doubt true enough , sir ; but how could I know there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale , though indeed I might have inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident . '' 
`` Look ye now , young man , thy lungs are a sort of soft , d'ye see ; thou dost not talk shark a bit . 
SURE , ye 've been to sea before now ; sure of that ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said I , `` I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the merchant -- '' `` Hard down out of that ! 
Mind what I said about the marchant service -- do n't aggravate me -- I wo n't have it . 
But let us understand each other . 
I have given thee a hint about what whaling is ; do ye yet feel inclined for it ? '' 
`` I do , sir . '' 
`` Very good . 
Now , art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale 's throat , and then jump after it ? 
Answer , quick ! '' 
`` I am , sir , if it should be positively indispensable to do so ; not to be got rid of , that is ; which I do n't take to be the fact . '' 
`` Good again . 
Now then , thou not only wantest to go a-whaling , to find out by experience what whaling is , but ye also want to go in order to see the world ? 
Was not that what ye said ? 
I thought so . 
Well then , just step forward there , and take a peep over the weather-bow , and then back to me and tell me what ye see there . '' 
For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request , not knowing exactly how to take it , whether humorously or in earnest . 
But concentrating all his crow 's feet into one scowl , Captain Peleg started me on the errand . 
Going forward and glancing over the weather bow , I perceived that the ship swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide , was now obliquely pointing towards the open ocean . 
The prospect was unlimited , but exceedingly monotonous and forbidding ; not the slightest variety that I could see . 
`` Well , what 's the report ? '' 
said Peleg when I came back ; `` what did ye see ? '' 
`` Not much , '' I replied -- `` nothing but water ; considerable horizon though , and there 's a squall coming up , I think . '' 
`` Well , what does thou think then of seeing the world ? 
Do ye wish to go round Cape Horn to see any more of it , eh ? 
Ca n't ye see the world where you stand ? '' 
I was a little staggered , but go a-whaling I must , and I would ; and the Pequod was as good a ship as any -- I thought the best -- and all this I now repeated to Peleg . 
Seeing me so determined , he expressed his willingness to ship me . 
`` And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off , '' he added -- `` come along with ye . '' 
And so saying , he led the way below deck into the cabin . 
Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising figure . 
It turned out to be Captain Bildad , who along with Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel ; the other shares , as is sometimes the case in these ports , being held by a crowd of old annuitants ; widows , fatherless children , and chancery wards ; each owning about the value of a timber head , or a foot of plank , or a nail or two in the ship . 
People in Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels , the same way that you do yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest . 
Now , Bildad , like Peleg , and indeed many other Nantucketers , was a Quaker , the island having been originally settled by that sect ; and to this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the Quaker , only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and heterogeneous . 
For some of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all sailors and whale-hunters . 
They are fighting Quakers ; they are Quakers with a vengeance . 
So that there are instances among them of men , who , named with Scripture names -- a singularly common fashion on the island -- and in childhood naturally imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker idiom ; still , from the audacious , daring , and boundless adventure of their subsequent lives , strangely blend with these unoutgrown peculiarities , a thousand bold dashes of character , not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king , or a poetical Pagan Roman . 
And when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force , with a globular brain and a ponderous heart ; who has also by the stillness and seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters , and beneath constellations never seen here at the north , been led to think untraditionally and independently ; receiving all nature 's sweet or savage impressions fresh from her own virgin voluntary and confiding breast , and thereby chiefly , but with some help from accidental advantages , to learn a bold and nervous lofty language -- that man makes one in a whole nation 's census -- a mighty pageant creature , formed for noble tragedies . 
Nor will it at all detract from him , dramatically regarded , if either by birth or other circumstances , he have what seems a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature . 
For all men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness . 
Be sure of this , O young ambition , all mortal greatness is but disease . 
