She began to do as she liked and to feel as she liked . 
She completely abandoned her Tuesdays at home , and did not return the visits of those who had called upon her . 
She made no ineffectual efforts to conduct her household en bonne menagere , going and coming as it suited her fancy , and , so far as she was able , lending herself to any passing caprice . 
Mr. Pontellier had been a rather courteous husband so long as he met a certain tacit submissiveness in his wife . 
But her new and unexpected line of conduct completely bewildered him . 
It shocked him . 
Then her absolute disregard for her duties as a wife angered him . 
When Mr. Pontellier became rude , Edna grew insolent . 
She had resolved never to take another step backward . 
`` It seems to me the utmost folly for a woman at the head of a household , and the mother of children , to spend in an atelier days which would be better employed contriving for the comfort of her family . '' 
`` I feel like painting , '' answered Edna . 
`` Perhaps I sha n't always feel like it . '' 
`` Then in God 's name paint ! 
but do n't let the family go to the devil . 
There 's Madame Ratignolle ; because she keeps up her music , she does n't let everything else go to chaos . 
And she 's more of a musician than you are a painter . '' 
`` She is n't a musician , and I 'm not a painter . 
It is n't on account of painting that I let things go . '' 
`` On account of what , then ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
I do n't know . 
Let me alone ; you bother me . '' 
It sometimes entered Mr. Pontellier 's mind to wonder if his wife were not growing a little unbalanced mentally . 
He could see plainly that she was not herself . 
That is , he could not see that she was becoming herself and daily casting aside that fictitious self which we assume like a garment with which to appear before the world . 
Her husband let her alone as she requested , and went away to his office . 
Edna went up to her atelier -- a bright room in the top of the house . 
She was working with great energy and interest , without accomplishing anything , however , which satisfied her even in the smallest degree . 
For a time she had the whole household enrolled in the service of art . 
The boys posed for her . 
They thought it amusing at first , but the occupation soon lost its attractiveness when they discovered that it was not a game arranged especially for their entertainment . 
The quadroon sat for hours before Edna 's palette , patient as a savage , while the house-maid took charge of the children , and the drawing-room went undusted . 
But the housemaid , too , served her term as model when Edna perceived that the young woman 's back and shoulders were molded on classic lines , and that her hair , loosened from its confining cap , became an inspiration . 
While Edna worked she sometimes sang low the little air , `` Ah ! 
si tu savais ! '' 
It moved her with recollections . 
She could hear again the ripple of the water , the flapping sail . 
She could see the glint of the moon upon the bay , and could feel the soft , gusty beating of the hot south wind . 
A subtle current of desire passed through her body , weakening her hold upon the brushes and making her eyes burn . 
There were days when she was very happy without knowing why . 
She was happy to be alive and breathing , when her whole being seemed to be one with the sunlight , the color , the odors , the luxuriant warmth of some perfect Southern day . 
She liked then to wander alone into strange and unfamiliar places . 
She discovered many a sunny , sleepy corner , fashioned to dream in . 
And she found it good to dream and to be alone and unmolested . 
There were days when she was unhappy , she did not know why , -- when it did not seem worth while to be glad or sorry , to be alive or dead ; when life appeared to her like a grotesque pandemonium and humanity like worms struggling blindly toward inevitable annihilation . 
She could not work on such a day , nor weave fancies to stir her pulses and warm her blood . 
It was during such a mood that Edna hunted up Mademoiselle Reisz . 
She had not forgotten the rather disagreeable impression left upon her by their last interview ; but she nevertheless felt a desire to see her -- above all , to listen while she played upon the piano . 
Quite early in the afternoon she started upon her quest for the pianist . 
Unfortunately she had mislaid or lost Mademoiselle Reisz 's card , and looking up her address in the city directory , she found that the woman lived on Bienville Street , some distance away . 
The directory which fell into her hands was a year or more old , however , and upon reaching the number indicated , Edna discovered that the house was occupied by a respectable family of mulattoes who had chambres garnies to let . 
They had been living there for six months , and knew absolutely nothing of a Mademoiselle Reisz . 
In fact , they knew nothing of any of their neighbors ; their lodgers were all people of the highest distinction , they assured Edna . 
She did not linger to discuss class distinctions with Madame Pouponne , but hastened to a neighboring grocery store , feeling sure that Mademoiselle would have left her address with the proprietor . 
He knew Mademoiselle Reisz a good deal better than he wanted to know her , he informed his questioner . 
In truth , he did not want to know her at all , or anything concerning her -- the most disagreeable and unpopular woman who ever lived in Bienville Street . 
He thanked heaven she had left the neighborhood , and was equally thankful that he did not know where she had gone . 
Edna 's desire to see Mademoiselle Reisz had increased tenfold since these unlooked-for obstacles had arisen to thwart it . 
She was wondering who could give her the information she sought , when it suddenly occurred to her that Madame Lebrun would be the one most likely to do so . 
She knew it was useless to ask Madame Ratignolle , who was on the most distant terms with the musician , and preferred to know nothing concerning her . 
She had once been almost as emphatic in expressing herself upon the subject as the corner grocer . 
Edna knew that Madame Lebrun had returned to the city , for it was the middle of November . 
And she also knew where the Lebruns lived , on Chartres Street . 
Their home from the outside looked like a prison , with iron bars before the door and lower windows . 
The iron bars were a relic of the old regime , and no one had ever thought of dislodging them . 
At the side was a high fence enclosing the garden . 
A gate or door opening upon the street was locked . 
Edna rang the bell at this side garden gate , and stood upon the banquette , waiting to be admitted . 
It was Victor who opened the gate for her . 
A black woman , wiping her hands upon her apron , was close at his heels . 
Before she saw them Edna could hear them in altercation , the woman -- plainly an anomaly -- claiming the right to be allowed to perform her duties , one of which was to answer the bell . 
Victor was surprised and delighted to see Mrs. Pontellier , and he made no attempt to conceal either his astonishment or his delight . 
He was a dark-browed , good-looking youngster of nineteen , greatly resembling his mother , but with ten times her impetuosity . 
He instructed the black woman to go at once and inform Madame Lebrun that Mrs. Pontellier desired to see her . 
The woman grumbled a refusal to do part of her duty when she had not been permitted to do it all , and started back to her interrupted task of weeding the garden . 
Whereupon Victor administered a rebuke in the form of a volley of abuse , which , owing to its rapidity and incoherence , was all but incomprehensible to Edna . 
Whatever it was , the rebuke was convincing , for the woman dropped her hoe and went mumbling into the house . 
Edna did not wish to enter . 
It was very pleasant there on the side porch , where there were chairs , a wicker lounge , and a small table . 
She seated herself , for she was tired from her long tramp ; and she began to rock gently and smooth out the folds of her silk parasol . 
Victor drew up his chair beside her . 
He at once explained that the black woman 's offensive conduct was all due to imperfect training , as he was not there to take her in hand . 
He had only come up from the island the morning before , and expected to return next day . 
He stayed all winter at the island ; he lived there , and kept the place in order and got things ready for the summer visitors . 
But a man needed occasional relaxation , he informed Mrs. Pontellier , and every now and again he drummed up a pretext to bring him to the city . 
My ! 
but he had had a time of it the evening before ! 
He would n't want his mother to know , and he began to talk in a whisper . 
He was scintillant with recollections . 
Of course , he could n't think of telling Mrs. Pontellier all about it , she being a woman and not comprehending such things . 
But it all began with a girl peeping and smiling at him through the shutters as he passed by . 
Oh ! 
but she was a beauty ! 
Certainly he smiled back , and went up and talked to her . 
Mrs. Pontellier did not know him if she supposed he was one to let an opportunity like that escape him . 
Despite herself , the youngster amused her . 
She must have betrayed in her look some degree of interest or entertainment . 
The boy grew more daring , and Mrs. Pontellier might have found herself , in a little while , listening to a highly colored story but for the timely appearance of Madame Lebrun . 
That lady was still clad in white , according to her custom of the summer . 
Her eyes beamed an effusive welcome . 
Would not Mrs. Pontellier go inside ? 
Would she partake of some refreshment ? 
Why had she not been there before ? 
How was that dear Mr. Pontellier and how were those sweet children ? 
Had Mrs. Pontellier ever known such a warm November ? 
Victor went and reclined on the wicker lounge behind his mother 's chair , where he commanded a view of Edna 's face . 
He had taken her parasol from her hands while he spoke to her , and he now lifted it and twirled it above him as he lay on his back . 
When Madame Lebrun complained that it was so dull coming back to the city ; that she saw so few people now ; that even Victor , when he came up from the island for a day or two , had so much to occupy him and engage his time ; then it was that the youth went into contortions on the lounge and winked mischievously at Edna . 
She somehow felt like a confederate in crime , and tried to look severe and disapproving . 
There had been but two letters from Robert , with little in them , they told her . 
Victor said it was really not worth while to go inside for the letters , when his mother entreated him to go in search of them . 
He remembered the contents , which in truth he rattled off very glibly when put to the test . 
One letter was written from Vera Cruz and the other from the City of Mexico . 
He had met Montel , who was doing everything toward his advancement . 
So far , the financial situation was no improvement over the one he had left in New Orleans , but of course the prospects were vastly better . 
He wrote of the City of Mexico , the buildings , the people and their habits , the conditions of life which he found there . 
He sent his love to the family . 
He inclosed a check to his mother , and hoped she would affectionately remember him to all his friends . 
That was about the substance of the two letters . 
Edna felt that if there had been a message for her , she would have received it . 
The despondent frame of mind in which she had left home began again to overtake her , and she remembered that she wished to find Mademoiselle Reisz . 
Madame Lebrun knew where Mademoiselle Reisz lived . 
She gave Edna the address , regretting that she would not consent to stay and spend the remainder of the afternoon , and pay a visit to Mademoiselle Reisz some other day . 
The afternoon was already well advanced . 
Victor escorted her out upon the banquette , lifted her parasol , and held it over her while he walked to the car with her . 
He entreated her to bear in mind that the disclosures of the afternoon were strictly confidential . 
She laughed and bantered him a little , remembering too late that she should have been dignified and reserved . 
`` How handsome Mrs. Pontellier looked ! '' 
said Madame Lebrun to her son . 
`` Ravishing ! '' 
he admitted . 
`` The city atmosphere has improved her . 
Some way she does n't seem like the same woman . '' 
Some people contended that the reason Mademoiselle Reisz always chose apartments up under the roof was to discourage the approach of beggars , peddlars and callers . 
There were plenty of windows in her little front room . 
They were for the most part dingy , but as they were nearly always open it did not make so much difference . 
They often admitted into the room a good deal of smoke and soot ; but at the same time all the light and air that there was came through them . 
From her windows could be seen the crescent of the river , the masts of ships and the big chimneys of the Mississippi steamers . 
A magnificent piano crowded the apartment . 
In the next room she slept , and in the third and last she harbored a gasoline stove on which she cooked her meals when disinclined to descend to the neighboring restaurant . 
It was there also that she ate , keeping her belongings in a rare old buffet , dingy and battered from a hundred years of use . 
When Edna knocked at Mademoiselle Reisz 's front room door and entered , she discovered that person standing beside the window , engaged in mending or patching an old prunella gaiter . 
The little musician laughed all over when she saw Edna . 
Her laugh consisted of a contortion of the face and all the muscles of the body . 
She seemed strikingly homely , standing there in the afternoon light . 
She still wore the shabby lace and the artificial bunch of violets on the side of her head . 
`` So you remembered me at last , '' said Mademoiselle . 
`` I had said to myself , ` Ah , bah ! 
she will never come . ' '' 
`` Did you want me to come ? '' 
asked Edna with a smile . 
`` I had not thought much about it , '' answered Mademoiselle . 
The two had seated themselves on a little bumpy sofa which stood against the wall . 
`` I am glad , however , that you came . 
I have the water boiling back there , and was just about to make some coffee . 
You will drink a cup with me . 
And how is la belle dame ? 
Always handsome ! 
always healthy ! 
always contented ! '' 
She took Edna 's hand between her strong wiry fingers , holding it loosely without warmth , and executing a sort of double theme upon the back and palm . 
`` Yes , '' she went on ; `` I sometimes thought : ` She will never come . 
She promised as those women in society always do , without meaning it . 
She will not come . ' 
For I really do n't believe you like me , Mrs. Pontellier . '' 
`` I do n't know whether I like you or not , '' replied Edna , gazing down at the little woman with a quizzical look . 
The candor of Mrs. Pontellier 's admission greatly pleased Mademoiselle Reisz . 
She expressed her gratification by repairing forthwith to the region of the gasoline stove and rewarding her guest with the promised cup of coffee . 
The coffee and the biscuit accompanying it proved very acceptable to Edna , who had declined refreshment at Madame Lebrun 's and was now beginning to feel hungry . 
Mademoiselle set the tray which she brought in upon a small table near at hand , and seated herself once again on the lumpy sofa . 
`` I have had a letter from your friend , '' she remarked , as she poured a little cream into Edna 's cup and handed it to her . 
`` My friend ? '' 
`` Yes , your friend Robert . 
He wrote to me from the City of Mexico . '' 
`` Wrote to YOU ? '' 
repeated Edna in amazement , stirring her coffee absently . 
`` Yes , to me . 
Why not ? 
Do n't stir all the warmth out of your coffee ; drink it . 
Though the letter might as well have been sent to you ; it was nothing but Mrs. Pontellier from beginning to end . '' 
`` Let me see it , '' requested the young woman , entreatingly . 
`` No ; a letter concerns no one but the person who writes it and the one to whom it is written . '' 
`` Have n't you just said it concerned me from beginning to end ? '' 
`` It was written about you , not to you . 
` Have you seen Mrs. Pontellier ? 
How is she looking ? ' 
he asks . 
` As Mrs. Pontellier says , ' or ` as Mrs. Pontellier once said . ' 
` If Mrs. Pontellier should call upon you , play for her that Impromptu of Chopin 's , my favorite . 
I heard it here a day or two ago , but not as you play it . 
I should like to know how it affects her , ' and so on , as if he supposed we were constantly in each other 's society . '' 
`` Let me see the letter . '' 
`` Oh , no . '' 
`` Have you answered it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Let me see the letter . '' 
`` No , and again , no . '' 
`` Then play the Impromptu for me . '' 
`` It is growing late ; what time do you have to be home ? '' 
`` Time does n't concern me . 
Your question seems a little rude . 
Play the Impromptu . '' 
`` But you have told me nothing of yourself . 
What are you doing ? '' 
`` Painting ! '' 
laughed Edna . 
`` I am becoming an artist . 
Think of it ! '' 
`` Ah ! 
an artist ! 
You have pretensions , Madame . '' 
`` Why pretensions ? 
Do you think I could not become an artist ? '' 
`` I do not know you well enough to say . 
I do not know your talent or your temperament . 
To be an artist includes much ; one must possess many gifts -- absolute gifts -- which have not been acquired by one 's own effort . 
And , moreover , to succeed , the artist must possess the courageous soul . '' 
`` What do you mean by the courageous soul ? '' 
`` Courageous , ma foi ! 
The brave soul . 
The soul that dares and defies . '' 
`` Show me the letter and play for me the Impromptu . 
You see that I have persistence . 
Does that quality count for anything in art ? '' 
`` It counts with a foolish old woman whom you have captivated , '' replied Mademoiselle , with her wriggling laugh . 
The letter was right there at hand in the drawer of the little table upon which Edna had just placed her coffee cup . 
Mademoiselle opened the drawer and drew forth the letter , the topmost one . 
She placed it in Edna 's hands , and without further comment arose and went to the piano . 
Mademoiselle played a soft interlude . 
It was an improvisation . 
She sat low at the instrument , and the lines of her body settled into ungraceful curves and angles that gave it an appearance of deformity . 
Gradually and imperceptibly the interlude melted into the soft opening minor chords of the Chopin Impromptu . 
Edna did not know when the Impromptu began or ended . 
She sat in the sofa corner reading Robert 's letter by the fading light . 
Mademoiselle had glided from the Chopin into the quivering love notes of Isolde 's song , and back again to the Impromptu with its soulful and poignant longing . 
The shadows deepened in the little room . 
The music grew strange and fantastic -- turbulent , insistent , plaintive and soft with entreaty . 
The shadows grew deeper . 
The music filled the room . 
It floated out upon the night , over the housetops , the crescent of the river , losing itself in the silence of the upper air . 
Edna was sobbing , just as she had wept one midnight at Grand Isle when strange , new voices awoke in her . 
She arose in some agitation to take her departure . 
`` May I come again , Mademoiselle ? '' 
she asked at the threshold . 
`` Come whenever you feel like it . 
Be careful ; the stairs and landings are dark ; do n't stumble . '' 
Mademoiselle reentered and lit a candle . 
Robert 's letter was on the floor . 
She stooped and picked it up . 
It was crumpled and damp with tears . 
Mademoiselle smoothed the letter out , restored it to the envelope , and replaced it in the table drawer . 
One morning on his way into town Mr. Pontellier stopped at the house of his old friend and family physician , Doctor Mandelet . 
The Doctor was a semi-retired physician , resting , as the saying is , upon his laurels . 
He bore a reputation for wisdom rather than skill -- leaving the active practice of medicine to his assistants and younger contemporaries -- and was much sought for in matters of consultation . 
A few families , united to him by bonds of friendship , he still attended when they required the services of a physician . 
The Pontelliers were among these . 
Mr. Pontellier found the Doctor reading at the open window of his study . 
His house stood rather far back from the street , in the center of a delightful garden , so that it was quiet and peaceful at the old gentleman 's study window . 
He was a great reader . 
He stared up disapprovingly over his eye-glasses as Mr. Pontellier entered , wondering who had the temerity to disturb him at that hour of the morning . 
`` Ah , Pontellier ! 
Not sick , I hope . 
Come and have a seat . 
What news do you bring this morning ? '' 
He was quite portly , with a profusion of gray hair , and small blue eyes which age had robbed of much of their brightness but none of their penetration . 
`` Oh ! 
I 'm never sick , Doctor . 
You know that I come of tough fiber -- of that old Creole race of Pontelliers that dry up and finally blow away . 
I came to consult -- no , not precisely to consult -- to talk to you about Edna . 
I do n't know what ails her . '' 
`` Madame Pontellier not well , '' marveled the Doctor . 
`` Why , I saw her -- I think it was a week ago -- walking along Canal Street , the picture of health , it seemed to me . '' 
`` Yes , yes ; she seems quite well , '' said Mr. Pontellier , leaning forward and whirling his stick between his two hands ; `` but she does n't act well . 
She 's odd , she 's not like herself . 
I ca n't make her out , and I thought perhaps you 'd help me . '' 
`` How does she act ? '' 
inquired the Doctor . 
`` Well , it is n't easy to explain , '' said Mr. Pontellier , throwing himself back in his chair . 
`` She lets the housekeeping go to the dickens . '' 
`` Well , well ; women are not all alike , my dear Pontellier . 
We 've got to consider -- '' `` I know that ; I told you I could n't explain . 
Her whole attitude -- toward me and everybody and everything -- has changed . 
You know I have a quick temper , but I do n't want to quarrel or be rude to a woman , especially my wife ; yet I 'm driven to it , and feel like ten thousand devils after I 've made a fool of myself . 
She 's making it devilishly uncomfortable for me , '' he went on nervously . 
`` She 's got some sort of notion in her head concerning the eternal rights of women ; and -- you understand -- we meet in the morning at the breakfast table . '' 
The old gentleman lifted his shaggy eyebrows , protruded his thick nether lip , and tapped the arms of his chair with his cushioned fingertips . 
`` What have you been doing to her , Pontellier ? '' 
`` Doing ! 
Parbleu ! '' 
`` Has she , '' asked the Doctor , with a smile , `` has she been associating of late with a circle of pseudo-intellectual women -- super-spiritual superior beings ? 
My wife has been telling me about them . '' 
`` That 's the trouble , '' broke in Mr. Pontellier , `` she has n't been associating with any one . 
She has abandoned her Tuesdays at home , has thrown over all her acquaintances , and goes tramping about by herself , moping in the street-cars , getting in after dark . 
I tell you she 's peculiar . 
I do n't like it ; I feel a little worried over it . '' 
This was a new aspect for the Doctor . 
`` Nothing hereditary ? '' 
he asked , seriously . 
`` Nothing peculiar about her family antecedents , is there ? '' 
`` Oh , no , indeed ! 
She comes of sound old Presbyterian Kentucky stock . 
The old gentleman , her father , I have heard , used to atone for his weekday sins with his Sunday devotions . 
I know for a fact , that his race horses literally ran away with the prettiest bit of Kentucky farming land I ever laid eyes upon . 
Margaret -- you know Margaret -- she has all the Presbyterianism undiluted . 
And the youngest is something of a vixen . 
By the way , she gets married in a couple of weeks from now . '' 
`` Send your wife up to the wedding , '' exclaimed the Doctor , foreseeing a happy solution . 
`` Let her stay among her own people for a while ; it will do her good . '' 
`` That 's what I want her to do . 
She wo n't go to the marriage . 
She says a wedding is one of the most lamentable spectacles on earth . 
Nice thing for a woman to say to her husband ! '' 
exclaimed Mr. Pontellier , fuming anew at the recollection . 
`` Pontellier , '' said the Doctor , after a moment 's reflection , `` let your wife alone for a while . 
Do n't bother her , and do n't let her bother you . 
Woman , my dear friend , is a very peculiar and delicate organism -- a sensitive and highly organized woman , such as I know Mrs. Pontellier to be , is especially peculiar . 
It would require an inspired psychologist to deal successfully with them . 
And when ordinary fellows like you and me attempt to cope with their idiosyncrasies the result is bungling . 
Most women are moody and whimsical . 
This is some passing whim of your wife , due to some cause or causes which you and I need n't try to fathom . 
But it will pass happily over , especially if you let her alone . 
Send her around to see me . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I could n't do that ; there 'd be no reason for it , '' objected Mr. Pontellier . 
`` Then I 'll go around and see her , '' said the Doctor . 
`` I 'll drop in to dinner some evening en bon ami . 
`` Do ! 
by all means , '' urged Mr. Pontellier . 
`` What evening will you come ? 
Say Thursday . 
Will you come Thursday ? '' 
he asked , rising to take his leave . 
`` Very well ; Thursday . 
My wife may possibly have some engagement for me Thursday . 
In case she has , I shall let you know . 
Otherwise , you may expect me . '' 
Mr. Pontellier turned before leaving to say : `` I am going to New York on business very soon . 
I have a big scheme on hand , and want to be on the field proper to pull the ropes and handle the ribbons . 
We 'll let you in on the inside if you say so , Doctor , '' he laughed . 
`` No , I thank you , my dear sir , '' returned the Doctor . 
`` I leave such ventures to you younger men with the fever of life still in your blood . '' 
`` What I wanted to say , '' continued Mr. Pontellier , with his hand on the knob ; `` I may have to be absent a good while . 
Would you advise me to take Edna along ? '' 
`` By all means , if she wishes to go . 
If not , leave her here . 
Do n't contradict her . 
The mood will pass , I assure you . 
It may take a month , two , three months -- possibly longer , but it will pass ; have patience . '' 
`` Well , good-by , a jeudi , '' said Mr. Pontellier , as he let himself out . 
The Doctor would have liked during the course of conversation to ask , `` Is there any man in the case ? '' 
but he knew his Creole too well to make such a blunder as that . 
He did not resume his book immediately , but sat for a while meditatively looking out into the garden . 
Edna 's father was in the city , and had been with them several days . 
She was not very warmly or deeply attached to him , but they had certain tastes in common , and when together they were companionable . 
His coming was in the nature of a welcome disturbance ; it seemed to furnish a new direction for her emotions . 
He had come to purchase a wedding gift for his daughter , Janet , and an outfit for himself in which he might make a creditable appearance at her marriage . 
Mr. Pontellier had selected the bridal gift , as every one immediately connected with him always deferred to his taste in such matters . 
And his suggestions on the question of dress -- which too often assumes the nature of a problem -- were of inestimable value to his father-in-law . 
But for the past few days the old gentleman had been upon Edna 's hands , and in his society she was becoming acquainted with a new set of sensations . 
He had been a colonel in the Confederate army , and still maintained , with the title , the military bearing which had always accompanied it . 
His hair and mustache were white and silky , emphasizing the rugged bronze of his face . 
He was tall and thin , and wore his coats padded , which gave a fictitious breadth and depth to his shoulders and chest . 
Edna and her father looked very distinguished together , and excited a good deal of notice during their perambulations . 
Upon his arrival she began by introducing him to her atelier and making a sketch of him . 
He took the whole matter very seriously . 
If her talent had been ten-fold greater than it was , it would not have surprised him , convinced as he was that he had bequeathed to all of his daughters the germs of a masterful capability , which only depended upon their own efforts to be directed toward successful achievement . 
Before her pencil he sat rigid and unflinching , as he had faced the cannon 's mouth in days gone by . 
He resented the intrusion of the children , who gaped with wondering eyes at him , sitting so stiff up there in their mother 's bright atelier . 
When they drew near he motioned them away with an expressive action of the foot , loath to disturb the fixed lines of his countenance , his arms , or his rigid shoulders . 
Edna , anxious to entertain him , invited Mademoiselle Reisz to meet him , having promised him a treat in her piano playing ; but Mademoiselle declined the invitation . 
So together they attended a soiree musicale at the Ratignolles ' . 
Monsieur and Madame Ratignolle made much of the Colonel , installing him as the guest of honor and engaging him at once to dine with them the following Sunday , or any day which he might select . 
Madame coquetted with him in the most captivating and naive manner , with eyes , gestures , and a profusion of compliments , till the Colonel 's old head felt thirty years younger on his padded shoulders . 
Edna marveled , not comprehending . 
She herself was almost devoid of coquetry . 
There were one or two men whom she observed at the soiree musicale ; but she would never have felt moved to any kittenish display to attract their notice -- to any feline or feminine wiles to express herself toward them . 
Their personality attracted her in an agreeable way . 
Her fancy selected them , and she was glad when a lull in the music gave them an opportunity to meet her and talk with her . 
Often on the street the glance of strange eyes had lingered in her memory , and sometimes had disturbed her . 
Mr. Pontellier did not attend these soirees musicales . 
He considered them bourgeois , and found more diversion at the club . 
To Madame Ratignolle he said the music dispensed at her soirees was too `` heavy , '' too far beyond his untrained comprehension . 
His excuse flattered her . 
But she disapproved of Mr. Pontellier 's club , and she was frank enough to tell Edna so . 
`` It 's a pity Mr. Pontellier does n't stay home more in the evenings . 
I think you would be more -- well , if you do n't mind my saying it -- more united , if he did . '' 
`` Oh ! 
dear no ! '' 
said Edna , with a blank look in her eyes . 
`` What should I do if he stayed home ? 
We would n't have anything to say to each other . '' 
She had not much of anything to say to her father , for that matter ; but he did not antagonize her . 
She discovered that he interested her , though she realized that he might not interest her long ; and for the first time in her life she felt as if she were thoroughly acquainted with him . 
He kept her busy serving him and ministering to his wants . 
It amused her to do so . 
She would not permit a servant or one of the children to do anything for him which she might do herself . 
Her husband noticed , and thought it was the expression of a deep filial attachment which he had never suspected . 
The Colonel drank numerous `` toddies '' during the course of the day , which left him , however , imperturbed . 
He was an expert at concocting strong drinks . 
He had even invented some , to which he had given fantastic names , and for whose manufacture he required diverse ingredients that it devolved upon Edna to procure for him . 
