`` Well , then , Eliza , hear my plan . 
Mas ' r took it into his head to send me right by here , with a note to Mr. Symmes , that lives a mile past . 
I believe he expected I should come here to tell you what I have . 
It would please him , if he thought it would aggravate ` Shelby 's folks , ' as he calls 'em . 
I 'm going home quite resigned , you understand , as if all was over . 
I 've got some preparations made , -- and there are those that will help me ; and , in the course of a week or so , I shall be among the missing , some day . 
Pray for me , Eliza ; perhaps the good Lord will hear you . '' 
`` O , pray yourself , George , and go trusting in him ; then you wo n't do anything wicked . '' 
`` Well , now , good-by , '' said George , holding Eliza 's hands , and gazing into her eyes , without moving . 
They stood silent ; then there were last words , and sobs , and bitter weeping , -- such parting as those may make whose hope to meet again is as the spider 's web , -- and the husband and wife were parted . 
The cabin of Uncle Tom was a small log building , close adjoining to `` the house , '' as the negro par excellence designates his master 's dwelling . 
In front it had a neat garden-patch , where , every summer , strawberries , raspberries , and a variety of fruits and vegetables , flourished under careful tending . 
The whole front of it was covered by a large scarlet bignonia and a native multiflora rose , which , entwisting and interlacing , left scarce a vestige of the rough logs to be seen . 
Here , also , in summer , various brilliant annuals , such as marigolds , petunias , four-o'clocks , found an indulgent corner in which to unfold their splendors , and were the delight and pride of Aunt Chloe 's heart . 
Let us enter the dwelling . 
The evening meal at the house is over , and Aunt Chloe , who presided over its preparation as head cook , has left to inferior officers in the kitchen the business of clearing away and washing dishes , and come out into her own snug territories , to `` get her ole man 's supper '' ; therefore , doubt not that it is her you see by the fire , presiding with anxious interest over certain frizzling items in a stew-pan , and anon with grave consideration lifting the cover of a bake-kettle , from whence steam forth indubitable intimations of `` something good . '' 
A round , black , shining face is hers , so glossy as to suggest the idea that she might have been washed over with white of eggs , like one of her own tea rusks . 
Her whole plump countenance beams with satisfaction and contentment from under her well-starched checked turban , bearing on it , however , if we must confess it , a little of that tinge of self-consciousness which becomes the first cook of the neighborhood , as Aunt Chloe was universally held and acknowledged to be . 
A cook she certainly was , in the very bone and centre of her soul . 
Not a chicken or turkey or duck in the barn-yard but looked grave when they saw her approaching , and seemed evidently to be reflecting on their latter end ; and certain it was that she was always meditating on trussing , stuffing and roasting , to a degree that was calculated to inspire terror in any reflecting fowl living . 
Her corn-cake , in all its varieties of hoe-cake , dodgers , muffins , and other species too numerous to mention , was a sublime mystery to all less practised compounders ; and she would shake her fat sides with honest pride and merriment , as she would narrate the fruitless efforts that one and another of her compeers had made to attain to her elevation . 
The arrival of company at the house , the arranging of dinners and suppers `` in style , '' awoke all the energies of her soul ; and no sight was more welcome to her than a pile of travelling trunks launched on the verandah , for then she foresaw fresh efforts and fresh triumphs . 
Just at present , however , Aunt Chloe is looking into the bake-pan ; in which congenial operation we shall leave her till we finish our picture of the cottage . 
In one corner of it stood a bed , covered neatly with a snowy spread ; and by the side of it was a piece of carpeting , of some considerable size . 
On this piece of carpeting Aunt Chloe took her stand , as being decidedly in the upper walks of life ; and it and the bed by which it lay , and the whole corner , in fact , were treated with distinguished consideration , and made , so far as possible , sacred from the marauding inroads and desecrations of little folks . 
In fact , that corner was the drawing-room of the establishment . 
In the other corner was a bed of much humbler pretensions , and evidently designed for use . 
The wall over the fireplace was adorned with some very brilliant scriptural prints , and a portrait of General Washington , drawn and colored in a manner which would certainly have astonished that hero , if ever he happened to meet with its like . 
On a rough bench in the corner , a couple of woolly-headed boys , with glistening black eyes and fat shining cheeks , were busy in superintending the first walking operations of the baby , which , as is usually the case , consisted in getting up on its feet , balancing a moment , and then tumbling down , -- each successive failure being violently cheered , as something decidedly clever . 
A table , somewhat rheumatic in its limbs , was drawn out in front of the fire , and covered with a cloth , displaying cups and saucers of a decidedly brilliant pattern , with other symptoms of an approaching meal . 
At this table was seated Uncle Tom , Mr. Shelby 's best hand , who , as he is to be the hero of our story , we must daguerreotype for our readers . 
He was a large , broad-chested , powerfully-made man , of a full glossy black , and a face whose truly African features were characterized by an expression of grave and steady good sense , united with much kindliness and benevolence . 
There was something about his whole air self-respecting and dignified , yet united with a confiding and humble simplicity . 
He was very busily intent at this moment on a slate lying before him , on which he was carefully and slowly endeavoring to accomplish a copy of some letters , in which operation he was overlooked by young Mas ' r George , a smart , bright boy of thirteen , who appeared fully to realize the dignity of his position as instructor . 
`` Not that way , Uncle Tom , -- not that way , '' said he , briskly , as Uncle Tom laboriously brought up the tail of his g the wrong side out ; `` that makes a q , you see . '' 
`` La sakes , now , does it ? '' 
said Uncle Tom , looking with a respectful , admiring air , as his young teacher flourishingly scrawled q 's and g 's innumerable for his edification ; and then , taking the pencil in his big , heavy fingers , he patiently recommenced . 
`` How easy white folks al ` us does things ! '' 
said Aunt Chloe , pausing while she was greasing a griddle with a scrap of bacon on her fork , and regarding young Master George with pride . 
`` The way he can write , now ! 
and read , too ! 
and then to come out here evenings and read his lessons to us , -- it 's mighty interestin ' ! '' 
`` But , Aunt Chloe , I 'm getting mighty hungry , '' said George . 
`` Is n't that cake in the skillet almost done ? '' 
`` Mose done , Mas ' r George , '' said Aunt Chloe , lifting the lid and peeping in , -- `` browning beautiful -- a real lovely brown . 
Ah ! 
let me alone for dat . 
Missis let Sally try to make some cake , t ' other day , jes to larn her , she said . 
` O , go way , Missis , ' said I ; ` it really hurts my feelin 's , now , to see good vittles spilt dat ar way ! 
Cake ris all to one side -- no shape at all ; no more than my shoe ; go way ! '' 
And with this final expression of contempt for Sally 's greenness , Aunt Chloe whipped the cover off the bake-kettle , and disclosed to view a neatly-baked pound-cake , of which no city confectioner need to have been ashamed . 
This being evidently the central point of the entertainment , Aunt Chloe began now to bustle about earnestly in the supper department . 
`` Here you , Mose and Pete ! 
get out de way , you niggers ! 
Get away , Polly , honey , -- mammy 'll give her baby some fin , by and by . 
Now , Mas ' r George , you jest take off dem books , and set down now with my old man , and I 'll take up de sausages , and have de first griddle full of cakes on your plates in less dan no time . '' 
`` They wanted me to come to supper in the house , '' said George ; `` but I knew what was what too well for that , Aunt Chloe . '' 
`` So you did -- so you did , honey , '' said Aunt Chloe , heaping the smoking batter-cakes on his plate ; `` you know 'd your old aunty 'd keep the best for you . 
O , let you alone for dat ! 
Go way ! '' 
And , with that , aunty gave George a nudge with her finger , designed to be immensely facetious , and turned again to her griddle with great briskness . 
`` Now for the cake , '' said Mas ' r George , when the activity of the griddle department had somewhat subsided ; and , with that , the youngster flourished a large knife over the article in question . 
`` La bless you , Mas ' r George ! '' 
said Aunt Chloe , with earnestness , catching his arm , `` you would n't be for cuttin ' it wid dat ar great heavy knife ! 
Smash all down -- spile all de pretty rise of it . 
Here , I 've got a thin old knife , I keeps sharp a purpose . 
Dar now , see ! 
comes apart light as a feather ! 
Now eat away -- you wo n't get anything to beat dat ar . '' 
`` Tom Lincon says , '' said George , speaking with his mouth full , `` that their Jinny is a better cook than you . '' 
`` Dem Lincons a n't much count , no way ! '' 
said Aunt Chloe , contemptuously ; `` I mean , set along side our folks . 
They 's ` spectable folks enough in a kinder plain way ; but , as to gettin ' up anything in style , they do n't begin to have a notion on ` t. Set Mas ' r Lincon , now , alongside Mas ' r Shelby ! 
Good Lor ! 
and Missis Lincon , -- can she kinder sweep it into a room like my missis , -- so kinder splendid , yer know ! 
O , go way ! 
do n't tell me nothin ' of dem Lincons ! '' 
-- and Aunt Chloe tossed her head as one who hoped she did know something of the world . 
`` Well , though , I 've heard you say , '' said George , `` that Jinny was a pretty fair cook . '' 
`` So I did , '' said Aunt Chloe , -- `` I may say dat . 
Good , plain , common cookin ' , Jinny 'll do ; -- make a good pone o ' bread , -- bile her taters far , -- her corn cakes is n't extra , not extra now , Jinny 's corn cakes is n't , but then they 's far , -- but , Lor , come to de higher branches , and what can she do ? 
Why , she makes pies -- sartin she does ; but what kinder crust ? 
Can she make your real flecky paste , as melts in your mouth , and lies all up like a puff ? 
Now , I went over thar when Miss Mary was gwine to be married , and Jinny she jest showed me de weddin ' pies . 
Jinny and I is good friends , ye know . 
I never said nothin ' ; but go ` long , Mas ' r George ! 
Why , I should n't sleep a wink for a week , if I had a batch of pies like dem ar . 
Why , dey wa n't no ` count ' t all . '' 
`` I suppose Jinny thought they were ever so nice , '' said George . 
`` Thought so ! 
-- did n't she ? 
Thar she was , showing em , as innocent -- ye see , it 's jest here , Jinny do n't know . 
Lor , the family a n't nothing ! 
She ca n't be spected to know ! 
` Ta ` nt no fault o ' hem . 
Ah , Mas ' r George , you does n't know half ` your privileges in yer family and bringin ' up ! '' 
Here Aunt Chloe sighed , and rolled up her eyes with emotion . 
`` I 'm sure , Aunt Chloe , I understand my pie and pudding privileges , '' said George . 
`` Ask Tom Lincon if I do n't crow over him , every time I meet him . '' 
Aunt Chloe sat back in her chair , and indulged in a hearty guffaw of laughter , at this witticism of young Mas ` r 's , laughing till the tears rolled down her black , shining cheeks , and varying the exercise with playfully slapping and poking Mas ' r Georgey , and telling him to go way , and that he was a case -- that he was fit to kill her , and that he sartin would kill her , one of these days ; and , between each of these sanguinary predictions , going off into a laugh , each longer and stronger than the other , till George really began to think that he was a very dangerously witty fellow , and that it became him to be careful how he talked `` as funny as he could . '' 
`` And so ye telled Tom , did ye ? 
O , Lor ! 
what young uns will be up ter ! 
Ye crowed over Tom ? 
O , Lor ! 
Mas ' r George , if ye would n't make a hornbug laugh ! '' 
`` Yes , '' said George , `` I says to him , ` Tom , you ought to see some of Aunt Chloe 's pies ; they 're the right sort , ' says I. '' `` Pity , now , Tom could n't , '' said Aunt Chloe , on whose benevolent heart the idea of Tom 's benighted condition seemed to make a strong impression . 
`` Ye oughter just ask him here to dinner , some o ' these times , Mas ' r George , '' she added ; `` it would look quite pretty of ye . 
Ye know , Mas ' r George , ye oughtenter feel ` bove nobody , on ` count yer privileges , 'cause all our privileges is gi 'n to us ; we ought al ` ays to ` member that , '' said Aunt Chloe , looking quite serious . 
`` Well , I mean to ask Tom here , some day next week , '' said George ; `` and you do your prettiest , Aunt Chloe , and we 'll make him stare . 
Wo n't we make him eat so he wo n't get over it for a fortnight ? '' 
`` Yes , yes -- sartin , '' said Aunt Chloe , delighted ; `` you 'll see . 
Lor ! 
to think of some of our dinners ! 
Yer mind dat ar great chicken pie I made when we guv de dinner to General Knox ? 
I and Missis , we come pretty near quarrelling about dat ar crust . 
What does get into ladies sometimes , I do n't know ; but , sometimes , when a body has de heaviest kind o ' ` sponsibility on 'em , as ye may say , and is all kinder ` seris ' and taken up , dey takes dat ar time to be hangin ' round and kinder interferin ' ! 
Now , Missis , she wanted me to do dis way , and she wanted me to do dat way ; and , finally , I got kinder sarcy , and , says I , ` Now , Missis , do jist look at dem beautiful white hands o ' yourn with long fingers , and all a sparkling with rings , like my white lilies when de dew 's on 'em ; and look at my great black stumpin hands . 
Now , do n't ye think dat de Lord must have meant me to make de pie-crust , and you to stay in de parlor ? 
Dar ! 
I was jist so sarcy , Mas ' r George . '' 
`` And what did mother say ? '' 
said George . 
`` Say ? 
-- why , she kinder larfed in her eyes -- dem great handsome eyes o ' hern ; and , says she , ` Well , Aunt Chloe , I think you are about in the right on ` t , ' says she ; and she went off in de parlor . 
She oughter cracked me over de head for bein ' so sarcy ; but dar 's whar ' t is -- I ca n't do nothin ' with ladies in de kitchen ! '' 
`` Well , you made out well with that dinner , -- I remember everybody said so , '' said George . 
`` Did n't I ? 
And wa n't I behind de dinin ' - room door dat bery day ? 
and did n't I see de General pass his plate three times for some more dat bery pie ? 
-- and , says he , ` You must have an uncommon cook , Mrs. Shelby . ' 
Lor ! 
I was fit to split myself . 
`` And de Gineral , he knows what cookin ' is , '' said Aunt Chloe , drawing herself up with an air . 
`` Bery nice man , de Gineral ! 
He comes of one of de bery fustest families in Old Virginny ! 
He knows what 's what , now , as well as I do -- de Gineral . 
Ye see , there 's pints in all pies , Mas ' r George ; but ta n't everybody knows what they is , or as orter be . 
But the Gineral , he knows ; I knew by his ` marks he made . 
Yes , he knows what de pints is ! '' 
By this time , Master George had arrived at that pass to which even a boy can come -LRB- under uncommon circumstances , when he really could not eat another morsel -RRB- , and , therefore , he was at leisure to notice the pile of woolly heads and glistening eyes which were regarding their operations hungrily from the opposite corner . 
`` Here , you Mose , Pete , '' he said , breaking off liberal bits , and throwing it at them ; `` you want some , do n't you ? 
Come , Aunt Chloe , bake them some cakes . '' 
And George and Tom moved to a comfortable seat in the chimney-corner , while Aunte Chloe , after baking a goodly pile of cakes , took her baby on her lap , and began alternately filling its mouth and her own , and distributing to Mose and Pete , who seemed rather to prefer eating theirs as they rolled about on the floor under the table , tickling each other , and occasionally pulling the baby 's toes . 
`` O ! 
go long , will ye ? '' 
said the mother , giving now and then a kick , in a kind of general way , under the table , when the movement became too obstreperous . 
`` Ca n't ye be decent when white folks comes to see ye ? 
Stop dat ar , now , will ye ? 
Better mind yerselves , or I 'll take ye down a button-hole lower , when Mas ' r George is gone ! '' 
What meaning was couched under this terrible threat , it is difficult to say ; but certain it is that its awful indistinctness seemed to produce very little impression on the young sinners addressed . 
`` La , now ! '' 
said Uncle Tom , `` they are so full of tickle all the while , they ca n't behave theirselves . '' 
Here the boys emerged from under the table , and , with hands and faces well plastered with molasses , began a vigorous kissing of the baby . 
`` Get along wid ye ! '' 
said the mother , pushing away their woolly heads . 
`` Ye 'll all stick together , and never get clar , if ye do dat fashion . 
Go long to de spring and wash yerselves ! '' 
she said , seconding her exhortations by a slap , which resounded very formidably , but which seemed only to knock out so much more laugh from the young ones , as they tumbled precipitately over each other out of doors , where they fairly screamed with merriment . 
`` Did ye ever see such aggravating young uns ? '' 
said Aunt Chloe , rather complacently , as , producing an old towel , kept for such emergencies , she poured a little water out of the cracked tea-pot on it , and began rubbing off the molasses from the baby 's face and hands ; and , having polished her till she shone , she set her down in Tom 's lap , while she busied herself in clearing away supper . 
The baby employed the intervals in pulling Tom 's nose , scratching his face , and burying her fat hands in his woolly hair , which last operation seemed to afford her special content . 
`` Aint she a peart young un ? '' 
said Tom , holding her from him to take a full-length view ; then , getting up , he set her on his broad shoulder , and began capering and dancing with her , while Mas ' r George snapped at her with his pocket-handkerchief , and Mose and Pete , now returned again , roared after her like bears , till Aunt Chloe declared that they `` fairly took her head off '' with their noise . 
As , according to her own statement , this surgical operation was a matter of daily occurrence in the cabin , the declaration no whit abated the merriment , till every one had roared and tumbled and danced themselves down to a state of composure . 
`` Well , now , I hopes you 're done , '' said Aunt Chloe , who had been busy in pulling out a rude box of a trundle-bed ; `` and now , you Mose and you Pete , get into thar ; for we 's goin ' to have the meetin ' . '' 
`` O mother , we do n't wanter . 
We wants to sit up to meetin ' , -- meetin 's is so curis . 
We likes 'em . '' 
`` La , Aunt Chloe , shove it under , and let 'em sit up , '' said Mas ' r George , decisively , giving a push to the rude machine . 
Aunt Chloe , having thus saved appearances , seemed highly delighted to push the thing under , saying , as she did so , `` Well , mebbe ' t will do 'em some good . '' 
The house now resolved itself into a committee of the whole , to consider the accommodations and arrangements for the meeting . 
`` What we 's to do for cheers , now , I declar I do n't know , '' said Aunt Chloe . 
As the meeting had been held at Uncle Tom 's weekly , for an indefinite length of time , without any more `` cheers , '' there seemed some encouragement to hope that a way would be discovered at present . 
`` Old Uncle Peter sung both de legs out of dat oldest cheer , last week , '' suggested Mose . 
`` You go long ! 
I 'll boun ' you pulled 'em out ; some o ' your shines , '' said Aunt Chloe . 
`` Well , it 'll stand , if it only keeps jam up agin de wall ! '' 
said Mose . 
`` Den Uncle Peter mus 'n' t sit in it , cause he al ` ays hitches when he gets a singing . 
He hitched pretty nigh across de room , t ' other night , '' said Pete . 
`` Good Lor ! 
get him in it , then , '' said Mose , `` and den he 'd begin , ` Come saints -- and sinners , hear me tell , ' and den down he 'd go , '' -- and Mose imitated precisely the nasal tones of the old man , tumbling on the floor , to illustrate the supposed catastrophe . 
`` Come now , be decent , ca n't ye ? '' 
said Aunt Chloe ; `` a n't yer shamed ? '' 
Mas ' r George , however , joined the offender in the laugh , and declared decidedly that Mose was a `` buster . '' 
So the maternal admonition seemed rather to fail of effect . 
`` Well , ole man , '' said Aunt Chloe , `` you 'll have to tote in them ar bar ` ls . '' 
`` Mother 's bar ` ls is like dat ar widder 's , Mas ' r George was reading ` bout , in de good book , -- dey never fails , '' said Mose , aside to Peter . 
`` I 'm sure one on 'em caved in last week , '' said Pete , `` and let 'em all down in de middle of de singin ' ; dat ar was failin ' , warnt it ? '' 
During this aside between Mose and Pete , two empty casks had been rolled into the cabin , and being secured from rolling , by stones on each side , boards were laid across them , which arrangement , together with the turning down of certain tubs and pails , and the disposing of the rickety chairs , at last completed the preparation . 
`` Mas ' r George is such a beautiful reader , now , I know he 'll stay to read for us , '' said Aunt Chloe ; '' ` pears like ' t will be so much more interestin ' . '' 
George very readily consented , for your boy is always ready for anything that makes him of importance . 
The room was soon filled with a motley assemblage , from the old gray-headed patriarch of eighty , to the young girl and lad of fifteen . 
A little harmless gossip ensued on various themes , such as where old Aunt Sally got her new red headkerchief , and how `` Missis was a going to give Lizzy that spotted muslin gown , when she 'd got her new berage made up ; '' and how Mas ' r Shelby was thinking of buying a new sorrel colt , that was going to prove an addition to the glories of the place . 
A few of the worshippers belonged to families hard by , who had got permission to attend , and who brought in various choice scraps of information , about the sayings and doings at the house and on the place , which circulated as freely as the same sort of small change does in higher circles . 
After a while the singing commenced , to the evident delight of all present . 
Not even all the disadvantage of nasal intonation could prevent the effect of the naturally fine voices , in airs at once wild and spirited . 
The words were sometimes the well-known and common hymns sung in the churches about , and sometimes of a wilder , more indefinite character , picked up at camp-meetings . 
The chorus of one of them , which ran as follows , was sung with great energy and unction : `` Die on the field of battle , Die on the field of battle , Glory in my soul . '' 
Another special favorite had oft repeated the words -- `` O , I 'm going to glory , -- wo n't you come along with me ? 
Do n't you see the angels beck ` ning , and a calling me away ? 
Do n't you see the golden city and the everlasting day ? '' 
There were others , which made incessant mention of `` Jordan 's banks , '' and `` Canaan 's fields , '' and the `` New Jerusalem ; '' for the negro mind , impassioned and imaginative , always attaches itself to hymns and expressions of a vivid and pictorial nature ; and , as they sung , some laughed , and some cried , and some clapped hands , or shook hands rejoicingly with each other , as if they had fairly gained the other side of the river . 
Various exhortations , or relations of experience , followed , and intermingled with the singing . 
One old gray-headed woman , long past work , but much revered as a sort of chronicle of the past , rose , and leaning on her staff , said -- `` Well , chil ` en ! 
Well , I 'm mighty glad to hear ye all and see ye all once more , 'cause I do n't know when I 'll be gone to glory ; but I 've done got ready , chil ` en ; ` pears like I 'd got my little bundle all tied up , and my bonnet on , jest a waitin ' for the stage to come along and take me home ; sometimes , in the night , I think I hear the wheels a rattlin ' , and I 'm lookin ' out all the time ; now , you jest be ready too , for I tell ye all , chil ` en , '' she said striking her staff hard on the floor , `` dat ar glory is a mighty thing ! 
It 's a mighty thing , chil ` en , -- you don ` no nothing about it , -- it 's wonderful . '' 
And the old creature sat down , with streaming tears , as wholly overcome , while the whole circle struck up -- `` O Canaan , bright Canaan I 'm bound for the land of Canaan . '' 
Mas ' r George , by request , read the last chapters of Revelation , often interrupted by such exclamations as `` The sakes now ! '' 
`` Only hear that ! '' 
`` Jest think on ` t ! '' 
`` Is all that a comin ' sure enough ? '' 
George , who was a bright boy , and well trained in religious things by his mother , finding himself an object of general admiration , threw in expositions of his own , from time to time , with a commendable seriousness and gravity , for which he was admired by the young and blessed by the old ; and it was agreed , on all hands , that `` a minister could n't lay it off better than he did ; that ' t was reely ` mazin ' ! '' 
Uncle Tom was a sort of patriarch in religious matters , in the neighborhood . 
Having , naturally , an organization in which the morale was strongly predominant , together with a greater breadth and cultivation of mind than obtained among his companions , he was looked up to with great respect , as a sort of minister among them ; and the simple , hearty , sincere style of his exhortations might have edified even better educated persons . 
But it was in prayer that he especially excelled . 
Nothing could exceed the touching simplicity , the childlike earnestness , of his prayer , enriched with the language of Scripture , which seemed so entirely to have wrought itself into his being , as to have become a part of himself , and to drop from his lips unconsciously ; in the language of a pious old negro , he `` prayed right up . '' 
And so much did his prayer always work on the devotional feelings of his audiences , that there seemed often a danger that it would be lost altogether in the abundance of the responses which broke out everywhere around him . 
While this scene was passing in the cabin of the man , one quite otherwise passed in the halls of the master . 
The trader and Mr. Shelby were seated together in the dining room afore-named , at a table covered with papers and writing utensils . 
Mr. Shelby was busy in counting some bundles of bills , which , as they were counted , he pushed over to the trader , who counted them likewise . 
`` All fair , '' said the trader ; `` and now for signing these yer . '' 
Mr. Shelby hastily drew the bills of sale towards him , and signed them , like a man that hurries over some disagreeable business , and then pushed them over with the money . 
Haley produced , from a well-worn valise , a parchment , which , after looking over it a moment , he handed to Mr. Shelby , who took it with a gesture of suppressed eagerness . 
`` Wal , now , the thing 's done ! '' 
said the trader , getting up . 
`` It 's done ! '' 
said Mr. Shelby , in a musing tone ; and , fetching a long breath , he repeated , `` It 's done ! '' 
`` Yer do n't seem to feel much pleased with it , ` pears to me , '' said the trader . 
`` Haley , '' said Mr. Shelby , `` I hope you 'll remember that you promised , on your honor , you would n't sell Tom , without knowing what sort of hands he 's going into . '' 
`` Why , you 've just done it sir , '' said the trader . 
`` Circumstances , you well know , obliged me , '' said Shelby , haughtily . 
`` Wal , you know , they may ` blige me , too , '' said the trader . 
`` Howsomever , I 'll do the very best I can in gettin ' Tom a good berth ; as to my treatin ' on him bad , you need n't be a grain afeard . 
If there 's anything that I thank the Lord for , it is that I 'm never noways cruel . '' 
After the expositions which the trader had previously given of his humane principles , Mr. Shelby did not feel particularly reassured by these declarations ; but , as they were the best comfort the case admitted of , he allowed the trader to depart in silence , and betook himself to a solitary cigar . 
Mr. and Mrs. Shelby had retired to their apartment for the night . 
He was lounging in a large easy-chair , looking over some letters that had come in the afternoon mail , and she was standing before her mirror , brushing out the complicated braids and curls in which Eliza had arranged her hair ; for , noticing her pale cheeks and haggard eyes , she had excused her attendance that night , and ordered her to bed . 
The employment , naturally enough , suggested her conversation with the girl in the morning ; and turning to her husband , she said , carelessly , `` By the by , Arthur , who was that low-bred fellow that you lugged in to our dinner-table today ? '' 
`` Haley is his name , '' said Shelby , turning himself rather uneasily in his chair , and continuing with his eyes fixed on a letter . 
`` Haley ! 
Who is he , and what may be his business here , pray ? '' 
`` Well , he 's a man that I transacted some business with , last time I was at Natchez , '' said Mr. Shelby . 
`` And he presumed on it to make himself quite at home , and call and dine here , ay ? '' 
`` Why , I invited him ; I had some accounts with him , '' said Shelby . 
`` Is he a negro-trader ? '' 
said Mrs. Shelby , noticing a certain embarrassment in her husband 's manner . 
`` Why , my dear , what put that into your head ? '' 
said Shelby , looking up . 
`` Nothing , -- only Eliza came in here , after dinner , in a great worry , crying and taking on , and said you were talking with a trader , and that she heard him make an offer for her boy -- the ridiculous little goose ! '' 
`` She did , hey ? '' 
said Mr. Shelby , returning to his paper , which he seemed for a few moments quite intent upon , not perceiving that he was holding it bottom upwards . 
`` It will have to come out , '' said he , mentally ; `` as well now as ever . '' 
`` I told Eliza , '' said Mrs. Shelby , as she continued brushing her hair , `` that she was a little fool for her pains , and that you never had anything to do with that sort of persons . 
Of course , I knew you never meant to sell any of our people , -- least of all , to such a fellow . '' 
`` Well , Emily , '' said her husband , `` so I have always felt and said ; but the fact is that my business lies so that I can not get on without . 
I shall have to sell some of my hands . '' 
`` To that creature ? 
Impossible ! 
Mr. Shelby , you can not be serious . '' 
`` I 'm sorry to say that I am , '' said Mr. Shelby . 
`` I 've agreed to sell Tom . '' 
`` What ! 
our Tom ? 
-- that good , faithful creature ! 
-- been your faithful servant from a boy ! 
O , Mr. Shelby ! 
-- and you have promised him his freedom , too , -- you and I have spoken to him a hundred times of it . 
Well , I can believe anything now , -- I can believe now that you could sell little Harry , poor Eliza 's only child ! '' 
said Mrs. Shelby , in a tone between grief and indignation . 
`` Well , since you must know all , it is so . 
I have agreed to sell Tom and Harry both ; and I do n't know why I am to be rated , as if I were a monster , for doing what every one does every day . '' 
`` But why , of all others , choose these ? '' 
said Mrs. Shelby . 
`` Why sell them , of all on the place , if you must sell at all ? '' 
`` Because they will bring the highest sum of any , -- that 's why . 
I could choose another , if you say so . 
The fellow made me a high bid on Eliza , if that would suit you any better , '' said Mr. Shelby . 
`` The wretch ! '' 
said Mrs. Shelby , vehemently . 
`` Well , I did n't listen to it , a moment , -- out of regard to your feelings , I would n't ; -- so give me some credit . '' 
`` My dear , '' said Mrs. Shelby , recollecting herself , `` forgive me . 
I have been hasty . 
I was surprised , and entirely unprepared for this ; -- but surely you will allow me to intercede for these poor creatures . 
Tom is a noble-hearted , faithful fellow , if he is black . 
I do believe , Mr. Shelby , that if he were put to it , he would lay down his life for you . '' 
`` I know it , -- I dare say ; -- but what 's the use of all this ? 
-- I ca n't help myself . '' 
`` Why not make a pecuniary sacrifice ? 
I 'm willing to bear my part of the inconvenience . 
O , Mr. Shelby , I have tried -- tried most faithfully , as a Christian woman should -- to do my duty to these poor , simple , dependent creatures . 
I have cared for them , instructed them , watched over them , and know all their little cares and joys , for years ; and how can I ever hold up my head again among them , if , for the sake of a little paltry gain , we sell such a faithful , excellent , confiding creature as poor Tom , and tear from him in a moment all we have taught him to love and value ? 
I have taught them the duties of the family , of parent and child , and husband and wife ; and how can I bear to have this open acknowledgment that we care for no tie , no duty , no relation , however sacred , compared with money ? 
I have talked with Eliza about her boy -- her duty to him as a Christian mother , to watch over him , pray for him , and bring him up in a Christian way ; and now what can I say , if you tear him away , and sell him , soul and body , to a profane , unprincipled man , just to save a little money ? 
I have told her that one soul is worth more than all the money in the world ; and how will she believe me when she sees us turn round and sell her child ? 
-- sell him , perhaps , to certain ruin of body and soul ! '' 
`` I 'm sorry you feel so about it , -- indeed I am , '' said Mr. Shelby ; `` and I respect your feelings , too , though I do n't pretend to share them to their full extent ; but I tell you now , solemnly , it 's of no use -- I ca n't help myself . 
I did n't mean to tell you this Emily ; but , in plain words , there is no choice between selling these two and selling everything . 
Either they must go , or all must . 
Haley has come into possession of a mortgage , which , if I do n't clear off with him directly , will take everything before it . 
I 've raked , and scraped , and borrowed , and all but begged , -- and the price of these two was needed to make up the balance , and I had to give them up . 
Haley fancied the child ; he agreed to settle the matter that way , and no other . 
I was in his power , and had to do it . 
If you feel so to have them sold , would it be any better to have all sold ? '' 
Mrs. Shelby stood like one stricken . 
Finally , turning to her toilet , she rested her face in her hands , and gave a sort of groan . 
`` This is God 's curse on slavery ! 
-- a bitter , bitter , most accursed thing ! 
-- a curse to the master and a curse to the slave ! 
I was a fool to think I could make anything good out of such a deadly evil . 
It is a sin to hold a slave under laws like ours , -- I always felt it was , -- I always thought so when I was a girl , -- I thought so still more after I joined the church ; but I thought I could gild it over , -- I thought , by kindness , and care , and instruction , I could make the condition of mine better than freedom -- fool that I was ! '' 
`` Why , wife , you are getting to be an abolitionist , quite . '' 
`` Abolitionist ! 
if they knew all I know about slavery , they might talk ! 
We do n't need them to tell us ; you know I never thought that slavery was right -- never felt willing to own slaves . '' 
`` Well , therein you differ from many wise and pious men , '' said Mr. Shelby . 
`` You remember Mr. B. 's sermon , the other Sunday ? '' 
`` I do n't want to hear such sermons ; I never wish to hear Mr. B. in our church again . 
Ministers ca n't help the evil , perhaps , -- ca n't cure it , any more than we can , -- but defend it ! 
-- it always went against my common sense . 
And I think you did n't think much of that sermon , either . '' 
`` Well , '' said Shelby , `` I must say these ministers sometimes carry matters further than we poor sinners would exactly dare to do . 
We men of the world must wink pretty hard at various things , and get used to a deal that is n't the exact thing . 
But we do n't quite fancy , when women and ministers come out broad and square , and go beyond us in matters of either modesty or morals , that 's a fact . 
But now , my dear , I trust you see the necessity of the thing , and you see that I have done the very best that circumstances would allow . '' 
`` O yes , yes ! '' 
said Mrs. Shelby , hurriedly and abstractedly fingering her gold watch , -- `` I have n't any jewelry of any amount , '' she added , thoughtfully ; `` but would not this watch do something ? 
-- it was an expensive one , when it was bought . 
If I could only at least save Eliza 's child , I would sacrifice anything I have . '' 
`` I 'm sorry , very sorry , Emily , '' said Mr. Shelby , `` I 'm sorry this takes hold of you so ; but it will do no good . 
The fact is , Emily , the thing 's done ; the bills of sale are already signed , and in Haley 's hands ; and you must be thankful it is no worse . 
That man has had it in his power to ruin us all , -- and now he is fairly off . 
If you knew the man as I do , you 'd think that we had had a narrow escape . '' 
`` Is he so hard , then ? '' 
`` Why , not a cruel man , exactly , but a man of leather , -- a man alive to nothing but trade and profit , -- cool , and unhesitating , and unrelenting , as death and the grave . 
He 'd sell his own mother at a good percentage -- not wishing the old woman any harm , either . '' 
`` And this wretch owns that good , faithful Tom , and Eliza 's child ! '' 
`` Well , my dear , the fact is that this goes rather hard with me ; it 's a thing I hate to think of . 
Haley wants to drive matters , and take possession tomorrow . 
I 'm going to get out my horse bright and early , and be off . 
I ca n't see Tom , that 's a fact ; and you had better arrange a drive somewhere , and carry Eliza off . 
Let the thing be done when she is out of sight . '' 
`` No , no , '' said Mrs. Shelby ; `` I 'll be in no sense accomplice or help in this cruel business . 
I 'll go and see poor old Tom , God help him , in his distress ! 
They shall see , at any rate , that their mistress can feel for and with them . 
As to Eliza , I dare not think about it . 
The Lord forgive us ! 
What have we done , that this cruel necessity should come on us ? '' 
There was one listener to this conversation whom Mr. and Mrs. Shelby little suspected . 
Communicating with their apartment was a large closet , opening by a door into the outer passage . 
When Mrs. Shelby had dismissed Eliza for the night , her feverish and excited mind had suggested the idea of this closet ; and she had hidden herself there , and , with her ear pressed close against the crack of the door , had lost not a word of the conversation . 
When the voices died into silence , she rose and crept stealthily away . 
Pale , shivering , with rigid features and compressed lips , she looked an entirely altered being from the soft and timid creature she had been hitherto . 
She moved cautiously along the entry , paused one moment at her mistress ' door , and raised her hands in mute appeal to Heaven , and then turned and glided into her own room . 
It was a quiet , neat apartment , on the same floor with her mistress . 
There was a pleasant sunny window , where she had often sat singing at her sewing ; there a little case of books , and various little fancy articles , ranged by them , the gifts of Christmas holidays ; there was her simple wardrobe in the closet and in the drawers : -- here was , in short , her home ; and , on the whole , a happy one it had been to her . 
But there , on the bed , lay her slumbering boy , his long curls falling negligently around his unconscious face , his rosy mouth half open , his little fat hands thrown out over the bedclothes , and a smile spread like a sunbeam over his whole face . 
`` Poor boy ! 
poor fellow ! '' 
said Eliza ; `` they have sold you ! 
but your mother will save you yet ! '' 
No tear dropped over that pillow ; in such straits as these , the heart has no tears to give , -- it drops only blood , bleeding itself away in silence . 
She took a piece of paper and a pencil , and wrote , hastily , `` O , Missis ! 
dear Missis ! 
do n't think me ungrateful , -- do n't think hard of me , any way , -- I heard all you and master said tonight . 
I am going to try to save my boy -- you will not blame me ! 
God bless and reward you for all your kindness ! '' 
Hastily folding and directing this , she went to a drawer and made up a little package of clothing for her boy , which she tied with a handkerchief firmly round her waist ; and , so fond is a mother 's remembrance , that , even in the terrors of that hour , she did not forget to put in the little package one or two of his favorite toys , reserving a gayly painted parrot to amuse him , when she should be called on to awaken him . 
It was some trouble to arouse the little sleeper ; but , after some effort , he sat up , and was playing with his bird , while his mother was putting on her bonnet and shawl . 
`` Where are you going , mother ? '' 
said he , as she drew near the bed , with his little coat and cap . 
His mother drew near , and looked so earnestly into his eyes , that he at once divined that something unusual was the matter . 
`` Hush , Harry , '' she said ; `` must n't speak loud , or they will hear us . 
A wicked man was coming to take little Harry away from his mother , and carry him ` way off in the dark ; but mother wo n't let him -- she 's going to put on her little boy 's cap and coat , and run off with him , so the ugly man ca n't catch him . '' 
Saying these words , she had tied and buttoned on the child 's simple outfit , and , taking him in her arms , she whispered to him to be very still ; and , opening a door in her room which led into the outer verandah , she glided noiselessly out . 
It was a sparkling , frosty , starlight night , and the mother wrapped the shawl close round her child , as , perfectly quiet with vague terror , he clung round her neck . 
Old Bruno , a great Newfoundland , who slept at the end of the porch , rose , with a low growl , as she came near . 
She gently spoke his name , and the animal , an old pet and playmate of hers , instantly , wagging his tail , prepared to follow her , though apparently revolving much , in this simple dog 's head , what such an indiscreet midnight promenade might mean . 
Some dim ideas of imprudence or impropriety in the measure seemed to embarrass him considerably ; for he often stopped , as Eliza glided forward , and looked wistfully , first at her and then at the house , and then , as if reassured by reflection , he pattered along after her again . 
A few minutes brought them to the window of Uncle Tom 's cottage , and Eliza stopping , tapped lightly on the window-pane . 
The prayer-meeting at Uncle Tom 's had , in the order of hymn-singing , been protracted to a very late hour ; and , as Uncle Tom had indulged himself in a few lengthy solos afterwards , the consequence was , that , although it was now between twelve and one o'clock , he and his worthy helpmeet were not yet asleep . 
`` Good Lord ! 
what 's that ? '' 
said Aunt Chloe , starting up and hastily drawing the curtain . 
`` My sakes alive , if it a n't Lizy ! 
Get on your clothes , old man , quick ! 
-- there 's old Bruno , too , a pawin round ; what on airth ! 
I 'm gwine to open the door . '' 
And suiting the action to the word , the door flew open , and the light of the tallow candle , which Tom had hastily lighted , fell on the haggard face and dark , wild eyes of the fugitive . 
`` Lord bless you ! 
-- I 'm skeered to look at ye , Lizy ! 
Are ye tuck sick , or what 's come over ye ? '' 
`` I 'm running away -- Uncle Tom and Aunt Chloe -- carrying off my child -- Master sold him ! '' 
`` Sold him ? '' 
echoed both , lifting up their hands in dismay . 
`` Yes , sold him ! '' 
said Eliza , firmly ; `` I crept into the closet by Mistress ' door tonight , and I heard Master tell Missis that he had sold my Harry , and you , Uncle Tom , both , to a trader ; and that he was going off this morning on his horse , and that the man was to take possession today . '' 
Tom had stood , during this speech , with his hands raised , and his eyes dilated , like a man in a dream . 
Slowly and gradually , as its meaning came over him , he collapsed , rather than seated himself , on his old chair , and sunk his head down upon his knees . 
