Vera 's remark was correct , as her remarks always were , but , like most of her observations , it made everyone feel uncomfortable , not only Sonya , Nicholas , and Natasha , but even the old countess , who - dreading this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making a brilliant match -- blushed like a girl . 
Denisov , to Rostov 's surprise , appeared in the drawing room with pomaded hair , perfumed , and in a new uniform , looking just as smart as he made himself when going into battle , and he was more amiable to the ladies and gentlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see him . 
On his return to Moscow from the army , Nicholas Rostov was welcomed by his home circle as the best of sons , a hero , and their darling Nikolenka ; by his relations as a charming , attractive , and polite young man ; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars , a good dancer , and one of the best matches in the city . 
The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow . 
The old count had money enough that year , as all his estates had been remortgaged , and so Nicholas , acquiring a trotter of his own , very stylish riding breeches of the latest cut , such as no one else yet had in Moscow , and boots of the latest fashion , with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs , passed his time very gaily . 
After a short period of adapting himself to the old conditions of life , Nicholas found it very pleasant to be at home again . 
He felt that he had grown up and matured very much . 
His despair at failing in a Scripture examination , his borrowing money from Gavril to pay a sleigh driver , his kissing Sonya on the sly -- he now recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind . 
Now he was a lieutenant of hussars , in a jacket laced with silver , and wearing the Cross of St. George , awarded to soldiers for bravery in action , and in the company of well-known , elderly , and respected racing men was training a trotter of his own for a race . 
He knew a lady on one of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening . 
He led the mazurka at the Arkharovs ' ball , talked about the war with Field Marshal Kamenski , visited the English Club , and was on intimate terms with a colonel of forty to whom Denisov had introduced nim . 
His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow . 
But still , as he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him , he often spoke about him and about his love for him , letting it be understood that he had not told all and that there was something in his feelings for the Emperor not everyone could understand , and with his whole soul he shared the adoration then common in Moscow for the Emperor , who was spoken of as the `` angel incarnate . '' 
During Rostov 's short stay in Moscow , before rejoining the army , he did not draw closer to Sonya , but rather drifted away from her . 
She was very pretty and sweet , and evidently deeply in love with him , but he was at the period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no time for that sort of thing and a young man fears to bind himself and prizes his freedom which he needs for so many other things . 
When he thought of Sonya , during this stay in Moscow , he said to himself , `` Ah , there will be , and there are , many more such girls somewhere whom I do not yet know . 
There will be time enough to think about love when I want to , but now I have no time . '' 
Besides , it seemed to him that the society of women was rather derogatory to his manhood . 
He went to balls and into ladies ' society with an affectation of doing so against his will . 
The races , the English Club , sprees with Denisov , and visits to a certain house -- that was another matter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar ! 
At the beginning of March , old Count Ilya Rostov was very busy arranging a dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club . 
The count walked up and down the hall in his dressing gown , giving orders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktist , the Club 's head cook , about asparagus , fresh cucumbers , strawberries , veal , and fish for this dinner . 
The count had been a member and on the committee of the Club from the day it was founded . 
To him the Club entrusted the arrangement of the festival in honor of Bagration , for few men knew so well how to arrange a feast on an open-handed , hospitable scale , and still fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out of their own resources what might be needed for the success of the fete . 
The club cook and the steward listened to the count 's orders with pleased faces , for they knew that under no other management could they so easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinner costing several thousand rubles . 
`` Well then , mind and have cocks ' comb in the turtle soup , you know ! '' 
`` Shall we have three cold dishes then ? '' 
asked the cook . 
The count considered . 
`` We ca n't have less -- yes , three ... the mayonnaise , that 's one , '' said he , bending down a finger . 
`` Then am I to order those large sterlets ? '' 
asked the steward . 
`` Yes , it ca n't be helped if they wo n't take less . 
Ah , dear me ! 
I was forgetting . 
We must have another entree . 
Ah , goodness gracious ! '' 
he clutched at his head . 
`` Who is going to get me the flowers ? 
Dmitri ! 
Eh , Dmitri ! 
Gallop off to our Moscow estate , '' he said to the factotum who appeared at his call . 
`` Hurry off and tell Maksim , the gardener , to set the serfs to work . 
Say that everything out of the hothouses must be brought here well wrapped up in felt . 
I must have two hundred pots here on Friday . '' 
Having given several more orders , he was about to go to his `` little countess '' to have a rest , but remembering something else of importance , he returned again , called back the cook and the club steward , and again began giving orders . 
A light footstep and the clinking of spurs were heard at the door , and the young count , handsome , rosy , with a dark little mustache , evidently rested and made sleeker by his easy life in Moscow , entered the room . 
`` Ah , my boy , my head 's in a whirl ! '' 
said the old man with a smile , as if he felt a little confused before his son . 
`` Now , if you would only help a bit ! 
