After staggering into Smolensk which seemed to them a promised land , the French , searching for food , killed one another , sacked their own stores , and when everything had been plundered fled farther . 
They all went without knowing whither or why they were going . 
Still less did that genius , Napoleon , know it , for no one issued any orders to him . 
But still he and those about him retained their old habits : wrote commands , letters , reports , and orders of the day ; called one another sire , mon cousin , prince d'Eckmuhl , roi de Naples , and so on . 
But these orders and reports were only on paper , nothing in them was acted upon for they could not be carried out , and though they entitled one another Majesties , Highnesses , or Cousins , they all felt that they were miserable wretches who had done much evil for which they had now to pay . 
And though they pretended to be concerned about the army , each was thinking only of himself and of how to get away quickly and save himself . 
The movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaign from Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russian blindman 's bluff , in which two players are blindfolded and one of them occasionally rings a little bell to inform the catcher of his whereabouts . 
First he rings his bell fearlessly , but when he gets into a tight place he runs away as quietly as he can , and often thinking to escape runs straight into his opponent 's arms . 
At first while they were still moving along the Kaluga road , Napoleon 's armies made their presence known , but later when they reached the Smolensk road they ran holding the clapper of their bell tight -- and often thinking they were escaping ran right into the Russians . 
Owing to the rapidity of the French flight and the Russian pursuit and the consequent exhaustion of the horses , the chief means of approximately ascertaining the enemy 's position -- by cavalry scouting -- was not available . 
Besides , as a result of the frequent and rapid change of position by each army , even what information was obtained could not be delivered in time . 
If news was received one day that the enemy had been in a certain position the day before , by the third day when something could have been done , that army was already two days ' march farther on and in quite another position . 
One army fled and the other pursued . 
Beyond Smolensk there were several different roads available for the French , and one would have thought that during their stay of four days they might have learned where the enemy was , might have arranged some more advantageous plan and undertaken something new . 
But after a four days ' halt the mob , with no maneuvers or plans , again began running along the beaten track , neither to the right nor to the left but along the old -- the worst -- road , through Krasnoe and Orsha . 
Expecting the enemy from behind and not in front , the French separated in their flight and spread out over a distance of twenty-four hours . 
In front of them all fled the Emperor , then the kings , then the dukes . 
The Russian army , expecting Napoleon to take the road to the right beyond the Dnieper -- which was the only reasonable thing for him to do -- themselves turned to the right and came out onto the highroad at Krasnoe . 
And here as in a game of blindman 's buff the French ran into our vanguard . 
Seeing their enemy unexpectedly the French fell into confusion and stopped short from the sudden fright , but then they resumed their flight , abandoning their comrades who were farther behind . 
Then for three days separate portions of the French army -- first Murat 's -LRB- the vice-king 's -RRB- , then Davout 's , and then Ney 's -- ran , as it were , the gauntlet of the Russian army . 
They abandoned one another , abandoned all their heavy baggage , their artillery , and half their men , and fled , getting past the Russians by night by making semicircles to the right . 
Ney , who came last , had been busying himself blowing up the walls of Smolensk which were in nobody 's way , because despite the unfortunate plight of the French or because of it , they wished to punish the floor against which they had hurt themselves . 
Ney , who had had a corps of ten thousand men , reached Napoleon at Orsha with only one thousand men left , having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon , and having crossed the Dnieper at night by stealth at a wooded spot . 
From Orsha they fled farther along the road to Vilna , still playing at blindman 's buff with the pursuing army . 
At the Berezina they again became disorganized , many were drowned and many surrendered , but those who got across the river fled farther . 
Their supreme chief donned a fur coat and , having seated himself in a sleigh , galloped on alone , abandoning his companions . 
The others who could do so drove away too , leaving those who could not to surrender or die . 
This campaign consisted in a flight of the French during which they did all they could to destroy themselves . 
From the time they turned onto the Kaluga road to the day their leader fled from the army , none of the movements of the crowd had any sense . 
So one might have thought that regarding this period of the campaign the historians , who attributed the actions of the mass to the will of one man , would have found it impossible to make the story of the retreat fit their theory . 
But no ! 
Mountains of books have been written by the historians about this campaign , and everywhere are described Napoleon 's arrangements , the maneuvers , and his profound plans which guided the army , as well as the military genius shown by his marshals . 
The retreat from Malo-Yaroslavets when he had a free road into a well-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him along which Kutuzov afterwards pursued him -- this unnecessary retreat along a devastated road -- is explained to us as being due to profound considerations . 
Similarly profound considerations are given for his retreat from Smolensk to Orsha . 
Then his heroism at Krasnoe is described , where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battle and take personal command , and to have walked about with a birch stick and said : `` J'ai assez fait l'empereur ; il est temps de faire le general , '' * but nevertheless immediately ran away again , abandoning to its fate the scattered fragments of the army he left behind . 
* `` I have acted the Emperor long enough ; it is time to act the general . '' 
Then we are told of the greatness of soul of the marshals , especially of Ney -- a greatness of soul consisting in this : that he made his way by night around through the forest and across the Dnieper and escaped to Orsha , abandoning standards , artillery , and nine tenths of his men . 
And lastly , the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroic army is presented to us by the historians as something great and characteristic of genius . 
Even that final running away , described in ordinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child is taught to be ashamed of -- even that act finds justification in the historians ' language . 
When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads of historical ratiocination any farther , when actions are clearly contrary to all that humanity calls right or even just , the historians produce a saving conception of `` greatness . '' 
`` Greatness , '' it seems , excludes the standards of right and wrong . 
For the `` great '' man nothing is wrong , there is no atrocity for which a `` great '' man can be blamed . 
`` C'est grand ! '' 
* say the historians , and there no longer exists either good or evil but only `` grand '' and `` not grand . '' 
Grand is good , not grand is bad . 
Grand is the characteristic , in their conception , of some special animals called `` heroes . '' 
And Napoleon , escaping home in a warm fur coat and leaving to perish those who were not merely his comrades but were -LRB- in his opinion -RRB- men he had brought there , feels que c'est grand , * -LSB- 2 -RSB- and his soul is tranquil . 
* `` It is great . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- That it is great . 
