And only idlers have failed to beat the Germans . 
Since the world began everybody has beaten the Germans . 
They beat no one -- except one another . 
He made his reputation fighting them . '' 
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which , according to him , Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics . 
His son made no rejoinder , but it was evident that whatever arguments were presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion . 
He listened , refraining from a reply , and involuntarily wondered how this old man , living alone in the country for so many years , could know and discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and political events . 
`` You think I 'm an old man and do n't understand the present state of affairs ? '' 
concluded his father . 
`` But it troubles me . 
I do n't sleep at night . 
Come now , where has this great commander of yours shown his skill ? '' 
he concluded . 
`` That would take too long to tell , '' answered the son . 
`` Well , then go to your Buonaparte ! 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , here 's another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours , '' he exclaimed in excellent French . 
`` You know , Prince , I am not a Bonapartist ! '' 
`` Dieu sait quand reviendra ... '' hummed the prince out of tune and , with a laugh still more so , he quitted the table . 
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of the dinner sat silent , glancing with a frightened look now at her father-in-law and now at Princess Mary . 
When they left the table she took her sister-in-law 's arm and drew her into another room . 
`` What a clever man your father is , '' said she ; `` perhaps that is why I am afraid of him . '' 
`` Oh , he is so kind ! '' 
answered Princess Mary . 
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening . 
The old prince , not altering his routine , retired as usual after dinner . 
The little princess was in her sister-in-law 's room . 
Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him . 
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in , he ordered the horses to be harnessed . 
Only those things he always kept with him remained in his room ; a small box , a large canteen fitted with silver plate , two Turkish pistols and a saber -- a present from his father who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov . 
All these traveling effects of Prince Andrew 's were in very good order : new , clean , and in cloth covers carefully tied with tapes . 
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life , men capable of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind . 
At such moments one reviews the past and plans for the future . 
Prince Andrew 's face looked very thoughtful and tender . 
With his hands behind him he paced briskly from corner to corner of the room , looking straight before him and thoughtfully shaking his head . 
Did he fear going to the war , or was he sad at leaving his wife ? 
-- perhaps both , but evidently he did not wish to be seen in that mood , for hearing footsteps in the passage he hurriedly unclasped his hands , stopped at a table as if tying the cover of the small box , and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable expression . 
It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard . 
`` I hear you have given orders to harness , '' she cried , panting -LRB- she had apparently been running -RRB- , `` and I did so wish to have another talk with you alone ! 
God knows how long we may again be parted . 
You are not angry with me for coming ? 
You have changed so , Andrusha , '' she added , as if to explain such a question . 
She smiled as she uttered his pet name , `` Andrusha . '' 
It was obviously strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andrusha -- the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood . 
`` And where is Lise ? '' 
he asked , answering her question only by a smile . 
`` She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room . 
Oh , Andrew ! 
What a treasure of a wife you have , '' said she , sitting down on the sofa , facing her brother . 
`` She is quite a child : such a dear , merry child . 
I have grown so fond of her . '' 
