Why was it more strongly fortified than any other post ? 
And why were all efforts exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at night on the twenty-fourth ? 
A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe the enemy . 
Thirdly , as proof that the position on which the battle was fought had not been foreseen and that the Shevardino Redoubt was not an advanced post of that position , we have the fact that up to the twenty-fifth , Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were convinced that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position , and that Kutuzov himself in his report , written in hot haste after the battle , speaks of the Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position . 
It was much later , when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure , that the incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented -LRB- probably to justify the mistakes of a commander in chief who had to be represented as infallible -RRB- that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post -- whereas in reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank -- and that the battle of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position previously selected , where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot which was almost unentrenched . 
The case was evidently this : a position was selected along the river Kolocha -- which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute angle -- so that the left flank was at Shevardino , the right flank near the village of Novoe , and the center at Borodino at the confluence of the rivers Kolocha and Voyna . 
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how the battle was actually fought , this position , protected by the river Kolocha , presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to prevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow . 
Napoleon , riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth , did not see -LRB- as the history books say he did -RRB- the position of the Russians from Utitsa to Borodino -LRB- he could not have seen that position because it did not exist -RRB- , nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army , but while pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the Russian position -- at the Shevardino Redoubt -- and unexpectedly for the Russians moved his army across the Kolocha . 
And the Russians , not having time to begin a general engagement , withdrew their left wing from the position they had intended to occupy and took up a new position which had not been foreseen and was not fortified . 
By crossing to the other side of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad , Napoleon shifted the whole forthcoming battle from right to left -LRB- looking from the Russian side -RRB- and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa , Semenovsk , and Borodino -- a plain no more advantageous as a position than any other plain in Russia -- and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of August took place . 
Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the Kolocha , and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt but had begun the attack next morning , no one would have doubted that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our and the battle would have taken place where we expected it . 
In that case we should probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt -- our left flank -- still more obstinately . 
We should have attacked Napoleon in the center or on the right , and the engagement would have taken place on the twenty-fifth , in the position we intended and had fortified . 
But as the attack on our left flank took place in the evening after the retreat of our rear guard -LRB- that is , immediately after the fight at Gridneva -RRB- , and as the Russian commanders did not wish , or were not in time , to begin a general engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth , the first and chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on the twenty-fourth , and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on the twenty-sixth . 
After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt , we found ourselves on the morning of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank , and were forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to be . 
Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak , unfinished entrenchments , but the disadvantage of that position was increased by the fact that the Russian commanders -- not having fully realized what had happened , namely the loss of our position on the left flank and the shifting of the whole field of the forthcoming battle from right to left -- maintained their extended position from the village of Novoe to Utitsa , and consequently had to move their forces from right to left during the battle . 
So it happened that throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed the entire French army launched against our left flank with but half as many men . 
-LRB- Poniatowski 's action against Utitsa , and Uvarov 's on the right flank against the French , were actions distinct from the main course of the battle . -RRB- 
So the battle of Borodino did not take place at all as -LRB- in an effort to conceal our commanders ' mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian army and people -RRB- it has been described . 
The battle of Borodino was not fought on a chosen and entrenched position with forces only slightly weaker than those of the enemy , but , as a result of the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt , the Russians fought the battle of Borodino on an open and almost unentrenched position , with forces only half as numerous as the French ; that is to say , under conditions in which it was not merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive result , but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete disintegration and flight . 
On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk . 
At the descent of the high steep hill , down which a winding road led out of the town past the cathedral on the right , where a service was being held and the bells were ringing , Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded on foot . 
Behind him a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded by its singers . 
Coming up toward him was a train of carts carrying men who had been wounded in the engagement the day before . 
The peasant drivers , shouting and lashing their horses , kept crossing from side to side . 
The carts , in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were lying or sitting , jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep incline to make it something like a road . 
The wounded , bandaged with rags , with pale cheeks , compressed lips , and knitted brows , held on to the sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another . 
Almost all of them stared with naive , childlike curiosity at Pierre 's white hat and green swallow-tail coat . 
Pierre 's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to one side of the road . 
The cavalry regiment , as it descended the hill with its singers , surrounded Pierre 's carriage and blocked the road . 
Pierre stopped , being pressed against the side of the cutting in which the road ran . 
The sunshine from behind the hill did not penetrate into the cutting and there it was cold and damp , but above Pierre 's head was the bright August sunshine and the bells sounded merrily . 
One of the carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre . 
The driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it , placed a stone under one of its tireless hind wheels , and began arranging the breech-band on his little horse . 
One of the wounded , an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was following the cart on foot , caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned to look at Pierre . 
`` I say , fellow countryman ! 
Will they set us down here or take us on to Moscow ? '' 
he asked . 
Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question . 
He was looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded , now at the cart by which he was standing , in which two wounded men were sitting and one was lying . 
One of those sitting up in the cart had probably been wounded in the cheek . 
His whole head was wrapped in rags and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby 's head . 
His nose and mouth were twisted to one side . 
This soldier was looking at the cathedral and crossing himself . 
Another , a young lad , a fair-haired recruit as white as though there was no blood in his thin face , looked at Pierre kindly , with a fixed smile . 
The third lay prone so that his face was not visible . 
The cavalry singers were passing close by : Ah lost , quite lost ... is my head so keen , Living in a foreign land . 
they sang their soldiers ' dance song . 
As if responding to them but with a different sort of merriment , the metallic sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot rays of the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort of merriment . 
But beneath the slope , by the cart with the wounded near the panting little nag where Pierre stood , it was damp , somber , and sad . 
