`` Why are you silent ? '' 
`` What do I think about it ? 
I am listening to you . 
It 's all very well ... . 
You say : join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim of life , the destiny of man , and the laws which govern the world . 
But who are we ? 
Men . 
How is it you know everything ? 
Why do I alone not see what you see ? 
You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth , but I do n't see it . '' 
Pierre interrupted him . 
`` Do you believe in a future life ? '' 
he asked . 
`` A future life ? '' 
Prince Andrew repeated , but Pierre , giving him no time to reply , took the repetition for a denial , the more readily as he knew Prince Andrew 's former atheistic convictions . 
`` You say you ca n't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth . 
Nor could I , and it can not be seen if one looks on our life here as the end of everything . 
On earth , here on this earth '' -LRB- Pierre pointed to the fields -RRB- , `` there is no truth , all is false and evil ; but in the universe , in the whole universe there is a kingdom of truth , and we who are now the children of earth are -- eternally -- children of the whole universe . 
Do n't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast harmonious whole ? 
Do n't I feel that I form one link , one step , between the lower and higher beings , in this vast harmonious multitude of beings in whom the Deity -- the Supreme Power if you prefer the term -- is manifest ? 
If I see , clearly see , that ladder leading from plant to man , why should I suppose it breaks off at me and does not go farther and farther ? 
I feel that I can not vanish , since nothing vanishes in this world , but that I shall always exist and always have existed . 
I feel that beyond me and above me there are spirits , and that in this world there is truth . '' 
`` Yes , that is Herder 's theory , '' said Prince Andrew , `` but it is not that which can convince me , dear friend -- life and death are what convince . 
What convinces is when one sees a being dear to one , bound up with one 's own life , before whom one was to blame and had hoped to make it right '' -LRB- Prince Andrew 's voice trembled and he turned away -RRB- , `` and suddenly that being is seized with pain , suffers , and ceases to exist ... . 
Why ? 
It can not be that there is no answer . 
And I believe there is ... . 
That 's what convinces , that is what has convinced me , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Yes , yes , of course , '' said Pierre , `` is n't that what I 'm saying ? '' 
`` No . 
All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of the necessity of a future life , but this : when you go hand in hand with someone and all at once that person vanishes there , into nowhere , and you yourself are left facing that abyss , and look in . 
And I have looked in ... '' `` Well , that 's it then ! 
You know that there is a there and there is a Someone ? 
There is the future life . 
The Someone is -- God . '' 
Prince Andrew did not reply . 
The carriage and horses had long since been taken off , onto the farther bank , and reharnessed . 
The sun had sunk half below the horizon and an evening frost was starring the puddles near the ferry , but Pierre and Andrew , to the astonishment of the footmen , coachmen , and ferrymen , still stood on the raft and talked . 
`` If there is a God and future life , there is truth and good , and man 's highest happiness consists in striving to attain them . 
We must live , we must love , and we must believe that we live not only today on this scrap of earth , but have lived and shall live forever , there , in the Whole , '' said Pierre , and he pointed to the sky . 
Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listening to Pierre , and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the sun gleaming on the blue waters . 
There was perfect stillness . 
Pierre became silent . 
The raft had long since stopped and only the waves of the current beat softly against it below . 
Prince Andrew felt as if the sound of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre 's words , whispering : `` It is true , believe it . '' 
He sighed , and glanced with a radiant , childlike , tender look at Pierre 's face , flushed and rapturous , but yet shy before his superior friend . 
`` Yes , if it only were so ! '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` However , it is time to get on , '' he added , and , stepping off the raft , he looked up at the sky to which Pierre had pointed , and for the first time since Austerlitz saw that high , everlasting sky he had seen while lying on that battlefield ; and something that had long been slumbering , something that was best within him , suddenly awoke , joyful and youthful , in his soul . 
