Denisov was bandaged up again and put to bed . 
Next day he woke calm and cheerful . 
But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostov 's and Denisov 's dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showed them a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the regimental commander in which inquiries were made about yesterday 's occurrence . 
The adjutant told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad turn : that a court-martial had been appointed , and that in view of the severity with which marauding and insubordination were now regarded , degradation to the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for . 
The case , as represented by the offended parties , was that , after seizing the transports , Major Denisov , being drunk , went to the chief quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief , threatened to strike him , and on being led out had rushed into the office and given two officials a thrashing , and dislocated the arm of one of them . 
In answer to Rostov 's renewed questions , Denisov said , laughing , that he thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed up in it , but that it was all nonsense and rubbish , and he did not in the least fear any kind of trial , and that if those scoundrels dared attack him he would give them an answer that they would not easily forget . 
Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter , but Rostov knew him too well not to detect that -LRB- while hiding it from others -RRB- at heart he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair , which was evidently taking a bad turn . 
Every day , letters of inquiry and notices from the court arrived , and on the first of May , Denisov was ordered to hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before the staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat office . 
On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossack regiments and two squadrons of hussars . 
Denisov , as was his wont , rode out in front of the outposts , parading his courage . 
A bullet fired by a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg . 
Perhaps at another time Denisov would not have left the regiment for so slight a wound , but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearing at the staff and went into hospital . 
In June the battle of Friedland was fought , in which the Pavlograds did not take part , and after that an armistice was proclaimed . 
Rostov , who felt his friend 's absence very much , having no news of him since he left and feeling very anxious about his wound and the progress of his affairs , took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit Denisov in hospital . 
The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated by Russian and French troops . 
Because it was summer , when it is so beautiful out in the fields , the little town presented a particularly dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences , its foul streets , tattered inhabitants , and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about . 
The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames and panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence that had been pulled to pieces . 
Several bandaged soldiers , with pale swollen faces , were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in the yard . 
Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of putrefaction and hospital air . 
On the stairs he met a Russian army doctor smoking a cigar . 
The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant . 
`` I ca n't tear myself to pieces , '' the doctor was saying . 
`` Come to Makar Alexeevich in the evening . 
I shall be there . '' 
The assistant asked some further questions . 
`` Oh , do the best you can ! 
Is n't it all the same ? '' 
The doctor noticed Rostov coming upstairs . 
`` What do you want , sir ? '' 
said the doctor . 
`` What do you want ? 
The bullets having spared you , do you want to try typhus ? 
This is a pesthouse , sir . '' 
`` How so ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` Typhus , sir . 
It 's death to go in . 
Only we two , Makeev and I '' -LRB- he pointed to the assistant -RRB- , `` keep on here . 
Some five of us doctors have died in this place ... . 
When a new one comes he is done for in a week , '' said the doctor with evident satisfaction . 
`` Prussian doctors have been invited here , but our allies do n't like it at all . '' 
Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars , who was wounded . 
`` I do n't know . 
I ca n't tell you , sir . 
Only think ! 
I am alone in charge of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients ! 
It 's well that the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and some lint each month or we should be lost ! '' 
he laughed . 
`` Four hundred , sir , and they 're always sending me fresh ones . 
There are four hundred ? 
