How long , O Lord , how long shall the wicked triumph ? 
How long shall they wield unlawful power ? 
`` Lord God ! 
Hear us when we pray to Thee ; strengthen with Thy might our most gracious sovereign lord , the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich ; be mindful of his uprightness and meekness , reward him according to his righteousness , and let it preserve us , Thy chosen Israel ! 
Bless his counsels , his undertakings , and his work ; strengthen his kingdom by Thine almighty hand , and give him victory over his enemy , even as Thou gavest Moses the victory over Amalek , Gideon over Midian , and David over Goliath . 
Preserve his army , put a bow of brass in the hands of those who have armed themselves in Thy Name , and gird their loins with strength for the fight . 
Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us ; confound and put to shame those who have devised evil against us , may they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust before the wind , and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them to flight ; may they be ensnared when they know it not , and may the plots they have laid in secret be turned against them ; let them fall before Thy servants ' feet and be laid low by our hosts ! 
Lord , Thou art able to save both great and small ; Thou art God , and man can not prevail against Thee ! 
`` God of our fathers ! 
Remember Thy bounteous mercy and loving-kindness which are from of old ; turn not Thy face from us , but be gracious to our unworthiness , and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard not our transgressions and iniquities ! 
Create in us a clean heart and renew a right spirit within us , strengthen us all in Thy faith , fortify our hope , inspire us with true love one for another , arm us with unity of spirit in the righteous defense of the heritage Thou gavest to us and to our fathers , and let not the scepter of the wicked be exalted against the destiny of those Thou hast sanctified . 
`` O Lord our God , in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust , let us not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy , and give us a token of Thy blessing , that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it and be put to shame and perish , and may all the nations know that Thou art the Lord and we are Thy people . 
Show Thy mercy upon us this day , O Lord , and grant us Thy salvation ; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice in Thy mercy ; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath the feet of Thy faithful servants ! 
For Thou art the defense , the succor , and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee , and to Thee be all glory , to Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , now and forever , world without end . 
Amen . '' 
In Natasha 's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her strongly . 
She listened to every word about the victory of Moses over Amalek , of Gideon over Midian , and of David over Goliath , and about the destruction of `` Thy Jerusalem , '' and she prayed to God with the tenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowing , but without fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer . 
She shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of righteousness , for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope , and its animation by love . 
But she could not pray that her enemies might be trampled under foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more of them that she might pray for them . 
But neither could she doubt the righteousness of the prayer that was being read on bended knees . 
She felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe at the thought of the punishment that overtakes men for their sins , and especially of her own sins , and she prayed to God to forgive them all , and her too , and to give them all , and her too , peace and happiness . 
And it seemed to her that God heard her prayer . 
From the day when Pierre , after leaving the Rostovs ' with Natasha 's grateful look fresh in his mind , had gazed at the comet that seemed to be fixed in the sky and felt that something new was appearing on his own horizon -- from that day the problem of the vanity and uselessness of all earthly things , that had incessantly tormented him , no longer presented itself . 
That terrible question `` Why ? '' 
`` Wherefore ? '' 
which had come to him amid every occupation , was now replaced , not by another question or by a reply to the former question , but by her image . 
When he listened to , or himself took part in , trivial conversations , when he read or heard of human baseness or folly , he was not horrified as formerly , and did not ask himself why men struggled so about these things when all is so transient and incomprehensible -- but he remembered her as he had last seen her , and all his doubts vanished -- not because she had answered the questions that had haunted him , but because his conception of her transferred him instantly to another , a brighter , realm of spiritual activity in which no one could be justified or guilty -- a realm of beauty and love which it was worth living for . 
Whatever worldly baseness presented itself to him , he said to himself : `` Well , supposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar , and the country and the Tsar confer honors upon him , what does that matter ? 
She smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again , and I love her , and no one will ever know it . '' 
And his soul felt calm and peaceful . 
Pierre still went into society , drank as much and led the same idle and dissipated life , because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs ' there were other hours he had to spend somehow , and the habits and acquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him along irresistibly . 
But latterly , when more and more disquieting reports came from the seat of war and Natasha 's health began to improve and she no longer aroused in him the former feeling of careful pity , an ever-increasing restlessness , which he could not explain , took possession of him . 
He felt that the condition he was in could not continue long , that a catastrophe was coming which would change his whole life , and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that approaching catastrophe . 
One of his brother Masons had revealed to Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon , drawn from the Revelation of St. John . 
In chapter 13 , verse 18 , of the Apocalypse , it is said : Here is wisdom . 
Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast : for it is the number of a man ; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six . 
And in the fifth verse of the same chapter : And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies ; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months . 
The French alphabet , written out with the same numerical values as the Hebrew , in which the first nine letters denote units and the others tens , will have the following significance : a b c d e f g h i k 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 l m n o p q r s 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 t u v w x y 100 110 120 130 140 150 z 160 Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers , it appears that the sum of them is 666 , and that Napoleon therefore the beast foretold in the Apocalypse . 
Moreover , by applying the same system to the words quarante-deux , * which was the term allowed to the beast that `` spoke great things and blasphemies , '' the same number 666 was obtained ; from which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon 's power had come in the year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two . 
This prophecy pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what would put an end to the power of the beast , that is , of Napoleon , and tried by the same system of using letters as numbers and adding them up , to find an answer to the question that engrossed him . 
He wrote the words L'Empereur Alexandre , La nation russe and added up their numbers , but the sums were either more or less than 666 . 
Once when making such calculations he wrote down his own name in French , Comte Pierre Besouhoff , but the sum of the numbers did not come right . 
Then he changed the spelling , substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le , still without obtaining the desired result . 
Then it occurred to him : if the answer to the question were contained in his name , his nationality would also be given in the answer . 
So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding up the numbers got 671 . 
This was only five too much , and five was represented by e , the very letter elided from the article le before the word Empereur . 
By omitting the e , though incorrectly , Pierre got the answer he sought . 
L'russe Besuhof made 666 . 
This discovery excited him . 
How , or by what means , he was connected with the great event foretold in the Apocalypse he did not know , but he did not doubt that connection for a moment . 
