`` He says she 's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure . 
They were howling there . '' 
-LRB- This meant that the she-wolf , about whom they both knew , had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse , a small place a mile and a half from the house . -RRB- 
`` We ought to go , do n't you think so ? '' 
said Nicholas . 
`` Come to me with Uvarka . '' 
`` As you please . '' 
`` Then put off feeding them . '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicholas ' big study . 
Though Daniel was not a big man , to see him in a room was like seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture and surroundings of human life . 
Daniel himself felt this , and as usual stood just inside the door , trying to speak softly and not move , for fear of breaking something in the master 's apartment , and he hastened to say all that was necessary so as to get from under that ceiling , out into the open under the sky once more . 
Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion that the hounds were fit -LRB- Daniel himself wished to go hunting -RRB- , Nicholas ordered the horses to be saddled . 
But just as Daniel was about to go Natasha came in with rapid steps , not having done up her hair or finished dressing and with her old nurse 's big shawl wrapped round her . 
Petya ran in at the same time . 
`` You are going ? '' 
asked Natasha . 
`` I knew you would ! 
Sonya said you would n't go , but I knew that today is the sort of day when you could n't help going . '' 
`` Yes , we are going , '' replied Nicholas reluctantly , for today , as he intended to hunt seriously , he did not want to take Natasha and Petya . 
`` We are going , but only wolf hunting : it would be dull for you . '' 
`` You know it is my greatest pleasure , '' said Natasha . 
`` It 's not fair ; you are going by yourself , are having the horses saddled and said nothing to us about it . '' '' 
` No barrier bars a Russian 's path ' -- we 'll go ! '' 
shouted Petya . 
`` But you ca n't . 
Mamma said you must n't , '' said Nicholas to Natasha . 
`` Yes , I 'll go . 
I shall certainly go , '' said Natasha decisively . 
`` Daniel , tell them to saddle for us , and Michael must come with my dogs , '' she added to the huntsman . 
It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all , but to have anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible . 
He cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business , careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the young lady . 
The old count , who had always kept up an enormous hunting establishment but had now handed it all completely over to his son 's care , being in very good spirits on this fifteenth of September , prepared to go out with the others . 
In an hour 's time the whole hunting party was at the porch . 
Nicholas , with a stern and serious air which showed that now was no time for attending to trifles , went past Natasha and Petya who were trying to tell him something . 
He had a look at all the details of the hunt , sent a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry , mounted his chestnut Donets , and whistling to his own leash of borzois , set off across the threshing ground to a field leading to the Otradnoe wood . 
The old count 's horse , a sorrel gelding called Viflyanka , was led by the groom in attendance on him , while the count himself was to drive in a small trap straight to a spot reserved for him . 
They were taking fifty-four hounds , with six hunt attendants and whippers-in . 
Besides the family , there were eight borzoi kennelmen and more than forty borzois , so that , with the borzois on the leash belonging to members of the family , there were about a hundred and thirty dogs and twenty horsemen . 
Each dog knew its master and its call . 
Each man in the hunt knew his business , his place , what he had to do . 
As soon as they had passed the fence they all spread out evenly and quietly , without noise or talk , along the road and field leading to the Otradnoe covert . 
The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet , now and then splashing into puddles as they crossed a road . 
The misty sky still seemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth , the air was still , warm , and silent . 
Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman , the snort of a horse , the crack of a whip , or the whine of a straggling hound could be heard . 
When they had gone a little less than a mile , five more riders with dogs appeared out of the mist , approaching the Rostovs . 
In front rode a fresh-looking , handsome old man with a large gray mustache . 
`` Good morning , Uncle ! '' 
said Nicholas , when the old man drew near . 
`` That 's it . 
