Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went out of the room to change her costume . 
In the drawing room people began arranging the chairs and taking their seats . 
Anatole moved a chair for Natasha and was about to sit down beside her , but the count , who never lost sight of her , took the seat himself . 
Anatole sat down behind her . 
Mademoiselle George , with her bare , fat , dimpled arms , and a red shawl draped over one shoulder , came into the space left vacant for her , and assumed an unnatural pose . 
Enthusiastic whispering was audible . 
Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience and began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for her son . 
In some places she raised her voice , in others she whispered , lifting her head triumphantly ; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse sounds , rolling her eyes . 
`` Adorable ! 
divine ! 
delicious ! '' 
was heard from every side . 
Natasha looked at the fat actress , but neither saw nor heard nor understood anything of what went on before her . 
She only felt herself again completely borne away into this strange senseless world - so remote from her old world -- a world in which it was impossible to know what was good or bad , reasonable or senseless . 
Behind her sat Anatole , and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened sense of expectancy . 
After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded Mademoiselle George , expressing their enthusiasm . 
`` How beautiful she is ! '' 
Natasha remarked to her father who had also risen and was moving through the crowd toward the actress . 
`` I do n't think so when I look at you ! '' 
said Anatole , following Natasha . 
He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him . 
`` You are enchanting ... from the moment I saw you I have never ceased ... '' `` Come , come , Natasha ! '' 
said the count , as he turned back for his daughter . 
`` How beautiful she is ! '' 
Natasha without saying anything stepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inquiring eyes . 
After giving several recitations , Mademoiselle George left , and Countess Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom . 
The count wished to go home , but Helene entreated him not to spoil her improvised ball , and the Rostovs stayed on . 
Anatole asked Natasha for a valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her she was bewitching and that he loved her . 
During the ecossaise , which she also danced with him , Anatole said nothing when they happened to be by themselves , but merely gazed at her . 
Natasha lifted her frightened eyes to him , but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate look and smile that she could not , whilst looking at him , say what she had to say . 
She lowered her eyes . 
`` Do n't say such things to me . 
I am betrothed and love another , '' she said rapidly ... . 
She glanced at him . 
Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said . 
`` Do n't speak to me of that ! 
What can I do ? '' 
said he . 
`` I tell you I am madly , madly , in love with you ! 
Is it my fault that you are enchanting ? 
... It 's our turn to begin . '' 
Natasha , animated and excited , looked about her with wide-open frightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual . 
She understood hardly anything that went on that evening . 
They danced the ecossaise and the Grossvater . 
Her father asked her to come home , but she begged to remain . 
Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to , she felt his eyes upon her . 
Later on she recalled how she had asked her father to let her go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress , that Helene had followed her and spoken laughingly of her brother 's love , and that she again met Anatole in the little sitting room . 
Helene had disappeared leaving them alone , and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender voice : `` I can not come to visit you but is it possible that I shall never see you ? 
I love you madly . 
Can I never ... ? '' 
