Pierre wished to be there with that smoke , those shining bayonets , that movement , and those sounds . 
He turned to look at Kutuzov and his suite , to compare his impressions with those of others . 
They were all looking at the field of battle as he was , and , as it seemed to him , with the same feelings . 
All their faces were now shining with that latent warmth of feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understood after his talk with Prince Andrew . 
`` Go , my dear fellow , go ... and Christ be with you ! '' 
Kutuzov was saying to a general who stood beside him , not taking his eye from the battlefield . 
Having received this order the general passed by Pierre on his way down the knoll . 
`` To the crossing ! '' 
said the general coldly and sternly in reply to one of the staff who asked where he was going . 
`` I 'll go there too , I too ! '' 
thought Pierre , and followed the general . 
The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him . 
Pierre went to his groom who was holding his horses and , asking which was the quietest , clambered onto it , seized it by the mane , and turning out his toes pressed his heels against its sides and , feeling that his spectacles were slipping off but unable to let go of the mane and reins , he galloped after the general , causing the staff officers to smile as they watched him from the knoll . 
Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was galloping turned sharply to the left , and Pierre , losing sight of him , galloped in among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him . 
He tried to pass either in front of them or to the right or left , but there were soldiers everywhere , all with expression and busy with some unseen but evidently important task . 
They all gazed with the same dissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white hat , who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse 's hoofs . 
`` Why ride into the middle of the battalion ? '' 
one of them shouted at him . 
Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket , and Pierre , bending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse , galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space . 
There was a bridge ahead of him , where other soldiers stood firing . 
Pierre rode up to them . 
Without being aware of it he had come to the bridge across the Kolocha between Gorki and Borodino , which the French -LRB- having occupied Borodino -RRB- were attacking in the first phase of the battle . 
Pierre saw that there was a bridge in front of him and that soldiers were doing something on both sides of it and in the meadow , among the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid the smoke of the campfires the day before ; but despite the incessant firing going on there he had no idea that this was the field of battle . 
He did not notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side , or the projectiles that flew over him , did not see the enemy on the other side of the river , and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded , though many fell near him . 
He looked about him with a smile which did not leave his face . 
`` Why 's that fellow in front of the line ? '' 
shouted somebody at him again . 
`` To the left ! 
... Keep to the right ! '' 
the men shouted to him . 
Pierre went to the right , and unexpectedly encountered one of Raevski 's adjutants whom he knew . 
The adjutant looked angrily at him , evidently also intending to shout at him , but on recognizing him he nodded . 
`` How have you got here ? '' 
he said , and galloped on . 
Pierre , feeling out of place there , having nothing to do , and afraid of getting in someone 's way again , galloped after the adjutant . 
`` What 's happening here ? 
May I come with you ? '' 
he asked . 
`` One moment , one moment ! '' 
replied the adjutant , and riding up to a stout colonel who was standing in the meadow , he gave him some message and then addressed Pierre . 
`` Why have you come here , Count ? '' 
he asked with a smile . 
`` Still inquisitive ? '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' assented Pierre . 
But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on . 
`` Here it 's tolerable , '' said he , `` but with Bagration on the left flank they 're getting it frightfully hot . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` Where is that ? '' 
`` Come along with me to our knoll . 
