Pfuel was evidently of that sort . 
He had a science -- the theory of oblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the Great 's wars , and all he came across in the history of more recent warfare seemed to him absurd and barbarous -- monstrous collisions in which so many blunders were committed by both sides that these wars could not be called wars , they did not accord with the theory , and therefore could not serve as material for science . 
In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible , for the plan of campaign that ended in Jena and Auerstadt , but he did not see the least proof of the fallibility of his theory in the disasters of that war . 
On the contrary , the deviations made from his theory were , in his opinion , the sole cause of the whole disaster , and with characteristically gleeful sarcasm he would remark , `` There , I said the whole affair would go to the devil ! '' 
Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love their theory that they lose sight of the theory 's object -- its practical application . 
His love of theory made him hate everything practical , and he would not listen to it . 
He was even pleased by failures , for failures resulting from deviations in practice from the theory only proved to him the accuracy of his theory . 
He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about the present war , with the air of a man who knows beforehand that all will go wrong , and who is not displeased that it should be so . 
The unbrushed tufts of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples expressed this most eloquently . 
He passed into the next room , and the deep , querulous sounds of his voice were at once heard from there . 
Prince Andrew 's eyes were still following Pfuel out of the room when Count Bennigsen entered hurriedly , and nodding to Bolkonski , but not pausing , went into the study , giving instructions to his adjutant as he went . 
The Emperor was following him , and Bennigsen had hastened on to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign . 
Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch , where the Emperor , who looked fatigued , was dismounting . 
Marquis Paulucci was talking to him with particular warmth and the Emperor , with his head bent to the left , was listening with a dissatisfied air . 
The Emperor moved forward evidently wishing to end the conversation , but the flushed and excited Italian , oblivious of decorum , followed him and continued to speak . 
`` And as for the man who advised forming this camp -- the Drissa camp , '' said Paulucci , as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing Prince Andrew scanned his unfamiliar face , `` as to that person , sire ... '' continued Paulucci , desperately , apparently unable to restrain himself , `` the man who advised the Drissa camp -- I see no alternative but the lunatic asylum or the gallows ! '' 
Without heeding the end of the Italian 's remarks , and as though not hearing them , the Emperor , recognizing Bolkonski , addressed him graciously . 
`` I am very glad to see you ! 
Go in there where they are meeting , and wait for me . '' 
The Emperor went into the study . 
He was followed by Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski and Baron Stein , and the door closed behind them . 
Prince Andrew , taking advantage of the Emperor 's permission , accompanied Paulucci , whom he had known in Turkey , into the drawing room where the council was assembled . 
Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position , as it were , of chief of the Emperor 's staff . 
He came out of the study into the drawing room with some maps which he spread on a table , and put questions on which he wished to hear the opinion of the gentlemen present . 
What had happened was that news -LRB- which afterwards proved to be false -RRB- had been received during the night of a movement by the French to outflank the Drissa camp . 
The first to speak was General Armfeldt who , to meet the difficulty that presented itself , unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position away from the Petersburg and Moscow roads . 
The reason for this was inexplicable -LRB- unless he wished to show that he , too , could have an opinion -RRB- , but he urged that at this point the army should unite and there await the enemy . 
It was plain that Armfeldt had thought out that plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answer the questions put -- which , in fact , his plan did not answer - as to avail himself of the opportunity to air it . 
It was one of the millions of proposals , one as good as another , that could be made as long as it was quite unknown what character the war would take . 
Some disputed his arguments , others defended them . 
Young Count Toll objected to the Swedish general 's views more warmly than anyone else , and in the course of the dispute drew from his side pocket a well-filled notebook , which he asked permission to read to them . 
In these voluminous notes Toll suggested another scheme , totally different from Armfeldt 's or Pfuel 's plan of campaign . 
In answer to Toll , Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack , which , he urged , could alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap -LRB- as he called the Drissa camp -RRB- in which we were situated . 
During all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter , Wolzogen -LRB- his `` bridge '' in court relations -RRB- , were silent . 
Pfuel only snorted contemptuously and turned away , to show that he would never demean himself by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing . 
So when Prince Volkonski , who was in the chair , called on him to give his opinion , he merely said : `` Why ask me ? 
General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an exposed rear , or why not this Italian gentleman 's attack -- very fine , or a retreat , also good ! 
Why ask me ? '' 
said he . 
`` Why , you yourselves know everything better than I do . '' 
But when Volkonski said , with a frown , that it was in the Emperor 's name that he asked his opinion , Pfuel rose and , suddenly growing animated , began to speak : `` Everything has been spoiled , everything muddled , everybody thought they knew better than I did , and now you come to me ! 
How mend matters ? 
There is nothing to mend ! 
The principles laid down by me must be strictly adhered to , '' said he , drumming on the table with his bony fingers . 
`` What is the difficulty ? 
Nonsense , childishness ! '' 
He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that no eventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp , that everything had been foreseen , and that if the enemy were really going to outflank it , the enemy would inevitably be destroyed . 
Paulucci , who did not know German , began questioning him in French . 
Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief , who spoke French badly , and began translating for him , hardly able to keep pace with Pfuel , who was rapidly demonstrating that not only all that had happened , but all that could happen , had been foreseen in his scheme , and that if there were now any difficulties the whole fault lay in the fact that his plan had not been precisely executed . 
He kept laughing sarcastically , he demonstrated , and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate , like a mathematician who ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of a problem that has already been proved . 
