All seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encountered this question . 
All the contradictions and obscurities of history and the false path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack of a solution of that question . 
If the will of every man were free , that is , if each man could act as he pleased , all history would be a series of disconnected incidents . 
If in a thousand years even one man in a million could act freely , that is , as he chose , it is evident that one single free act of that man 's in violation of the laws governing human action would destroy the possibility of the existence of any laws for the whole of humanity . 
If there be a single law governing the actions of men , free will can not exist , for then man 's will is subject to that law . 
In this contradiction lies the problem of free will , which from most ancient times has occupied the best human minds and from most ancient times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance . 
The problem is that regarding man as a subject of observation from whatever point of view -- theological , historical , ethical , or philosophic -- we find a general law of necessity to which he -LRB- like all that exists -RRB- is subject . 
But regarding him from within ourselves as what we are conscious of , we feel ourselves to be free . 
This consciousness is a source of self-cognition quite apart from and independent of reason . 
Through his reason man observes himself , but only through consciousness does he know himself . 
Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason is conceivable . 
To understand , observe , and draw conclusions , man must first of all be conscious of himself as living . 
A man is only conscious of himself as a living being by the fact that he wills , that is , is conscious of his volition . 
But his will -- which forms the essence of his life -- man recognizes -LRB- and can but recognize -RRB- as free . 
If , observing himself , man sees that his will is always directed by one and the same law -LRB- whether he observes the necessity of taking food , using his brain , or anything else -RRB- he can not recognize this never-varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of it . 
Were it not free it could not be limited . 
A man 's will seems to him to be limited just because he is not conscious of it except as free . 
You say : I am not and am not free . 
But I have lifted my hand and let it fall . 
Everyone understands that this illogical reply is an irrefutable demonstration of freedom . 
That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to reason . 
If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent source of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and to experience , but in fact such subjection does not exist and is inconceivable . 
A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he , as an object of observation , is subject to certain laws , and man submits to them and never resists the laws of gravity or impermeability once he has become acquainted with them . 
But the same series of experiments and arguments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he is conscious in himself is impossible , and that his every action depends on his organization , his character , and the motives acting upon him ; yet man never submits to the deductions of these experiments and arguments . 
Having learned from experiment and argument that a stone falls downwards , a man indubitably believes this and always expects the law that he has learned to be fulfilled . 
But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws , he does not and can not believe this . 
However often experiment and reasoning may show a man that under the same conditions and with the same character he will do the same thing as before , yet when under the same conditions and with the same character he approaches for the thousandth time the action that always ends in the same way , he feels as certainly convinced as before the experiment that he can act as he pleases . 
Every man , savage or sage , however incontestably reason and experiment may prove to him that it is impossible to imagine two different courses of action in precisely the same conditions , feels that without this irrational conception -LRB- which constitutes the essence of freedom -RRB- he can not imagine life . 
He feels that however impossible it may be , it is so , for without this conception of freedom not only would he be unable to understand life , but he would be unable to live for a single moment . 
He could not live , because all man 's efforts , all his impulses to life , are only efforts to increase freedom . 
Wealth and poverty , fame and obscurity , power and subordination , strength and weakness , health and disease , culture and ignorance , work and leisure , repletion and hunger , virtue and vice , are only greater or lesser degrees of freedom . 
A man having no freedom can not be conceived of except as deprived of life . 
If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senseless contradiction like the possibility of performing two actions at one and the same instant of time , or of an effect without a cause , that only proves that consciousness is not subject to reason . 
This unshakable , irrefutable consciousness of freedom , uncontrolled by experiment or argument , recognized by all thinkers and felt by everyone without exception , this consciousness without which no conception of man is possible constitutes the other side of the question . 
Man is the creation of an all-powerful , all-good , and all-seeing God . 
What is sin , the conception of which arises from the consciousness of man 's freedom ? 
That is a question for theology . 
The actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressed in statistics . 
What is man 's responsibility to society , the conception of which results from the conception of freedom ? 
That is a question for jurisprudence . 
Man 's actions proceed from his innate character and the motives acting upon him . 
What is conscience and the perception of right and wrong in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom ? 
That is a question for ethics . 
Man in connection with the general life of humanity appears subject to laws which determine that life . 
But the same man apart from that connection appears to free . 
How should the past life of nations and of humanity be regarded -- as the result of the free , or as the result of the constrained , activity of man ? 
That is a question for history . 
Only in our self-confident day of the popularization of knowledge - thanks to that most powerful engine of ignorance , the diffusion of printed matter -- has the question of the freedom of will been put on a level on which the question itself can not exist . 
In our time the majority of so-called advanced people -- that is , the crowd of ignoramuses -- have taken the work of the naturalists who deal with one side of the question for a solution of the whole problem . 
They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist , for the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscular movements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves ; the soul and free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we sprang from the apes . 
