She felt sorry for herself : sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to anyone -- while she felt herself so capable of loving and being loved . 
Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs ' home . 
Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass , the solemn and wearisome Christmas congratulations from neighbors and servants , and the new dresses everyone put on , there were no special festivities , though the calm frost of twenty degrees Reaumur , the dazzling sunshine by day , and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for some special celebration of the season . 
On the third day of Christmas week , after the midday dinner , all the inmates of the house dispersed to various rooms . 
It was the dullest time of the day . 
Nicholas , who had been visiting some neighbors that morning , was asleep on the sitting-room sofa . 
The old count was resting in his study . 
Sonya sat in the drawing room at the round table , copying a design for embroidery . 
The countess was playing patience . 
Nastasya Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old ladies . 
Natasha came into the room , went up to Sonya , glanced at what she was doing , and then went up to her mother and stood without speaking . 
`` Why are you wandering about like an outcast ? '' 
asked her mother . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
`` Him ... I want him ... now , this minute ! 
I want him ! '' 
said Natasha , with glittering eyes and no sign of a smile . 
The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter . 
`` Do n't look at me , Mamma ! 
Do n't look ; I shall cry directly . '' 
`` Sit down with me a little , '' said the countess . 
`` Mamma , I want him . 
Why should I be wasted like this , Mamma ? '' 
Her voice broke , tears gushed from her eyes , and she turned quickly to hide them and left the room . 
She passed into the sitting room , stood there thinking awhile , and then went into the maids ' room . 
There an old maidservant was grumbling at a young girl who stood panting , having just run in through the cold from the serfs ' quarters . 
`` Stop playing -- there 's a time for everything , '' said the old woman . 
`` Let her alone , Kondratevna , '' said Natasha . 
`` Go , Mavrushka , go . '' 
Having released Mavrushka , Natasha crossed the dancing hall and went to the vestibule . 
There an old footman and two young ones were playing cards . 
They broke off and rose as she entered . 
`` What can I do with them ? '' 
thought Natasha . 
`` Oh , Nikita , please go ... where can I send him ? 
... Yes , go to the yard and fetch a fowl , please , a cock , and you , Misha , bring me some oats . '' 
`` Just a few oats ? '' 
said Misha , cheerfully and readily . 
`` Go , go quickly , '' the old man urged him . 
`` And you , Theodore , get me a piece of chalk . '' 
On her way past the butler 's pantry she told them to set a samovar , though it was not at all the time for tea . 
Foka , the butler , was the most ill-tempered person in the house . 
Natasha liked to test her power over him . 
He distrusted the order and asked whether the samovar was really wanted . 
`` Oh dear , what a young lady ! '' 
said Foka , pretending to frown at Natasha . 
No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble as Natasha did . 
She could not see people unconcernedly , but had to send them on some errand . 
She seemed to be trying whether any of them would get angry or sulky with her ; but the serfs fulfilled no one 's orders so readily as they did hers . 
`` What can I do , where can I go ? '' 
