The lunatic 's solemn , gloomy face was thin and yellow , with its beard growing in uneven tufts . 
His black , agate pupils with saffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids . 
`` Stop ! 
Pull up , I tell you ! '' 
he cried in a piercing voice , and again shouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures . 
Coming abreast of the caleche he ran beside it . 
`` Thrice have they slain me , thrice have I risen from the dead . 
They stoned me , crucified me ... I shall rise ... shall rise ... shall rise . 
They have torn my body . 
The kingdom of God will be overthrown ... Thrice will I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it ! '' 
he cried , raising his voice higher and higher . 
Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closed in on Vereshchagin . 
He turned away . 
`` Go fas ... faster ! '' 
he cried in a trembling voice to his coachman . 
The caleche flew over the ground as fast as the horses could draw it , but for a long time Count Rostopchin still heard the insane despairing screams growing fainter in the distance , while his eyes saw nothing but the astonished , frightened , bloodstained face of `` the traitor '' in the fur-lined coat . 
Recent as that mental picture was , Rostopchin already felt that it had cut deep into his heart and drawn blood . 
Even now he felt clearly that the gory trace of that recollection would not pass with time , but that the terrible memory would , on the contrary , dwell in his heart ever more cruelly and painfully to the end of his life . 
He seemed still to hear the sound of his own words : `` Cut him down ! 
I command it ... '' `` Why did I utter those words ? 
It was by some accident I said them ... . 
I need not have said them , '' he thought . 
`` And then nothing would have happened . '' 
He saw the frightened and then infuriated face of the dragoon who dealt the blow , the look of silent , timid reproach that boy in the fur-lined coat had turned upon him . 
`` But I did not do it for my own sake . 
I was bound to act that way ... . 
The mob , the traitor ... the public welfare , '' thought he . 
Troops were still crowding at the Yauza bridge . 
It was hot . 
Kutuzov , dejected and frowning , sat on a bench by the bridge toying with his whip in the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily . 
A man in a general 's uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutuzov and said something in French . 
It was Count Rostopchin . 
He told Kutuzov that he had come because Moscow , the capital , was no more and only the army remained . 
`` Things would have been different if your Serene Highness had not told me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle ; all this would not have happened , '' he said . 
Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if , not grasping what was said to him , he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment on the face of the man addressing him . 
Rostopchin grew confused and became silent . 
Kutuzov slightly shook his head and not taking his penetrating gaze from Rostopchin 's face muttered softly : `` No ! 
I shall not give up Moscow without a battle ! '' 
Whether Kutuzov was thinking of something entirely different when he spoke those words , or uttered them purposely , knowing them to be meaningless , at any rate Rostopchin made no reply and hastily left him . 
And strange to say , the Governor of Moscow , the proud Count Rostopchin , took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where he began with shouts to drive on the carts that blocked the way . 
Toward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat 's troops were entering Moscow . 
In front rode a detachment of Wurttemberg hussars and behind them rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite . 
About the middle of the Arbat Street , near the Church of the Miraculous Icon of St. Nicholas , Murat halted to await news from the advanced detachment as to the condition in which they had found the citadel , le Kremlin . 
Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow . 
They all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange , long-haired commander dressed up in feathers and gold . 
`` Is that their Tsar himself ? 
He 's not bad ! '' 
low voices could be heard saying . 
An interpreter rode up to the group . 
`` Take off your cap ... your caps ! '' 
