The chief steward , who considered the young count 's attempts almost insane -- unprofitable to himself , to the count , and to the serfs -- made some concessions . 
Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs as impracticable , he arranged for the erection of large buildings -- schools , hospitals , and asylums -- on all the estates before the master arrived . 
Everywhere preparations were made not for ceremonious welcomes -LRB- which he knew Pierre would not like -RRB- , but for just such gratefully religious ones , with offerings of icons and the bread and salt of hospitality , as , according to his understanding of his master , would touch and delude him . 
The southern spring , the comfortable rapid traveling in a Vienna carriage , and the solitude of the road , all had a gladdening effect on Pierre . 
The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque than the other ; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly grateful for the benefits conferred on them . 
Everywhere were receptions , which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feeling in the depth of his heart . 
In one place the peasants presented him with bread and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint Paul , asking permission , as a mark of their gratitude for the benefits he had conferred on them , to build a new chantry to the church at their own expense in honor of Peter and Paul , his patron saints . 
In another place the women with infants in arms met him to thank him for releasing them from hard work . 
On a third estate the priest , bearing a cross , came to meet him surrounded by children whom , by the count 's generosity , he was instructing in reading , writing , and religion . 
On all his estates Pierre saw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or in course of erection , all on one plan , for hospitals , schools , and almshouses , which were soon to be opened . 
Everywhere he saw the stewards ' accounts , according to which the serfs ' manorial labor had been diminished , and heard the touching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue coats . 
What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him with bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peter and Paul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter 's day , and that the richest peasants -LRB- who formed the deputation -RRB- had begun the chantry long before , but that nine tenths of the peasants in that villages were in a state of the greatest poverty . 
He did not know that since the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land , they did still harder work on their own land . 
He did not know that the priest who met him with the cross oppressed the peasants by his exactions , and that the pupils ' parents wept at having to let him take their children and secured their release by heavy payments . 
He did not know that the brick buildings , built to plan , were being built by serfs whose manorial labor was thus increased , though lessened on paper . 
He did not know that where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs ' payments had been diminished by a third , their obligatory manorial work had been increased by a half . 
And so Pierre was delighted with his visit to his estates and quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had left Petersburg , and wrote enthusiastic letters to his `` brother-instructor '' as he called the Grand Master . 
`` How easy it is , how little effort it needs , to do so much good , '' thought Pierre , `` and how little attention we pay to it ! '' 
He was pleased at the gratitude he received , but felt abashed at receiving it . 
This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do for these simple , kindly people . 
The chief steward , a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectly through the naive and intelligent count and played with him as with a toy , seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre , pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all the uselessness of freeing the serfs , who were quite happy as it was . 
Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would be difficult to imagine happier people , and that God only knew what would happen to them when they were free , but he insisted , though reluctantly , on what he thought right . 
The steward promised to do all in his power to carry out the count 's wishes , seeing clearly that not only would the count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank , but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued to give in money and work all that other people 's serfs gave -- that is to say , all that could be got out of them . 
Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state of mind , Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting his friend Bolkonski , whom he had not seen for two years . 
Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fields and forests of fir and birch , which were partly cut down . 
The house lay behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and with banks still bare of grass . 
It was at the end of a village that stretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were a few fir trees . 
The homestead consisted of a threshing floor , outhouses , stables , a bathhouse , a lodge , and a large brick house with semicircular facade still in course of construction . 
Round the house was a garden newly laid out . 
The fences and gates were new and solid ; two fire pumps and a water cart , painted green , stood in a shed ; the paths were straight , the bridges were strong and had handrails . 
Everything bore an impress of tidiness and good management . 
Some domestic serfs Pierre met , in reply to inquiries as to where the prince lived , pointed out a small newly built lodge close to the pond . 
Anton , a man who had looked after Prince Andrew in his boyhood , helped Pierre out of his carriage , said that the prince was at home , and showed him into a clean little anteroom . 
Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house after the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend in Petersburg . 
He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered wooden walls redolent of pine , and would have gone farther , but Anton ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door . 
`` Well , what is it ? '' 
came a sharp , unpleasant voice . 
`` A visitor , '' answered Anton . 
`` Ask him to wait , '' and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed back . 
Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to face with Prince Andrew , who came out frowning and looking old . 
Pierre embraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek and looked at him closely . 
`` Well , I did not expect you , I am very glad , '' said Prince Andrew . 
Pierre said nothing ; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise . 
He was struck by the change in him . 
His words were kindly and there was a smile on his lips and face , but his eyes were dull and lifeless and in spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous and glad sparkle . 
Prince Andrew had grown thinner , paler , and more manly-looking , but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used to it were his inertia and a wrinkle on his brow indicating prolonged concentration on some one thought . 
As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation , it was long before their conversation could settle on anything . 
They put questions and gave brief replies about things they knew ought to be talked over at length . 
At last the conversation gradually settled on some of the topics at first lightly touched on : their past life , plans for the future , Pierre 's journeys and occupations , the war , and so on . 
The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in his friend 's look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile with which he listened to Pierre , especially when he spoke with joyful animation of the past or the future . 
