said Princess Mary in alarm , running with her soft , ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law . 
`` Your excellency , should not Mary Bogdanovna be sent for ? '' 
said one of the maids who was present . 
-LRB- Mary Bogdanovna was a midwife from the neighboring town , who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortnight . -RRB- 
`` Oh yes , '' assented Princess Mary , `` perhaps that 's it . 
I 'll go . 
Courage , my angel . '' 
She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room . 
`` Oh , no , no ! '' 
And besides the pallor and the physical suffering on the little princess ' face , an expression of childish fear of inevitable pain showed itself . 
`` No , it 's only indigestion ? 
... Say it 's only indigestion , say so , Mary ! 
Say ... '' And the little princess began to cry capriciously like a suffering child and to wring her little hands even with some affectation . 
Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Mary Bogdanovna . 
`` Mon Dieu ! 
Mon Dieu ! 
Oh ! '' 
she heard as she left the room . 
The midwife was already on her way to meet her , rubbing her small , plump white hands with an air of calm importance . 
`` Mary Bogdanovna , I think it 's beginning ! '' 
said Princess Mary looking at the midwife with wide-open eyes of alarm . 
`` Well , the Lord be thanked , Princess , '' said Mary Bogdanovna , not hastening her steps . 
`` You young ladies should not know anything about it . '' 
`` But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet ? '' 
said the princess . 
-LRB- In accordance with Lise 's and Prince Andrew 's wishes they had sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him at any moment . -RRB- 
`` No matter , Princess , do n't be alarmed , '' said Mary Bogdanovna . 
`` We 'll manage very well without a doctor . '' 
Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavy being carried by . 
She looked out . 
The men servants were carrying the large leather sofa from Prince Andrew 's study into the bedroom . 
On their faces was a quiet and solemn look . 
Princess Mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in the house , now and then opening her door when someone passed and watching what was going on in the passage . 
Some women passing with quiet steps in and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned away . 
She did not venture to ask any questions , and shut the door again , now sitting down in her easy chair , now taking her prayer book , now kneeling before the icon stand . 
To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers did not calm her excitement . 
Suddenly her door opened softly and her old nurse , Praskovya Savishna , who hardly ever came to that room as the old prince had forbidden it , appeared on the threshold with a shawl round her head . 
`` I 've come to sit with you a bit , Masha , '' said the nurse , `` and here I 've brought the prince 's wedding candles to light before his saint , my angel , '' she said with a sigh . 
`` Oh , nurse , I 'm so glad ! '' 
`` God is merciful , birdie . '' 
The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down by the door with her knitting . 
Princess Mary took a book and began reading . 
Only when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another , the princess anxious and inquiring , the nurse encouraging . 
Everyone in the house was dominated by the same feeling that Princess Mary experienced as she sat in her room . 
But owing to the superstition that the fewer the people who know of it the less a woman in travail suffers , everyone tried to pretend not to know ; no one spoke of it , but apart from the ordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in the prince 's household , a common anxiety , a softening of the heart , and a consciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished at that moment made itself felt . 
There was no laughter in the maids ' large hall . 
In the men servants ' hall all sat waiting , silently and alert . 
In the outlying serfs ' quarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept . 
The old prince , stepping on his heels , paced up and down his study and sent Tikhon to ask Mary Bogdanovna what news . 
-- `` Say only that ` the prince told me to ask , ' and come and tell me her answer . '' 
