Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law , Pierre late one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph Alexeevich . 
This is what he noted in his diary : Moscow , 17th November I have just returned from my benefactor , and hasten to write down what I have experienced . 
Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and has for three years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder . 
No one has ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint . 
From morning till late at night , except when he eats his very plain food , he is working at science . 
He received me graciously and made me sit down on the bed on which he lay . 
I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of Jerusalem , and he responded in the same manner , asking me with a mild smile what I had learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges . 
I told him everything as best I could , and told him what I had proposed to our Petersburg lodge , of the bad reception I had encountered , and of my rupture with the Brothers . 
Joseph Alexeevich , having remained silent and thoughtful for a good while , told me his view of the matter , which at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow . 
He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of the order : -LRB- 1 -RRB- The preservation and study of the mystery . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- The purification and reformation of oneself for its reception , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- The improvement of the human race by striving for such purification . 
Which is the principal aim of these three ? 
Certainly self-reformation and self-purification . 
Only to this aim can we always strive independently of circumstances . 
But at the same time just this aim demands the greatest efforts of us ; and so , led astray by pride , losing sight of this aim , we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in our impurity we are unworthy to receive , or seek the reformation of the human race while ourselves setting an example of baseness and profligacy . 
Illuminism is not a pure doctrine , just because it is attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride . 
On this ground Joseph Alexeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity , and in the depth of my soul I agreed with him . 
Talking of my family affairs he said to me , `` the chief duty of a true Mason , as I have told you , lies in perfecting himself . 
We often think that by removing all the difficulties of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim , but on the contrary , my dear sir , it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attain our three chief aims : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Self-knowledge -- for man can only know himself by comparison , -LRB- 2 -RRB- Self-perfecting , which can only be attained by conflict , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- The attainment of the chief virtue -- love of death . 
Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop our innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life . '' 
These words are all the more remarkable because , in spite of his great physical sufferings , Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life though he loves death , for which -- in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man -- he does not yet feel himself sufficiently prepared . 
My benefactor then explained to me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything . 
He advised me not to avoid intercourse with the Petersburg Brothers , but to take up only second-grade posts in the lodge , to try , while diverting the Brothers from pride , to turn them toward the true path self-knowledge and self-perfecting . 
Besides this he advised me for myself personally above all to keep a watch over myself , and to that end he gave me a notebook , the one I am now writing in and in which I will in future note down all my actions . 
Petersburg , 23rd November I am again living with my wife . 
My mother-in-law came to me in tears and said that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear her ; that she was innocent and unhappy at my desertion , and much more . 
I knew that if I once let myself see her I should not have strength to go on refusing what she wanted . 
In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice to seek . 
Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what to do . 
I went to my room and reread Joseph Alexeevich 's letters and recalled my conversations with him , and deduced from it all that I ought not to refuse a suppliant , and ought to reach a helping hand to everyone -- especially to one so closely bound to me -- and that I must bear my cross . 
But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right , then let union with her have only a spiritual aim . 
That is what I decided , and what I wrote to Joseph Alexeevich . 
I told my wife that I begged her to forget the past , to forgive me whatever wrong I may have done her , and that I had nothing to forgive . 
It gave me joy to tell her this . 
She need not know how hard it was for me to see her again . 
I have settled on the upper floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling of regeneration . 
At that time , as always happens , the highest society that met at court and at the grand balls was divided into several circles , each with its own particular tone . 
The largest of these was the French circle of the Napoleonic alliance , the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt . 
In this group Helene , as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with her husband , took a very prominent place . 
She was visited by the members of the French embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted for their intellect and polished manners . 
Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors and had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic notabilities . 
At Erfurt her success had been brilliant . 
Napoleon himself had noticed her in the theater and said of her : `` C'est un superbe animal . '' 
* Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not surprise Pierre , for she had become even handsomer than before . 
What did surprise him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded in gaining the reputation `` d' une femme charmante , aussi spirituelle que belle . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-page letters . 
Bilibin saved up his epigrams to produce them in Countess Bezukhova 's presence . 
To be received in the Countess Bezukhova 's salon was regarded as a diploma of intellect . 
Young men read books before attending Helene 's evenings , to have something to say in her salon , and secretaries of the embassy , and even ambassadors , confided diplomatic secrets to her , so that in a way Helene was a power . 
Pierre , who knew she was very stupid , sometimes attended , with a strange feeling of perplexity and fear , her evenings and dinner parties , where politics , poetry , and philosophy were discussed . 
