But he looked at me with vexation and jumped up , breaking off his remarks . 
I felt abashed and asked whether what he had been saying did not concern me ; but he did not reply , gave me a kind look , and then we suddenly found ourselves in my bedroom where there is a double bed . 
He lay down on the edge of it and I burned with longing to caress him and lie down too . 
And he said , `` Tell me frankly what is your chief temptation ? 
Do you know it ? 
I think you know it already . '' 
Abashed by this question , I replied that sloth was my chief temptation . 
He shook his head incredulously ; and even more abashed , I said that though I was living with my wife as he advised , I was not living with her as her husband . 
To this he replied that one should not deprive a wife of one 's embraces and gave me to understand that that was my duty . 
But I replied that I should be ashamed to do it , and suddenly everything vanished . 
And I awoke and found in my mind the text from the Gospel : `` The life was the light of men . 
And the light shineth in darkness ; and the darkness comprehended it not . '' 
Joseph Alexeevich 's face had looked young and bright . 
That day I received a letter from my benefactor in which he wrote about `` conjugal duties . '' 
9th December I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart . 
I saw that I was in Moscow in my house , in the big sitting room , and Joseph Alexeevich came in from the drawing room . 
I seemed to know at once that the process of regeneration had already taken place in him , and I rushed to meet him . 
I embraced him and kissed his hands , and he said , `` Hast thou noticed that my face is different ? '' 
I looked at him , still holding him in my arms , and saw that his face was young , but that he had no hair on his head and his features were quite changed . 
And I said , `` I should have known you had I met you by chance , '' and I thought to myself , `` Am I telling the truth ? '' 
And suddenly I saw him lying like a dead body ; then he gradually recovered and went with me into my study carrying a large book of sheets of drawing paper ; I said , `` I drew that , '' and he answered by bowing his head . 
I opened the book , and on all the pages there were excellent drawings . 
And in my dream I knew that these drawings represented the love adventures of the soul with its beloved . 
And on its pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparent garments and with a transparent body , flying up to the clouds . 
And I seemed to know that this maiden was nothing else than a representation of the Song of Songs . 
And looking at those drawings I dreamed I felt that I was doing wrong , but could not tear myself away from them . 
Lord , help me ! 
My God , if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing , Thy will be done ; but if I am myself the cause , teach me what I should do ! 
I shall perish of my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me ! 
The Rostovs ' monetary affairs had not improved during the two years they had spent in the country . 
Though Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to his resolution and was still serving modestly in an obscure regiment , spending comparatively little , the way of life at Otradnoe -- Mitenka 's management of affairs , in particular -- was such that the debts inevitably increased every year . 
The only resource obviously presenting itself to the old count was to apply for an official post , so he had come to Petersburg to look for one and also , as he said , to let the lassies enjoy themselves for the last time . 
Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to Vera and was accepted . 
Though in Moscow the Rostovs belonged to the best society without themselves giving it a thought , yet in Petersburg their circle of acquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one . 
In Petersburg they were provincials , and the very people they had entertained in Moscow without inquiring to what set they belonged , here looked down on them . 
The Rostovs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersburg as in Moscow , and the most diverse people met at their suppers . 
Country neighbors from Otradnoe , impoverished old squires and their daughters , Peronskaya a maid of honor , Pierre Bezukhov , and the son of their district postmaster who had obtained a post in Petersburg . 
Among the men who very soon became frequent visitors at the Rostovs ' house in Petersburg were Boris , Pierre whom the count had met in the street and dragged home with him , and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostovs ' and paid the eldest daughter , Countess Vera , the attentions a young man pays when he intends to propose . 
Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded at Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left . 
He narrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air that everyone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed , and he had obtained two decorations for Austerlitz . 
In the Finnish war he also managed to distinguish himself . 
He had picked up the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aide-de-camp standing near the commander in chief and had taken it to his commander . 
Just as he had done after Austerlitz , he related this occurrence at such length and so insistently that everyone again believed it had been necessary to do this , and he received two decorations for the Finnish war also . 
In 1809 he was a captain in the Guards , wore medals , and held some special lucrative posts in Petersburg . 
Though some skeptics smiled when told of Berg 's merits , it could not be denied that he was a painstaking and brave officer , on excellent terms with his superiors , and a moral young man with a brilliant career before him and an assured position in society . 
Four years before , meeting a German comrade in the stalls of a Moscow theater , Berg had pointed out Vera Rostova to him and had said in German , `` das soll mein Weib werden , '' * and from that moment had made up his mind to marry her . 
Now in Petersburg , having considered the Rostovs ' position and his own , he decided that the time had come to propose . 
* `` That girl shall be my wife . '' 
Berg 's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was not flattering to him . 
At first it seemed strange that the son of an obscure Livonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countess Rostova ; but Berg 's chief characteristic was such a naive and good natured egotism that the Rostovs involuntarily came to think it would be a good thing , since he himself was so firmly convinced that it was good , indeed excellent . 
