I beg you to leave the town and break off all communication with such men as Klyucharev . 
And I will knock the nonsense out of anybody '' -- but probably realizing that he was shouting at Bezukhov who so far was not guilty of anything , he added , taking Pierre 's hand in a friendly manner , `` We are on the eve of a public disaster and I have n't time to be polite to everybody who has business with me . 
My head is sometimes in a whirl . 
Well , mon cher , what are you doing personally ? '' 
`` Why , nothing , '' answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changing the thoughtful expression of his face . 
The count frowned . 
`` A word of friendly advice , mon cher . 
Be off as soon as you can , that 's all I have to tell you . 
Happy he who has ears to hear . 
Good-by , my dear fellow . 
Oh , by the by ! '' 
he shouted through the doorway after Pierre , `` is it true that the countess has fallen into the clutches of the holy fathers of the Society of Jesus ? '' 
Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchin 's room more sullen and angry than he had ever before shown himself . 
When he reached home it was already getting dark . 
Some eight people had come to see him that evening : the secretary of a committee , the colonel of his battalion , his steward , his major-domo , and various petitioners . 
They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisions from him . 
Pierre did not understand and was not interested in any of these questions and only answered them in order to get rid of these people . 
When left alone at last he opened and read his wife 's letter . 
`` They , the soldiers at the battery , Prince Andrew killed ... that old man ... Simplicity is submission to God . 
Suffering is necessary ... the meaning of all ... one must harness ... my wife is getting married ... One must forget and understand ... '' And going to his bed he threw himself on it without undressing and immediately fell asleep . 
When he awoke next morning the major-domo came to inform him that a special messenger , a police officer , had come from Count Rostopchin to know whether Count Bezukhov had left or was leaving the town . 
A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him in the drawing room . 
Pierre dressed hurriedly and , instead of going to see them , went to the back porch and out through the gate . 
From that time till the end of the destruction of Moscow no one of Bezukhov 's household , despite all the search they made , saw Pierre again or knew where he was . 
The Rostovs remained in Moscow till the first of September , that is , till the eve of the enemy 's entry into the city . 
After Petya had joined Obolenski 's regiment of Cossacks and left for Belaya Tserkov where that regiment was forming , the countess was seized with terror . 
The thought that both her sons were at the war , had both gone from under her wing , that today or tomorrow either or both of them might be killed like the three sons of one of her acquaintances , struck her that summer for the first time with cruel clearness . 
She tried to get Nicholas back and wished to go herself to join Petya , or to get him an appointment somewhere in Petersburg , but neither of these proved possible . 
Petya could not return unless his regiment did so or unless he was transferred to another regiment on active service . 
Nicholas was somewhere with the army and had not sent a word since his last letter , in which he had given a detailed account of his meeting with Princess Mary . 
The countess did not sleep at night , or when she did fall asleep dreamed that she saw her sons lying dead . 
After many consultations and conversations , the count at last devised means to tranquillize her . 
He got Petya transferred from Obolenski 's regiment to Bezukhov 's , which was in training near Moscow . 
Though Petya would remain in the service , this transfer would give the countess the consolation of seeing at least one of her sons under her wing , and she hoped to arrange matters for her Petya so as not to let him go again , but always get him appointed to places where he could not possibly take part in a battle . 
As long as Nicholas alone was in danger the countess imagined that she loved her first-born more than all her other children and even reproached herself for it ; but when her youngest : the scapegrace who had been bad at lessons , was always breaking things in the house and making himself a nuisance to everybody , that snub-nosed Petya with his merry black eyes and fresh rosy cheeks where soft down was just beginning to show - when he was thrown amid those big , dreadful , cruel men who were fighting somewhere about something and apparently finding pleasure in it -- then his mother thought she loved him more , much more , than all her other children . 
The nearer the time came for Petya to return , the more uneasy grew the countess . 
She began to think she would never live to see such happiness . 
The presence of Sonya , of her beloved Natasha , or even of her husband irritated her . 
`` What do I want with them ? 
I want no one but Petya , '' she thought . 
At the end of August the Rostovs received another letter from Nicholas . 
He wrote from the province of Voronezh where he had been sent to procure remounts , but that letter did not set the countess at ease . 
Knowing that one son was out of danger she became the more anxious about Petya . 
Though by the twentieth of August nearly all the Rostovs ' acquaintances had left Moscow , and though everybody tried to persuade the countess to get away as quickly as possible , she would not bear of leaving before her treasure , her adored Petya , returned . 
On the twenty-eighth of August he arrived . 
The passionate tenderness with which his mother received him did not please the sixteen-year-old officer . 
Though she concealed from him her intention of keeping him under her wing , Petya guessed her designs , and instinctively fearing that he might give way to emotion when with her -- might `` become womanish '' as he termed it to himself -- he treated her coldly , avoided her , and during his stay in Moscow attached himself exclusively to Natasha for whom he had always had a particularly brotherly tenderness , almost lover-like . 
Owing to the count 's customary carelessness nothing was ready for their departure by the twenty-eighth of August and the carts that were to come from their Ryazan and Moscow estates to remove their household belongings did not arrive till the thirtieth . 
From the twenty-eighth till the thirty-first all Moscow was in a bustle and commotion . 
Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodino were brought in by the Dorogomilov gate and taken to various parts of Moscow , and thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants and their possessions out by the other gates . 
