While still in the anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato laugh -- a laugh such as one hears on the stage . 
Someone -- it sounded like Speranski -- was distinctly ejaculating ha-ha-ha . 
Prince Andrew had never before heard Speranski 's famous laugh , and this ringing , high pitched laughter from a statesman made a strange impression on him . 
He entered the dining room . 
The whole company were standing between two windows at a small table laid with hors-d'oeuvres . 
Speranski , wearing a gray swallow-tail coat with a star on the breast , and evidently still the same waistcoat and high white stock he had worn at the meeting of the Council of State , stood at the table with a beaming countenance . 
His guests surrounded him . 
Magnitski , addressing himself to Speranski , was relating an anecdote , and Speranski was laughing in advance at what Magnitski was going to say . 
When Prince Andrew entered the room Magnitski 's words were again crowned by laughter . 
Stolypin gave a deep bass guffaw as he munched a piece of bread and cheese . 
Gervais laughed softly with a hissing chuckle , and Speranski in a high-pitched staccato manner . 
Still laughing , Speranski held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew . 
`` Very pleased to see you , Prince , '' he said . 
`` One moment ... '' he went on , turning to Magnitski and interrupting his story . 
`` We have agreed that this is a dinner for recreation , with not a word about business ! '' 
and turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh . 
Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speranski with astonishment , regret , and disillusionment . 
It seemed to him that this was not Speranski but someone else . 
Everything that had formerly appeared mysterious and fascinating in Speranski suddenly became plain and unattractive . 
At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemed to consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes . 
Before Magnitski had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something still funnier . 
Most of the anecdotes , if not relating to the state service , related to people in the service . 
It seemed that in this company the insignificance of those people was so definitely accepted that the only possible attitude toward them was one of good humored ridicule . 
Speranski related how at the Council that morning a deaf dignitary , when asked his opinion , replied that he thought so too . 
Gervais gave a long account of an official revision , remarkable for the stupidity of everybody concerned . 
Stolypin , stuttering , broke into the conversation and began excitedly talking of the abuses that existed under the former order of things -- threatening to give a serious turn to the conversation . 
Magnitski starting quizzing Stolypin about his vehemence . 
Gervais intervened with a joke , and the talk reverted to its former lively tone . 
Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement in a circle of friends , and his guests , understanding his wish , tried to enliven him and amuse themselves . 
But their gaiety seemed to Prince Andrew mirthless and tiresome . 
Speranski 's high-pitched voice struck him unpleasantly , and the incessant laughter grated on him like a false note . 
Prince Andrew did not laugh and feared that he would be a damper on the spirits of the company , but no one took any notice of his being out of harmony with the general mood . 
They all seemed very gay . 
He tried several times to join in the conversation , but his remarks were tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water , and he could not jest with them . 
There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said , it was witty and might have been funny , but it lacked just that something which is the salt of mirth , and they were not even aware that such a thing existed . 
After dinner Speranski 's daughter and her governess rose . 
He patted the little girl with his white hand and kissed her . 
And that gesture , too , seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew . 
The men remained at table over their port -- English fashion . 
In the midst of a conversation that was started about Napoleon 's Spanish affairs , which they all agreed in approving , Prince Andrew began to express a contrary opinion . 
Speranski smiled and , with an evident wish to prevent the conversation from taking an unpleasant course , told a story that had no connection with the previous conversation . 
For a few moments all were silent . 
Having sat some time at table , Speranski corked a bottle of wine and , remarking , `` Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair , '' passed it to the servant and got up . 
All rose and continuing to talk loudly went into the drawing room . 
Two letters brought by a courier were handed to Speranski and he took them to his study . 
As soon as he had left the room the general merriment stopped and the guests began to converse sensibly and quietly with one another . 
`` Now for the recitation ! '' 
said Speranski on returning from his study . 
`` A wonderful talent ! '' 
he said to Prince Andrew , and Magnitski immediately assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous verses in French which he had composed about various well-known Petersburg people . 
