`` All beyond the river , and Zubova , and in the Kremlin ... . 
Just look ! 
There 's not half of it left . 
Yes , I told you -- the whole quarter beyond the river , and so it is . '' 
`` Well , you know it 's burned , so what 's the use of talking ? '' 
said the major . 
As they passed near a church in the Khamovniki -LRB- one of the few unburned quarters of Moscow -RRB- the whole mass of prisoners suddenly started to one side and exclamations of horror and disgust were heard . 
`` Ah , the villains ! 
What heathens ! 
Yes ; dead , dead , so he is ... And smeared with something ! '' 
Pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evoked these exclamations , and dimly made out something leaning against the palings surrounding the church . 
From the words of his comrades who saw better than he did , he found that this was the body of a man , set upright against the palings with its face smeared with soot . 
`` Go on ! 
What the devil ... Go on ! 
Thirty thousand devils ! 
... '' the convoy guards began cursing and the French soldiers , with fresh virulence , drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were gazing at the dead man . 
Through the cross streets of the Khamovniki quarter the prisoners marched , followed only by their escort and the vehicles and wagons belonging to that escort , but when they reached the supply stores they came among a huge and closely packed train of artillery mingled with private vehicles . 
At the bridge they all halted , waiting for those in front to get across . 
From the bridge they had a view of endless lines of moving baggage trains before and behind them . 
To the right , where the Kaluga road turns near Neskuchny , endless rows of troops and carts stretched away into the distance . 
These were troops of Beauharnais ' corps which had started before any of the others . 
Behind , along the riverside and across the Stone Bridge , were Ney 's troops and transport . 
Davout 's troops , in whose charge were the prisoners , were crossing the Crimean bridge and some were already debouching into the Kaluga road . 
But the baggage trains stretched out so that the last of Beauharnais ' train had not yet got out of Moscow and reached the Kaluga road when the vanguard of Ney 's army was already emerging from the Great Ordynka Street . 
When they had crossed the Crimean bridge the prisoners moved a few steps forward , halted , and again moved on , and from all sides vehicles and men crowded closer and closer together . 
They advanced the few hundred paces that separated the bridge from the Kaluga road , taking more than an hour to do so , and came out upon the square where the streets of the Transmoskva ward and the Kaluga road converge , and the prisoners jammed close together had to stand for some hours at that crossway . 
From all sides , like the roar of the sea , were heard the rattle of wheels , the tramp of feet , and incessant shouts of anger and abuse . 
Pierre stood pressed against the wall of a charred house , listening to that noise which mingled in his imagination with the roll of the drums . 
To get a better view , several officer prisoners climbed onto the wall of the half-burned house against which Pierre was leaning . 
`` What crowds ! 
Just look at the crowds ! 
... They 've loaded goods even on the cannon ! 
Look there , those are furs ! '' 
they exclaimed . 
`` Just see what the blackguards have looted ... . 
There ! 
See what that one has behind in the cart ... . 
Why , those are settings taken from some icons , by heaven ! 
... Oh , the rascals ! 
... See how that fellow has loaded himself up , he can hardly walk ! 
Good lord , they 've even grabbed those chaises ! 
... See that fellow there sitting on the trunks ... . 
Heavens ! 
They 're fighting . '' 
`` That 's right , hit him on the snout -- on his snout ! 
Like this , we sha n't get away before evening . 
Look , look there ... . 
Why , that must be Napoleon 's own . 
See what horses ! 
And the monograms with a crown ! 
