Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees , occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand , sometimes touching his horse 's side with his foot , or , without turning round , handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him , with as calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride . 
He glanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin , who talked much and in great agitation . 
He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could help him . 
As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds , the wind fell , as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning after the storm ; drops still continued to fall , but vertically now , and all was still . 
The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it . 
A few minutes later it reappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud , tearing its edge . 
Everything grew bright and glittered . 
And with that light , and as if in reply to it , came the sound of guns ahead of them . 
Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of that firing , Count Ostermann-Tolstoy 's adjutant came galloping from Vitebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road . 
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery -- which had also quickened their pace -- rode down a hill , and passing through an empty and deserted village again ascended . 
The horses began to lather and the men to flush . 
`` Halt ! 
Dress your ranks ! '' 
the order of the regimental commander was heard ahead . 
`` Forward by the left . 
Walk , march ! '' 
came the order from in front . 
And the hussars , passing along the line of troops on the left flank of our position , halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line . 
To the right stood our infantry in a dense column : they were the reserve . 
Higher up the hill , on the very horizon , our guns were visible through the wonderfully clear air , brightly illuminated by slanting morning sunbeams . 
In front , beyond a hollow dale , could be seen the enemy 's columns and guns . 
Our advanced line , already in action , could be heard briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale . 
At these sounds , long unheard , Rostov 's spirits rose , as at the strains of the merriest music . 
Trap-ta-ta-tap ! 
cracked the shots , now together , now several quickly one after another . 
Again all was silent and then again it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and exploding them . 
The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour . 
A cannonade began . 
Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron , halted , spoke to the commander of the regiment , and rode up the hill to the guns . 
After Ostermann had gone , a command rang out to the Uhlans . 
`` Form column ! 
Prepare to charge ! '' 
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry to pass . 
The Uhlans started , the streamers on their spears fluttering , and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to the left . 
As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill , the hussars were ordered up the hill to support the battery . 
As they took the places vacated by the Uhlans , bullets came from the front , whining and whistling , but fell spent without taking effect . 
The sounds , which he had not heard for so long , had an even more pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds of firing . 
Drawing himself up , he viewed the field of battle opening out before him from the hill , and with his whole soul followed the movement of the Uhlans . 
They swooped down close to the French dragoons , something confused happened there amid the smoke , and five minutes later our Uhlans were galloping back , not to the place they had occupied but more to the left , and among the orange-colored Uhlans on chestnut horses and behind them , in a large group , blue French dragoons on gray horses could be seen . 
Rostov , with his keen sportsman 's eye , was one of the first to catch sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans . 
Nearer and nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoons pursuing them . 
He could already see how these men , who looked so small at the foot of the hill , jostled and overtook one another , waving their arms and their sabers in the air . 
Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt . 
He felt instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now , the latter could not withstand them , but if a charge was to be made it must be done now , at that very moment , or it would be too late . 
He looked around . 
A captain , standing beside him , was gazing like himself with eyes fixed on the cavalry below them . 
`` Andrew Sevastyanych ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` You know , we could crush them ... '' `` A fine thing too ! '' 
replied the captain , `` and really ... '' Rostov , without waiting to hear him out , touched his horse , galloped to the front of his squadron , and before he had time to finish giving the word of command , the whole squadron , sharing his feeling , was following him . 
