`` How is he ? 
... '' The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of a court of justice . 
All were silent or talked in low tones . 
Prince Nicholas came in serious and taciturn . 
Princess Mary seemed even quieter and more diffident than usual . 
The guests were reluctant to address her , feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation . 
Count Rostopchin alone kept the conversation going , now relating the latest town news , and now the latest political gossip . 
Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in the conversation . 
Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judge receives a report , only now and then , silently or by a brief word , showing that he took heed of what was being reported to him . 
The tone of the conversation was such as indicated that no one approved of what was being done in the political world . 
Incidents were related evidently confirming the opinion that everything was going from bad to worse , but whether telling a story or giving an opinion the speaker always stopped , or was stopped , at the point beyond which his criticism might touch the sovereign himself . 
At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news : Napoleon 's seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg 's territory , and the Russian Note , hostile to Napoleon , which had been sent to all the European courts . 
`` Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel , '' said Count Rostopchin , repeating a phrase he had uttered several times before . 
`` One only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the crowned heads . 
Now the Pope 's turn has come and Bonaparte does n't scruple to depose the head of the Catholic Church -- yet all keep silent ! 
Our sovereign alone has protested against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg 's territory , and even ... '' Count Rostopchin paused , feeling that he had reached the limit beyond which censure was impossible . 
`` Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy of Oldenburg , '' said Prince Bolkonski . 
`` He shifts the Dukes about as I might move my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estates . '' 
`` The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength of character and resignation , '' remarked Boris , joining in respectfully . 
He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honor of being presented to the Duke . 
Prince Bolkonski glanced at the young man as if about to say something in reply , but changed his mind , evidently considering him too young . 
`` I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised how badly the Note was worded , '' remarked Count Rostopchin in the casual tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him . 
Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment , not understanding why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note . 
`` Does it matter , Count , how the Note is worded , '' he asked , `` so long as its substance is forcible ? '' 
`` My dear fellow , with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easy to have a good style , '' returned Count Rostopchin . 
Pierre now understood the count 's dissatisfaction with the wording of the Note . 
`` One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up , '' remarked the old prince . 
`` There in Petersburg they are always writing - not notes only but even new laws . 
My Andrew there has written a whole volume of laws for Russia . 
Nowadays they are always writing ! '' 
and he laughed unnaturally . 
There was a momentary pause in the conversation ; the old general cleared his throat to draw attention . 
`` Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg ? 
The figure cut by the new French ambassador . '' 
`` Eh ? 
Yes , I heard something : he said something awkward in His Majesty 's presence . '' 
`` His Majesty drew attention to the Grenadier division and to the march past , '' continued the general , `` and it seems the ambassador took no notice and allowed himself to reply that : ` We in France pay no attention to such trifles ! ' 
The Emperor did not condescend to reply . 
At the next review , they say , the Emperor did not once deign to address him . '' 
All were silent . 
On this fact relating to the Emperor personally , it was impossible to pass any judgment . 
`` Impudent fellows ! '' 
said the prince . 
`` You know Metivier ? 
I turned him out of my house this morning . 
He was here ; they admitted him spite of my request that they should let no one in , '' he went on , glancing angrily at his daughter . 
And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and the reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy . 
Though these reasons were very insufficient and obscure , no one made any rejoinder . 
After the roast , champagne was served . 
The guests rose to congratulate the old prince . 
