On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew , of their friendship , of his various meetings with him , and especially of the last one at Borodino . 
`` Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in ? 
Is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to him before he died ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
He recalled Karataev and his death and involuntarily began to compare these two men , so different , and yet so similar in that they had both lived and both died and in the love he felt for both of them . 
Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood . 
The house had escaped the fire ; it showed signs of damage but its general aspect was unchanged . 
The old footman , who met Pierre with a stern face as if wishing to make the visitor feel that the absence of the old prince had not disturbed the order of things in the house , informed him that the princess had gone to her own apartments , and that she received on Sundays . 
`` Announce me . 
Perhaps she will see me , '' said Pierre . 
`` Yes , sir , '' said the man . 
`` Please step into the portrait gallery . '' 
A few minutes later the footman returned with Dessalles , who brought word from the princess that she would be very glad to see Pierre if he would excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment . 
In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with her another person dressed in black . 
Pierre remembered that the princess always had lady companions , but who they were and what they were like he never knew or remembered . 
`` This must be one of her companions , '' he thought , glancing at the lady in the black dress . 
The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand . 
`` Yes , '' she said , looking at his altered face after he had kissed her hand , `` so this is how we meet again . 
He spoke of you even at the very last , '' she went on , turning her eyes from Pierre to her companion with a shyness that surprised him for an instant . 
`` I was so glad to hear of your safety . 
It was the first piece of good news we had received for a long time . '' 
Again the princess glanced round at her companion with even more uneasiness in her manner and was about to add something , but Pierre interrupted her . 
`` Just imagine -- I knew nothing about him ! '' 
said he . 
`` I thought he had been killed . 
All I know I heard at second hand from others . 
I only know that he fell in with the Rostovs ... . 
What a strange coincidence ! '' 
Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation . 
He glanced once at the companion 's face , saw her attentive and kindly gaze fixed on him , and , as often happens when one is talking , felt somehow that this companion in the black dress was a good , kind , excellent creature who would not hinder his conversing freely with Princess Mary . 
But when he mentioned the Rostovs , Princess Mary 's face expressed still greater embarrassment . 
She again glanced rapidly from Pierre 's face to that of the lady in the black dress and said : `` Do you really not recognize her ? '' 
Pierre looked again at the companion 's pale , delicate face with its black eyes and peculiar mouth , and something near to him , long forgotten and more than sweet , looked at him from those attentive eyes . 
`` But no , it ca n't be ! '' 
he thought . 
`` This stern , thin , pale face that looks so much older ! 
It can not be she . 
It merely reminds me of her . '' 
But at that moment Princess Mary said , `` Natasha ! '' 
And with difficulty , effort , and stress , like the opening of a door grown rusty on its hinges , a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes , and from that opening door came a breath of fragrance which suffused Pierre with a happiness he had long forgotten and of which he had not even been thinking -- especially at that moment . 
It suffused him , seized him , and enveloped him completely . 
When she smiled doubt was no longer possible , it was Natasha and he loved her . 
At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her , to Princess Mary , and above all to himself , a secret of which he himself had been unaware . 
He flushed joyfully yet with painful distress . 
He tried to hide his agitation . 
But the more he tried to hide it the more clearly -- clearer than any words could have done -- did he betray to himself , to her , and to Princess Mary that he loved her . 
`` No , it 's only the unexpectedness of it , '' thought Pierre . 
But as soon as he tried to continue the conversation he had begun with Princess Mary he again glanced at Natasha , and a still-deeper flush suffused his face and a still-stronger agitation of mingled joy and fear seized his soul . 
He became confused in his speech and stopped in the middle of what he was saying . 
Pierre had failed to notice Natasha because he did not at all expect to see her there , but he had failed to recognize her because the change in her since he last saw her was immense . 
