Kutuzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm of the verses . 
When Pierre had left Kutuzov , Dolokhov came up to him and took his hand . 
`` I am very glad to meet you here , Count , '' he said aloud , regardless of the presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute and solemn tone . 
`` On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of us is fated to survive , I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that I regret the misunderstandings that occurred between us and should wish you not to have any ill feeling for me . 
I beg you to forgive me . '' 
Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile , not knowing what to say to him . 
With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him . 
Boris said a few words to his general , and Count Bennigsen turned to Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line . 
`` It will interest you , '' said he . 
`` Yes , very much , '' replied Pierre . 
Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova , and Bennigsen and his suite , with Pierre among them , set out on their ride along the line . 
From Gorki , Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which , when they had looked it from the hill , the officer had pointed out as being the center of our position and where rows of fragrant new-mown hay lay by the riverside . 
They rode across that bridge into the village of Borodino and thence turned to the left , passing an enormous number of troops and guns , and came to a high knoll where militiamen were digging . 
This was the redoubt , as yet unnamed , which afterwards became known as the Raevski Redoubt , or the Knoll Battery , but Pierre paid no special attention to it . 
He did not know that it would become more memorable to him than any other spot on the plain of Borodino . 
They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk , where the soldiers were dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns . 
Then they rode downhill and uphill , across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by hail , following a track freshly made by the artillery over the furrows of the plowed land , and reached some fleches * which were still being dug . 
* A kind of entrenchment . 
At the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the Shevardino Redoubt opposite , which had been ours the day before and where several horsemen could be descried . 
The officers said that either Napoleon or Murat was there , and they all gazed eagerly at this little group of horsemen . 
Pierre also looked at them , trying to guess which of the scarcely discernible figures was Napoleon . 
At last those mounted men rode away from the mound and disappeared . 
Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him , and began explaining the whole position of our troops . 
Pierre listened to him , straining each faculty to understand the essential points of the impending battle , but was mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for the task . 
He could make nothing of it . 
Bennigsen stopped speaking and , noticing that Pierre was listening , suddenly said to him : `` I do n't think this interests you ? '' 
`` On the contrary it 's very interesting ! '' 
replied Pierre not quite truthfully . 
From the fleches they rode still farther to the left , along a road winding through a thick , low-growing birch wood . 
In the middle of the wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and , scared by the tramp of the many horses , grew so confused that it leaped along the road in front of them for some time , arousing general attention and laughter , and only when several voices shouted at it did it dart to one side and disappear in the thicket . 
After going through the wood for about a mile and a half they came out on a glade where troops of Tuchkov 's corps were stationed to defend the left flank . 
Here , at the extreme left flank , Bennigsen talked a great deal and with much heat , and , as it seemed to Pierre , gave orders of great military importance . 
In front of Tuchkov 's troops was some high ground not occupied by troops . 
Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake , saying that it was madness to leave a height which commanded the country around unoccupied and to place troops below it . 
Some of the generals expressed the same opinion . 
One in particular declared with martial heat that they were put there to be slaughtered . 
Bennigsen on his own authority ordered the troops to occupy the high ground . 
This disposition on the left flank increased Pierre 's doubt of his own capacity to understand military matters . 
Listening to Bennigsen and the generals criticizing the position of the troops behind the hill , he quite understood them and shared their opinion , but for that very reason he could not understand how the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so gross and palpable a blunder . 
Pierre did not know that these troops were not , as Bennigsen supposed , put there to defend the position , but were in a concealed position as an ambush , that they should not be seen and might be able to strike an approaching enemy unexpectedly . 
Bennigsen did not know this and moved the troops forward according to his own ideas without mentioning the matter to the commander in chief . 
On that bright evening of August 25 , Prince Andrew lay leaning on his elbow in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkovo at the further end of his regiment 's encampment . 
Through a gap in the broken wall he could see , beside the wooden fence , a row of thirty year-old birches with their lower branches lopped off , a field on which shocks of oats were standing , and some bushes near which rose the smoke of campfires -- the soldiers ' kitchens . 
Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to him , Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable as he had done seven years before at Austerlitz . 
He had received and given the orders for next day 's battle and had nothing more to do . 
But his thoughts -- the simplest , clearest , and therefore most terrible thoughts -- would give him no peace . 
He knew that tomorrow 's battle would be the most terrible of all he had taken part in , and for the first time in his life the possibility of death presented itself to him -- not in relation to any worldly matter or with reference to its effect on others , but simply in relation to himself , to his own soul -- vividly , plainly , terribly , and almost as a certainty . 
And from the height of this perception all that had previously tormented and preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light without shadows , without perspective , without distinction of outline . 
All life appeared to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he had long been gazing by artificial light through a glass . 
Now he suddenly saw those badly daubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass . 
