`` It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I. . . '' 
she began , but Hippolyte interrupted her with the words : `` Le Roi de Prusse ... '' and again , as soon as all turned toward him , excused himself and said no more . 
Anna Pavlovna frowned . 
Mortemart , Hippolyte 's friend , addressed him firmly . 
`` Come now , what about your Roi de Prusse ? '' 
Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing . 
`` Oh , it 's nothing . 
I only wished to say ... '' -LRB- he wanted to repeat a joke he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that evening to get in -RRB- `` I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight pour le Roi de Prusse ! '' 
Boris smiled circumspectly , so that it might be taken as ironical or appreciative according to the way the joke was received . 
Everybody laughed . 
`` Your joke is too bad , it 's witty but unjust , '' said Anna Pavlovna , shaking her little shriveled finger at him . 
`` We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse , but for right principles . 
Oh , that wicked Prince Hippolyte ! '' 
she said . 
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the political news . 
It became particularly animated toward the end of the evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned . 
`` You know N -- N -- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year ? '' 
said `` the man of profound intellect . '' 
`` Why should n't S -- S -- get the same distinction ? '' 
`` Pardon me ! 
A snuffbox with the Emperor 's portrait is a reward but not a distinction , '' said the diplomatist -- `` a gift , rather . '' 
`` There are precedents , I may mention Schwarzenberg . '' 
`` It 's impossible , '' replied another . 
`` Will you bet ? 
The ribbon of the order is a different matter ... '' When everybody rose to go , Helene who had spoken very little all the evening again turned to Boris , asking him in a tone of caressing significant command to come to her on Tuesday . 
`` It is of great importance to me , '' she said , turning with a smile toward Anna Pavlovna , and Anna Pavlovna , with the same sad smile with which she spoke of her exalted patroness , supported Helene 's wish . 
It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evening about the Prussian army , Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see him . 
She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on Tuesday . 
But on Tuesday evening , having come to Helene 's splendid salon , Boris received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to come . 
There were other guests and the countess talked little to him , and only as he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly and in a whisper , with a strangely unsmiling face : `` Come to dinner tomorrow ... in the evening . 
You must come ... . 
Come ! '' 
During that stay in Petersburg , Boris became an intimate in the countess ' house . 
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier . 
Everywhere one heard curses on Bonaparte , `` the enemy of mankind . '' 
Militiamen and recruits were being enrolled in the villages , and from the seat of war came contradictory news , false as usual and therefore variously interpreted . 
The life of old Prince Bolkonski , Prince Andrew , and Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805 . 
In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia . 
Despite the weakness of age , which had become particularly noticeable since the time when he thought his son had been killed , he did not think it right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor himself , and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy and strength . 
He was continually traveling through the three provinces entrusted to him , was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties , severe to cruelty with his subordinates , and went into everything down to the minutest details himself . 
Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in mathematics from her father , and when the old prince was at home went to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas -LRB- as his grandfather called him -RRB- . 
The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess ' rooms and Princess Mary spent most of the day in the nursery , taking a mother 's place to her little nephew as best she could . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , too , seemed passionately fond of the boy , and Princess Mary often deprived herself to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel -- as she called her nephew -- and playing with him . 
Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the tomb of the little princess , and in this chapel was a marble monument brought from Italy , representing an angel with outspread wings ready to fly upwards . 
The angel 's upper lip was slightly raised as though about to smile , and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel 's face reminded them strangely of the little princess . 
But what was still stranger , though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister , was that in the expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel 's face , Prince Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead wife : `` Ah , why have you done this to me ? '' 
Soon after Prince Andrew 's return the old prince made over to him a large estate , Bogucharovo , about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills . 
Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills , partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with his father 's peculiarities , and partly because he needed solitude , Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo , began building and spent most of his time there . 
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not to continue his military service , and when the war recommenced and everybody had to serve , he took a post under his father in the recruitment so as to avoid active service . 
The old prince and his son seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805 . 
