and , blocking her path , he brought his face close to hers . 
His large , glittering , masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw nothing but them . 
`` Natalie ? '' 
he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being painfully pressed . 
`` Natalie ? '' 
`` I do n't understand . 
I have nothing to say , '' her eyes replied . 
Burning lips were pressed to hers , and at the same instant she felt herself released , and Helene 's footsteps and the rustle of her dress were heard in the room . 
Natasha looked round at her , and then , red and trembling , threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and moved toward the door . 
`` One word , just one , for God 's sake ! '' 
cried Anatole . 
She paused . 
She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what had happened and to which she could find no answer . 
`` Natalie , just a word , only one ! '' 
he kept repeating , evidently not knowing what to say and he repeated it till Helene came up to them . 
Helene returned with Natasha to the drawing room . 
The Rostovs went away without staying for supper . 
After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night . 
She was tormented by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew . 
She loved Prince Andrew -- she remembered distinctly how deeply she loved him . 
But she also loved Anatole , of that there was no doubt . 
`` Else how could all this have happened ? '' 
thought she . 
`` If , after that , I could return his smile when saying good-by , if I was able to let it come to that , it means that I loved him from the first . 
It means that he is kind , noble , and splendid , and I could not help loving him . 
What am I to do if I love him and the other one too ? '' 
she asked herself , unable to find an answer to these terrible questions . 
Morning came with its cares and bustle . 
Everyone got up and began to move about and talk , dressmakers came again . 
Marya Dmitrievna appeared , and they were called to breakfast . 
Natasha kept looking uneasily at everybody with wide-open eyes , as if wishing to intercept every glance directed toward her , and tried to appear the same as usual . 
After breakfast , which was her best time , Marya Dmitrievna sat down in her armchair and called Natasha and the count to her . 
`` Well , friends , I have now thought the whole matter over and this is my advice , '' she began . 
`` Yesterday , as you know , I went to see Prince Bolkonski . 
Well , I had a talk with him ... . 
He took it into his head to begin shouting , but I am not one to be shouted down . 
I said what I had to say ! '' 
`` Well , and he ? '' 
asked the count . 
`` He ? 
He 's crazy ... he did not want to listen . 
But what 's the use of talking ? 
As it is we have worn the poor girl out , '' said Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` My advice to you is finish your business and go back home to Otradnoe ... and wait there . '' 
`` Oh , no ! '' 
exclaimed Natasha . 
`` Yes , go back , '' said Marya Dmitrievna , `` and wait there . 
If your betrothed comes here now -- there will be no avoiding a quarrel ; but alone with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to you . '' 
Count Rostov approved of this suggestion , appreciating its reasonableness . 
If the old man came round it would be all the better to visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on ; and if not , the wedding , against his wishes , could only be arranged at Otradnoe . 
