Then some other people ran in and began dragging away the maiden who had been in white and was now in light blue . 
They did not drag her away at once , but sang with her for a long time and then at last dragged her off , and behind the scenes something metallic was struck three times and everyone knelt down and sang a prayer . 
All these things were repeatedly interrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audience . 
During this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls she saw Anatole Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair , staring at her . 
She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it did not occur to her that there was anything wrong in it . 
When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose , turned to the Rostovs ' box -- her whole bosom completely exposed -- beckoned the old count with a gloved finger , and paying no attention to those who had entered her box began talking to him with an amiable smile . 
`` Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters , '' said she . 
`` The whole town is singing their praises and I do n't even know then ! '' 
Natasha rose and curtsied to the splendid countess . 
She was so pleased by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure . 
`` I want to become a Moscovite too , now , '' said Helene . 
`` How is it you 're not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country ? '' 
Countess Bezukhova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinating woman . 
She could say what she did not think -- especially what was flattering -- quite simply and naturally . 
`` Dear count , you must let me look after your daughters ! 
Though I am not staying here long this time -- nor are you -- I will try to amuse them . 
I have already heard much of you in Petersburg and wanted to get to know you , '' said she to Natasha with her stereotyped and lovely smile . 
`` I had heard about you from my page , Drubetskoy . 
Have you heard he is getting married ? 
And also from my husband 's friend Bolkonski , Prince Andrew Bolkonski , '' she went on with special emphasis , implying that she knew of his relation to Natasha . 
To get better acquainted she asked that one of the young ladies should come into her box for the rest of the performance , and Natasha moved over to it . 
The scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candles were burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung on the walls . 
In the middle stood what were probably a king and a queen . 
The king waved his right arm and , evidently nervous , sang something badly and sat down on a crimson throne . 
The maiden who had been first in white and then in light blue , now wore only a smock , and stood beside the throne with her hair down . 
She sang something mournfully , addressing the queen , but the king waved his arm severely , and men and women with bare legs came in from both sides and began dancing all together . 
Then the violins played very shrilly and merrily and one of the women with thick bare legs and thin arms , separating from the others , went behind the wings , adjusted her bodice , returned to the middle of the stage , and began jumping and striking one foot rapidly against the other . 
In the stalls everyone clapped and shouted `` bravo ! '' 
Then one of the men went into a corner of the stage . 
The cymbals and horns in the orchestra struck up more loudly , and this man with bare legs jumped very high and waved his feet about very rapidly . 
-LRB- He was Duport , who received sixty thousand rubles a year for this art . -RRB- 
Everybody in the stalls , boxes , and galleries began clapping and shouting with all their might , and the man stopped and began smiling and bowing to all sides . 
Then other men and women danced with bare legs . 
Then the king again shouted to the sound of music , and they all began singing . 
But suddenly a storm came on , chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in the orchestra , everyone ran off , again dragging one of their number away , and the curtain dropped . 
Once more there was a terrible noise and clatter among the audience , and with rapturous faces everyone began shouting : `` Duport ! 
Duport ! 
Duport ! '' 
Natasha no longer thought this strange . 
She look about with pleasure , smiling joyfully . 
`` Is n't Duport delightful ? '' 
Helene asked her . 
`` Oh , yes , '' replied Natasha . 
During the entr ` acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene 's box , the door opened , and Anatole entered , stooping and trying not to brush against anyone . 
`` Let me introduce my brother to you , '' said Helene , her eyes shifting uneasily from Natasha to Anatole . 
Natasha turned her pretty little head toward the elegant young officer and smiled at him over her bare shoulder . 
Anatole , who was as handsome at close quarters as at a distance , sat down beside her and told her he had long wished to have this happiness -- ever since the Naryshkins ' ball in fact , at which he had had the well-remembered pleasure of seeing her . 
Kuragin was much more sensible and simple with women than among men . 
He talked boldly and naturally , and Natasha was strangely and agreeably struck by the fact that there was nothing formidable in this man about whom there was so much talk , but that on the contrary his smile was most naive , cheerful , and good-natured . 
Kuragin asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at a previous performance Semenova had fallen down on the stage . 
