`` We had better separate , '' he muttered in a broken voice . 
`` Separate ? 
Very well , but only if you give me a fortune , '' said Helene . 
`` Separate ! 
That 's a thing to frighten me with ! '' 
Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her . 
`` I 'll kill you ! '' 
he shouted , and seizing the marble top of a table with a strength he had never before felt , he made a step toward her brandishing the slab . 
Helene 's face became terrible , she shrieked and sprang aside . 
His father 's nature showed itself in Pierre . 
He felt the fascination and delight of frenzy . 
He flung down the slab , broke it , and swooping down on her with outstretched hands shouted , `` Get out ! '' 
in such a terrible voice that the whole house heard it with horror . 
God knows what he would have done at that moment had Helene not fled from the room . 
A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estates in Great Russia , which formed the larger part of his property , and left for Petersburg alone . 
Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz and the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills , and in spite of the letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made , his body had not been found nor was he on the list of prisoners . 
What was worst of all for his relations was the fact that there was still a possibility of his having been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the place and that he might now be lying , recovering or dying , alone among strangers and unable to send news of himself . 
The gazettes from which the old prince first heard of the defeat at Austerlitz stated , as usual very briefly and vaguely , that after brilliant engagements the Russians had had to retreat and had made their withdrawal in perfect order . 
The old prince understood from this official report that our army had been defeated . 
A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz came a letter from Kutuzov informing the prince of the fate that had befallen his son . 
`` Your son , '' wrote Kutuzov , `` fell before my eyes , a standard in his hand and at the head of a regiment -- he fell as a hero , worthy of his father and his fatherland . 
To the great regret of myself and of the whole army it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not . 
I comfort myself and you with the hope that your son is alive , for otherwise he would have been mentioned among the officers found on the field of battle , a list of whom has been sent me under flag of truce . '' 
After receiving this news late in the evening , when he was alone in his study , the old prince went for his walk as usual next morning , but he was silent with his steward , the gardener , and the architect , and though he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone . 
When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at his lathe and , as usual , did not look round at her . 
`` Ah , Princess Mary ! '' 
he said suddenly in an unnatural voice , throwing down his chisel . 
-LRB- The wheel continued to revolve by its own impetus , and Princess Mary long remembered the dying creak of that wheel , which merged in her memory with what followed . -RRB- 
She approached him , saw his face , and something gave way within her . 
Her eyes grew dim . 
By the expression of her father 's face , not sad , not crushed , but angry and working unnaturally , she saw that hanging over her and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune , the worst in life , one she had not yet experienced , irreparable and incomprehensible -- the death of one she loved . 
`` Father ! 
Andrew ! '' 
-- said the ungraceful , awkward princess with such an indescribable charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that her father could not bear her look but turned away with a sob . 
`` Bad news ! 
He 's not among the prisoners nor among the killed ! 
Kutuzov writes ... '' and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to drive the princess away by that scream ... `` Killed ! '' 
The princess did not fall down or faint . 
She was already pale , but on hearing these words her face changed and something brightened in her beautiful , radiant eyes . 
It was as if joy -- a supreme joy apart from the joys and sorrows of this world -- overflowed the great grief within her . 
She forgot all fear of her father , went up to him , took his hand , and drawing him down put her arm round his thin , scraggy neck . 
`` Father , '' she said , `` do not turn away from me , let us weep together . '' 
`` Scoundrels ! 
Blackguards ! '' 
shrieked the old man , turning his face away from her . 
`` Destroying the army , destroying the men ! 
And why ? 
Go , go and tell Lise . '' 
The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her father and wept . 
She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he took leave of her and of Lise , his look tender yet proud . 
