In spite of Rostopchin 's broadsheets , or because of them or independently of them , the strangest and most contradictory rumors were current in the town . 
Some said that no one was to be allowed to leave the city , others on the contrary said that all the icons had been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave . 
Some said there had been another battle after Borodino at which the French had been routed , while others on the contrary reported that the Russian army bad been destroyed . 
Some talked about the Moscow militia which , preceded by the clergy , would go to the Three Hills ; others whispered that Augustin had been forbidden to leave , that traitors had been seized , that the peasants were rioting and robbing people on their way from Moscow , and so on . 
But all this was only talk ; in reality -LRB- though the Council of Fili , at which it was decided to abandon Moscow , had not yet been held -RRB- both those who went away and those who remained behind felt , though they did not show it , that Moscow would certainly be abandoned , and that they ought to get away as quickly as possible and save their belongings . 
It was felt that everything would suddenly break up and change , but up to the first of September nothing had done so . 
As a criminal who is being led to execution knows that he must die immediately , but yet looks about him and straightens the cap that is awry on his head , so Moscow involuntarily continued its wonted life , though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the conditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit would be completely upset . 
During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the whole Rostov family was absorbed in various activities . 
The head of the family , Count Ilya Rostov , continually drove about the city collecting the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty orders at home about the preparations for their departure . 
The countess watched the things being packed , was dissatisfied with everything , was constantly in pursuit of Petya who was always running away from her , and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spent all his time . 
Sonya alone directed the practical side of matters by getting things packed . 
But of late Sonya had been particularly sad and silent . 
Nicholas ' letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary had elicited , in her presence , joyous comments from the countess , who saw an intervention of Providence in this meeting of the princess and Nicholas . 
`` I was never pleased at Bolkonski 's engagement to Natasha , '' said the countess , `` but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess , and had a presentiment that it would happen . 
What a good thing it would be ! '' 
Sonya felt that this was true : that the only possibility of retrieving the Rostovs ' affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman , and that the princess was a good match . 
It was very bitter for her . 
But despite her grief , or perhaps just because of it , she took on herself all the difficult work of directing the storing and packing of their things and was busy for whole days . 
The count and countess turned to her when they had any orders to give . 
Petya and Natasha on the contrary , far from helping their parents , were generally a nuisance and a hindrance to everyone . 
Almost all day long the house resounded with their running feet , their cries , and their spontaneous laughter . 
They laughed and were gay not because there was any reason to laugh , but because gaiety and mirth were in their hearts and so everything that happened was a cause for gaiety and laughter to them . 
Petya was in high spirits because having left home a boy he had returned -LRB- as everybody told him -RRB- a fine young man , because he was at home , because he had left Belaya Tserkov where there was no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come to Moscow where there was to be fighting in a few days , and chiefly because Natasha , whose lead he always followed , was in high spirits . 
Natasha was gay because she had been sad too long and now nothing reminded her of the cause of her sadness , and because she was feeling well . 
She was also happy because she had someone to adore her : the adoration of others was a lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make them run freely -- and Petya adored her . 
Above all , they were gay because there was a war near Moscow , there would be fighting at the town gates , arms were being given out , everybody was escaping -- going away somewhere , and in general something extraordinary was happening , and that is always exciting , especially to the young . 
On Saturday , the thirty-first of August , everything in the Rostovs ' house seemed topsy-turvy . 
All the doors were open , all the furniture was being carried out or moved about , and the mirrors and pictures had been taken down . 
There were trunks in the rooms , and hay , wrapping paper , and ropes were scattered about . 
The peasants and house serfs carrying out the things were treading heavily on the parquet floors . 
The yard was crowded with peasant carts , some loaded high and already corded up , others still empty . 
The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasants who had come with the carts resounded as they shouted to one another in the yard and in the house . 
The count bad been out since morning . 
The countess had a headache brought on by all the noise and turmoil and was lying down in the new sitting room with a vinegar compress on her head . 
Petya was not at home , he had gone to visit a friend with whom he meant to obtain a transfer from the militia to the active army . 
Sonya was in the ballroom looking after the packing of the glass and china . 
Natasha was sitting on the floor of her dismantled room with dresses , ribbons , and scarves strewn all about her , gazing fixedly at the floor and holding in her hands the old ball dress -LRB- already out of fashion -RRB- which she had worn at her first Petersburg ball . 
Natasha was ashamed of doing nothing when everyone else was so busy , and several times that morning had tried to set to work , but her heart was not in it , and she could not and did not know how to do anything except with all her heart and all her might . 
For a while she had stood beside Sonya while the china was being packed and tried to help , but soon gave it up and went to her room to pack her own things . 
At first she found it amusing to give away dresses and ribbons to the maids , but when that was done and what was left had still to be packed , she found it dull . 
`` Dunyasha , you pack ! 
You will , wo n't you , dear ? '' 
And when Dunyasha willingly promised to do it all for her , Natasha sat down on the floor , took her old ball dress , and fell into a reverie quite unrelated to what ought to have occupied her thoughts now . 
She was roused from her reverie by the talk of the maids in the next room -LRB- which was theirs -RRB- and by the sound of their hurried footsteps going to the back porch . 
Natasha got up and looked out of the window . 
An enormously long row of carts full of wounded men had stopped in the street . 
The housekeeper , the old nurse , the cooks , coachmen , maids , footmen , postilions , and scullions stood at the gate , staring at the wounded . 
Natasha , throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holding an end of it in each hand , went out into the street . 
The former housekeeper , old Mavra Kuzminichna , had stepped out of the crowd by the gate , gone up to a cart with a hood constructed of bast mats , and was speaking to a pale young officer who lay inside . 
Natasha moved a few steps forward and stopped shyly , still holding her handkerchief , and listened to what the housekeeper was saying . 
