What did you commit by so acting ? 
A venial , or a mortal , sin ? 
A venial sin , for you acted without evil intention . 
If now you married again with the object of bearing children , your sin might be forgiven . 
But the question is again a twofold one : firstly ... '' But suddenly Helene , who was getting bored , said with one of her bewitching smiles : `` But I think that having espoused the true religion I can not be bound by what a false religion laid upon me . '' 
The director of her conscience was astounded at having the case presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus ' egg . 
He was delighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil 's progress , but could not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed . 
`` Let us understand one another , Countess , '' said he with a smile , and began refuting his spiritual daughter 's arguments . 
Helene understood that the question was very simple and easy from the ecclesiastical point of view , and that her directors were making difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter would be regarded by the secular authorities . 
So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society . 
She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him what she had told her other suitor ; that is , she put the matter so that the only way for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her . 
The elderly magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage with a woman whose husband was alive , as the younger man had been , but Helene 's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as marrying a maiden had its effect on him too . 
Had Helene herself shown the least sign of hesitation , shame , or secrecy , her cause would certainly have been lost ; but not only did she show no signs of secrecy or shame , on the contrary , with good-natured naivete she told her intimate friends -LRB- and these were all Petersburg -RRB- that both the prince and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was afraid of grieving either . 
A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg , not that Helene wanted to be divorced from her husband -LRB- had such a report spread many would have opposed so illegal an intention -RRB- but simply that the unfortunate and interesting Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry . 
The question was no longer whether this was possible , but only which was the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court . 
There were , it is true , some rigid individuals unable to rise to the height of such a question , who saw in the project a desecration of the sacrament of marriage , but there were not many such and they remained silent , while the majority were interested in Helene 's good fortune and in the question which match would be the more advantageous . 
Whether it was right or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did not discuss , for that question had evidently been settled by people `` wiser than you or me , '' as they said , and to doubt the correctness of that decision would be to risk exposing one 's stupidity and incapacity to live in society . 
Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova , had come to Petersburg that summer to see one of her sons , allowed herself plainly to express an opinion contrary to the general one . 
Meeting Helene at a ball she stopped her in the middle of the room and , amid general silence , said in her gruff voice : `` So wives of living men have started marrying again ! 
Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty ? 
You have been forestalled , my dear ! 
It was thought of long ago . 
It is done in all the brothels , '' and with these words Marya Dmitrievna , turning up her wide sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round , moved across the room . 
Though people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was regarded in Petersburg as a buffoon , and so of what she had said they only noticed , and repeated in a whisper , the one coarse word she had used , supposing the whole sting of her remark to lie in that word . 
Prince Vasili , who of late very often forgot what he had said and repeated one and the same thing a hundred times , remarked to his daughter whenever he chanced to see her : `` Helene , I have a word to say to you , '' and he would lead her aside , drawing her hand downward . 
`` I have heard of certain projects concerning ... you know . 
Well my dear child , you know how your father 's heart rejoices to know that you ... You have suffered so much ... . 
But , my dear child , consult only your own heart . 
That is all I have to say , '' and concealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheek against his daughter 's and move away . 
Bilibin , who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly clever man , and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman as Helene always has -- men friends who can never change into lovers -- once gave her his view of the matter at a small and intimate gathering . 
`` Listen , Bilibin , '' said Helene -LRB- she always called friends of that sort by their surnames -RRB- , and she touched his coat sleeve with her white , beringed fingers . 
`` Tell me , as you would a sister , what I ought to do . 
Which of the two ? '' 
Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered , with a smile on his lips . 
`` You are not taking me unawares , you know , '' said he . 
`` As a true friend , I have thought and thought again about your affair . 
You see , if you marry the prince '' -- he meant the younger man -- and he crooked one finger , `` you forever lose the chance of marrying the other , and you will displease the court besides . 
-LRB- You know there is some kind of connection . -RRB- 
But if you marry the old count you will make his last days happy , and as widow of the Grand ... the prince would no longer be making a mesalliance by marrying you , '' and Bilibin smoothed out his forehead . 
`` That 's a true friend ! '' 
said Helene beaming , and again touching Bilibin 's sleeve . 
`` But I love them , you know , and do n't want to distress either of them . 
I would give my life for the happiness of them both . '' 
Bilibin shrugged his shoulders , as much as to say that not even he could help in that difficulty . 
`` Une maitresse-femme ! 
* That 's what is called putting things squarely . 
She would like to be married to all three at the same time , '' thought he . 
* A masterly woman . 
`` But tell me , how will your husband look at the matter ? '' 
Bilibin asked , his reputation being so well established that he did not fear to ask so naive a question . 
