muttered the officer , threateningly , and turning his horse he trotted away , jolting in his saddle . 
`` A dog astwide a fence ! 
A weal dog astwide a fence ! '' 
shouted Denisov after him -LRB- the most insulting expression a cavalryman can address to a mounted infantryman -RRB- and riding up to Rostov , he burst out laughing . 
`` I 've taken twansports from the infantwy by force ! '' 
he said . 
`` After all , ca n't let our men starve . '' 
The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to an infantry regiment , but learning from Lavrushka that the transport was unescorted , Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force . 
The soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely , and they even shared them with the other squadrons . 
The next day the regimental commander sent for Denisov , and holding his fingers spread out before his eyes said : `` This is how I look at this affair : I know nothing about it and wo n't begin proceedings , but I advise you to ride over to the staff and settle the business there in the commissariat department and if possible sign a receipt for such and such stores received . 
If not , as the demand was booked against an infantry regiment , there will be a row and the affair may end badly . '' 
From the regimental commander 's , Denisov rode straight to the staff with a sincere desire to act on this advice . 
In the evening he came back to his dugout in a state such as Rostov had never yet seen him in . 
Denisov could not speak and gasped for breath . 
When Rostov asked what was the matter , he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse , feeble voice . 
Alarmed at Denisov 's condition , Rostov suggested that he should undress , drink some water , and send for the doctor . 
`` Twy me for wobbewy ... oh ! 
Some more water ... Let them twy me , but I 'll always thwash scoundwels ... and I 'll tell the Empewo ' ... Ice ... '' he muttered . 
The regimental doctor , when he came , said it was absolutely necessary to bleed Denisov . 
A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy arm and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him . 
`` I get there , '' began Denisov . '' 
` Now then , where 's your chief 's quarters ? ' 
They were pointed out . 
` Please to wait . ' 
` I 've widden twenty miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait . 
Announce me . ' 
Vewy well , so out comes their head chief -- also took it into his head to lecture me : ` It 's wobbewy ! ' 
-- ` Wobbewy , ' I say , ` is not done by man who seizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers , but by him who takes them to fill his own pockets ! ' 
` Will you please be silent ? ' 
` Vewy good ! ' 
Then he says : ` Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner , but your affair will be passed on to headquarters . ' 
I go to the commissioner . 
I enter , and at the table ... who do you think ? 
No , but wait a bit ! 
... Who is it that 's starving us ? '' 
shouted Denisov , hitting the table with the fist of his newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and the tumblers on it jumped about . 
`` Telyanin ! 
` What ? 
So it 's you who 's starving us to death ! 
Is it ? 
Take this and this ! ' 
and I hit him so pat , stwaight on his snout ... ` Ah , what a. . . 
what ... ! ' 
and I sta ` ted fwashing him ... Well , I 've had a bit of fun I can tell you ! '' 
cried Denisov , gleeful and yet angry , his showing under his black mustache . 
`` I 'd have killed him if they had n't taken him away ! '' 
`` But what are you shouting for ? 
Calm yourself , '' said Rostov . 
`` You 've set your arm bleeding afresh . 
Wait , we must tie it up again . '' 
