Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving , with red-liveried footmen and footmen in plumed hats . 
From the carriages emerged men wearing uniforms , stars , and ribbons , while ladies in satin and ermine cautiously descended the carriage steps which were let down for them with a clatter , and then walked hurriedly and noiselessly over the baize at the entrance . 
Almost every time a new carriage drove up a whisper ran through the crowd and caps were doffed . 
`` The Emperor ? 
... No , a minister ... . 
prince ... ambassador . 
Do n't you see the plumes ? 
... '' was whispered among the crowd . 
One person , better dressed than the rest , seemed to know everyone and mentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day . 
A third of the visitors had already arrived , but the Rostovs , who were to be present , were still hurrying to get dressed . 
There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball in the Rostov family , many fears that the invitation would not arrive , that the dresses would not be ready , or that something would not be arranged as it should be . 
Marya Ignatevna Peronskaya , a thin and shallow maid of honor at the court of the Dowager Empress , who was a friend and relation of the countess and piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersburg high society , was to accompany them to the ball . 
They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at ten o'clock , but it was already five minutes to ten , and the girls were not yet dressed . 
Natasha was going to her first grand ball . 
She had got up at eight that morning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day . 
All her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they all -- she herself , Mamma , and Sonya -- should be as well dressed as possible . 
Sonya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands . 
The countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress , and the two girls white gauze over pink silk slips , with roses on their bodices and their hair dressed a la grecque . 
Everything essential had already been done ; feet , hands , necks , and ears washed , perfumed , and powdered , as befits a ball ; the openwork silk stockings and white satin shoes with ribbons were already on ; the hairdressing was almost done . 
Sonya was finishing dressing and so was the countess , but Natasha , who had bustled about helping them all , was behindhand . 
She was still sitting before a looking-glass with a dressing jacket thrown over her slender shoulders . 
Sonya stood ready dressed in the middle of the room and , pressing the head of a pin till it hurt her dainty finger , was fixing on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin went through it . 
`` That 's not the way , that 's not the way , Sonya ! '' 
cried Natasha turning her head and clutching with both hands at her hair which the maid who was dressing it had not time to release . 
`` That bow is not right . 
Come here ! '' 
Sonya sat down and Natasha pinned the ribbon on differently . 
`` Allow me , Miss ! 
I ca n't do it like that , '' said the maid who was holding Natasha 's hair . 
`` Oh , dear ! 
Well then , wait . 
That 's right , Sonya . '' 
`` Are n't you ready ? 
It is nearly ten , '' came the countess ' voice . 
`` Directly ! 
Directly ! 
And you , Mamma ? '' 
`` I have only my cap to pin on . '' 
`` Do n't do it without me ! '' 
called Natasha . 
`` You wo n't do it right . '' 
`` But it 's already ten . '' 
They had decided to be at the ball by half past ten , and Natasha had still to get dressed and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens . 
When her hair was done , Natasha , in her short petticoat from under which her dancing shoes showed , and in her mother 's dressing jacket , ran up to Sonya , scrutinized her , and then ran to her mother . 
Turning her mother 's head this way and that , she fastened on the cap and , hurriedly kissing her gray hair , ran back to the maids who were turning up the hem of her skirt . 
The cause of the delay was Natasha 's skirt , which was too long . 
Two maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends of thread . 
A third with pins in her mouth was running about between the countess and Sonya , and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer garment up high on one uplifted hand . 
`` Mavra , quicker , darling ! '' 
`` Give me my thimble , Miss , from there ... '' `` Whenever will you be ready ? '' 
