The old man , roused by activity , expected the best results from the new campaign , while Prince Andrew on the contrary , taking no part in the war and secretly regretting this , saw only the dark side . 
On February 26 , 1807 , the old prince set off on one of his circuits . 
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father 's absence . 
Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days . 
The coachman who had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters for Prince Andrew . 
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the letters to Princess Mary 's apartments , but did not find him there . 
He was told that the prince had gone to the nursery . 
`` If you please , your excellency , Petrusha has brought some papers , '' said one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a child 's little chair while , frowning and with trembling hands , he poured drops from a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full of water . 
`` What is it ? '' 
he said crossly , and , his hand shaking unintentionally , he poured too many drops into the glass . 
He threw the mixture onto the floor and asked for some more water . 
The maid brought it . 
There were in the room a child 's cot , two boxes , two armchairs , a table , a child 's table , and the little chair on which Prince Andrew was sitting . 
The curtains were drawn , and a single candle was burning on the table , screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall on the cot . 
`` My dear , '' said Princess Mary , addressing her brother from beside the cot where she was standing , `` better wait a bit ... later ... '' `` Oh , leave off , you always talk nonsense and keep putting things off -- and this is what comes of it ! '' 
said Prince Andrew in an exasperated whisper , evidently meaning to wound his sister . 
`` My dear , really ... it 's better not to wake him ... he 's asleep , '' said the princess in a tone of entreaty . 
Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed , wineglass in hand . 
`` Perhaps we 'd really better not wake him , '' he said hesitating . 
`` As you please ... really ... I think so ... but as you please , '' said Princess Mary , evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion had prevailed . 
She drew her brother 's attention to the maid who was calling him in a whisper . 
It was the second night that neither of them had slept , watching the boy who was in a high fever . 
These last days , mistrusting their household doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town , they had been trying first one remedy and then another . 
Worn out by sleeplessness and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and reproached and disputed with each other . 
`` Petrusha has come with papers from your father , '' whispered the maid . 
Prince Andrew went out . 
`` Devil take them ! '' 
he muttered , and after listening to the verbal instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his father 's letter , he returned to the nursery . 
`` Well ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Still the same . 
Wait , for heaven 's sake . 
Karl Ivanich always says that sleep is more important than anything , '' whispered Princess Mary with a sigh . 
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him . 
He was burning hot . 
`` Confound you and your Karl Ivanich ! '' 
He took the glass with the drops and again went up to the cot . 
`` Andrew , do n't ! '' 
said Princess Mary . 
But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes , and stooped glass in hand over the infant . 
`` But I wish it , '' he said . 
`` I beg you -- give it him ! '' 
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively and calling the nurse began giving the medicine . 
The child screamed hoarsely . 
Prince Andrew winced and , clutching his head , went out and sat down on a sofa in the next room . 
He still had all the letters in his hand . 
Opening them mechanically he began reading . 
The old prince , now and then using abbreviations , wrote in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows : Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful news -- if it 's not false . 
Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete victory over Buonaparte at Eylau . 
In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing , and the rewards sent to the army are innumerable . 
