It 's like a portable house ... . 
That fellow 's dropped his sack and does n't see it . 
Fighting again ... A woman with a baby , and not bad-looking either ! 
Yes , I dare say , that 's the way they 'll let you pass ... Just look , there 's no end to it . 
Russian wenches , by heaven , so they are ! 
In carriages -- see how comfortably they 've settled themselves ! '' 
Again , as at the church in Khamovniki , a wave of general curiosity bore all the prisoners forward onto the road , and Pierre , thanks to his stature , saw over the heads of the others what so attracted their curiosity . 
In three carriages involved among the munition carts , closely squeezed together , sat women with rouged faces , dressed in glaring colors , who were shouting something in shrill voices . 
From the moment Pierre had recognized the appearance of the mysterious force nothing had seemed to him strange or dreadful : neither the corpse smeared with soot for fun nor these women hurrying away nor the burned ruins of Moscow . 
All that he now witnessed scarcely made an impression on him -- as if his soul , making ready for a hard struggle , refused to receive impressions that might weaken it . 
The women 's vehicles drove by . 
Behind them came more carts , soldiers , wagons , soldiers , gun carriages , carriages , soldiers , ammunition carts , more soldiers , and now and then women . 
Pierre did not see the people as individuals but saw their movement . 
All these people and horses seemed driven forward by some invisible power . 
During the hour Pierre watched them they all came flowing from the different streets with one and the same desire to get on quickly ; they all jostled one another , began to grow angry and to fight , white teeth gleamed , brows frowned , ever the same words of abuse flew from side to side , and all the faces bore the same swaggeringly resolute and coldly cruel expression that had struck Pierre that morning on the corporal 's face when the drums were beating . 
It was not till nearly evening that the officer commanding the escort collected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his way in among the baggage trains , and the prisoners , hemmed in on all sides , emerged onto the Kaluga road . 
They marched very quickly , without resting , and halted only when the sun began to set . 
The baggage carts drew up close together and the men began to prepare for their night 's rest . 
They all appeared angry and dissatisfied . 
For a long time , oaths , angry shouts , and fighting could be heard from all sides . 
A carriage that followed the escort ran into one of the carts and knocked a hole in it with its pole . 
Several soldiers ran toward the cart from different sides : some beat the carriage horses on their heads , turning them aside , others fought among themselves , and Pierre saw that one German was badly wounded on the head by a sword . 
It seemed that all these men , now that they had stopped amid fields in the chill dusk of the autumn evening , experienced one and the same feeling of unpleasant awakening from the hurry and eagerness to push on that had seized them at the start . 
Once at a standstill they all seemed to understand that they did not yet know where they were going , and that much that was painful and difficult awaited them on this journey . 
During this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse than they had done at the start . 
It was here that the prisoners for the first time received horseflesh for their meat ration . 
From the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed what seemed like personal spite against each of the prisoners , in unexpected contrast to their former friendly relations . 
This spite increased still more when , on calling over the roll of prisoners , it was found that in the bustle of leaving Moscow one Russian soldier , who had pretended to suffer from colic , had escaped . 
Pierre saw a Frenchman beat a Russian soldier cruelly for straying too far from the road , and heard his friend the captain reprimand and threaten to court-martial a noncommissioned officer on account of the escape of the Russian . 
To the noncommissioned officer 's excuse that the prisoner was ill and could not walk , the officer replied that the order was to shoot those who lagged behind . 
Pierre felt that that fatal force which had crushed him during the executions , but which he had not felt during his imprisonment , now again controlled his existence . 
It was terrible , but he felt that in proportion to the efforts of that fatal force to crush him , there grew and strengthened in his soul a power of life independent of it . 
He ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted with his comrades . 
Neither Pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seen in Moscow , or of the roughness of their treatment by the French , or of the order to shoot them which had been announced to them . 
As if in reaction against the worsening of their position they were all particularly animated and gay . 
They spoke of personal reminiscences , of amusing scenes they had witnessed during the campaign , and avoided all talk of their present situation . 
The sun had set long since . 
Bright stars shone out here and there in the sky . 
A red glow as of a conflagration spread above the horizon from the rising full moon , and that vast red ball swayed strangely in the gray haze . 
It grew light . 
The evening was ending , but the night had not yet come . 
Pierre got up and left his new companions , crossing between the campfires to the other side of the road where he had been told the common soldier prisoners were stationed . 
He wanted to talk to them . 
On the road he was stopped by a French sentinel who ordered him back . 
Pierre turned back , not to his companions by the campfire , but to an unharnessed cart where there was nobody . 
Tucking his legs under him and dropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel of the cart and remained motionless a long while sunk in thought . 
Suddenly he burst out into a fit of his broad , good-natured laughter , so loud that men from various sides turned with surprise to see what this strange and evidently solitary laughter could mean . 
`` Ha-ha-ha ! '' 
laughed Pierre . 
And he said aloud to himself : `` The soldier did not let me pass . 
