`` Yes , yes , '' the governor 's wife said as if talking to herself . 
`` But , my dear boy , among other things you are too attentive to the other , the blonde . 
One is sorry for the husband , really ... '' `` Oh no , we are good friends with him , '' said Nicholas in the simplicity of his heart ; it did not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant to himself might not be pleasant to someone else . 
`` But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor 's wife ! '' 
thought Nicholas suddenly at supper . 
`` She will really begin to arrange a match ... and Soyna ... ? '' 
And on taking leave of the governor 's wife , when she again smilingly said to him , `` Well then , remember ! '' 
he drew her aside . 
`` But see here , to tell the truth , Aunt ... '' `` What is it , my dear ? 
Come , let 's sit down here , '' said she . 
Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimate thoughts -LRB- which he would not have told to his mother , his sister , or his friend -RRB- to this woman who was almost a stranger . 
When he afterwards recalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness which had very important results for him , it seemed to him -- as it seems to everyone in such cases -- that it was merely some silly whim that seized him : yet that burst of frankness , together with other trifling events , had immense consequences for him and for all his family . 
`` You see , Aunt , Mamma has long wanted me to marry an heiress , but the very idea of marrying for money is repugnant to me . '' 
`` Oh yes , I understand , '' said the governor 's wife . 
`` But Princess Bolkonskaya -- that 's another matter . 
I will tell you the truth . 
In the first place I like her very much , I feel drawn to her ; and then , after I met her under such circumstances -- so strangely , the idea often occurred to me : ` This is fate . ' 
Especially if you remember that Mamma had long been thinking of it ; but I had never happened to meet her before , somehow it had always happened that we did not meet . 
And as long as my sister Natasha was engaged to her brother it was of course out of the question for me to think of marrying her . 
And it must needs happen that I should meet her just when Natasha 's engagement had been broken off ... and then everything ... So you see ... I never told this to anyone and never will , only to you . '' 
The governor 's wife pressed his elbow gratefully . 
`` You know Sonya , my cousin ? 
I love her , and promised to marry her , and will do so ... . 
So you see there can be no question about - '' said Nicholas incoherently and blushing . 
`` My dear boy , what a way to look at it ! 
You know Sonya has nothing and you yourself say your Papa 's affairs are in a very bad way . 
And what about your mother ? 
It would kill her , that 's one thing . 
And what sort of life would it be for Sonya -- if she 's a girl with a heart ? 
Your mother in despair , and you all ruined ... . 
No , my dear , you and Sonya ought to understand that . '' 
Nicholas remained silent . 
It comforted him to hear these arguments . 
`` All the same , Aunt , it is impossible , '' he rejoined with a sigh , after a short pause . 
`` Besides , would the princess have me ? 
And besides , she is now in mourning . 
How can one think of it ! '' 
`` But you do n't suppose I 'm going to get you married at once ? 
There is always a right way of doing things , '' replied the governor 's wife . 
`` What a matchmaker you are , Aunt ... '' said Nicholas , kissing her plump little hand . 
On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostov , Princess Mary had found her nephew there with his tutor , and a letter from Prince Andrew giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvintseva at Voronezh . 
That feeling akin to temptation which had tormented her during her father 's illness , since his death , and especially since her meeting with Rostov was smothered by arrangements for the journey , anxiety about her brother , settling in a new house , meeting new people , and attending to her nephew 's education . 
She was sad . 
Now , after a month passed in quiet surroundings , she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia . 
She was agitated and incessantly tortured by the thought of the dangers to which her brother , the only intimate person now remaining to her , was exposed . 
She was worried too about her nephew 's education for which she had always felt herself incompetent , but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace -- a peace arising from consciousness of having stifled those personal dreams and hopes that had been on the point of awakening within her and were related to her meeting with Rostov . 
The day after her party the governor 's wife came to see Malvintseva and , after discussing her plan with the aunt , remarked that though under present circumstances a formal betrothal was , of course , not to be thought of , all the same the young people might be brought together and could get to know one another . 
Malvintseva expressed approval , and the governor 's wife began to speak of Rostov in Mary 's presence , praising him and telling how he had blushed when Princess Mary 's name was mentioned . 
But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful feeling -- her mental tranquillity was destroyed , and desires , doubts , self-reproach , and hopes reawoke . 
During the two days that elapsed before Rostov called , Princess Mary continually thought of how she ought to behave to him . 
