At the edge of the road stood an oak . 
Probably ten times the age of the birches that formed the forest , it was ten times as thick and twice as tall as they . 
It was an enormous tree , its girth twice as great as a man could embrace , and evidently long ago some of its branches had been broken off and its bark scarred . 
With its huge ungainly limbs sprawling unsymmetrically , and its gnarled hands and fingers , it stood an aged , stern , and scornful monster among the smiling birch trees . 
Only the dead-looking evergreen firs dotted about in the forest , and this oak , refused to yield to the charm of spring or notice either the spring or the sunshine . 
`` Spring , love , happiness ! '' 
this oak seemed to say . 
`` Are you not weary of that stupid , meaningless , constantly repeated fraud ? 
Always the same and always a fraud ? 
There is no spring , no sun , no happiness ! 
Look at those cramped dead firs , ever the same , and at me too , sticking out my broken and barked fingers just where they have grown , whether from my back or my sides : as they have grown so I stand , and I do not believe in your hopes and your lies . '' 
As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several times to look at that oak , as if expecting something from it . 
Under the oak , too , were flowers and grass , but it stood among them scowling , rigid , misshapen , and grim as ever . 
`` Yes , the oak is right , a thousand times right , '' thought Prince Andrew . 
`` Let others -- the young -- yield afresh to that fraud , but we know life , our life is finished ! '' 
A whole sequence of new thoughts , hopeless but mournfully pleasant , rose in his soul in connection with that tree . 
During this journey he , as it were , considered his life afresh and arrived at his old conclusion , restful in its hopelessness : that it was not for him to begin anything anew -- but that he must live out his life , content to do no harm , and not disturbing himself or desiring anything . 
Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the district in connection with the affairs of the Ryazan estate of which he was trustee . 
This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov , and in the middle of May Prince Andrew went to visit him . 
It was now hot spring weather . 
The whole forest was already clothed in green . 
It was dusty and so hot that on passing near water one longed to bathe . 
Prince Andrew , depressed and preoccupied with the business about which he had to speak to the Marshal , was driving up the avenue in the grounds of the Rostovs ' house at Otradnoe . 
He heard merry girlish cries behind some trees on the right and saw group of girls running to cross the path of his caleche . 
Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a dark-haired , remarkably slim , pretty girl in a yellow chintz dress , with a white handkerchief on her head from under which loose locks of hair escaped . 
The girl was shouting something but , seeing that he was a stranger , ran back laughing without looking at him . 
Suddenly , he did not know why , he felt a pang . 
The day was so beautiful , the sun so bright , everything around so gay , but that slim pretty girl did not know , or wish to know , of his existence and was contented and cheerful in her own separate -- probably foolish - but bright and happy life . 
`` What is she so glad about ? 
What is she thinking of ? 
Not of the military regulations or of the arrangement of the Ryazan serfs ' quitrents . 
Of what is she thinking ? 
Why is she so happy ? '' 
Prince Andrew asked himself with instinctive curiosity . 
In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was living at Otradnoe just as he had done in former years , that is , entertaining almost the whole province with hunts , theatricals , dinners , and music . 
He was glad to see Prince Andrew , as he was to see any new visitor , and insisted on his staying the night . 
During the dull day , in the course of which he was entertained by his elderly hosts and by the more important of the visitors -LRB- the old count 's house was crowded on account of an approaching name day -RRB- , Prince Andrew repeatedly glanced at Natasha , gay and laughing among the younger members of the company , and asked himself each time , `` What is she thinking about ? 
Why is she so glad ? '' 
That night , alone in new surroundings , he was long unable to sleep . 
He read awhile and then put out his candle , but relit it . 
It was hot in the room , the inside shutters of which were closed . 
He was cross with the stupid old man -LRB- as he called Rostov -RRB- , who had made him stay by assuring him that some necessary documents had not yet arrived from town , and he was vexed with himself for having stayed . 
He got up and went to the window to open it . 
As soon as he opened the shutters the moonlight , as if it had long been watching for this , burst into the room . 
He opened the casement . 
The night was fresh , bright , and very still . 
Just before the window was a row of pollard trees , looking black on one side and with a silvery light on the other . 
Beneath the trees grewsome kind of lush , wet , bushy vegetation with silver-lit leaves and stems here and there . 
Farther back beyond the dark trees a roof glittered with dew , to the right was a leafy tree with brilliantly white trunk and branches , and above it shone the moon , nearly at its full , in a pale , almost starless , spring sky . 
Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested on that sky . 
