`` My dear fellow , what have you been up to in Moscow ? 
Why have you quarreled with Helene , mon cher ? 
You are under a delusion , '' said Prince Vasili , as he entered . 
`` I know all about it , and I can tell you positively that Helene is as innocent before you as Christ was before the Jews . '' 
Pierre was about to reply , but Prince Vasili interrupted him . 
`` And why did n't you simply come straight to me as to a friend ? 
I know all about it and understand it all , '' he said . 
`` You behaved as becomes a man values his honor , perhaps too hastily , but we wo n't go into that . 
But consider the position in which you are placing her and me in the eyes of society , and even of the court , '' he added , lowering his voice . 
`` She is living in Moscow and you are here . 
Remember , dear boy , '' and he drew Pierre 's arm downwards , `` it is simply a misunderstanding . 
I expect you feel it so yourself . 
Let us write her a letter at once , and she 'll come here and all will be explained , or else , my dear boy , let me tell you it 's quite likely you 'll have to suffer for it . '' 
Prince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look . 
`` I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a keen interest in the whole affair . 
You know she is very gracious to Helene . '' 
Pierre tried several times to speak , but , on one hand , Prince Vasili did not let him and , on the other , Pierre himself feared to begin to speak in the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which he had firmly resolved to answer his father-in-law . 
Moreover , the words of the Masonic statutes , `` be kindly and courteous , '' recurred to him . 
He blinked , went red , got up and sat down again , struggling with himself to do what was for him the most difficult thing in life -- to say an unpleasant thing to a man 's face , to say what the other , whoever he might be , did not expect . 
He was so used to submitting to Prince Vasili 's tone of careless self-assurance that he felt he would be unable to withstand it now , but he also felt that on what he said now his future depended -- whether he would follow the same old road , or that new path so attractively shown him by the Masons , on which he firmly believed he would be reborn to a new life . 
`` Now , dear boy , '' said Prince Vasili playfully , `` say ` yes , ' and I 'll write to her myself , and we will kill the fatted calf . '' 
But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful speech , Pierre , without looking at him , and with a kind of fury that made him like his father , muttered in a whisper : `` Prince , I did not ask you here . 
Go , please go ! '' 
And he jumped up and opened the door for him . 
`` Go ! '' 
he repeated , amazed at himself and glad to see the look of confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili 's face . 
`` What 's the matter with you ? 
Are you ill ? '' 
`` Go ! '' 
the quivering voice repeated . 
And Prince Vasili had to go without receiving any explanation . 
A week later , Pierre , having taken leave of his new friends , the Masons , and leaving large sums of money with them for alms , went away to his estates . 
His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons and promised to write to him and guide him in his new activity . 
The duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and , in spite of the Emperor 's severity regarding duels at that time , neither the principals nor their seconds suffered for it . 
But the story of the duel , confirmed by Pierre 's rupture with his wife , was the talk of society . 
Pierre who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was an illegitimate son , and petted and extolled when he was the best match in Russia , had sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his marriage -- when the marriageable daughters and their mothers had nothing to hope from him -- especially as he did not know how , and did not wish , to court society 's favor . 
Now he alone was blamed for what had happened , he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his father to fits of bloodthirsty rage . 
And when after Pierre 's departure Helene returned to Petersburg , she was received by all her acquaintances not only cordially , but even with a shade of deference due to her misfortune . 
When conversation turned on her husband Helene assumed a dignified expression , which with characteristic tact she had acquired though she did not understand its significance . 
This expression suggested that she had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly and that her husband was a cross laid upon her by God . 
Prince Vasili expressed his opinion more openly . 
He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and , pointing to his forehead , remarked : `` A bit touched -- I always said so . '' 
`` I said from the first , '' declared Anna Pavlovna referring to Pierre , `` I said at the time and before anyone else '' -LRB- she insisted on her priority -RRB- `` that that senseless young man was spoiled by the depraved ideas of these days . 
I said so even at the time when everybody was in raptures about him , when he had just returned from abroad , and when , if you remember , he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees . 
And how has it ended ? 
I was against this marriage even then and foretold all that has happened . '' 
Anna Pavlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind of soirees as before -- such as she alone had the gift of arranging -- at which was to be found `` the cream of really good society , the bloom of the intellectual essence of Petersburg , '' as she herself put it . 
Besides this refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna 's receptions were also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new and interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the state of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court society so dearly and distinctly indicated . 
Toward the end of 1806 , when all the sad details of Napoleon 's destruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstadt and the surrender of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received , when our troops had already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon was beginning , Anna Pavlovna gave one of her soirees . 
The `` cream of really good society '' consisted of the fascinating Helene , forsaken by her husband , Mortemart , the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had just returned from Vienna , two diplomatists , the old aunt , a young man referred to in that drawing room as `` a man of great merit '' -LRB- un homme de beaucoup de merite -RRB- , a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother , and several other less noteworthy persons . 
