She started , glanced round at him , and screening the candle with her hand stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement , picked up the ball , and regained her former position . 
He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a deep breath after stooping , but refrained from doing so and breathed cautiously . 
At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past , and he had told her that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had brought them together again , but after that they never spoke of the future . 
`` Can it or can it not be ? '' 
he now thought as he looked at her and listened to the light click of the steel needles . 
`` Can fate have brought me to her so strangely only for me to die ? 
... Is it possible that the truth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spent my life in falsity ? 
I love her more than anything in the world ! 
But what am I to do if I love her ? '' 
he thought , and he involuntarily groaned , from a habit acquired during his sufferings . 
On hearing that sound Natasha put down the stocking , leaned nearer to him , and suddenly , noticing his shining eyes , stepped lightly up to him and bent over him . 
`` You are not asleep ? '' 
`` No , I have been looking at you a long time . 
I felt you come in . 
No one else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do ... that light . 
I want to weep for joy . '' 
Natasha drew closer to him . 
Her face shone with rapturous joy . 
`` Natasha , I love you too much ! 
More than anything in the world . '' 
`` And I ! '' 
-- She turned away for an instant . 
`` Why too much ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Why too much ? 
... Well , what do you , what do you feel in your soul , your whole soul -- shall I live ? 
What do you think ? '' 
`` I am sure of it , sure ! '' 
Natasha almost shouted , taking hold of both his hands with a passionate movement . 
He remained silent awhile . 
`` How good it would be ! '' 
and taking her hand he kissed it . 
Natasha felt happy and agitated , but at once remembered that this would not do and that he had to be quiet . 
`` But you have not slept , '' she said , repressing her joy . 
`` Try to sleep ... please ! '' 
He pressed her hand and released it , and she went back to the candle and sat down again in her former position . 
Twice she turned and looked at him , and her eyes met his beaming at her . 
She set herself a task on her stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished . 
Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep . 
He did not sleep long and suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration . 
As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now always occupied his mind -- about life and death , and chiefly about death . 
He felt himself nearer to it . 
`` Love ? 
What is love ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Love hinders death . 
Love is life . 
All , everything that I understand , I understand only because I love . 
Everything is , everything exists , only because I love . 
Everything is united by it alone . 
