`` Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured ! '' 
said the French grenadier . 
The French onlookers and listeners laughed . 
`` We 'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov ... , '' * said Dolokhov . 
* `` On vous fera danser . '' 
`` Qu ' est-ce qu'il chante ? '' 
* asked a Frenchman . 
* `` What 's he singing about ? '' 
`` It 's ancient history , '' said another , guessing that it referred to a former war . 
`` The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the others ... '' `` Bonaparte ... '' began Dolokhov , but the Frenchman interrupted him . 
`` Not Bonaparte . 
He is the Emperor ! 
Sacre nom ... ! '' 
cried he angrily . 
`` The devil skin your Emperor . '' 
And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier 's Russian and shouldering his musket walked away . 
`` Let us go , Ivan Lukich , '' he said to the captain . 
`` Ah , that 's the way to talk French , '' said the picket soldiers . 
`` Now , Sidorov , you have a try ! '' 
Sidorov , turning to the French , winked , and began to jabber meaningless sounds very fast : `` Kari , mala , tafa , safi , muter , Kaska , '' he said , trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice . 
`` Ho ! 
ho ! 
ho ! 
Ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! 
Ouh ! 
ouh ! '' 
came peals of such healthy and good-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the French involuntarily , so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be to unload the muskets , muskets , explode the ammunition , and all return home as quickly as possible . 
But the guns remained loaded , the loopholes in blockhouses and entrenchments looked out just as menacingly , and the unlimbered cannon confronted one another as before . 
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left , Prince Andrew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had told him the whole field could be seen . 
Here he dismounted , and stopped beside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon . 
Before the guns an artillery sentry was pacing up and down ; he stood at attention when the officer arrived , but at a sign resumed his measured , monotonous pacing . 
Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes and artillerymen 's bonfires . 
To the left , not far from the farthest cannon , was a small , newly constructed wattle shed from which came the sound of officers ' voices in eager conversation . 
It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the greater part of the enemy 's opened out from this battery . 
Just facing it , on the crest of the opposite hill , the village of Schon Grabern could be seen , and in three places to left and right the French troops amid the smoke of their campfires , the greater part of whom were evidently in the village itself and behind the hill . 
To the left from that village , amid the smoke , was something resembling a battery , but it was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye . 
Our right flank was posted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French position . 
Our infantry were stationed there , and at the farthest point the dragoons . 
In the center , where Tushin 's battery stood and from which Prince Andrew was surveying the position , was the easiest and most direct descent and ascent to the brook separating us from Schon Grabern . 
On the left our troops were close to a copse , in which smoked the bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood . 
The French line was wider than ours , and it was plain that they could easily outflank us on both sides . 
Behind our position was a steep and deep dip , making it difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire . 
Prince Andrew took out his notebook and , leaning on the cannon , sketched a plan of the position . 
He made some notes on two points , intending to mention them to Bagration . 
His idea was , first , to concentrate all the artillery in the center , and secondly , to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the dip . 
Prince Andrew , being always near the commander in chief , closely following the mass movements and general orders , and constantly studying historical accounts of battles , involuntarily pictured to himself the course of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline . 
He imagined only important possibilities : `` If the enemy attacks the right flank , '' he said to himself , `` the Kiev grenadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs must hold their position till reserves from the center come up . 
