What men ! 
... and they say he 's not the right one ... . 
How not the right one ? 
... O Lord ! 
And there 's another has been beaten too -- they say he 's nearly done for ... . 
Oh , the people ... Are n't they afraid of sinning ? 
... '' said the same mob now , looking with pained distress at the dead body with its long , thin , half-severed neck and its livid face stained with blood and dust . 
A painstaking police officer , considering the presence of a corpse in his excellency 's courtyard unseemly , told the dragoons to take it away . 
Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it along the ground . 
The gory , dust-stained , half-shaven head with its long neck trailed twisting along the ground . 
The crowd shrank back from it . 
At the moment when Vereshchagin fell and the crowd closed in with savage yells and swayed about him , Rostopchin suddenly turned pale and , instead of going to the back entrance where his carriage awaited him , went with hurried steps and bent head , not knowing where and why , along the passage leading to the rooms on the ground floor . 
The count 's face was white and he could not control the feverish twitching of his lower jaw . 
`` This way , your excellency ... Where are you going ? 
... This way , please ... '' said a trembling , frightened voice behind him . 
Count Rostopchin was unable to reply and , turning obediently , went in the direction indicated . 
At the back entrance stood his caleche . 
The distant roar of the yelling crowd was audible even there . 
He hastily took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his country house in Sokolniki . 
When they reached the Myasnitski Street and could no longer hear the shouts of the mob , the count began to repent . 
He remembered with dissatisfaction the agitation and fear he had betrayed before his subordinates . 
`` The mob is terrible -- disgusting , '' he said to himself in French . 
`` They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease . '' 
`` Count ! 
One God is above us both ! '' 
-- Vereshchagin 's words suddenly recurred to him , and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back . 
But this was only a momentary feeling and Count Rostopchin smiled disdainfully at himself . 
`` I had other duties , '' thought he . 
`` The people had to be appeased . 
Many other victims have perished and are perishing for the public good '' -- and he began thinking of his social duties to his family and to the city entrusted to him , and of himself -- not himself as Theodore Vasilyevich Rostopchin -LRB- he fancied that Theodore Vasilyevich Rostopchin was sacrificing himself for the public good -RRB- but himself as governor , the representative of authority and of the Tsar . 
`` Had I been simply Theodore Vasilyevich my course of action would have been quite different , but it was my duty to safeguard my life and dignity as commander in chief . '' 
Lightly swaying on the flexible springs of his carriage and no longer hearing the terrible sounds of the crowd , Rostopchin grew physically calm and , as always happens , as soon as he became physically tranquil his mind devised reasons why he should be mentally tranquil too . 
The thought which tranquillized Rostopchin was not a new one . 
Since the world began and men have killed one another no one has ever committed such a crime against his fellow man without comforting himself with this same idea . 
This idea is le bien public , the hypothetical welfare of other people . 
To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain , but he who commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies . 
And Rostopchin now knew it . 
Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done , but he even found cause for self-satisfaction in having so successfully contrived to avail himself of a convenient opportunity to punish a criminal and at the same time pacify the mob . 
`` Vereshchagin was tried and condemned to death , '' thought Rostopchin -LRB- though the Senate had only condemned Vereshchagin to hard labor -RRB- , `` he was a traitor and a spy . 
I could not let him go unpunished and so I have killed two birds with one stone : to appease the mob I gave them a victim and at the same time punished a miscreant . '' 
Having reached his country house and begun to give orders about domestic arrangements , the count grew quite tranquil . 
Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across the Sokolniki field , no longer thinking of what had occurred but considering what was to come . 
He was driving to the Yauza bridge where he had heard that Kutuzov was . 
Count Rostopchin was mentally preparing the angry and stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutuzov for his deception . 
He would make that foxy old courtier feel that the responsibility for all the calamities that would follow the abandonment of the city and the ruin of Russia -LRB- as Rostopchin regarded it -RRB- would fall upon his doting old head . 
Planning beforehand what he would say to Kutuzov , Rostopchin turned angrily in his caleche and gazed sternly from side to side . 
The Sokolniki field was deserted . 
Only at the end of it , in front of the almshouse and the lunatic asylum , could be seen some people in white and others like them walking singly across the field shouting and gesticulating . 
One of these was running to cross the path of Count Rostopchin 's carriage , and the count himself , his coachman , and his dragoons looked with vague horror and curiosity at these released lunatics and especially at the one running toward them . 
Swaying from side to side on his long , thin legs in his fluttering dressing gown , this lunatic was running impetuously , his gaze fixed on Rostopchin , shouting something in a hoarse voice and making signs to him to stop . 
