said Kutuzov as he signed the last of the documents , and rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fat white neck he moved toward the door with a more cheerful expression . 
The priest 's wife , flushing rosy red , caught up the dish she had after all not managed to present at the right moment , though she had so long been preparing for it , and with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov . 
He screwed up his eyes , smiled , lifted her chin with his hand , and said : `` Ah , what a beauty ! 
Thank you , sweetheart ! '' 
He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the dish for her . 
`` Well , my dear , and how are we getting on ? '' 
he asked , moving to the door of the room assigned to him . 
The priest 's wife smiled , and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the room . 
The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with him . 
Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kutuzov . 
He found him reclining in an armchair , still in the same unbuttoned overcoat . 
He had in his hand a French book which he closed as Prince Andrew entered , marking the place with a knife . 
Prince Andrew saw by the cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis . 
`` Well , sit down , sit down here . 
Let 's have a talk , '' said Kutuzov . 
`` It 's sad , very sad . 
But remember , my dear fellow , that I am a father to you , a second father ... '' Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father 's death , and what he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it . 
`` What ... what they have brought us to ! '' 
Kutuzov suddenly cried in an agitated voice , evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince Andrew 's story the condition Russia was in . 
`` But give me time , give me time ! '' 
he said with a grim look , evidently not wishing to continue this agitating conversation , and added : `` I sent for you to keep you with me . '' 
`` I thank your Serene Highness , but I fear I am no longer fit for the staff , '' replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed . 
Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him . 
`` But above all , '' added Prince Andrew , `` I have grown used to my regiment , am fond of the officers , and I fancy the men also like me . 
I should be sorry to leave the regiment . 
If I decline the honor of being with you , believe me ... '' A shrewd , kindly , yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov 's podgy face . 
He cut Bolkonski short . 
`` I am sorry , for I need you . 
But you 're right , you 're right ! 
It 's not here that men are needed . 
Advisers are always plentiful , but men are not . 
The regiments would not be what they are if the would-be advisers served there as you do . 
I remember you at Austerlitz ... . 
I remember , yes , I remember you with the standard ! '' 
said Kutuzov , and a flush of pleasure suffused Prince Andrew 's face at this recollection . 
Taking his hand and drawing him downwards , Kutuzov offered his cheek to be kissed , and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man 's eyes . 
Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov 's tears came easily , and that he was particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to show sympathy with his loss , yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both pleasant and flattering to him . 
`` Go your way and God be with you . 
I know your path is the path of honor ! '' 
He paused . 
`` I missed you at Bucharest , but I needed someone to send . '' 
And changing the subject , Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkish war and the peace that had been concluded . 
`` Yes , I have been much blamed , '' he said , `` both for that war and the peace ... but everything came at the right time . 
Tout vient a point a celui qui sait attendre . 
* And there were as many advisers there as here ... '' he went on , returning to the subject of `` advisers '' which evidently occupied him . 
`` Ah , those advisers ! '' 
said he . 
`` If we had listened to them all we should not have made peace with Turkey and should not have been through with that war . 
Everything in haste , but more haste , less speed . 
Kamenski would have been lost if he had not died . 
