In the troubled waters of conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor 's headquarters , it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at other times . 
A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post would today agree with Pfuel , tomorrow with his opponent , and the day after , merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor , would declare that he had no opinion at all on the matter . 
Another who wished to gain some advantage would attract the Emperor 's attention by loudly advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before , and would dispute and shout at the council , beating his breast and challenging those who did not agree with him to duels , thereby proving that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good . 
A third , in the absence of opponents , between two councils would simply solicit a special gratuity for his faithful services , well knowing that at that moment people would be too busy to refuse him . 
A fourth while seemingly overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor 's eye . 
A fifth , to achieve his long-cherished aim of dining with the Emperor , would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some newly emerging opinion and for this object would produce arguments more or less forcible and correct . 
All the men of this party were fishing for rubles , decorations , and promotions , and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperial favor , and directly they noticed it turning in any direction , this whole drone population of the army began blowing hard that way , so that it was all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere . 
Amid the uncertainties of the position , with the menace of serious danger giving a peculiarly threatening character to everything , amid this vortex of intrigue , egotism , conflict of views and feelings , and the diversity of race among these people -- this eighth and largest party of those preoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion and obscurity to the common task . 
Whatever question arose , a swarm of these drones , without having finished their buzzing on a previous theme , flew over to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of those who were disputing honestly . 
From among all these parties , just at the time Prince Andrew reached the army , another , a ninth party , was being formed and was beginning to raise its voice . 
This was the party of the elders , reasonable men experienced and capable in state affairs , who , without sharing any of those conflicting opinions , were able to take a detached view of what was going on at the staff at headquarters and to consider means of escape from this muddle , indecision , intricacy , and weakness . 
The men of this party said and thought that what was wrong resulted chiefly from the Emperor 's presence in the army with his military court and from the consequent presence there of an indefinite , conditional , and unsteady fluctuation of relations , which is in place at court but harmful in an army ; that a sovereign should reign but not command the army , and that the only way out of the position would be for the Emperor and his court to leave the army ; that the mere presence of the Emperor paralyzed the action of fifty thousand men required to secure his personal safety , and that the worst commander in chief if independent would be better than the very best one trammeled by the presence and authority of the monarch . 
Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa , Shishkov , the Secretary of State and one of the chief representatives of this party , wrote a letter to the Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashev agreed to sign . 
In this letter , availing himself of permission given him by the Emperor to discuss the general course of affairs , he respectfully suggested -- on the plea that it was necessary for the sovereign to arouse a warlike spirit in the people of the capital -- that the Emperor should leave the army . 
That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to them to defend their country -- the very incitement which was the chief cause of Russia 's triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar 's personal presence in Moscow -- was suggested to the Emperor , and accepted by him , as a pretext for quitting the army . 
This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor when Barclay , one day at dinner , informed Bolkonski that the sovereign wished to see him personally , to question him about Turkey , and that Prince Andrew was to present himself at Bennigsen 's quarters at six that evening . 
News was received at the Emperor 's quarters that very day of a fresh movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army -- news subsequently found to be false . 
And that morning Colonel Michaud had ridden round the Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel , and till then considered a chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon 's destruction , was an absurdity , threatening the destruction of the Russian army . 
Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen 's quarters -- a country gentleman 's house of moderate size , situated on the very banks of the river . 
Neither Bennigsen nor the Emperor was there , but Chernyshev , the Emperor 's aide-de-camp , received Bolkonski and informed him that the Emperor , accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci , had gone a second time that day to inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp , of the suitability of which serious doubts were beginning to be felt . 
Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novel in his hand . 
This room had probably been a music room ; there was still an organ in it on which some rugs were piled , and in one corner stood the folding bedstead of Bennigsen 's adjutant . 
This adjutant was also there and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding , evidently exhausted by work or by feasting . 
Two doors led from the room , one straight on into what had been the drawing room , and another , on the right , to the study . 
Through the first door came the sound of voices conversing in German and occasionally in French . 
In that drawing room were gathered , by the Emperor 's wish , not a military council -LRB- the Emperor preferred indefiniteness -RRB- , but certain persons whose opinions he wished to know in view of the impending difficulties . 
It was not a council of war , but , as it were , a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor personally . 
To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General Armfeldt , Adjutant General Wolzogen , Wintzingerode -LRB- whom Napoleon had referred to as a renegade French subject -RRB- , Michaud , Toll , Count Stein who was not a military man at all , and Pfuel himself , who , as Prince Andrew had heard , was the mainspring of the whole affair . 
Prince Andrew had an opportunity of getting a good look at him , for Pfuel arrived soon after himself and , in passing through to the drawing room , stopped a minute to speak to Chernyshev . 
At first sight , Pfuel , in his ill-made uniform of a Russian general , which fitted him badly like a fancy costume , seemed familiar to Prince Andrew , though he saw him now for the first time . 
There was about him something of Weyrother , Mack , and Schmidt , and many other German theorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805 , but he was more typical than any of them . 
Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German theorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united to such an extent . 
Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned , of coarse , robust build , broad in the hips , and with prominent shoulder blades . 
His face was much wrinkled and his eyes deep set . 
His hair had evidently been hastily brushed smooth in front of the temples , but stuck up behind in quaint little tufts . 
He entered the room , looking restlessly and angrily around , as if afraid of everything in that large apartment . 
Awkwardly holding up his sword , he addressed Chernyshev and asked in German where the Emperor was . 
One could see that he wished to pass through the rooms as quickly as possible , finish with the bows and greetings , and sit down to business in front of a map , where he would feel at home . 
He nodded hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev , and smiled ironically on hearing that the sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he , Pfuel , had planned in accord with his theory . 
He muttered something to himself abruptly and in a bass voice , as self-assured Germans do -- it might have been `` stupid fellow '' ... or `` the whole affair will be ruined , '' or `` something absurd will come of it . '' 
... Prince Andrew did not catch what he said and would have passed on , but Chernyshev introduced him to Pfuel , remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the war had terminated so fortunately . 
Pfuel barely glanced -- not so much at Prince Andrew as past him -- and said , with a laugh : `` That must have been a fine tactical war '' ; and , laughing contemptuously , went on into the room from which the sound of voices was heard . 
Pfuel , always inclined to be irritably sarcastic , was particularly disturbed that day , evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect and criticize his camp in his absence . 
From this short interview with Pfuel , Prince Andrew , thanks to his Austerlitz experiences , was able to form a clear conception of the man . 
Pfuel was one of those hopelessly and immutably self-confident men , self-confident to the point of martyrdom as only Germans are , because only Germans are self-confident on the basis of an abstract notion -- science , that is , the supposed knowledge of absolute truth . 
A Frenchman is self-assured because he regards himself personally , both in mind and body , as irresistibly attractive to men and women . 
An Englishman is self-assured , as being a citizen of the best-organized state in the world , and therefore as an Englishman always knows what he should do and knows that all he does as an Englishman is undoubtedly correct . 
An Italian is self-assured because he is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people . 
A Russian is self-assured just because he knows nothing does not want to know anything , since he does not believe that anything can be known . 
The German 's self-assurance is worst of all , stronger and more repulsive than any other , because he imagines that he knows the truth - science -- which he himself has invented but which is for him the absolute truth . 
