It may be arrogant of me , but still it is best to say it . 
If you refuse him on my account , I must tell you the whole truth . 
I love you , and I think I love you more than anyone else ... '' `` That is enough for me , '' said Sonya , blushing . 
`` No , but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in love again , though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship , confidence , and love as I have for you . 
Then I am young . 
Mamma does not wish it . 
In a word , I make no promise . 
And I beg you to consider Dolokhov 's offer , '' he said , articulating his friend 's name with difficulty . 
`` Do n't say that to me ! 
I want nothing . 
I love you as a brother and always shall , and I want nothing more . '' 
`` You are an angel : I am not worthy of you , but I am afraid of misleading you . '' 
And Nicholas again kissed her hand . 
Iogel 's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow . 
So said the mothers as they watched their young people executing their newly learned steps , and so said the youths and maidens themselves as they danced till they were ready to drop , and so said the grown-up young men and women who came to these balls with an air of condescension and found them most enjoyable . 
That year two marriages had come of these balls . 
The two pretty young Princesses Gorchakov met suitors there and were married and so further increased the fame of these dances . 
What distinguished them from others was the absence of host or hostess and the presence of the good-natured Iogel , flying about like a feather and bowing according to the rules of his art , as he collected the tickets from all his visitors . 
There was the fact that only those came who wished to dance and amuse themselves as girls of thirteen and fourteen do who are wearing long dresses for the first time . 
With scarcely any exceptions they all were , or seemed to be , pretty -- so rapturous were their smiles and so sparkling their eyes . 
Sometimes the best of the pupils , of whom Natasha , who was exceptionally graceful , was first , even danced the pas de chale , but at this last ball only the ecossaise , the anglaise , and the mazurka , which was just coming into fashion , were danced . 
Iogel had taken a ballroom in Bezukhov 's house , and the ball , as everyone said , was a great success . 
There were many pretty girls and the Rostov girls were among the prettiest . 
They were both particularly happy and gay . 
That evening , proud of Dolokhov 's proposal , her refusal , and her explanation with Nicholas , Sonya twirled about before she left home so that the maid could hardly get her hair plaited , and she was transparently radiant with impulsive joy . 
Natasha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a real ball was even happier . 
They were both dressed in white muslin with pink ribbons . 
Natasha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom . 
She was not in love with anyone in particular , but with everyone . 
Whatever person she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment . 
`` Oh , how delightful it is ! '' 
she kept saying , running up to Sonya . 
Nicholas and Denisov were walking up and down , looking with kindly patronage at the dancers . 
`` How sweet she is -- she will be a weal beauty ! '' 
said Denisov . 
`` Who ? '' 
`` Countess Natasha , '' answered Denisov . 
`` And how she dances ! 
What gwace ! '' 
he said again after a pause . 
`` Who are you talking about ? '' 
`` About your sister , '' ejaculated Denisov testily . 
Rostov smiled . 
`` My dear count , you were one of my best pupils -- you must dance , '' said little Iogel coming up to Nicholas . 
`` Look how many charming young ladies - '' He turned with the same request to Denisov who was also a former pupil of his . 
`` No , my dear fellow , I 'll be a wallflower , '' said Denisov . 
`` Do n't you wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons ? '' 
`` Oh no ! '' 
said Iogel , hastening to reassure him . 
`` You were only inattentive , but you had talent -- oh yes , you had talent ! '' 
