The soldiers near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and move on . 
The horses moved off the bank . 
The ice , that had held under those on foot , collapsed in a great mass , and some forty men who were on it dashed , some forward and some back , drowning one another . 
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered the dam , the pond , and the bank . 
On the Pratzen Heights , where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his hand , lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciously uttering a gentle , piteous , and childlike moan . 
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still . 
He did not know how long his unconsciousness lasted . 
Suddenly he again felt that he was alive and suffering from a burning , lacerating pain in his head . 
`` Where is it , that lofty sky that I did not know till now , but saw today ? '' 
was his first thought . 
`` And I did not know this suffering either , '' he thought . 
`` Yes , I did not know anything , anything at all till now . 
But where am I ? '' 
He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses , and voices speaking French . 
He opened his eyes . 
Above him again was the same lofty sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher , and between them gleamed blue infinity . 
He did not turn his head and did not see those who , judging by the sound of hoofs and voices , had ridden up and stopped near him . 
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp . 
Bonaparte riding over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left on the field . 
`` Fine men ! '' 
remarked Napoleon , looking at a dead Russian grenadier , who , with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape , lay on his stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide . 
`` The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted , Your Majesty , '' said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firing at Augesd . 
`` Have some brought from the reserve , '' said Napoleon , and having gone on a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew , who lay on his back with the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him . 
-LRB- The flag had already been taken by the French as a trophy . -RRB- 
`` That 's a fine death ! '' 
said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski . 
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was Napoleon who said it . 
He heard the speaker addressed as Sire . 
But he heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly . 
Not only did they not interest him , but he took no notice of them and at once forgot them . 
His head was burning , he felt himself bleeding to death , and he saw above him the remote , lofty , and everlasting sky . 
He knew it was Napoleon -- his hero -- but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him such a small , insignificant creature compared with what was passing now between himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over it . 
At that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over him , or what was said of him ; he was only glad that people were standing near him and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to life , which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to understand it so differently . 
He collected all his strength , to stir and utter a sound . 
He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak , sickly groan which aroused his own pity . 
`` Ah ! 
He is alive , '' said Napoleon . 
`` Lift this young man up and carry him to the dressing station . '' 
Having said this , Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes , who , hat in hand , rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory . 
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more : he lost consciousness from the terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher , the jolting while being moved , and the probing of his wound at the dressing station . 
He did not regain consciousness till late in the day , when with other wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital . 
During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look about him and even speak . 
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French convoy officer , who said rapidly : `` We must halt here : the Emperor will pass here immediately ; it will please him to see these gentlemen prisoners . '' 
`` There are so many prisoners today , nearly the whole Russian army , that he is probably tired of them , '' said another officer . 
`` All the same ! 
They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor Alexander 's Guards , '' said the first one , indicating a Russian officer in the white uniform of the Horse Guards . 
Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersburg society . 
Beside him stood a lad of nineteen , also a wounded officer of the Horse Guards . 
Bonaparte , having come up at a gallop , stopped his horse . 
`` Which is the senior ? '' 
