`` You 've been in a hurry . 
That 's bad ! '' 
He laughed in his usual dry , cold , unpleasant way , with his lips only and not with his eyes . 
`` You must walk , walk as much as possible , as much as possible , '' he said . 
The little princess did not , or did not wish to , hear his words . 
She was silent and seemed confused . 
The prince asked her about her father , and she began to smile and talk . 
He asked about mutual acquaintances , and she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings from various people and retailing the town gossip . 
`` Countess Apraksina , poor thing , has lost her husband and she has cried her eyes out , '' she said , growing more and more lively . 
As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly , and suddenly , as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a definite idea of her , he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich . 
`` Well , Michael Ivanovich , our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it . 
Prince Andrew '' -LRB- he always spoke thus of his son -RRB- `` has been telling me what forces are being collected against him ! 
While you and I never thought much of him . '' 
Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when `` you and I '' had said such things about Bonaparte , but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on which to hang the prince 's favorite topic , he looked inquiringly at the young prince , wondering what would follow . 
`` He is a great tactician ! '' 
said the prince to his son , pointing to the architect . 
And the conversation again turned on the war , on Bonaparte , and the generals and statesmen of the day . 
The old prince seemed convinced not only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the A B C of war or of politics , and that Bonaparte was an insignificant little Frenchy , successful only because there were no longer any Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him ; but he was also convinced that there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war , but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing , pretending to do something real . 
Prince Andrew gaily bore with his father 's ridicule of the new men , and drew him on and listened to him with evident pleasure . 
`` The past always seems good , '' said he , `` but did not Suvorov himself fall into a trap Moreau set him , and from which he did not know how to escape ? '' 
`` Who told you that ? 
Who ? '' 
cried the prince . 
`` Suvorov ! '' 
And he jerked away his plate , which Tikhon briskly caught . 
`` Suvorov ! 
... Consider , Prince Andrew . 
Two ... Frederick and Suvorov ; Moreau ! 
... Moreau would have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand ; but he had the Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands . 
It would have puzzled the devil himself ! 
When you get there you 'll find out what those Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are ! 
Suvorov could n't manage them so what chance has Michael Kutuzov ? 
No , my dear boy , '' he continued , `` you and your generals wo n't get on against Buonaparte ; you 'll have to call in the French , so that birds of a feather may fight together . 
The German , Pahlen , has been sent to New York in America , to fetch the Frenchman , Moreau , '' he said , alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau to enter the Russian service ... `` Wonderful ! 
... Were the Potemkins , Suvorovs , and Orlovs Germans ? 
No , lad , either you fellows have all lost your wits , or I have outlived mine . 
May God help you , but we 'll see what will happen . 
Buonaparte has become a great commander among them ! 
Hm ! 
... '' `` I do n't at all say that all the plans are good , '' said Prince Andrew , `` I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte . 
You may laugh as much as you like , but all the same Bonaparte is a great general ! '' 
`` Michael Ivanovich ! '' 
cried the old prince to the architect who , busy with his roast meat , hoped he had been forgotten : `` Did n't I tell you Buonaparte was a great tactician ? 
Here , he says the same thing . '' 
`` To be sure , your excellency . '' 
replied the architect . 
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh . 
`` Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth . 
He has got splendid soldiers . 
Besides he began by attacking Germans . 
