`` What would you have me do ? '' 
he said at last . 
`` You know I did all a father could for their education , and they have both turned out fools . 
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool , but Anatole is an active one . 
That is the only difference between them . '' 
He said this smiling in a way more natural and animated than usual , so that the wrinkles round his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant . 
`` And why are children born to such men as you ? 
If you were not a father there would be nothing I could reproach you with , '' said Anna Pavlovna , looking up pensively . 
`` I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my children are the bane of my life . 
It is the cross I have to bear . 
That is how I explain it to myself . 
It ca n't be helped ! '' 
He said no more , but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a gesture . 
Anna Pavlovna meditated . 
`` Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole ? '' 
she asked . 
`` They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking , and though I do n't feel that weakness in myself as yet , I know a little person who is very unhappy with her father . 
She is a relation of yours , Princess Mary Bolkonskaya . '' 
Prince Vasili did not reply , though , with the quickness of memory and perception befitting a man of the world , he indicated by a movement of the head that he was considering this information . 
`` Do you know , '' he said at last , evidently unable to check the sad current of his thoughts , `` that Anatole is costing me forty thousand rubles a year ? 
And , '' he went on after a pause , `` what will it be in five years , if he goes on like this ? '' 
Presently he added : `` That 's what we fathers have to put up with ... . 
Is this princess of yours rich ? '' 
`` Her father is very rich and stingy . 
He lives in the country . 
He is the well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the late Emperor , and was nicknamed ` the King of Prussia . ' 
He is very clever but eccentric , and a bore . 
The poor girl is very unhappy . 
She has a brother ; I think you know him , he married Lise Meinen lately . 
He is an aide-de-camp of Kutuzov 's and will be here tonight . '' 
`` Listen , dear Annette , '' said the prince , suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna 's hand and for some reason drawing it downwards . 
`` Arrange that affair for me and I shall always be your most devoted slave - slafe with an f , as a village elder of mine writes in his reports . 
She is rich and of good family and that 's all I want . '' 
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him , he raised the maid of honor 's hand to his lips , kissed it , and swung it to and fro as he lay back in his armchair , looking in another direction . 
`` Attendez , '' said Anna Pavlovna , reflecting , `` I 'll speak to Lise , young Bolkonski 's wife , this very evening , and perhaps the thing can be arranged . 
It shall be on your family 's behalf that I 'll start my apprenticeship as old maid . '' 
Anna Pavlovna 's drawing room was gradually filling . 
The highest Petersburg society was assembled there : people differing widely in age and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged . 
Prince Vasili 's daughter , the beautiful Helene , came to take her father to the ambassador 's entertainment ; she wore a ball dress and her badge as maid of honor . 
The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya , known as la femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg , * was also there . 
She had been married during the previous winter , and being pregnant did not go to any large gatherings , but only to small receptions . 
Prince Vasili 's son , Hippolyte , had come with Mortemart , whom he introduced . 
The Abbe Morio and many others had also come . 
* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg . 
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said , `` You have not yet seen my aunt , '' or `` You do not know my aunt ? '' 
and very gravely conducted him or her to a little old lady , wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap , who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive ; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt , Anna Pavlovna mentioned each one 's name and then left them . 
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not one of them knew , not one of them wanted to know , and not one of them cared about ; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful and solemn interest and silent approval . 
The aunt spoke to each of them in the same words , about their health and her own , and the health of Her Majesty , `` who , thank God , was better today . '' 
And each visitor , though politeness prevented his showing impatience , left the old woman with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return to her the whole evening . 
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a gold-embroidered velvet bag . 
