Anatole went into the back room . 
`` Now then ! 
Nearly ready ? 
You 're dawdling ! '' 
he shouted to the servants . 
Dolokhov put away the money , called a footman whom he ordered to bring something for them to eat and drink before the journey , and went into the room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sitting . 
Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and smiling pensively , while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself . 
`` Come and eat something . 
Have a drink ! '' 
Dolokhov shouted to him from the other room . 
`` I do n't want to , '' answered Anatole continuing to smile . 
`` Come ! 
Balaga is here . '' 
Anatole rose and went into the dining room . 
Balaga was a famous troyka driver who had known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years and had given them good service with his troykas . 
More than once when Anatole 's regiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in the evening , brought him to Moscow by daybreak , and driven him back again the next night . 
More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape when pursued . 
More than once he had driven them through the town with gypsies and `` ladykins '' as he called the cocottes . 
More than once in their service he had run over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the streets of Moscow and had always been protected from the consequences by `` my gentlemen '' as he called them . 
He had ruined more than one horse in their service . 
More than once they had beaten him , and more than once they had made him drunk on champagne and Madeira , which he loved ; and he knew more than one thing about each of them which would long ago have sent an ordinary man to Siberia . 
They often called Balaga into their orgies and made him drink and dance at the gypsies ' , and more than one thousand rubles of their money had passed through his hands . 
In their service he risked his skin and his life twenty times a year , and in their service had lost more horses than the money he had from them would buy . 
But he liked them ; liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour , liked upsetting a driver or running down a pedestrian , and flying at full gallop through the Moscow streets . 
He liked to hear those wild , tipsy shouts behind him : `` Get on ! 
Get on ! '' 
when it was impossible to go any faster . 
He liked giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant who , more dead than alive , was already hurrying out of his way . 
`` Real gentlemen ! '' 
he considered them . 
Anatole and Dolokhov liked Balaga too for his masterly driving and because he liked the things they liked . 
With others Balaga bargained , charging twenty-five rubles for a two hours ' drive , and rarely drove himself , generally letting his young men do so . 
But with `` his gentlemen '' he always drove himself and never demanded anything for his work . 
Only a couple of times a year -- when he knew from their valets that they had money in hand -- he would turn up of a morning quite sober and with a deep bow would ask them to help him . 
The gentlemen always made him sit down . 
`` Do help me out , Theodore Ivanych , sir , '' or `` your excellency , '' he would say . 
`` I am quite out of horses . 
Let me have what you can to go to the fair . '' 
And Anatole and Dolokhov , when they had money , would give him a thousand or a couple of thousand rubles . 
Balaga was a fair-haired , short , and snub-nosed peasant of about twenty-seven ; red-faced , with a particularly red thick neck , glittering little eyes , and a small beard . 
He wore a fine , dark-blue , silk-lined cloth coat over a sheepskin . 
On entering the room now he crossed himself , turning toward the front corner of the room , and went up to Dolokhov , holding out a small , black hand . 
`` Theodore Ivanych ! '' 
he said , bowing . 
`` How d'you do , friend ? 
Well , here he is ! '' 
`` Good day , your excellency ! '' 
he said , again holding out his hand to Anatole who had just come in . 
`` I say , Balaga , '' said Anatole , putting his hands on the man 's shoulders , `` do you care for me or not ? 
Eh ? 
