When he entered the Rostovs ' drawing room Natasha was in her own room . 
When she heard of his arrival she almost ran into the drawing room , flushed and beaming with a more than cordial smile . 
Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress , with dark eyes shining from under her curls and boisterous , childish laughter , as he had known her four years before ; and so he was taken aback when quite a different Natasha entered , and his face expressed rapturous astonishment . 
This expression on his face pleased Natasha . 
`` Well , do you recognize your little madcap playmate ? '' 
asked the countess . 
Boris kissed Natasha 's hand and said that he was astonished at the change in her . 
`` How handsome you have grown ! '' 
`` I should think so ! '' 
replied Natasha 's laughing eyes . 
`` And is Papa older ? '' 
she asked . 
Natasha sat down and , without joining in Boris ' conversation with the countess , silently and minutely studied her childhood 's suitor . 
He felt the weight of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and glanced at her occasionally . 
Boris ' uniform , spurs , tie , and the way his hair was brushed were all comme il faut and in the latest fashion . 
This Natasha noticed at once . 
He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess , arranging with his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left hand like a skin , and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his lips about the amusements of the highest Petersburg society , recalling with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances . 
It was not accidentally , Natasha felt , that he alluded , when speaking of the highest aristocracy , to an ambassador 's ball he had attended , and to invitations he had received from N.N. and S.S. All this time Natasha sat silent , glancing up at him from under her brows . 
This gaze disturbed and confused Boris more and more . 
He looked round more frequently toward her , and broke off in what he was saying . 
He did not stay more than ten minutes , then rose and took his leave . 
The same inquisitive , challenging , and rather mocking eyes still looked at him . 
After his first visit Boris said to himself that Natasha attracted him just as much as ever , but that he must not yield to that feeling , because to marry her , a girl almost without fortune , would mean ruin to his career , while to renew their former relations without intending to marry her would be dishonorable . 
Boris made up his mind to avoid meeting Natasha , but despite that resolution he called again a few days later and began calling often and spending whole days at the Rostovs ' . 
It seemed to him that he ought to have an explanation with Natasha and tell her that the old times must be forgotten , that in spite of everything ... she could not be his wife , that he had no means , and they would never let her marry him . 
But he failed to do so and felt awkward about entering on such an explanation . 
From day to day he became more and more entangled . 
It seemed to her mother and Sonya that Natasha was in love with Boris as of old . 
She sang him his favorite songs , showed him her album , making him write in it , did not allow him to allude to the past , letting it be understood how was the present ; and every day he went away in a fog , without having said what he meant to , and not knowing what he was doing or why he came , or how it would all end . 
He left off visiting Helene and received reproachful notes from her every day , and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs . 
One night when the old countess , in nightcap and dressing jacket , without her false curls , and with her poor little knob of hair showing under her white cotton cap , knelt sighing and groaning on a rug and bowing to the ground in prayer , her door creaked and Natasha , also in a dressing jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair in curlpapers , ran in . 
The countess -- her prayerful mood dispelled -- looked round and frowned . 
She was finishing her last prayer : `` Can it be that this couch will be my grave ? '' 
Natasha , flushed and eager , seeing her mother in prayer , suddenly checked her rush , half sat down , and unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself . 
Seeing that her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and , rapidly slipping one little foot against the other , pushed off her slippers and jumped onto the bed the countess had feared might become her grave . 
This couch was high , with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than the one below . 
Natasha jumped on it , sank into the feather bed , rolled over to the wall , and began snuggling up the bedclothes as she settled down , raising her knees to her chin , kicking out and laughing almost inaudibly , now covering herself up head and all , and now peeping at her mother . 
The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a stern face , but seeing , that Natasha 's head was covered , she smiled in her kind , weak way . 
`` Now then , now then ! '' 
said she . 
`` Mamma , can we have a talk ? 
Yes ? '' 
said Natasha . 
`` Now , just one on your throat and another ... that 'll do ! '' 
And seizing her mother round the neck , she kissed her on the throat . 
In her behavior to her mother Natasha seemed rough , but she was so sensitive and tactful that however she clasped her mother she always managed to do it without hurting her or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased . 
`` Well , what is it tonight ? '' 
said the mother , having arranged her pillows and waited until Natasha , after turning over a couple of times , had settled down beside her under the quilt , spread out her arms , and assumed a serious expression . 
These visits of Natasha 's at night before the count returned from his club were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother , and daughter . 
`` What is it tonight ? 
