Though he is a German -- I congratulate him ! 
I ca n't make out what the commander at Korchevo -- a certain Khandrikov -- is up to ; till now the additional men and provisions have not arrived . 
Gallop off to him at once and say I 'll have his head off if everything is not here in a week . 
Have received another letter about the Preussisch-Eylau battle from Petenka -- he took part in it -- and it 's all true . 
When mischief-makers do n't meddle even a German beats Buonaparte . 
He is said to be fleeing in great disorder . 
Mind you gallop off to Korchevo without delay and carry out instructions ! 
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope . 
It was a closely written letter of two sheets from Bilibin . 
He folded it up without reading it and reread his father 's letter , ending with the words : `` Gallop off to Korchevo and carry out instructions ! '' 
`` No , pardon me , I wo n't go now till the child is better , '' thought he , going to the door and looking into the nursery . 
Princess Mary was still standing by the cot , gently rocking the baby . 
`` Ah yes , and what else did he say that 's unpleasant ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew , recalling his father 's letter . 
`` Yes , we have gained a victory over Bonaparte , just when I 'm not serving . 
Yes , yes , he 's always poking fun at me ... . 
Ah , well ! 
Let him ! '' 
And he began reading Bilibin 's letter which was written in French . 
He read without understanding half of it , read only to forget , if but for a moment , what he had too long been thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all else . 
Bilibin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity , and though he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms , he described the whole campaign with a fearless self-censure and self-derision genuinely Russian . 
Bilibin wrote that the obligation of diplomatic discretion tormented him , and he was happy to have in Prince Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he had accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in the army . 
The letter was old , having been written before the battle at Preussisch-Eylau . 
`` Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz , '' wrote Bilibin , `` as you know , my dear prince , I never leave headquarters . 
I have certainly acquired a taste for war , and it is just as well for me ; what I have seen during these last three months is incredible . 
`` I begin ab ovo . 
` The enemy of the human race , ' as you know , attacks the Prussians . 
The Prussians are our faithful allies who have only betrayed us three times in three years . 
We take up their cause , but it turns out that ` the enemy of the human race ' pays no heed to our fine speeches and in his rude and savage way throws himself on the Prussians without giving them time to finish the parade they had begun , and in two twists of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs himself in the palace at Potsdam . '' ' 
I most ardently desire , ' writes the King of Prussia to Bonaparte , ` that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my palace in a manner agreeable to yourself , and in so far as circumstances allowed , I have hastened to take all steps to that end . 
May I have succeeded ! ' 
The Prussian generals pride themselves on being polite to the French and lay down their arms at the first demand . 
`` The head of the garrison at Glogau , with ten thousand men , asks the King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender ... . 
All this is absolutely true . 
`` In short , hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude , it turns out that we have landed ourselves in war , and what is more , in war on our own frontiers , with and for the King of Prussia . 
We have everything in perfect order , only one little thing is lacking , namely , a commander in chief . 
As it was considered that the Austerlitz success might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so young , all our octogenarians were reviewed , and of Prozorovski and Kamenski the latter was preferred . 
The general comes to us , Suvorov-like , in a kibitka , and is received with acclamations of joy and triumph . 
`` On the 4th , the first courier arrives from Petersburg . 
The mails are taken to the field marshal 's room , for he likes to do everything himself . 
I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant for us . 
The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed to him . 
We search , but none are to be found . 
The field marshal grows impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor to Count T. , Prince V. , and others . 
Then he bursts into one of his wild furies and rages at everyone and everything , seizes the letters , opens them , and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others . 
` Ah ! 
So that 's the way they treat me ! 
No confidence in me ! 
Ah , ordered to keep an eye on me ! 
Very well then ! 
