Evidently some jolly excitement was going on there . 
`` Finished , finished ! '' 
little Natasha 's gleeful yell rose above them all . 
Pierre exchanged glances with Countess Mary and Nicholas -LRB- Natasha he never lost sight of -RRB- and smiled happily . 
`` That 's delightful music ! '' 
said he . 
`` It means that Anna Makarovna has finished her stocking , '' said Countess Mary . 
`` Oh , I 'll go and see , '' said Pierre , jumping up . 
`` You know , '' he added , stopping at the door , `` why I 'm especially fond of that music ? 
It is always the first thing that tells me all is well . 
When I was driving here today , the nearer I got to the house the more anxious I grew . 
As I entered the anteroom I heard Andrusha 's peals of laughter and that meant that all was well . '' 
`` I know ! 
I know that feeling , '' said Nicholas . 
`` But I must n't go there -- those stockings are to be a surprise for me . '' 
Pierre went to the children , and the shouting and laughter grew still louder . 
`` Come , Anna Makarovna , '' Pierre 's voice was heard saying , `` come here into the middle of the room and at the word of command , ` One , two , ' and when I say ` three ' ... You stand here , and you in my arms - well now ! 
One , two ! 
... '' said Pierre , and a silence followed : `` three ! '' 
and a rapturously breathless cry of children 's voices filled the room . 
`` Two , two ! '' 
they shouted . 
This meant two stockings , which by a secret process known only to herself Anna Makarovna used to knit at the same time on the same needles , and which , when they were ready , she always triumphantly drew , one out of the other , in the children 's presence . 
Soon after this the children came in to say good night . 
They kissed everyone , the tutors and governesses made their bows , and they went out . 
Only young Nicholas and his tutor remained . 
Dessalles whispered to the boy to come downstairs . 
`` No , Monsieur Dessalles , I will ask my aunt to let me stay , '' replied Nicholas Bolkonski also in a whisper . 
`` Ma tante , please let me stay , '' said he , going up to his aunt . 
His face expressed entreaty , agitation , and ecstasy . 
Countess Mary glanced at him and turned to Pierre . 
`` When you are here he ca n't tear himself away , '' she said . 
`` I will bring him to you directly , Monsieur Dessalles . 
Good night ! '' 
said Pierre , giving his hand to the Swiss tutor , and he turned to young Nicholas with a smile . 
`` You and I have n't seen anything of one another yet ... How like he is growing , Mary ! '' 
he added , addressing Countess Mary . 
`` Like my father ? '' 
asked the boy , flushing crimson and looking up at Pierre with bright , ecstatic eyes . 
Pierre nodded , and went on with what he had been saying when the children had interrupted . 
Countess Mary sat down doing woolwork ; Natasha did not take her eyes off her husband . 
Nicholas and Denisov rose , asked for their pipes , smoked , went to fetch more tea from Sonya -- who sat weary but resolute at the samovar -- and questioned Pierre . 
The curly-headed , delicate boy sat with shining eyes unnoticed in a corner , starting every now and then and muttering something to himself , and evidently experiencing a new and powerful emotion as he turned his curly head , with his thin neck exposed by his turn-down collar , toward the place where Pierre sat . 
The conversation turned on the contemporary gossip about those in power , in which most people see the chief interest of home politics . 
Denisov , dissatisfied with the government on account of his own disappointments in the service , heard with pleasure of the things done in Petersburg which seemed to him stupid , and made forcible and sharp comments on what Pierre told them . 
`` One used to have to be a German -- now one must dance with Tatawinova and Madame Kwudener , and wead Ecka ` tshausen and the bwethwen . 
Oh , they should let that fine fellow Bonaparte lose -- he 'd knock all this nonsense out of them ! 
Fancy giving the command of the Semenov wegiment to a fellow like that Schwa ` tz ! '' 
he cried . 
Nicholas , though free from Denisov 's readiness to find fault with everything , also thought that discussion of the government was a very serious and weighty matter , and the fact that A had been appointed Minister of This and B Governor General of That , and that the Emperor had said so-and-so and this minister so-and-so , seemed to him very important . 
