This short man nodded to Dolgorukov as to an intimate friend and stared at Prince Andrew with cool intensity , walking straight toward him and evidently expecting him to bow or to step out of his way . 
Prince Andrew did neither : a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other turned away and went down the side of the corridor . 
`` Who was that ? '' 
asked Boris . 
`` He is one of the most remarkable , but to me most unpleasant of men - the Minister of Foreign Affairs , Prince Adam Czartoryski ... . 
It is such men as he who decide the fate of nations , '' added Bolkonski with a sigh he could not suppress , as they passed out of the palace . 
Next day , the army began its campaign , and up to the very battle of Austerlitz , Boris was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgorukov again and remained for a while with the Ismaylov regiment . 
At dawn on the sixteenth of November , Denisov 's squadron , in which Nicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration 's detachment , moved from the place where it had spent the night , advancing into action as arranged , and after going behind other columns for about two thirds of a mile was stopped on the highroad . 
Rostov saw the Cossacks and then the first and second squadrons of hussars and infantry battalions and artillery pass by and go forward and then Generals Bagration and Dolgorukov ride past with their adjutants . 
All the fear before action which he had experienced as previously , all the inner struggle to conquer that fear , all his dreams of distinguishing himself as a true hussar in this battle , had been wasted . 
Their squadron remained in reserve and Nicholas Rostov spent that day in a dull and wretched mood . 
At nine in the morning , he heard firing in front and shouts of hurrah , and saw wounded being brought back -LRB- there were not many of them -RRB- , and at last he saw how a whole detachment of French cavalry was brought in , convoyed by a sontnya of Cossacks . 
Evidently the affair was over and , though not big , had been a successful engagement . 
The men and officers returning spoke of a brilliant victory , of the occupation of the town of Wischau and the capture of a whole French squadron . 
The day was bright and sunny after a sharp night frost , and the cheerful glitter of that autumn day was in keeping with the news of victory which was conveyed , not only by the tales of those who had taken part in it , but also by the joyful expression on the faces of soldiers , officers , generals , and adjutants , as they passed Rostov going or coming . 
And Nicholas , who had vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent that happy day in inactivity , was all the more depressed . 
`` Come here , Wostov . 
Let 's dwink to dwown our gwief ! '' 
shouted Denisov , who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some food . 
The officers gathered round Denisov 's canteen , eating and talking . 
`` There ! 
They are bringing another ! '' 
cried one of the officers , indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by two Cossacks . 
One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had taken from the prisoner . 
`` Sell us that horse ! '' 
Denisov called out to the Cossacks . 
`` If you like , your honor ! '' 
The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner . 
The French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German accent . 
He was breathless with agitation , his face was red , and when he heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers , addressing first one , then another . 
He said he would not have been taken , it was not his fault but the corporal 's who had sent him to seize some horsecloths , though he had told him the Russians were there . 
And at every word he added : `` But do n't hurt my little horse ! '' 
and stroked the animal . 
It was plain that he did not quite grasp where he was . 
Now he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now , imagining himself before his own officers , insisted on his soldierly discipline and zeal in the service . 
He brought with him into our rearguard all the freshness of atmosphere of the French army , which was so alien to us . 
The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces , and Rostov , being the richest of the officers now that he had received his money , bought it . 
`` But do n't hurt my little horse ! '' 
said the Alsatian good-naturedly to Rostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar . 
Rostov smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money . 
`` Alley ! 
Alley ! '' 
said the Cossack , touching the prisoner 's arm to make him go on . 
`` The Emperor ! 
The Emperor ! '' 
was suddenly heard among the hussars . 
All began to run and bustle , and Rostov saw coming up the road behind him several riders with white plumes in their hats . 
In a moment everyone was in his place , waiting . 
Rostov did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted . 
Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected mood amid people of whom he was weary had gone , instantly every thought of himself had vanished . 
