All the way Petya had been preparing himself to behave with Denisov as befitted a grownup man and an officer -- without hinting at their previous acquaintance . 
But as soon as Denisov smiled at him Petya brightened up , blushed with pleasure , forgot the official manner he had been rehearsing , and began telling him how he had already been in a battle near Vyazma and how a certain hussar had distinguished himself there . 
`` Well , I am glad to see you , '' Denisov interrupted him , and his face again assumed its anxious expression . 
`` Michael Feoklitych , '' said he to the esaul , `` this is again fwom that German , you know . 
He '' -- he indicated Petya -- `` is serving under him . '' 
And Denisov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was a repetition of the German general 's demand that he should join forces with him for an attack on the transport . 
`` If we do n't take it tomowwow , he 'll snatch it fwom under our noses , '' he added . 
While Denisov was talking to the esaul , Petya -- abashed by Denisov 's cold tone and supposing that it was due to the condition of his trousers -- furtively tried to pull them down under his greatcoat so that no one should notice it , while maintaining as martial an air as possible . 
`` Will there be any orders , your honor ? '' 
he asked Denisov , holding his hand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and general for which he had prepared himself , `` or shall I remain with your honor ? '' 
`` Orders ? '' 
Denisov repeated thoughtfully . 
`` But can you stay till tomowwow ? '' 
`` Oh , please ... May I stay with you ? '' 
cried Petya . 
`` But , just what did the genewal tell you ? 
To weturn at once ? '' 
asked Denisov . 
Petya blushed . 
`` He gave me no instructions . 
I think I could ? '' 
he returned , inquiringly . 
`` Well , all wight , '' said Denisov . 
And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the halting place arranged near the watchman 's hut in the forest , and told the officer on the Kirghiz horse -LRB- who performed the duties of an adjutant -RRB- to go and find out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come that evening . 
Denisov himself intended going with the esaul and Petya to the edge of the forest where it reached out to Shamshevo , to have a look at the part of the French bivouac they were to attack next day . 
`` Well , old fellow , '' said he to the peasant guide , `` lead us to Shamshevo . '' 
Denisov , Petya , and the esaul , accompanied by some Cossacks and the hussar who had the prisoner , rode to the left across a ravine to the edge of the forest . 
The rain had stopped , and only the mist was falling and drops from the trees . 
Denisov , the esaul , and Petya rode silently , following the peasant in the knitted cap who , stepping lightly with outturned toes and moving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves , silently led them to the edge of the forest . 
He ascended an incline , stopped , looked about him , and advanced to where the screen of trees was less dense . 
On reaching a large oak tree that had not yet shed its leaves , he stopped and beckoned mysteriously to them with his hand . 
Denisov and Petya rode up to him . 
From the spot where the peasant was standing they could see the French . 
Immediately beyond the forest , on a downward slope , lay a field of spring rye . 
To the right , beyond a steep ravine , was a small village and a landowner 's house with a broken roof . 
In the village , in the house , in the garden , by the well , by the pond , over all the rising ground , and all along the road uphill from the bridge leading to the village , not more than five hundred yards away , crowds of men could be seen through the shimmering mist . 
Their un-Russian shouting at their horses which were straining uphill with the carts , and their calls to one another , could be clearly heard . 
`` Bwing the prisoner here , '' said Denisov in a low voice , not taking his eyes off the French . 
A Cossack dismounted , lifted the boy down , and took him to Denisov . 
Pointing to the French troops , Denisov asked him what these and those of them were . 
The boy , thrusting his cold hands into his pockets and lifting his eyebrows , looked at Denisov in affright , but in spite of an evident desire to say all he knew gave confused answers , merely assenting to everything Denisov asked him . 
Denisov turned away from him frowning and addressed the esaul , conveying his own conjectures to him . 
Petya , rapidly turning his head , looked now at the drummer boy , now at Denisov , now at the esaul , and now at the French in the village and along the road , trying not to miss anything of importance . 
`` Whether Dolokhov comes or not , we must seize it , eh ? '' 
said Denisov with a merry sparkle in his eyes . 
`` It is a very suitable spot , '' said the esaul . 
`` We 'll send the infantwy down by the swamps , '' Denisov continued . 
`` They 'll cweep up to the garden ; you 'll wide up fwom there with the Cossacks '' -- he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the village -- `` and I with my hussars fwom here . 
And at the signal shot ... '' `` The hollow is impassable -- there 's a swamp there , '' said the esaul . 
`` The horses would sink . 
