Denisov blushed like a girl -LRB- it was strange to see the color rise in that shaggy , bibulous , time-worn face -RRB- and boldly began to expound his plan of cutting the enemy 's lines of communication between Smolensk and Vyazma . 
Denisov came from those parts and knew the country well . 
His plan seemed decidedly a good one , especially from the strength of conviction with which he spoke . 
Kutuzov looked down at his own legs , occasionally glancing at the door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge from it . 
And from that hut , while Denisov was speaking , a general with a portfolio under his arm really did appear . 
`` What ? '' 
said Kutuzov , in the midst of Denisov 's explanations , `` are you ready so soon ? '' 
`` Ready , your Serene Highness , '' replied the general . 
Kutuzov swayed his head , as much as to say : `` How is one man to deal with it all ? '' 
and again listened to Denisov . 
`` I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer , '' said Denisov , `` that I can bweak Napoleon 's line of communication ! '' 
`` What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov ? '' 
asked Kutuzov , interrupting him . 
`` He is my uncle , your Sewene Highness . '' 
`` Ah , we were friends , '' said Kutuzov cheerfully . 
`` All right , all right , friend , stay here at the staff and tomorrow we 'll have a talk . '' 
With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for the papers Konovnitsyn had brought him . 
`` Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside ? '' 
said the general on duty in a discontented voice , `` the plans must be examined and several papers have to be signed . '' 
An adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness within . 
But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he was disengaged . 
He made a grimace ... `` No , tell them to bring a small table out here , my dear boy . 
I 'll look at them here , '' said he . 
`` Do n't go away , '' he added , turning to Prince Andrew , who remained in the porch and listened to the general 's report . 
While this was being given , Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman 's voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door . 
Several times on glancing that way he noticed behind that door a plump , rosy , handsome woman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head , holding a dish and evidently awaiting the entrance of the commander in chief . 
Kutuzov 's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of the priest whose home it was , and that she intended to offer his Serene Highness bread and salt . 
`` Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highness with the cross at the church , and she intends to welcome him in the house ... . 
She 's very pretty , '' added the adjutant with a smile . 
At those words Kutuzov looked round . 
He was listening to the general 's report -- which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position at Tsarevo-Zaymishche -- as he had listened to Denisov , and seven years previously had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of war . 
He evidently listened only because he had ears which , though there was a piece of tow in one of them , could not help hearing ; but it was evident that nothing the general could say would surprise or even interest him , that he knew all that would be said beforehand , and heard it all only because he had to , as one has to listen to the chanting of a service of prayer . 
All that Denisov had said was clever and to the point . 
What the general was saying was even more clever and to the point , but it was evident that Kutuzov despised knowledge and cleverness , and knew of something else that would decide the matter -- something independent of cleverness and knowledge . 
Prince Andrew watched the commander in chief 's face attentively , and the only expression he could see there was one of boredom , curiosity as to the meaning of the feminine whispering behind the door , and a desire to observe propriety . 
It was evident that Kutuzov despised cleverness and learning and even the patriotic feeling shown by Denisov , but despised them not because of his own intellect , feelings , or knowledge -- he did not try to display any of these -- but because of something else . 
He despised them because of his old age and experience of life . 
The only instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that report referred to looting by the Russian troops . 
At the end of the report the general put before him for signature a paper relating to the recovery of payment from army commanders for green oats mown down by the soldiers , when landowners lodged petitions for compensation . 
After hearing the matter , Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shook his head . 
`` Into the stove ... into the fire with it ! 
I tell you once for all , my dear fellow , '' said he , `` into the fire with all such things ! 
Let them cut the crops and burn wood to their hearts ' content . 
I do n't order it or allow it , but I do n't exact compensation either . 
One ca n't get on without it . 
` When wood is chopped the chips will fly . ' '' 
He looked at the paper again . 
`` Oh , this German precision ! '' 
he muttered , shaking his head . 
`` Well , that 's all ! '' 
