A stern expression of the lofty , secret suffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face . 
Nicholas gazed at her . 
`` O God ! 
What will become of us if she dies , as I always fear when her face is like that ? '' 
thought he , and placing himself before the icon he began to say his evening prayers . 
Natasha and Pierre , left alone , also began to talk as only a husband and wife can talk , that is , with extraordinary clearness and rapidity , understanding and expressing each other 's thoughts in ways contrary to all rules of logic , without premises , deductions , or conclusions , and in a quite peculiar way . 
Natasha was so used to this kind of talk with her husband that for her it was the surest sign of something being wrong between them if Pierre followed a line of logical reasoning . 
When he began proving anything , or talking argumentatively and calmly and she , led on by his example , began to do the same , she knew that they were on the verge of a quarrel . 
From the moment they were alone and Natasha came up to him with wide-open happy eyes , and quickly seizing his head pressed it to her bosom , saying : `` Now you are all mine , mine ! 
You wo n't escape ! '' 
-- from that moment this conversation began , contrary to all the laws of logic and contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about at one and the same time . 
This simultaneous discussion of many topics did not prevent a clear understanding but on the contrary was the surest sign that they fully understood one another . 
Just as in a dream when all is uncertain , unreasoning , and contradictory , except the feeling that guides the dream , so in this intercourse contrary to all laws of reason , the words themselves were not consecutive and clear but only the feeling that prompted them . 
Natasha spoke to Pierre about her brother 's life and doings , of how she had suffered and lacked life during his own absence , and of how she was fonder than ever of Mary , and how Mary was in every way better than herself . 
In saying this Natasha was sincere in acknowledging Mary 's superiority , but at the same time by saying it she made a demand on Pierre that he should , all the same , prefer her to Mary and to all other women , and that now , especially after having seen many women in Petersburg , he should tell her so afresh . 
Pierre , answering Natasha 's words , told her how intolerable it had been for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersburg . 
`` I have quite lost the knack of talking to ladies , '' he said . 
`` It was simply dull . 
Besides , I was very busy . '' 
Natasha looked intently at him and went on : `` Mary is so splendid , '' she said . 
`` How she understands children ! 
It is as if she saw straight into their souls . 
Yesterday , for instance , Mitya was naughty ... '' `` How like his father he is , '' Pierre interjected . 
Natasha knew why he mentioned Mitya 's likeness to Nicholas : the recollection of his dispute with his brother-in-law was unpleasant and he wanted to know what Natasha thought of it . 
`` Nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything not generally accepted . 
But I understand that you value what opens up a fresh line , '' said she , repeating words Pierre had once uttered . 
`` No , the chief point is that to Nicholas ideas and discussions are an amusement -- almost a pastime , '' said Pierre . 
`` For instance , he is collecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book till he has read what he had already bought -- Sismondi and Rousseau and Montesquieu , '' he added with a smile . 
`` You know how much I. . . '' 
he began to soften down what he had said ; but Natasha interrupted him to show that this was unnecessary . 
`` So you say ideas are an amusement to him ... '' `` Yes , and for me nothing else is serious . 
All the time in Petersburg I saw everyone as in a dream . 
When I am taken up by a thought , all else is mere amusement . '' 
`` Ah , I 'm so sorry I was n't there when you met the children , '' said Natasha . 
`` Which was most delighted ? 
Lisa , I 'm sure . '' 
`` Yes , '' Pierre replied , and went on with what was in his mind . 
`` Nicholas says we ought not to think . 
But I ca n't help it . 
Besides , when I was in Petersburg I felt -LRB- I can this to you -RRB- that the whole affair would go to pieces without me -- everyone was pulling his own way . 
But I succeeded in uniting them all ; and then my idea is so clear and simple . 
You see , I do n't say that we ought to oppose this and that . 
We may be mistaken . 
What I say is : ` Join hands , you who love the right , and let there be but one banner -- that of active virtue . ' 
Prince Sergey is a fine fellow and clever . '' 
Natasha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of Pierre 's idea , but one thing disconcerted her . 
`` Can a man so important and necessary to society be also my husband ? 
How did this happen ? '' 
She wished to express this doubt to him . 
`` Now who could decide whether he is really cleverer than all the others ? '' 
