`` God could not have put into her heart an impulse that was against His will . 
My wife -- as she once was -- did not struggle , and perhaps she was right . 
Nothing has been found out , nothing discovered , '' Pierre again said to himself . 
`` All we can know is that we know nothing . 
And that 's the height of human wisdom . '' 
Everything within and around him seemed confused , senseless , and repellent . 
Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction . 
`` I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this gentleman , '' said the postmaster , entering the room followed by another traveler , also detained for lack of horses . 
The newcomer was a short , large-boned , yellow-faced , wrinkled old man , with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite grayish color . 
Pierre took his feet off the table , stood up , and lay down on a bed that had been got ready for him , glancing now and then at the newcomer , who , with a gloomy and tired face , was wearily taking off his wraps with the aid of his servant , and not looking at Pierre . 
With a pair of felt boots on his thin bony legs , and keeping on a worn , nankeen-covered , sheepskin coat , the traveler sat down on the sofa , leaned back his big head with its broad temples and close-cropped hair , and looked at Bezukhov . 
The stern , shrewd , and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre . 
He felt a wish to speak to the stranger , but by the time he had made up his mind to ask him a question about the roads , the traveler had closed his eyes . 
His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a death 's head . 
The stranger sat without stirring , either resting or , as it seemed to Pierre , sunk in profound and calm meditation . 
His servant was also a yellow , wrinkled old man , without beard or mustache , evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown . 
This active old servant was unpacking the traveler 's canteen and preparing tea . 
He brought in a boiling samovar . 
When everything was ready , the stranger opened his eyes , moved to the table , filled a tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom he passed it . 
Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness , and the need , even the inevitability , of entering into conversation with this stranger . 
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down , * with an unfinished bit of nibbled sugar , and asked if anything more would be wanted . 
* To indicate he did not want more tea . 
`` No . 
Give me the book , '' said the stranger . 
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work , and the traveler became absorbed in it . 
Pierre looked at him . 
All at once the stranger closed the book , putting in a marker , and again , leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa , sat in his former position with his eyes shut . 
Pierre looked at him and had not time to turn away when the old man , opening his eyes , fixed his steady and severe gaze straight on Pierre 's face . 
Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look , but the bright old eyes attracted him irresistibly . 
`` I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bezukhov , if I am not mistaken , '' said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice . 
Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles . 
`` I have heard of you , my dear sir , '' continued the stranger , `` and of your misfortune . '' 
He seemed to emphasize the last word , as if to say -- `` Yes , misfortune ! 
Call it what you please , I know that what happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune . '' 
-- `` I regret it very much , my dear sir . '' 
Pierre flushed and , hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed , bent forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile . 
`` I have not referred to this out of curiosity , my dear sir , but for greater reasons . '' 
He paused , his gaze still on Pierre , and moved aside on the sofa by way of inviting the other to take a seat beside him . 
Pierre felt reluctant to enter into conversation with this old man , but , submitting to him involuntarily , came up and sat down beside him . 
`` You are unhappy , my dear sir , '' the stranger continued . 
`` You are young and I am old . 
I should like to help you as far as lies in my power . '' 
`` Oh , yes ! '' 
said Pierre , with a forced smile . 
`` I am very grateful to you . 
Where are you traveling from ? '' 
The stranger 's face was not genial , it was even cold and severe , but in spite of this , both the face and words of his new acquaintance were irresistibly attractive to Pierre . 
`` But if for reason you do n't feel inclined to talk to me , '' said the old man , `` say so , my dear sir . '' 
And he suddenly smiled , in an unexpected and tenderly paternal way . 
`` Oh no , not at all ! 
