But can she love me ? 
... I am too old for her ... . 
Why do n't you speak ? '' 
`` I ? 
I ? 
What did I tell you ? '' 
said Pierre suddenly , rising and beginning to pace up and down the room . 
`` I always thought it ... . 
That girl is such a treasure ... she is a rare girl ... . 
My dear friend , I entreat you , do n't philosophize , do n't doubt , marry , marry , marry ... . 
And I am sure there will not be a happier man than you . '' 
`` But what of her ? '' 
`` She loves you . '' 
`` Do n't talk rubbish ... '' said Prince Andrew , smiling and looking into Pierre 's eyes . 
`` She does , I know , '' Pierre cried fiercely . 
`` But do listen , '' returned Prince Andrew , holding him by the arm . 
`` Do you know the condition I am in ? 
I must talk about it to someone . '' 
`` Well , go on , go on . 
I am very glad , '' said Pierre , and his face really changed , his brow became smooth , and he listened gladly to Prince Andrew . 
Prince Andrew seemed , and really was , quite a different , quite a new man . 
Where was his spleen , his contempt for life , his disillusionment ? 
Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind to speak openly ; and to him he told all that was in his soul . 
Now he boldly and lightly made plans for an extended future , said he could not sacrifice his own happiness to his father 's caprice , and spoke of how he would either make his father consent to this marriage and love her , or would do without his consent ; then he marveled at the feeling that had mastered him as at something strange , apart from and independent of himself . 
`` I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of such love , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` It is not at all the same feeling that I knew in the past . 
The whole world is now for me divided into two halves : one half is she , and there all is joy , hope , light : the other half is everything where she is not , and there is all gloom and darkness ... '' `` Darkness and gloom , '' reiterated Pierre : `` yes , yes , I understand that . '' 
`` I can not help loving the light , it is not my fault . 
And I am very happy ! 
You understand me ? 
I know you are glad for my sake . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' Pierre assented , looking at his friend with a touched and sad expression in his eyes . 
The brighter Prince Andrew 's lot appeared to him , the gloomier seemed his own . 
Prince Andrew needed his father 's consent to his marriage , and to obtain this he started for the country next day . 
His father received his son 's communication with external composure , but inward wrath . 
He could not comprehend how anyone could wish to alter his life or introduce anything new into it , when his own life was already ending . 
`` If only they would let me end my days as I want to , '' thought the old man , `` then they might do as they please . '' 
With his son , however , he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and , adopting a quiet tone , discussed the whole matter . 
In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards birth , wealth , or rank . 
Secondly , Prince Andrew was no longer as young as he had been and his health was poor -LRB- the old man laid special stress on this -RRB- , while she was very young . 
Thirdly , he had a son whom it would be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl . 
`` Fourthly and finally , '' the father said , looking ironically at his son , `` I beg you to put it off for a year : go abroad , take a cure , look out as you wanted to for a German tutor for Prince Nicholas . 
Then if your love or passion or obstinacy -- as you please -- is still as great , marry ! 
And that 's my last word on it . 
Mind , the last ... '' concluded the prince , in a tone which showed that nothing would make him alter his decision . 
Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that his feelings , or his fiancee 's , would not stand a year 's test , or that he -LRB- the old prince himself -RRB- would die before then , and he decided to conform to his father 's wish -- to propose , and postpone the wedding for a year . 
Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs , Prince Andrew returned to Petersburg . 
Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonski all day , but he did not come . 
On the second and third day it was the same . 
Pierre did not come either and Natasha , not knowing that Prince Andrew had gone to see his father , could not explain his absence to herself . 
