Wolzogen took his place and continued to explain his views in French , every now and then turning to Pfuel and saying , `` Is it not so , your excellency ? '' 
But Pfuel , like a man heated in a fight who strikes those on his own side , shouted angrily at his own supporter , Wolzogen : `` Well , of course , what more is there to explain ? '' 
Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously in French . 
Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German . 
Toll explained to Volkonski in Russian . 
Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence . 
Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel , angry , determined , and absurdly self-confident as he was . 
Of all those present , evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself , nursed no hatred against anyone , and only desired that the plan , formed on a theory arrived at by years of toil , should be carried out . 
He was ridiculous , and unpleasantly sarcastic , but yet he inspired involuntary respect by his boundless devotion to an idea . 
Besides this , the remarks of all except Pfuel had one common trait that had not been noticeable at the council of war in 1805 : there was now a panic fear of Napoleon 's genius , which , though concealed , was noticeable in every rejoinder . 
Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon , they expected him from every side , and invoked his terrible name to shatter each other 's proposals . 
Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like everyone else who opposed his theory . 
But besides this feeling of respect , Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew . 
From the tone in which the courtiers addressed him and the way Paulucci had allowed himself to speak of him to the Emperor , but above all from a certain desperation in Pfuel 's own expressions , it was clear that the others knew , and Pfuel himself felt , that his fall was at hand . 
And despite his self-confidence and grumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable , with his hair smoothly brushed on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind . 
Though he concealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt , he was evidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of verifying his theory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the whole world was slipping away from him . 
The discussions continued a long time , and the longer they lasted the more heated became the disputes , culminating in shouts and personalities , and the less was it possible to arrive at any general conclusion from all that had been said . 
Prince Andrew , listening to this polyglot talk and to these surmises , plans , refutations , and shouts , felt nothing but amazement at what they were saying . 
A thought that had long since and often occurred to him during his military activities -- the idea that there is not and can not be any science of war , and that therefore there can be no such thing as a military genius -- now appeared to him an obvious truth . 
`` What theory and science is possible about a matter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and can not be defined , especially when the strength of the acting forces can not be ascertained ? 
No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our or the enemy 's armies will be in a day 's time , and no one can gauge the force of this or that detachment . 
Sometimes -- when there is not a coward at the front to shout , ` We are cut off ! ' 
and start running , but a brave and jolly lad who shouts , ` Hurrah ! ' 
-- a detachment of five thousand is worth thirty thousand , as at Schon Grabern , while at times fifty thousand run from eight thousand , as at Austerlitz . 
What science can there be in a matter in which , as in all practical matters , nothing can be defined and everything depends on innumerable conditions , the significance of which is determined at a particular moment which arrives no one knows when ? 
Armfeldt says our army is cut in half , and Paulucci says we have got the French army between two fires ; Michaud says that the worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it , and Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strength ; Toll proposes one plan , Armfeldt another , and they are all good and all bad , and the advantages of any suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial . 
And why do they all speak of a ` military genius ' ? 
Is a man a genius who can order bread to be brought up at the right time and say who is to go to the right and who to the left ? 
It is only because military men are invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatter power , attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess . 
The best generals I have known were , on the contrary , stupid or absent-minded men . 
Bagration was the best , Napoleon himself admitted that . 
And of Bonaparte himself ! 
I remember his limited , self-satisfied face on the field of Austerlitz . 
Not only does a good army commander not need any special qualities , on the contrary he needs the absence of the highest and best human attributes -- love , poetry , tenderness , and philosophic inquiring doubt . 
He should be limited , firmly convinced that what he is doing is very important -LRB- otherwise he will not have sufficient patience -RRB- , and only then will he be a brave leader . 
God forbid that he should be humane , should love , or pity , or think of what is just and unjust . 
It is understandable that a theory of their ` genius ' was invented for them long ago because they have power ! 
The success of a military action depends not on them , but on the man in the ranks who shouts , ` We are lost ! ' 
or who shouts , ` Hurrah ! ' 
And only in the ranks can one serve with assurance of being useful . '' 
So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking , and he roused himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving . 
At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he would like to serve , and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circles forever by not asking to remain attached to the sovereign 's person , but for permission to serve in the army . 
Before the beginning of the campaign , Rostov had received a letter from his parents in which they told him briefly of Natasha 's illness and the breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew -LRB- which they explained by Natasha 's having rejected him -RRB- and again asked Nicholas to retire from the army and return home . 
On receiving this letter , Nicholas did not even make any attempt to get leave of absence or to retire from the army , but wrote to his parents that he was sorry Natasha was ill and her engagement broken off , and that he would do all he could to meet their wishes . 
To Sonya he wrote separately . 
`` Adored friend of my soul ! '' 
he wrote . 
`` Nothing but honor could keep me from returning to the country . 
But now , at the commencement of the campaign , I should feel dishonored , not only in my comrades ' eyes but in my own , if I preferred my own happiness to my love and duty to the Fatherland . 
But this shall be our last separation . 
