What of the bridge and its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg ? 
We heard reports that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna ? '' 
he said . 
`` Prince Auersperg is on this , on our side of the river , and is defending us -- doing it very badly , I think , but still he is defending us . 
But Vienna is on the other side . 
No , the bridge has not yet been taken and I hope it will not be , for it is mined and orders have been given to blow it up . 
Otherwise we should long ago have been in the mountains of Bohemia , and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour between two fires . '' 
`` But still this does not mean that the campaign is over , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Well , I think it is . 
The bigwigs here think so too , but they dare n't say so . 
It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign , it wo n't be your skirmishing at Durrenstein , or gunpowder at all , that will decide the matter , but those who devised it , '' said Bilibin quoting one of his own mots , releasing the wrinkles on his forehead , and pausing . 
`` The only question is what will come of the meeting between the Emperor Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin ? 
If Prussia joins the Allies , Austria 's hand will be forced and there will be war . 
If not it is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of the new Campo Formio are to be drawn up . '' 
`` What an extraordinary genius ! '' 
Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed , clenching his small hand and striking the table with it , `` and what luck the man has ! '' 
`` Buonaparte ? '' 
said Bilibin inquiringly , puckering up his forehead to indicate that he was about to say something witty . 
`` Buonaparte ? '' 
he repeated , accentuating the u : `` I think , however , now that he lays down laws for Austria at Schonbrunn , il faut lui faire grace de l' u ! 
* I shall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte ! '' 
* `` We must let him off the u ! '' 
`` But joking apart , '' said Prince Andrew , `` do you really think the campaign is over ? '' 
`` This is what I think . 
Austria has been made a fool of , and she is not used to it . 
She will retaliate . 
And she has been fooled in the first place because her provinces have been pillaged -- they say the Holy Russian army loots terribly -- her army is destroyed , her capital taken , and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty . 
And therefore -- this is between ourselves -- I instinctively feel that we are being deceived , my instinct tells me of negotiations with France and projects for peace , a secret peace concluded separately . '' 
* Fine eyes . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
cried Prince Andrew . 
`` That would be too base . '' 
`` If we live we shall see , '' replied Bilibin , his face again becoming smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end . 
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows , he felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far , far away from him . 
The alliance with Prussia , Austria 's treachery , Bonaparte 's new triumph , tomorrow 's levee and parade , and the audience with the Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts . 
He closed his eyes , and immediately a sound of cannonading , of musketry and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears , and now again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill , the French were firing , and he felt his heart palpitating as he rode forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all around , and he experienced tenfold the joy of living , as he had not done since childhood . 
He woke up ... `` Yes , that all happened ! '' 
he said , and , smiling happily to himself like a child , he fell into a deep , youthful slumber . 
Next day he woke late . 
Recalling his recent impressions , the first thought that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented to the Emperor Francis ; he remembered the Minister of War , the polite Austrian adjutant , Bilibin , and last night 's conversation . 
Having dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform , which he had not worn for a long time , he went into Bilibin 's study fresh , animated , and handsome , with his hand bandaged . 
In the study were four gentlemen of the diplomatic corps . 
With Prince Hippolyte Kuragin , who was a secretary to the embassy , Bolkonski was already acquainted . 
Bilibin introduced him to the others . 
The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin 's were young , wealthy , gay society men , who here , as in Vienna , formed a special set which Bilibin , their leader , called les notres . 
* This set , consisting almost exclusively of diplomats , evidently had its own interests which had nothing to do with war or politics but related to high society , to certain women , and to the official side of the service . 
These gentlemen received Prince Andrew as one of themselves , an honor they did not extend to many . 
From politeness and to start conversation , they asked him a few questions about the army and the battle , and then the talk went off into merry jests and gossip . 
* Ours . 
`` But the best of it was , '' said one , telling of the misfortune of a fellow diplomat , `` that the Chancellor told him flatly that his appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it . 
