-LRB- 3 -RRB- Sunday and Wednesday of each week are appointed as the chief market days and to that end a sufficient number of troops will be stationed along the highroads on Tuesdays and Saturdays at such distances from the town as to protect the carts . 
-LRB- 4 -RRB- Similar measures will be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with no hindrance on their return journey . 
-LRB- 5 -RRB- Steps will immediately be taken to re-establish ordinary trading . 
Inhabitants of the city and villages , and you , workingmen and artisans , to whatever nation you belong , you are called on to carry out the paternal intentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King and to co-operate with him for the public welfare ! 
Lay your respect and confidence at his feet and do not delay to unite with us ! 
With the object of raising the spirits of the troops and of the people , reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed . 
The Emperor rode through the streets to comfort the inhabitants , and , despite his preoccupation with state affairs , himself visited the theaters that were established by his order . 
In regard to philanthropy , the greatest virtue of crowned heads , Napoleon also did all in his power . 
He caused the words Maison de ma Mere to be inscribed on the charitable institutions , thereby combining tender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch . 
He visited the Foundling Hospital and , allowing the orphans saved by him to kiss his white hands , graciously conversed with Tutolmin . 
Then , as Thiers eloquently recounts , he ordered his soldiers to be paid in forged Russian money which he had prepared : `` Raising the use of these means by an act worthy of himself and of the French army , he let relief be distributed to those who had been burned out . 
But as food was too precious to be given to foreigners , who were for the most part enemies , Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food from outside , and had paper rubles distributed to them . '' 
With reference to army discipline , orders were continually being issued to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military duties and to suppress robbery . 
But strange to say , all these measures , efforts , and plans -- which were not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances -- did not affect the essence of the matter but , like the hands of a clock detached from the mechanism , swung about in an arbitrary and aimless way without engaging the cogwheels . 
With reference to the military side -- the plan of campaign -- that work of genius of which Thiers remarks that , `` His genius never devised anything more profound , more skillful , or more admirable , '' and enters into a polemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of genius must be referred not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October - that plan never was or could be executed , for it was quite out of touch with the facts of the case . 
The fortifying of the Kremlin , for which la Mosquee -LRB- as Napoleon termed the church of Basil the Beatified -RRB- was to have been razed to the ground , proved quite useless . 
The mining of the Kremlin only helped toward fulfilling Napoleon 's wish that it should be blown up when he left Moscow -- as a child wants the floor on which he has hurt himself to be beaten . 
The pursuit of the Russian army , about which Napoleon was so concerned , produced an unheard-of result . 
The French generals lost touch with the Russian army of sixty thousand men , and according to Thiers it was only eventually found , like a lost pin , by the skill -- and apparently the genius -- of Murat . 
With reference to diplomacy , all Napoleon 's arguments as to his magnanimity and justice , both to Tutolmin and to Yakovlev -LRB- whose chief concern was to obtain a greatcoat and a conveyance -RRB- , proved useless ; Alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to their embassage . 
With regard to legal matters , after the execution of the supposed incendiaries the rest of Moscow burned down . 
With regard to administrative matters , the establishment of a municipality did not stop the robberies and was only of use to certain people who formed part of that municipality and under pretext of preserving order looted Moscow or saved their own property from being looted . 
With regard to religion , as to which in Egypt matters had so easily been settled by Napoleon 's visit to a mosque , no results were achieved . 
Two or three priests who were found in Moscow did try to carry out Napoleon 's wish , but one of them was slapped in the face by a French soldier while conducting service , and a French official reported of another that : `` The priest whom I found and invited to say Mass cleaned and locked up the church . 
That night the doors were again broken open , the padlocks smashed , the books mutilated , and other disorders perpetrated . '' 
With reference to commerce , the proclamation to industrious workmen and to peasants evoked no response . 
There were no industrious workmen , and the peasants caught the commissaries who ventured too far out of town with the proclamation and killed them . 
As to the theaters for the entertainment of the people and the troops , these did not meet with success either . 
The theaters set up in the Kremlin and in Posnyakov 's house were closed again at once because the actors and actresses were robbed . 
Even philanthropy did not have the desired effect . 
The genuine as well as the false paper money which flooded Moscow lost its value . 
The French , collecting booty , cared only for gold . 
Not only was the paper money valueless which Napoleon so graciously distributed to the unfortunate , but even silver lost its value in relation to gold . 
But the most amazing example of the ineffectiveness of the orders given by the authorities at that time was Napoleon 's attempt to stop the looting and re-establish discipline . 
This is what the army authorities were reporting : `` Looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it . 
Order is not yet restored and not a single merchant is carrying on trade in a lawful manner . 
The sutlers alone venture to trade , and they sell stolen goods . '' 
`` The neighborhood of my ward continues to be pillaged by soldiers of the 3rd Corps who , not satisfied with taking from the unfortunate inhabitants hiding in the cellars the little they have left , even have the ferocity to wound them with their sabers , as I have repeatedly witnessed . '' 
`` Nothing new , except that the soldiers are robbing and pillaging - October 9 . '' 
`` Robbery and pillaging continue . 
There is a band of thieves in our district who ought to be arrested by a strong force -- October 11 . '' 
`` The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders to stop pillage , parties of marauding Guards are continually seen returning to the Kremlin . 
Among the Old Guard disorder and pillage were renewed more violently than ever yesterday evening , last night , and today . 
The Emperor sees with regret that the picked soldiers appointed to guard his person , who should set an example of discipline , carry disobedience to such a point that they break into the cellars and stores containing army supplies . 
Others have disgraced themselves to the extent of disobeying sentinels and officers , and have abused and beaten them . '' 
`` The Grand Marshal of the palace , '' wrote the governor , `` complains bitterly that in spite of repeated orders , the soldiers continue to commit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windows of the Emperor . '' 
That army , like a herd of cattle run wild and trampling underfoot the provender which might have saved it from starvation , disintegrated and perished with each additional day it remained in Moscow . 
But it did not go away . 
It began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by the capture of transport trains on the Smolensk road , and by the battle of Tarutino . 
The news of that battle of Tarutino , unexpectedly received by Napoleon at a review , evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians -LRB- Thiers says -RRB- , and he issued the order for departure which the whole army was demanding . 
