`` No , not to unite . 
Thoughts can not be united , but to harness all these thoughts together is what we need ! 
Yes , one must harness them , must harness them ! '' 
he repeated to himself with inward rapture , feeling that these words and they alone expressed what he wanted to say and solved the question that tormented him . 
`` Yes , one must harness , it is time to harness . '' 
`` Time to harness , time to harness , your excellency ! 
Your excellency ! '' 
some voice was repeating . 
`` We must harness , it is time to harness ... '' It was the voice of the groom , trying to wake him . 
The sun shone straight into Pierre 's face . 
He glanced at the dirty innyard in the middle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pump while carts were passing out of the gate . 
Pierre turned away with repugnance , and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat . 
`` No , I do n't want that , I do n't want to see and understand that . 
I want to understand what was revealing itself to me in my dream . 
One second more and I should have understood it all ! 
But what am I to do ? 
Harness , but how can I harness everything ? '' 
and Pierre felt with horror that the meaning of all he had seen and thought in the dream had been destroyed . 
The groom , the coachman , and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer had come with news that the French were already near Mozhaysk and that our men were leaving it . 
Pierre got up and , having told them to harness and overtake him , went on foot through the town . 
The troops were moving on , leaving about ten thousand wounded behind them . 
There were wounded in the yards , at the windows of the houses , and the streets were crowded with them . 
In the streets , around carts that were to take some of the wounded away , shouts , curses , and blows could be heard . 
Pierre offered the use of his carriage , which had overtaken him , to a wounded general he knew , and drove with him to Moscow . 
On the way Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and of that of Prince Andrew . 
On the thirteenth of August Pierre reached Moscow . 
Close to the gates of the city he was met by Count Rostopchin 's adjutant . 
`` We have been looking for you everywhere , '' said the adjutant . 
`` The count wants to see you particularly . 
He asks you to come to him at once on a very important matter . '' 
Without going home , Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscow commander in chief . 
Count Rostopchin had only that morning returned to town from his summer villa at Sokolniki . 
The anteroom and reception room of his house were full of officials who had been summoned or had come for orders . 
Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count and explained to him that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to be surrendered . 
Though this news was being concealed from the inhabitants , the officials -- the heads of the various government departments -- knew that Moscow would soon be in the enemy 's hands , just as Count Rostopchin himself knew it , and to escape personal responsibility they had all come to the governor to ask how they were to deal with their various departments . 
As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army came out of Rostopchin 's private room . 
In answer to questions with which he was greeted , the courier made a despairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room . 
While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched the various officials , old and young , military and civilian , who were there . 
They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy . 
Pierre went up to a group of men , one of whom he knew . 
After greeting Pierre they continued their conversation . 
`` If they 're sent out and brought back again later on it will do no harm , but as things are now one ca n't answer for anything . '' 
`` But you see what he writes ... '' said another , pointing to a printed sheet he held in his hand . 
`` That 's another matter . 
That 's necessary for the people , '' said the first . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Oh , it 's a fresh broadsheet . '' 
Pierre took it and began reading . 
His Serene Highness has passed through Mozhaysk in order to join up with the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong position where the enemy will not soon attack him . 
