But Kutuzov , with respectfully bowed head , seemed also to be waiting . 
The silence lasted for about a minute . 
`` However , if you command it , Your Majesty , '' said Kutuzov , lifting his head and again assuming his former tone of a dull , unreasoning , but submissive general . 
He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich , the commander of the column , gave him the order to advance . 
The troops again began to move , and two battalions of the Novgorod and one of the Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor . 
As this Apsheron battalion marched by , the red-faced Miloradovich , without his greatcoat , with his Orders on his breast and an enormous tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front and back , galloped strenuously forward , and with a dashing salute reined in his horse before the Emperor . 
`` God be with you , general ! '' 
said the Emperor . 
`` Ma foi , sire , nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite , sire , '' * he answered gaily , raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the gentlemen of the Tsar 's suite by his poor French . 
* `` Indeed , Sire , we shall do everything it is possible to do , Sire . '' 
Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little behind the Emperor . 
The Apsheron men , excited by the Tsar 's presence , passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold , brisk pace . 
`` Lads ! '' 
shouted Miloradovich in a loud , self-confident , and cheery voice , obviously so elated by the sound of firing , by the prospect of battle , and by the sight of the gallant Apsherons , his comrades in Suvorov 's time , now passing so gallantly before the Emperors , that he forgot the sovereigns ' presence . 
`` Lads , it 's not the first village you 've had to take , '' cried he . 
`` Glad to do our best ! '' 
shouted the soldiers . 
The Emperor 's horse started at the sudden cry . 
This horse that had carried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the field of Austerlitz , enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and pricking its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on the Empress ' Field , not understanding the significance of the firing , nor of the nearness of the Emperor Francis ' black cob , nor of all that was being said , thought , and felt that day by its rider . 
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a remark to him , pointing to the gallant Apsherons . 
Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind the carabineers . 
When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column he stopped at a solitary , deserted house that had probably once been an inn , where two roads parted . 
Both of them led downhill and troops were marching along both . 
The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights . 
Down below , on the left , the firing became more distinct . 
Kutuzov had stopped and was speaking to an Austrian general . 
Prince Andrew , who was a little behind looking at them , turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass . 
`` Look , look ! '' 
said this adjutant , looking not at the troops in the distance , but down the hill before him . 
`` It 's the French ! '' 
The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass , trying to snatch it from one another . 
The expression on all their faces suddenly changed to one of horror . 
The French were supposed to be a mile and a half away , but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in front of us . 
`` It 's the enemy ? 
... No ! 
... Yes , see it is ! 
... for certain ... . 
But how is that ? '' 
said different voices . 
With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right , not more than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing , a dense French column coming up to meet the Apsherons . 
`` Here it is ! 
The decisive moment has arrived . 
My turn has come , '' thought Prince Andrew , and striking his horse he rode up to Kutuzov . 
`` The Apsherons must be stopped , your excellency , '' cried he . 
But at that very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round , firing was heard quite close at hand , and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from Prince Andrew shouted , `` Brothers ! 
All 's lost ! '' 
And at this as if at a command , everyone began to run . 
Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where five minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors . 
Not only would it have been difficult to stop that crowd , it was even impossible not to be carried back with it oneself . 
Bolkonski only tried not to lose touch with it , and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what was happening in front of him . 
