The valet 's sleepy , frightened exclamation , `` What do you want ? 
What 's the matter ? '' 
made Natasha approach more swiftly to what was lying in the corner . 
Horribly unlike a man as that body looked , she must see him . 
She passed the valet , the snuff fell from the candle wick , and she saw Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt , and such as she had always seen him . 
He was the same as ever , but the feverish color of his face , his glittering eyes rapturously turned toward her , and especially his neck , delicate as a child 's , revealed by the turn-down collar of his shirt , gave him a peculiarly innocent , childlike look , such as she had never seen on him before . 
She went up to him and with a swift , flexible , youthful movement dropped on her knees . 
He smiled and held out his hand to her . 
Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in the ambulance station on the field of Borodino . 
His feverish state and the inflammation of his bowels , which were injured , were in the doctor 's opinion sure to carry him off . 
But on the seventh day he ate with pleasure a piece of bread with some tea , and the doctor noticed that his temperature was lower . 
He had regained consciousness that morning . 
The first night after they left Moscow had been fairly warm and he had remained in the caleche , but at Mytishchi the wounded man himself asked to be taken out and given some tea . 
The pain caused by his removal into the hut had made him groan aloud and again lose consciousness . 
When he had been placed on his camp bed he lay for a long time motionless with closed eyes . 
Then he opened them and whispered softly : `` And the tea ? '' 
His remembering such a small detail of everyday life astonished the doctor . 
He felt Prince Andrew 's pulse , and to his surprise and dissatisfaction found it had improved . 
He was dissatisfied because he knew by experience that if his patient did not die now , he would do so a little later with greater suffering . 
Timokhin , the red-nosed major of Prince Andrew 's regiment , had joined him in Moscow and was being taken along with him , having been wounded in the leg at the battle of Borodino . 
They were accompanied by a doctor , Prince Andrew 's valet , his coachman , and two orderlies . 
They gave Prince Andrew some tea . 
He drank it eagerly , looking with feverish eyes at the door in front of him as if trying to understand and remember something . 
`` I do n't want any more . 
Is Timokhin here ? '' 
he asked . 
Timokhin crept along the bench to him . 
`` I am here , your excellency . '' 
`` How 's your wound ? '' 
`` Mine , sir ? 
All right . 
But how about you ? '' 
Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something . 
`` Could n't one get a book ? '' 
he asked . 
`` What book ? '' 
`` The Gospels . 
I have n't one . '' 
The doctor promised to procure it for him and began to ask how he was feeling . 
Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but reasonably , and then said he wanted a bolster placed under him as he was uncomfortable and in great pain . 
The doctor and valet lifted the cloak with which he was covered and , making wry faces at the noisome smell of mortifying flesh that came from the wound , began examining that dreadful place . 
The doctor was very much displeased about something and made a change in the dressings , turning the wounded man over so that he groaned again and grew unconscious and delirious from the agony . 
He kept asking them to get him the book and put it under him . 
`` What trouble would it be to you ? '' 
he said . 
`` I have not got one . 
Please get it for me and put it under for a moment , '' he pleaded in a piteous voice . 
The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands . 
`` You fellows have no conscience , '' said he to the valet who was pouring water over his hands . 
`` For just one moment I did n't look after you ... It 's such pain , you know , that I wonder how he can bear it . '' 
