`` Come , let 's argue then , '' said Prince Andrew , `` You talk of schools , '' he went on , crooking a finger , `` education and so forth ; that is , you want to raise him '' -LRB- pointing to a peasant who passed by them taking off his cap -RRB- `` from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual needs , while it seems to me that animal happiness is the only happiness possible , and that is just what you want to deprive him of . 
I envy him , but you want to make him what I am , without giving him my means . 
Then you say , ` lighten his toil . ' 
But as I see it , physical labor is as essential to him , as much a condition of his existence , as mental activity is to you or me . 
You ca n't help thinking . 
I go to bed after two in the morning , thoughts come and I ca n't sleep but toss about till dawn , because I think and ca n't help thinking , just as he ca n't help plowing and mowing ; if he did n't , he would go to the drink shop or fall ill . 
Just as I could not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week , so he could not stand my physical idleness , but would grow fat and die . 
The third thing -- what else was it you talked about ? '' 
and Prince Andrew crooked a third finger . 
`` Ah , yes , hospitals , medicine . 
He has a fit , he is dying , and you come and bleed him and patch him up . 
He will drag about as a cripple , a burden to everybody , for another ten years . 
It would be far easier and simpler for him to die . 
Others are being born and there are plenty of them as it is . 
It would be different if you grudged losing a laborer -- that 's how I regard him -- but you want to cure him from love of him . 
And he does not want that . 
And besides , what a notion that medicine ever cured anyone ! 
Killed them , yes ! '' 
said he , frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre . 
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was evident he had reflected on this subject more than once , and he spoke readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time . 
His glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless . 
`` Oh , that is dreadful , dreadful ! '' 
said Pierre . 
`` I do n't understand how one can live with such ideas . 
I had such moments myself not long ago , in Moscow and when traveling , but at such times I collapsed so that I do n't live at all -- everything seems hateful to me ... myself most of all . 
Then I do n't eat , do n't wash ... and how is it with you ? 
... '' `` Why not wash ? 
That is not cleanly , '' said Prince Andrew ; `` on the contrary one must try to make one 's life as pleasant as possible . 
I 'm alive , that is not my fault , so I must live out my life as best I can without hurting others . '' 
`` But with such ideas what motive have you for living ? 
One would sit without moving , undertaking nothing ... '' `` Life as it is leaves one no peace . 
I should be thankful to do nothing , but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the honor to choose me to be their marshal ; it was all I could do to get out of it . 
They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualifications for it -- the kind of good-natured , fussy shallowness necessary for the position . 
Then there 's this house , which must be built in order to have a nook of one 's own in which to be quiet . 
And now there 's this recruiting . '' 
`` Why are n't you serving in the army ? '' 
`` After Austerlitz ! '' 
said Prince Andrew gloomily . 
`` No , thank you very much ! 
I have promised myself not to serve again in the active Russian army . 
And I wo n't -- not even if Bonaparte were here at Smolensk threatening Bald Hills -- even then I would n't serve in the Russian army ! 
Well , as I was saying , '' he continued , recovering his composure , `` now there 's this recruiting . 
My father is chief in command of the Third District , and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve under him . '' 
`` Then you are serving ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
He paused a little while . 
`` And why do you serve ? '' 
`` Why , for this reason ! 
My father is one of the most remarkable men of his time . 
But he is growing old , and though not exactly cruel he has too energetic a character . 
