`` Well , is she pretty ? 
Ah , friend -- my pink one is delicious ; her name is Dunyasha ... '' But on glancing at Rostov 's face Ilyin stopped short . 
He saw that his hero and commander was following quite a different train of thought . 
Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyin and without replying strode off with rapid steps to the village . 
`` I 'll show them ; I 'll give it to them , the brigands ! '' 
said he to himself . 
Alpatych at a gliding trot , only just managing not to run , kept up with him with difficulty . 
`` What decision have you been pleased to come to ? '' 
said he . 
Rostov stopped and , clenching his fists , suddenly and sternly turned on Alpatych . 
`` Decision ? 
What decision ? 
Old dotard ! 
... '' cried he . 
`` What have you been about ? 
Eh ? 
The peasants are rioting , and you ca n't manage them ? 
You 're a traitor yourself ! 
I know you . 
I 'll flay you all alive ! 
... '' And as if afraid of wasting his store of anger , he left Alpatych and went rapidly forward . 
Alpatych , mastering his offended feelings , kept pace with Rostov at a gliding gait and continued to impart his views . 
He said the peasants were obdurate and that at the present moment it would be imprudent to `` overresist '' them without an armed force , and would it not be better first to send for the military ? 
`` I 'll give them armed force ... I 'll ` overresist ' them ! '' 
uttered Rostov meaninglessly , breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to vent it . 
Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick , resolute steps toward the crowd . 
And the nearer he drew to it the more Alpatych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results . 
The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw Rostov 's rapid , firm steps and resolute , frowning face . 
After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to see the princess , a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd . 
Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and might take it amiss that the mistress was being detained . 
Dron was of this opinion , but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked their ex-Elder . 
`` How many years have you been fattening on the commune ? '' 
Karp shouted at him . 
`` It 's all one to you ! 
You 'll dig up your pot of money and take it away with you ... . 
What does it matter to you whether our homes are ruined or not ? '' 
`` We 've been told to keep order , and that no one is to leave their homes or take away a single grain , and that 's all about it ! '' 
cried another . 
`` It was your son 's turn to be conscripted , but no fear ! 
You begrudged your lump of a son , '' a little old man suddenly began attacking Dron -- `` and so they took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier ! 
But we all have to die . '' 
`` To be sure , we all have to die . 
I 'm not against the commune , '' said Dron . 
`` That 's it -- not against it ! 
You 've filled your belly ... '' The two tall peasants had their say . 
As soon as Rostov , followed by Ilyin , Lavrushka , and Alpatych , came up to the crowd , Karp , thrusting his fingers into his belt and smiling a little , walked to the front . 
Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer together . 
`` Who is your Elder here ? 
Hey ? '' 
shouted Rostov , coming up to the crowd with quick steps . 
