As you know , I am quite indifferent to politics , but from my father 's remarks and his talks with Michael Ivanovich I know all that goes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred on Buonaparte , who only at Bald Hills in the whole world , it seems , is not accepted as a great man , still less as Emperor of France . 
And my father can not stand this . 
It seems to me that it is chiefly because of his political views that my father is reluctant to speak of going to Moscow ; for he foresees the encounters that would result from his way of expressing his views regardless of anybody . 
All the benefit he might derive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the disputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable . 
In any case it will be decided very shortly . 
Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew 's absence . 
He , as I wrote you before , has changed very much of late . 
After his sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits . 
He has again become as I used to know him when a child : kind , affectionate , with that heart of gold to which I know no equal . 
He has realized , it seems to me , that life is not over for him . 
But together with this mental change he has grown physically much weaker . 
He has become thinner and more nervous . 
I am anxious about him and glad he is taking this trip abroad which the doctors recommended long ago . 
I hope it will cure him . 
You write that in Petersburg he is spoken of as one of the most active , cultivated , and capable of the young men . 
Forgive my vanity as a relation , but I never doubted it . 
The good he has done to everybody here , from his peasants up to the gentry , is incalculable . 
On his arrival in Petersburg he received only his due . 
I always wonder at the way rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow , especially such false ones as that you write about -- I mean the report of my brother 's betrothal to the little Rostova . 
I do not think my brother will ever marry again , and certainly not her ; and this is why : first , I know that though he rarely speaks about the wife he has lost , the grief of that loss has gone too deep in his heart for him ever to decide to give her a successor and our little angel a stepmother . 
Secondly because , as far as I know , that girl is not the kind of girl who could please Prince Andrew . 
I do not think he would choose her for a wife , and frankly I do not wish it . 
But I am running on too long and am at the end of my second sheet . 
Good-by , my dear friend . 
May God keep you in His holy and mighty care . 
My dear friend , Mademoiselle Bourienne , sends you kisses . 
MARY In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpected letter from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and surprising news . 
He informed her of his engagement to Natasha Rostova . 
The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tender and confiding affection for his sister . 
He wrote that he had never loved as he did now and that only now did he understand and know what life was . 
He asked his sister to forgive him for not having told her of his resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills , though he had spoken of it to his father . 
He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her father to give his consent , irritating him and having to bear the brunt of his displeasure without attaining her object . 
`` Besides , '' he wrote , `` the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now . 
My father then insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months , half of that period , have passed , and my resolution is firmer than ever . 
If the doctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in Russia , but as it is I have to postpone my return for three months . 
You know me and my relations with Father . 
I want nothing from him . 
I have been and always shall be independent ; but to go against his will and arouse his anger , now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short time , would destroy half my happiness . 
I am now writing to him about the same question , and beg you to choose a good moment to hand him the letter and to let me know how he looks at the whole matter and whether there is hope that he may consent to reduce the term by four months . '' 
After long hesitations , doubts , and prayers , Princess Mary gave the letter to her father . 
The next day the old prince said to her quietly : `` Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead ... . 
It wo n't be long -- I shall soon set him free . '' 
The princess was about to reply , but her father would not let her speak and , raising his voice more and more , cried : `` Marry , marry , my boy ! 
... A good family ! 
... Clever people , eh ? 
Rich , eh ? 
Yes , a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have ! 
Write and tell him that he may marry tomorrow if he likes . 
She will be little Nicholas ' stepmother and I 'll marry Bourienne ! 
... Ha , ha , ha ! 
