Fleeing from Moscow the soldiers took with them everything they had stolen . 
Napoleon , too , carried away his own personal tresor , but on seeing the baggage trains that impeded the army , he was -LRB- Thiers says -RRB- horror-struck . 
And yet with his experience of war he did not order all the superfluous vehicles to be burned , as he had done with those of a certain marshal when approaching Moscow . 
He gazed at the caleches and carriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked that it was a very good thing , as those vehicles could be used to carry provisions , the sick , and the wounded . 
The plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal which feels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing . 
To study the skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time it entered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studying the dying leaps and shudders of a mortally wounded animal . 
Very often a wounded animal , hearing a rustle , rushes straight at the hunter 's gun , runs forward and back again , and hastens its own end . 
Napoleon , under pressure from his whole army , did the same thing . 
The rustle of the battle of Tarutino frightened the beast , and it rushed forward onto the hunter 's gun , reached him , turned back , and finally -- like any wild beast -- ran back along the most disadvantageous and dangerous path , where the old scent was familiar . 
During the whole of that period Napoleon , who seems to us to have been the leader of all these movements -- as the figurehead of a ship may seem to a savage to guide the vessel -- acted like a child who , holding a couple of strings inside a carriage , thinks he is driving it . 
Early in the morning of the sixth of October Pierre went out of the shed , and on returning stopped by the door to play with a little blue-gray dog , with a long body and short bandy legs , that jumped about him . 
This little dog lived in their shed , sleeping beside Karataev at night ; it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned again . 
Probably it had never had an owner , and it still belonged to nobody and had no name . 
The French called it Azor ; the soldier who told stories called it Femgalka ; Karataev and others called it Gray , or sometimes Flabby . 
Its lack of a master , a name , or even of a breed or any definite color did not seem to trouble the blue-gray dog in the least . 
Its furry tail stood up firm and round as a plume , its bandy legs served it so well that it would often gracefully lift a hind leg and run very easily and quickly on three legs , as if disdaining to use all four . 
Everything pleased it . 
Now it would roll on its back , yelping with delight , now bask in the sun with a thoughtful air of importance , and now frolic about playing with a chip of wood or a straw . 
Pierre 's attire by now consisted of a dirty torn shirt -LRB- the only remnant of his former clothing -RRB- , a pair of soldier 's trousers which by Karataev 's advice he tied with string round the ankles for warmth , and a peasant coat and cap . 
Physically he had changed much during this time . 
He no longer seemed stout , though he still had the appearance of solidity and strength hereditary in his family . 
A beard and mustache covered the lower part of his face , and a tangle of hair , infested with lice , curled round his head like a cap . 
The look of his eyes was resolute , calm , and animatedly alert , as never before . 
The former slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by an energetic readiness for action and resistance . 
His feet were bare . 
Pierre first looked down the field across which vehicles and horsemen were passing that morning , then into the distance across the river , then at the dog who was pretending to be in earnest about biting him , and then at his bare feet which he placed with pleasure in various positions , moving his dirty thick big toes . 
Every time he looked at his bare feet a smile of animated self-satisfaction flitted across his face . 
The sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned during these weeks and this recollection was pleasant to him . 
For some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts in the mornings -- what is called an `` old wives ' summer . '' 
In the sunshine the air was warm , and that warmth was particularly pleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still in the air . 
On everything -- far and near -- lay the magic crystal glitter seen only at that time autumn . 
The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance , with the village , the church , and the large white house . 
The bare trees , the sand , the bricks and roofs of the houses , the green church spire , and the corners of the white house in the distance , all stood out in the transparent air in most delicate outline and with unnatural clearness . 
Near by could be seen the familiar ruins of a half-burned mansion occupied by the French , with lilac bushes still showing dark green beside the fence . 
And even that ruined and befouled house -- which in dull weather was repulsively ugly -- seemed quietly beautiful now , in the clear , motionless brilliance . 
A French corporal , with coat unbuttoned in a homely way , a skullcap on his head , and a short pipe in his mouth , came from behind a corner of the shed and approached Pierre with a friendly wink . 
`` What sunshine , Monsieur Kiril ! '' 
-LRB- Their name for Pierre . -RRB- 
`` Eh ? 
Just like spring ! '' 
And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre his pipe , though whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it . 
`` To be on the march in such weather ... '' he began . 
Pierre inquired what was being said about leaving , and the corporal told him that nearly all the troops were starting and there ought to be an order about the prisoners that day . 
Sokolov , one of the soldiers in the shed with Pierre , was dying , and Pierre told the corporal that something should be done about him . 
The corporal replied that Pierre need not worry about that as they had an ambulance and a permanent hospital and arrangements would be made for the sick , and that in general everything that could happen had been foreseen by the authorities . 
`` Besides , Monsieur Kiril , you have only to say a word to the captain , you know . 
He is a man who never forgets anything . 
Speak to the captain when he makes his round , he will do anything for you . '' 
-LRB- The captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats with Pierre and showed him all sorts of favors . -RRB- '' 
` You see , St. Thomas , ' he said to me the other day . 
