He must n't be without a stepmother either ! 
Only one thing , no more women are wanted in my house -- let him marry and live by himself . 
Perhaps you will go and live with him too ? '' 
he added , turning to Princess Mary . 
`` Go in heavens name ! 
Go out into the frost ... the frost ... the frost ! 
After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the matter . 
But repressed vexation at his son 's poor-spirited behavior found expression in his treatment of his daughter . 
To his former pretexts for irony a fresh one was now added -- allusions to stepmothers and amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
`` Why should n't I marry her ? '' 
he asked his daughter . 
`` She 'll make a splendid princess ! '' 
And latterly , to her surprise and bewilderment , Princess Mary noticed that her father was really associating more and more with the Frenchwoman . 
She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his letter , but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to the idea . 
Little Nicholas and his education , her brother Andrew , and religion were Princess Mary 's joys and consolations ; but besides that , since everyone must have personal hopes , Princess Mary in the profoundest depths of her heart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chief consolation of her life . 
This comforting dream and hope were given her by God 's folk -- the half-witted and other pilgrims who visited her without the prince 's knowledge . 
The longer she lived , the more experience and observation she had of life , the greater was her wonder at the short-sightedness of men who seek enjoyment and happiness here on earth : toiling , suffering , struggling , and harming one another , to obtain that impossible , visionary , sinful happiness . 
Prince Andrew had loved his wife , she died , but that was not enough : he wanted to bind his happiness to another woman . 
Her father objected to this because he wanted a more distinguished and wealthier match for Andrew . 
And they all struggled and suffered and tormented one another and injured their souls , their eternal souls , for the attainment of benefits which endure but for an instant . 
Not only do we know this ourselves , but Christ , the Son of God , came down to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and is a probation ; yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it . 
`` How is it that no one realizes this ? '' 
thought Princess Mary . 
`` No one except these despised God 's folk who , wallet on back , come to me by the back door , afraid of being seen by the prince , not for fear of ill-usage by him but for fear of causing him to sin . 
To leave family , home , and all the cares of worldly welfare , in order without clinging to anything to wander in hempen rags from place to place under an assumed name , doing no one any harm but praying for all - for those who drive one away as well as for those who protect one : higher than that life and truth there is no life or truth ! '' 
There was one pilgrim , a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called Theodosia , who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and worn heavy chains . 
Princess Mary was particularly fond of her . 
Once , when in a room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was talking of her life , the thought that Theodosia alone had found the true path of life suddenly came to Princess Mary with such force that she resolved to become a pilgrim herself . 
When Theodosia had gone to sleep Princess Mary thought about this for a long time , and at last made up her mind that , strange as it might seem , she must go on a pilgrimage . 
She disclosed this thought to no one but to her confessor , Father Akinfi , the monk , and he approved of her intention . 
Under guise of a present for the pilgrims , Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim 's complete costume for herself : a coarse smock , bast shoes , a rough coat , and a black kerchief . 
Often , approaching the chest of drawers containing this secret treasure , Princess Mary paused , uncertain whether the time had not already come to put her project into execution . 
Often , listening to the pilgrims ' tales , she was so stimulated by their simple speech , mechanical to them but to her so full of deep meaning , that several times she was on the point of abandoning everything and running away from home . 
In imagination she already pictured herself by Theodosia 's side , dressed in coarse rags , walking with a staff , a wallet on her back , along the dusty road , directing her wanderings from one saint 's shrine to another , free from envy , earthly love , or desire , and reaching at last the place where there is no more sorrow or sighing , but eternal joy and bliss . 
`` I shall come to a place and pray there , and before having time to get used to it or getting to love it , I shall go farther . 
I will go on till my legs fail , and I 'll lie down and die somewhere , and shall at last reach that eternal , quiet haven , where there is neither sorrow nor sighing ... '' thought Princess Mary . 
But afterwards , when she saw her father and especially little Koko -LRB- Nicholas -RRB- , her resolve weakened . 
She wept quietly , and felt that she was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God . 
The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor -- idleness -- was a condition of the first man 's blessedness before the Fall . 
Fallen man has retained a love of idleness , but the curse weighs on the race not only because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our brows , but because our moral nature is such that we can not be both idle and at ease . 
An inner voice tells us we are in the wrong if we are idle . 
If man could find a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilling his duty , he would have found one of the conditions of man 's primitive blessedness . 
And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idleness is the lot of a whole class - the military . 
The chief attraction of military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and irreproachable idleness . 
Nicholas Rostov experienced this blissful condition to the full when , after 1807 , he continued to serve in the Pavlograd regiment , in which he already commanded the squadron he had taken over from Denisov . 
Rostov had become a bluff , good-natured fellow , whom his Moscow acquaintances would have considered rather bad form , but who was liked and respected by his comrades , subordinates , and superiors , and was well contented with his life . 
Of late , in 1809 , he found in letters from home more frequent complaints from his mother that their affairs were falling into greater and greater disorder , and that it was time for him to come back to gladden and comfort his old parents . 
Reading these letters , Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to take him away from surroundings in which , protected from all the entanglements of life , he was living so calmly and quietly . 
He felt that sooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life , with its embarrassments and affairs to be straightened out , its accounts with stewards , quarrels , and intrigues , its ties , society , and with Sonya 's love and his promise to her . 
It was all dreadfully difficult and complicated ; and he replied to his mother in cold , formal letters in French , beginning : `` My dear Mamma , '' and ending : `` Your obedient son , '' which said nothing of when he would return . 
