Here , this way ! '' 
But Pierre was not listening to the woman . 
He had for some seconds been intently watching what was going on a few steps away . 
He was looking at the Armenian family and at two French soldiers who had gone up to them . 
One of these , a nimble little man , was wearing a blue coat tied round the waist with a rope . 
He had a nightcap on his head and his feet were bare . 
The other , whose appearance particularly struck Pierre , was a long , lank , round-shouldered , fair-haired man , slow in his movements and with an idiotic expression of face . 
He wore a woman 's loose gown of frieze , blue trousers , and large torn Hessian boots . 
The little barefooted Frenchman in the blue coat went up to the Armenians and , saying something , immediately seized the old man by his legs and the old man at once began pulling off his boots . 
The other in the frieze gown stopped in front of the beautiful Armenian girl and with his hands in his pockets stood staring at her , motionless and silent . 
`` Here , take the child ! '' 
said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly to the woman , handing the little girl to her . 
`` Give her back to them , give her back ! '' 
he almost shouted , putting the child , who began screaming , on the ground , and again looking at the Frenchman and the Armenian family . 
The old man was already sitting barefoot . 
The little Frenchman had secured his second boot and was slapping one boot against the other . 
The old man was saying something in a voice broken by sobs , but Pierre caught but a glimpse of this , his whole attention was directed to the Frenchman in the frieze gown who meanwhile , swaying slowly from side to side , had drawn nearer to the young woman and taking his hands from his pockets had seized her by the neck . 
The beautiful Armenian still sat motionless and in the same attitude , with her long lashes drooping as if she did not see or feel what the soldier was doing to her . 
While Pierre was running the few steps that separated him from the Frenchman , the tall marauder in the frieze gown was already tearing from her neck the necklace the young Armenian was wearing , and the young woman , clutching at her neck , screamed piercingly . 
`` Let that woman alone ! '' 
exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice , seizing the soldier by his round shoulders and throwing him aside . 
The soldier fell , got up , and ran away . 
But his comrade , throwing down the boots and drawing his sword , moved threateningly toward Pierre . 
`` Voyons , Pas de betises ! '' 
* he cried . 
* `` Look here , no nonsense ! '' 
Pierre was in such a transport of rage that he remembered nothing and his strength increased tenfold . 
He rushed at the barefooted Frenchman and , before the latter had time to draw his sword , knocked him off his feet and hammered him with his fists . 
Shouts of approval were heard from the crowd around , and at the same moment a mounted patrol of French Uhlans appeared from round the corner . 
The Uhlans came up at a trot to Pierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them . 
Pierre remembered nothing of what happened after that . 
He only remembered beating someone and being beaten and finally feeling that his hands were bound and that a crowd of French soldiers stood around him and were searching him . 
`` Lieutenant , he has a dagger , '' were the first words Pierre understood . 
`` Ah , a weapon ? '' 
said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldier who had been arrested with Pierre . 
`` All right , you can tell all about it at the court-martial . '' 
Then he turned to Pierre . 
`` Do you speak French ? '' 
Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply . 
His face probably looked very terrible , for the officer said something in a whisper and four more Uhlans left the ranks and placed themselves on both sides of Pierre . 
`` Do you speak French ? '' 
the officer asked again , keeping at a distance from Pierre . 
`` Call the interpreter . '' 
A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks , and by his clothes and manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him to be a French salesman from one of the Moscow shops . 
`` He does not look like a common man , '' said the interpreter , after a searching look at Pierre . 
`` Ah , he looks very much like an incendiary , '' remarked the officer . 
`` And ask him who he is , '' he added . 
`` Who are you ? '' 
asked the interpreter in poor Russian . 
`` You must answer the chief . '' 
