And I am he ... '' and that was unanswerable . 
It was more than true . 
During that fortnight of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby for comfort so often , and fussed over him so much , that she overfed him and he fell ill . 
She was terrified by his illness , and yet that was just what she needed . 
While attending to him she bore the anxiety about her husband more easily . 
She was nursing her boy when the sound of Pierre 's sleigh was heard at the front door , and the old nurse -- knowing how to please her mistress -- entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beaming face . 
`` Has he come ? '' 
Natasha asked quickly in a whisper , afraid to move lest she should rouse the dozing baby . 
`` He 's come , ma'am , '' whispered the nurse . 
The blood rushed to Natasha 's face and her feet involuntarily moved , but she could not jump up and run out . 
The baby again opened his eyes and looked at her . 
`` You 're here ? '' 
he seemed to be saying , and again lazily smacked his lips . 
Cautiously withdrawing her breast , Natasha rocked him a little , handed him to the nurse , and went with rapid steps toward the door . 
But at the door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for having in her joy left the child too soon , and she glanced round . 
The nurse with raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot . 
`` Go , ma'am ! 
Do n't worry , go ! '' 
she whispered , smiling , with the kind of familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress . 
Natasha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom . 
Denisov , who had come out of the study into the dancing room with his pipe , now for the first time recognized the old Natasha . 
A flood of brilliant , joyful light poured from her transfigured face . 
`` He 's come ! '' 
she exclaimed as she ran past , and Denisov felt that he too was delighted that Pierre , whom he did not much care for , had returned . 
On reaching the vestibule Natasha saw a tall figure in a fur coat unwinding his scarf . 
`` It 's he ! 
It 's really he ! 
He has come ! '' 
she said to herself , and rushing at him embraced him , pressed his head to her breast , and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy , happy face , covered with hoarfrost . 
`` Yes , it is he , happy and contented ... '' Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she had experienced for the last fortnight , and the joy that had lit up her face vanished ; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent of reproaches and angry words . 
`` Yes , it 's all very well for you . 
You are pleased , you 've had a good time ... . 
But what about me ? 
You might at least have shown consideration for the children . 
I am nursing and my milk was spoiled ... . 
Petya was at death 's door . 
But you were enjoying yourself . 
Yes , enjoying ... '' Pierre knew he was not to blame , for he could not have come sooner ; he knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two ; above all he knew that he himself was bright and happy . 
He wanted to smile but dared not even think of doing so . 
He made a piteous , frightened face and bent down . 
`` I could not , on my honor . 
But how is Petya ? '' 
`` All right now . 
Come along ! 
I wonder you 're not ashamed ! 
If only you could see what I was like without you , how I suffered ! '' 
`` You are well ? '' 
`` Come , come ! '' 
she said , not letting go of his arm . 
And they went to their rooms . 
