`` Good day , your honor ! '' 
he shouted , rolling his eyes at Rostov and evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities . 
`` Get him to his place and give him some water , '' said Rostov , pointing to the Cossack . 
`` Yes , your honor , '' the soldier replied complacently , and rolling his eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter , but did not move . 
`` No , it 's impossible to do anything here , '' thought Rostov , lowering his eyes , and he was going out , but became aware of an intense look fixed on him on his right , and he turned . 
Close to the corner , on an overcoat , sat an old , unshaven , gray-bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton , with a stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov . 
The man 's neighbor on one side whispered something to him , pointing at Rostov , who noticed that the old man wanted to speak to him . 
He drew nearer and saw that the old man had only one leg bent under him , the other had been amputated above the knee . 
His neighbor on the other side , who lay motionless some distance from him with his head thrown back , was a young soldier with a snub nose . 
His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were rolled back . 
Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran down his back . 
`` Why , this one seems ... '' he began , turning to the assistant . 
`` And how we 've been begging , your honor , '' said the old soldier , his jaw quivering . 
`` He 's been dead since morning . 
After all we 're men , not dogs . '' 
`` I 'll send someone at once . 
He shall be taken away -- taken away at once , '' said the assistant hurriedly . 
`` Let us go , your honor . '' 
`` Yes , yes , let us go , '' said Rostov hastily , and lowering his eyes and shrinking , he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of reproachful envious eyes that were fixed upon him , and went out of the room . 
Going along the corridor , the assistant led Rostov to the officers ' wards , consisting of three rooms , the doors of which stood open . 
There were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or sitting on them . 
Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing gowns . 
The first person Rostov met in the officers ' ward was a thin little man with one arm , who was walking about the first room in a nightcap and hospital dressing gown , with a pipe between his teeth . 
Rostov looked at him , trying to remember where he had seen him before . 
`` See where we 've met again ! '' 
said the little man . 
`` Tushin , Tushin , do n't you remember , who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern ? 
And I 've had a bit cut off , you see ... '' he went on with a smile , pointing to the empty sleeve of his dressing gown . 
`` Looking for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov ? 
My neighbor , '' he added , when he heard who Rostov wanted . 
`` Here , here , '' and Tushin led him into the next room , from whence came sounds of several laughing voices . 
`` How can they laugh , or even live at all here ? '' 
thought Rostov , still aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong in the soldiers ' ward , and still seeming to see fixed on him those envious looks which had followed him out from both sides , and the face of that young soldier with eyes rolled back . 
Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket , though it was nearly noon . 
`` Ah , Wostov ? 
How are you , how are you ? '' 
he called out , still in the same voice as in the regiment , but Rostov noticed sadly that under this habitual ease and animation some new , sinister , hidden feeling showed itself in the expression of Denisov 's face and the intonations of his voice . 
His wound , though a slight one , had not yet healed even now , six weeks after he had been hit . 
His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces of the other hospital patients , but it was not this that struck Rostov . 
What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to see him , and smiled at him unnaturally . 
He did not ask about the regiment , nor about the general state of affairs , and when Rostov spoke of these matters did not listen . 
Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded of the regiment , or in general of that other free life which was going on outside the hospital . 
He seemed to try to forget that old life and was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers . 
On Rostov 's inquiry as to how the matter stood , he at once produced from under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the rough draft of his answer to it . 
He became animated when he began reading his paper and specially drew Rostov 's attention to the stinging rejoinders he made to his enemies . 
His hospital companions , who had gathered round Rostov -- a fresh arrival from the world outside - gradually began to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading his answer . 
Rostov noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard that story more than once and were tired of it . 
Only the man who had the next bed , a stout Uhlan , continued to sit on his bed , gloomily frowning and smoking a pipe , and little one-armed Tushin still listened , shaking his head disapprovingly . 
In the middle of the reading , the Uhlan interrupted Denisov . 
`` But what I say is , '' he said , turning to Rostov , `` it would be best simply to petition the Emperor for pardon . 
