Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marriage for a year ; but Natasha attacked her brother with exasperation , proving to him that it could not be otherwise , and that it would be a bad thing to enter a family against the father 's will , and that she herself wished it so . 
`` You do n't at all understand , '' she said . 
Nicholas was silent and agreed with her . 
Her brother often wondered as he looked at her . 
She did not seem at all like a girl in love and parted from her affianced husband . 
She was even-tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old . 
This amazed Nicholas and even made him regard Bolkonski 's courtship skeptically . 
He could not believe that her fate was sealed , especially as he had not seen her with Prince Andrew . 
It always seemed to him that there was something not quite right about this intended marriage . 
`` Why this delay ? 
Why no betrothal ? '' 
he thought . 
Once , when he had touched on this topic with his mother , he discovered , to his surprise and somewhat to his satisfaction , that in the depth of her soul she too had doubts about this marriage . 
`` You see he writes , '' said she , showing her son a letter of Prince Andrew 's , with that latent grudge a mother always has in regard to a daughter 's future married happiness , `` he writes that he wo n't come before December . 
What can be keeping him ? 
Illness , probably ! 
His health is very delicate . 
Do n't tell Natasha . 
And do n't attach importance to her being so bright : that 's because she 's living through the last days of her girlhood , but I know what she is like every time we receive a letter from him ! 
However , God grant that everything turns out well ! '' 
-LRB- She always ended with these words . -RRB- 
`` He is an excellent man ! '' 
After reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull . 
He was worried by the impending necessity of interfering in the stupid business matters for which his mother had called him home . 
To throw off this burden as quickly as possible , on the third day after his arrival he went , angry and scowling and without answering questions as to where he was going , to Mitenka 's lodge and demanded an account of everything . 
But what an account of everything might be Nicholas knew even less than the frightened and bewildered Mitenka . 
The conversation and the examination of the accounts with Mitenka did not last long . 
The village elder , a peasant delegate , and the village clerk , who were waiting in the passage , heard with fear and delight first the young count 's voice roaring and snapping and rising louder and louder , and then words of abuse , dreadful words , ejaculated one after the other . 
`` Robber ! 
... Ungrateful wretch ! 
... I 'll hack the dog to pieces ! 
I 'm not my father ! 
... Robbing us ! 
... '' and so on . 
Then with no less fear and delight they saw how the young count , red in the face and with bloodshot eyes , dragged Mitenka out by the scruff of the neck and applied his foot and knee to his behind with great agility at convenient moments between the words , shouting , `` Be off ! 
Never let me see your face here again , you villain ! '' 
Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into the shrubbery . 
-LRB- This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge for culprits at Otradnoe . 
Mitenka himself , returning tipsy from the town , used to hide there , and many of the residents at Otradnoe , hiding from Mitenka , knew of its protective qualities . -RRB- 
Mitenka 's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and frightened faces out of the door of a room where a bright samovar was boiling and where the steward 's high bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt . 
The young count paid no heed to them , but , breathing hard , passed by with resolute strides and went into the house . 
The countess , who heard at once from the maids what had happened at the lodge , was calmed by the thought that now their affairs would certainly improve , but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effect this excitement might have on her son . 
She went several times to his door on tiptoe and listened , as he lighted one pipe after another . 
Next day the old count called his son aside and , with an embarrassed smile , said to him : `` But you know , my dear boy , it 's a pity you got excited ! 
Mitenka has told me all about it . '' 
`` I knew , '' thought Nicholas , `` that I should never understand anything in this crazy world . '' 
`` You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles . 
But they were carried forward -- and you did not look at the other page . '' 
`` Papa , he is a blackguard and a thief ! 
I know he is ! 
