`` Oh , those Moscow gossips ! '' 
said Dolokhov , and he took up the cards with a smile . 
`` Aah ! '' 
Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head . 
The seven he needed was lying uppermost , the first card in the pack . 
He had lost more than he could pay . 
`` Still , do n't ruin yourself ! '' 
said Dolokhov with a side glance at Rostov as he continued to deal . 
An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested in their own play . 
The whole interest was concentrated on Rostov . 
Instead of sixteen hundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him , which he had reckoned up to ten thousand , but that now , as he vaguely supposed , must have risen to fifteen thousand . 
In reality it already exceeded twenty thousand rubles . 
Dolokhov was no longer listening to stories or telling them , but followed every movement of Rostov 's hands and occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him . 
He had decided to play until that score reached forty-three thousand . 
He had fixed on that number because forty-three was the sum of his and Sonya 's joint ages . 
Rostov , leaning his head on both hands , sat at the table which was scrawled over with figures , wet with spilled wine , and littered with cards . 
One tormenting impression did not leave him : that those broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt sleeves , those hands which he loved and hated , held him in their power . 
`` Six hundred rubles , ace , a corner , a nine ... winning it back 's impossible ... Oh , how pleasant it was at home ! 
... The knave , double or quits ... it ca n't be ! 
... And why is he doing this to me ? '' 
Rostov pondered . 
Sometimes he staked a large sum , but Dolokhov refused to accept it and fixed the stake himself . 
Nicholas submitted to him , and at one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridge over the Enns , and then guessed that the card that came first to hand from the crumpled heap under the table would save him , now counted the cords on his coat and took a card with that number and tried staking the total of his losses on it , then he looked round for aid from the other players , or peered at the now cold face of Dolokhov and tried to read what was passing in his mind . 
`` He knows of course what this loss means to me . 
He ca n't want my ruin . 
Was n't he my friend ? 
Was n't I fond of him ? 
But it 's not his fault . 
What 's he to do if he has such luck ? 
... And it 's not my fault either , '' he thought to himself , `` I have done nothing wrong . 
Have I killed anyone , or insulted or wished harm to anyone ? 
Why such a terrible misfortune ? 
And when did it begin ? 
Such a little while ago I came to this table with the thought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mamma 's name day and then going home . 
I was so happy , so free , so lighthearted ! 
And I did not realize how happy I was ! 
When did that end and when did this new , terrible state of things begin ? 
What marked the change ? 
I sat all the time in this same place at this table , chose and placed cards , and watched those broad-boned agile hands in the same way . 
When did it happen and what has happened ? 
I am well and strong and still the same and in the same place . 
No , it ca n't be ! 
Surely it will all end in nothing ! '' 
He was flushed and bathed in perspiration , though the room was not hot . 
His face was terrible and piteous to see , especially from its helpless efforts to seem calm . 
The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand . 
Rostov had just prepared a card , by bending the corner of which he meant to double the three thousand just put down to his score , when Dolokhov , slamming down the pack of cards , put it aside and began rapidly adding up the total of Rostov 's debt , breaking the chalk as he marked the figures in his clear , bold hand . 
`` Supper , it 's time for supper ! 
And here are the gypsies ! '' 
Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outside and saying something in their gypsy accents . 
