Among the gentry of the province Nicholas was respected but not liked . 
He did not concern himself with the interests of his own class , and consequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid . 
The whole summer , from spring sowing to harvest , he was busy with the work on his farm . 
In autumn he gave himself up to hunting with the same business like seriousness -- leaving home for a month , or even two , with his hunt . 
In winter he visited his other villages or spent his time reading . 
The books he read were chiefly historical , and on these he spent a certain sum every year . 
He was collecting , as he said , a serious library , and he made it a rule to read through all the books he bought . 
He would sit in his study with a grave air , reading -- a task he first imposed upon himself as a duty , but which afterwards became a habit affording him a special kind of pleasure and a consciousness of being occupied with serious matters . 
In winter , except for business excursions , he spent most of his time at home making himself one with his family and entering into all the details of his children 's relations with their mother . 
The harmony between him and his wife grew closer and closer and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her . 
From the time of his marriage Sonya had lived in his house . 
Before that , Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself and Sonya , blaming himself and commending her . 
He had asked Princess Mary to be gentle and kind to his cousin . 
She thoroughly realized the wrong he had done Sonya , felt herself to blame toward her , and imagined that her wealth had influenced Nicholas ' choice . 
She could not find fault with Sonya in any way and tried to be fond of her , but often felt ill-will toward her which she could not overcome . 
Once she had a talk with her friend Natasha about Sonya and about her own injustice toward her . 
`` You know , '' said Natasha , `` you have read the Gospels a great deal - there is a passage in them that just fits Sonya . '' 
`` What ? '' 
asked Countess Mary , surprised . '' 
` To him that hath shall be given , and from him that hath not shall be taken away . ' 
You remember ? 
She is one that hath not ; why , I do n't know . 
Perhaps she lacks egotism , I do n't know , but from her is taken away , and everything has been taken away . 
Sometimes I am dreadfully sorry for her . 
Formerly I very much wanted Nicholas to marry her , but I always had a sort of presentiment that it would not come off . 
She is a sterile flower , you know -- like some strawberry blossoms . 
Sometimes I am sorry for her , and sometimes I think she does n't feel it as you or I would . '' 
Though Countess Mary told Natasha that those words in the Gospel must be understood differently , yet looking at Sonya she agreed with Natasha 's explanation . 
It really seemed that Sonya did not feel her position trying , and had grown quite reconciled to her lot as a sterile flower . 
She seemed to be fond not so much of individuals as of the family as a whole . 
Like a cat , she had attached herself not to the people but to the home . 
She waited on the old countess , petted and spoiled the children , was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift , and all this was unconsciously accepted from her with insufficient gratitude . 
The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt , though not on the same scale as under the old prince . 
The buildings , begun under straitened circumstances , were more than simple . 
The immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood , plastered only inside . 
It had bare deal floors and was furnished with very simple hard sofas , armchairs , tables , and chairs made by their own serf carpenters out of their own birchwood . 
The house was spacious and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors . 
Whole families of the Rostovs ' and Bolkonskis ' relations sometimes came to Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for months . 
Besides that , four times a year , on the name days and birthdays of the hosts , as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a day or two . 
The rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with its ordinary occupations , and its breakfasts , lunches , dinners , and suppers , provided out of the produce of the estate . 
It was the eve of St. Nicholas , the fifth of December , 1820 . 
Natasha had been staying at her brother 's with her husband and children since early autumn . 
Pierre had gone to Petersburg on business of his own for three weeks as he said , but had remained there nearly seven weeks and was expected back every minute . 
Besides the Bezukhov family , Nicholas ' old friend the retired General Vasili Dmitrich Denisov was staying with the Rostovs this fifth of December . 
On the sixth , which was his name day when the house would be full of visitors , Nicholas knew he would have to exchange his Tartar tunic for a tail coat , and put on narrow boots with pointed toes , and drive to the new church he had built , and then receive visitors who would come to congratulate him , offer them refreshments , and talk about the elections of the nobility ; but he considered himself entitled to spend the eve of that day in his usual way . 
He examined the bailiff 's accounts of the village in Ryazan which belonged to his wife 's nephew , wrote two business letters , and walked over to the granaries , cattle yards and stables before dinner . 
Having taken precautions against the general drunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a great saint 's day , he returned to dinner , and without having time for a private talk with his wife sat down at the long table laid for twenty persons , at which the whole household had assembled . 
At that table were his mother , his mother 's old lady companion Belova , his wife , their three children with their governess and tutor , his wife 's nephew with his tutor , Sonya , Denisov , Natasha , her three children , their governess , and old Michael Ivanovich , the late prince 's architect , who was living on in retirement at Bald Hills . 
Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table . 
When her husband took his place she concluded , from the rapid manner in which after taking up his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglass standing before him , that he was out of humor , as was sometimes the case when he came in to dinner straight from the farm -- especially before the soup . 
