`` Yes , God be thanked ! 
Yes ! 
They 've just finished supper . 
Let me have a look at you , your excellency . '' 
`` Is everything quite all right ? '' 
`` The Lord be thanked , yes ! '' 
Rostov , who had completely forgotten Denisov , not wishing anyone to forestall him , threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the large dark ballroom . 
All was the same : there were the same old card tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it ; but someone had already seen the young master , and , before he had reached the drawing room , something flew out from a side door like a tornado and began hugging and kissing him . 
Another and yet another creature of the same kind sprang from a second door and a third ; more hugging , more kissing , more outcries , and tears of joy . 
He could not distinguish which was Papa , which Natasha , and which Petya . 
Everyone shouted , talked , and kissed him at the same time . 
Only his mother was not there , he noticed that . 
`` And I did not know ... Nicholas ... My darling ! 
... '' `` Here he is ... our own ... Kolya , * dear fellow ... How he has changed ! 
... Where are the candles ? 
... Tea ! 
... '' * Nicholas . 
`` And me , kiss me ! '' 
`` Dearest ... and me ! '' 
Sonya , Natasha , Petya , Anna Mikhaylovna , Vera , and the old count were all hugging him , and the serfs , men and maids , flocked into the room , exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing . 
Petya , clinging to his legs , kept shouting , `` And me too ! '' 
Natasha , after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face with kisses , holding him tight by the skirt of his coat , sprang away and pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly . 
All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy , and all around were lips seeking a kiss . 
Sonya too , all rosy red , clung to his arm and , radiant with bliss , looked eagerly toward his eyes , waiting for the look for which she longed . 
Sonya now was sixteen and she was very pretty , especially at this moment of happy , rapturous excitement . 
She gazed at him , not taking her eyes off him , and smiling and holding her breath . 
He gave her a grateful look , but was still expectant and looking for someone . 
The old countess had not yet come . 
But now steps were heard at the door , steps so rapid that they could hardly be his mother 's . 
Yet it was she , dressed in a new gown which he did not know , made since he had left . 
All the others let him go , and he ran to her . 
When they met , she fell on his breast , sobbing . 
She could not lift her face , but only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar 's jacket . 
Denisov , who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone , stood there and wiped his eyes at the sight . 
`` Vasili Denisov , your son 's friend , '' he said , introducing himself to the count , who was looking inquiringly at him . 
`` You are most welcome ! 
I know , I know , '' said the count , kissing and embracing Denisov . 
`` Nicholas wrote us ... Natasha , Vera , look ! 
Here is Denisov ! '' 
The same happy , rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denisov . 
`` Darling Denisov ! '' 
screamed Natasha , beside herself with rapture , springing to him , putting her arms round him , and kissing him . 
This escapade made everybody feel confused . 
Denisov blushed too , but smiled and , taking Natasha 's hand , kissed it . 
Denisov was shown to the room prepared for him , and the Rostovs all gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room . 
The old countess , not letting go of his hand and kissing it every moment , sat beside him : the rest , crowding round him , watched every movement , word , or look of his , never taking their blissfully adoring eyes off him . 
His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearest to him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea , handkerchief , and pipe . 
Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him ; but the first moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemed insufficient , and he kept expecting something more , more and yet more . 
Next morning , after the fatigues of their journey , the travelers slept till ten o'clock . 
In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers , satchels , sabretaches , open portmanteaus , and dirty boots . 
