He forgot that what he was saying about Natasha could have been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife . 
`` Yes , I have noticed that , '' said Countess Mary . 
`` When I told him that duty and the oath were above everything , he started proving goodness knows what ! 
A pity you were not there -- what would you have said ? '' 
`` As I see it you were quite right , and I told Natasha so . 
Pierre says everybody is suffering , tortured , and being corrupted , and that it is our duty to help our neighbor . 
Of course he is right there , '' said Countess Mary , `` but he forgets that we have other duties nearer to us , duties indicated to us by God Himself , and that though we might expose ourselves to risks we must not risk our children . '' 
`` Yes , that 's it ! 
That 's just what I said to him , '' put in Nicholas , who fancied he really had said it . 
`` But they insisted on their own view : love of one 's neighbor and Christianity -- and all this in the presence of young Nicholas , who had gone into my study and broke all my things . '' 
`` Ah , Nicholas , do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas , '' said Countess Mary . 
`` He is such an exceptional boy . 
I am afraid I neglect him in favor of my own : we all have children and relations while he has no one . 
He is constantly alone with his thoughts . '' 
`` Well , I do n't think you need reproach yourself on his account . 
All that the fondest mother could do for her son you have done and are doing for him , and of course I am glad of it . 
He is a fine lad , a fine lad ! 
This evening he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance , and fancy -- as we were going in to supper I looked and he had broken everything on my table to bits , and he told me of it himself at once ! 
I never knew him to tell an untruth . 
A fine lad , a fine lad ! '' 
repeated Nicholas , who at heart was not fond of Nicholas Bolkonski but was always anxious to recognize that he was a fine lad . 
`` Still , I am not the same as his own mother , '' said Countess Mary . 
`` I feel I am not the same and it troubles me . 
A wonderful boy , but I am dreadfully afraid for him . 
It would be good for him to have companions . '' 
`` Well it wo n't be for long . 
Next summer I 'll take him to Petersburg , '' said Nicholas . 
`` Yes , Pierre always was a dreamer and always will be , '' he continued , returning to the talk in the study which had evidently disturbed him . 
`` Well , what business is it of mine what goes on there -- whether Arakcheev is bad , and all that ? 
What business was it of mine when I married and was so deep in debt that I was threatened with prison , and had a mother who could not see or understand it ? 
And then there are you and the children and our affairs . 
Is it for my own pleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from morning to night ? 
No , but I know I must work to comfort my mother , to repay you , and not to leave the children such beggars as I was . '' 
Countess Mary wanted to tell him that man does not live by bread alone and that he attached too much importance to these matters . 
But she knew she must not say this and that it would be useless to do so . 
She only took his hand and kissed it . 
He took this as a sign of approval and a confirmation of his thoughts , and after a few minutes ' reflection continued to think aloud . 
`` You know , Mary , today Elias Mitrofanych '' -LRB- this was his overseer -RRB- `` came back from the Tambov estate and told me they are already offering eighty thousand rubles for the forest . '' 
And with an eager face Nicholas began to speak of the possibility of repurchasing Otradnoe before long , and added : `` Another ten years of life and I shall leave the children ... in an excellent position . '' 
Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that he told her . 
She knew that when he thought aloud in this way he would sometimes ask her what he had been saying , and be vexed if he noticed that she had been thinking about something else . 
But she had to force herself to attend , for what he was saying did not interest her at all . 
She looked at him and did not think , but felt , about something different . 
She felt a submissive tender love for this man who would never understand all that she understood , and this seemed to make her love for him still stronger and added a touch of passionate tenderness . 
Besides this feeling which absorbed her altogether and hindered her from following the details of her husband 's plans , thoughts that had no connection with what he was saying flitted through her mind . 
She thought of her nephew . 
Her husband 's account of the boy 's agitation while Pierre was speaking struck her forcibly , and various traits of his gentle , sensitive character recurred to her mind ; and while thinking of her nephew she thought also of her own children . 
She did not compare them with him , but compared her feeling for them with her feeling for him , and felt with regret that there was something lacking in her feeling for young Nicholas . 
Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from the difference in their ages , but she felt herself to blame toward him and promised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible - in this life to love her husband , her children , little Nicholas , and all her neighbors , as Christ loved mankind . 
Countess Mary 's soul always strove toward the infinite , the eternal , and the absolute , and could therefore never be at peace . 
