So it has been with Barclay . 
While Russia was well , a foreigner could serve her and be a splendid minister ; but as soon as she is in danger she needs one of her own kin . 
But in your Club they have been making him out a traitor ! 
They slander him as a traitor , and the only result will be that afterwards , ashamed of their false accusations , they will make him out a hero or a genius instead of a traitor , and that will be still more unjust . 
He is an honest and very punctilious German . '' 
`` And they say he 's a skillful commander , '' rejoined Pierre . 
`` I do n't understand what is meant by ' a skillful commander , ' '' replied Prince Andrew ironically . 
`` A skillful commander ? '' 
replied Pierre . 
`` Why , one who foresees all contingencies ... and foresees the adversary 's intentions . '' 
`` But that 's impossible , '' said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter settled long ago . 
Pierre looked at him in surprise . 
`` And yet they say that war is like a game of chess ? '' 
he remarked . 
`` Yes , '' replied Prince Andrew , `` but with this little difference , that in chess you may think over each move as long as you please and are not limited for time , and with this difference too , that a knight is always stronger than a pawn , and two pawns are always stronger than one , while in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division and sometimes weaker than a company . 
The relative strength of bodies of troops can never be known to anyone . 
Believe me , '' he went on , `` if things depended on arrangements made by the staff , I should be there making arrangements , but instead of that I have the honor to serve here in the regiment with these gentlemen , and I consider that on us tomorrow 's battle will depend and not on those others ... . 
Success never depends , and never will depend , on position , or equipment , or even on numbers , and least of all on position . '' 
`` But on what then ? '' 
`` On the feeling that is in me and in him , '' he pointed to Timokhin , `` and in each soldier . '' 
Prince Andrew glanced at Timokhin , who looked at his commander in alarm and bewilderment . 
In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity Prince Andrew now seemed excited . 
He could apparently not refrain from expressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him . 
`` A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it ! 
Why did we lose the battle at Austerlitz ? 
The French losses were almost equal to ours , but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle , and we did lose it . 
And we said so because we had nothing to fight for there , we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon as we could . 
` We 've lost , so let us run , ' and we ran . 
If we had not said that till the evening , heaven knows what might not have happened . 
But tomorrow we sha n't say it ! 
You talk about our position , the left flank weak and the right flank too extended , '' he went on . 
`` That 's all nonsense , there 's nothing of the kind . 
But what awaits us tomorrow ? 
A hundred million most diverse chances which will be decided on the instant by the fact that our men or theirs run or do not run , and that this man or that man is killed , but all that is being done at present is only play . 
The fact is that those men with whom you have ridden round the position not only do not help matters , but hinder . 
They are only concerned with their own petty interests . '' 
`` At such a moment ? '' 
said Pierre reproachfully . 
`` At such a moment ! '' 
Prince Andrew repeated . 
`` To them it is only a moment affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross or ribbon . 
For me tomorrow means this : a Russian army of a hundred thousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fight , and the thing is that these two hundred thousand men will fight and the side that fights more fiercely and spares itself least will win . 
And if you like I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles those at the top may make , we shall win tomorrow 's battle . 
Tomorrow , happen what may , we shall win ! '' 
`` There now , your excellency ! 
That 's the truth , the real truth , '' said Timokhin . 
`` Who would spare himself now ? 
The soldiers in my battalion , believe me , would n't drink their vodka ! 
` It 's not the day for that ! ' 
they say . '' 
