And , indeed , human reason replies : every time conquerors appear there have been wars , but this does not prove that the conquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of a war in the personal activity of a single man . 
Whenever I look at my watch and its hands point to ten , I hear the bells of the neighboring church ; but because the bells begin to ring when the hands of the clock reach ten , I have no right to assume that the movement of the bells is caused by the position of the hands of the watch . 
Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle and see the valves opening and wheels turning ; but I have no right to conclude that the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause of the movement of the engine . 
The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaks are budding , and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak is budding . 
But though I do not know what causes the cold winds to blow when the oak buds unfold , I can not agree with the peasants that the unfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the cold wind , for the force of the wind is beyond the influence of the buds . 
I see only a coincidence of occurrences such as happens with all the phenomena of life , and I see that however much and however carefully I observe the hands of the watch , and the valves and wheels of the engine , and the oak , I shall not discover the cause of the bells ringing , the engine moving , or of the winds of spring . 
To that I must entirely change my point of view and study the laws of the movement of steam , of the bells , and of the wind . 
History must do the same . 
And attempts in this direction have already been made . 
To study the laws of history we must completely change the subject of our observation , must leave aside kings , ministers , and generals , and the common , infinitesimally small elements by which the masses are moved . 
No one can say in how far it is possible for man to advance in this way toward an understanding of the laws of history ; but it is evident that only along that path does the possibility of discovering the laws of history lie , and that as yet not a millionth part as much mental effort has been applied in this direction by historians as has been devoted to describing the actions of various kings , commanders , and ministers and propounding the historians ' own reflections concerning these actions . 
The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia . 
The Russian army and people avoided a collision till Smolensk was reached , and again from Smolensk to Borodino . 
The French army pushed on to Moscow , its goal , its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim , just as the velocity of a falling body increases as it approaches the earth . 
Behind it were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken , hostile country ; ahead were a few dozen miles separating it from its goal . 
Every soldier in Napoleon 's army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum . 
The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit of hatred of the enemy flared up , and while it retreated the army increased and consolidated . 
At Borodino a collision took place . 
Neither army was broken up , but the Russian army retreated immediately after the collision as inevitably as a ball recoils after colliding with another having a greater momentum , and with equal inevitability the ball of invasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled on for some distance , though the collision had deprived it of all its force . 
The Russians retreated eighty miles -- to beyond Moscow -- and the French reached Moscow and there came to a standstill . 
For five weeks after that there was not a single battle . 
The French did not move . 
As a bleeding , mortally wounded animal licks its wounds , they remained inert in Moscow for five weeks , and then suddenly , with no fresh reason , fled back : they made a dash for the Kaluga road , and -LRB- after a victory -- for at Malo-Yaroslavets the field of conflict again remained theirs -RRB- without undertaking a single serious battle , they fled still more rapidly back to Smolensk , beyond Smolensk , beyond the Berezina , beyond Vilna , and farther still . 
On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August , Kutuzov and the whole Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was a victory . 
Kutuzov reported so to the Emperor . 
He gave orders to prepare for a fresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone , but because he knew that the enemy was beaten , as everyone who had taken part in the battle knew it . 
But all that evening and next day reports came in one after another of unheard-of losses , of the loss of half the army , and a fresh battle proved physically impossible . 
It was impossible to give battle before information had been collected , the wounded gathered in , the supplies of ammunition replenished , the slain reckoned up , new officers appointed to replace those who had been killed , and before the men had had food and sleep . 
And meanwhile , the very next morning after the battle , the French army advanced of itself upon the Russians , carried forward by the force of its own momentum now seemingly increased in inverse proportion to the square of the distance from its aim . 
Kutuzov 's wish was to attack next day , and the whole army desired to do so . 
But to make an attack the wish to do so is not sufficient , there must also be a possibility of doing it , and that possibility did not exist . 
It was impossible not to retreat a day 's march , and then in the same way it was impossible not to retreat another and a third day 's march , and at last , on the first of September when the army drew near Moscow -- despite the strength of the feeling that had arisen in all ranks -- the force of circumstances compelled it to retire beyond Moscow . 
And the troops retired one more , last , day 's march , and abandoned Moscow to the enemy . 
For people accustomed to think that plans of campaign and battles are made by generals -- as any one of us sitting over a map in his study may imagine how he would have arranged things in this or that battle -- the questions present themselves : Why did Kutuzov during the retreat not do this or that ? 
Why did he not take up a position before reaching Fili ? 
Why did he not retire at once by the Kaluga road , abandoning Moscow ? 
and so on . 
People accustomed to think in that way forget , or do not know , the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of any commander in chief . 
The activity of a commander in chief does not all resemble the activity we imagine to ourselves when we sit at case in our studies examining some campaign on the map , with a certain number of troops on this and that side in a certain known locality , and begin our plans from some given moment . 
A commander in chief is never dealing with the beginning of any event - the position from which we always contemplate it . 
The commander in chief is always in the midst of a series of shifting events and so he never can at any moment consider the whole import of an event that is occurring . 
Moment by moment the event is imperceptibly shaping itself , and at every moment of this continuous , uninterrupted shaping of events the commander in chief is in the midst of a most complex play of intrigues , worries , contingencies , authorities , projects , counsels , threats , and deceptions and is continually obliged to reply to innumerable questions addressed to him , which constantly conflict with one another . 
Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutuzov should have moved his army to the Kaluga road long before reaching Fili , and that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him . 
But a commander in chief , especially at a difficult moment , has always before him not one proposal but dozens simultaneously . 
And all these proposals , based on strategics and tactics , contradict each other . 
A commander in chief 's business , it would seem , is simply to choose one of these projects . 
But even that he can not do . 
Events and time do not wait . 
For instance , on the twenty-eighth it is suggested to him to cross to the Kaluga road , but just then an adjutant gallops up from Miloradovich asking whether he is to engage the French or retire . 
An order must be given him at once , that instant . 
