One adjutant , nearest the door , was sitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown , writing . 
Another , the red , stout Nesvitski , lay on a bed with his arms under his head , laughing with an officer who had sat down beside him . 
A third was playing a Viennese waltz on the clavichord , while a fourth , lying on the clavichord , sang the tune . 
Bolkonski was not there . 
None of these gentlemen changed his position on seeing Boris . 
The one who was writing and whom Boris addressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkonski was on duty and that he should go through the door on the left into the reception room if he wished to see him . 
Boris thanked him and went to the reception room , where he found some ten officers and generals . 
When he entered , Prince Andrew , his eyes drooping contemptuously -LRB- with that peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says , `` If it were not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment '' -RRB- , was listening to an old Russian general with decorations , who stood very erect , almost on tiptoe , with a soldier 's obsequious expression on his purple face , reporting something . 
`` Very well , then , be so good as to wait , '' said Prince Andrew to the general , in Russian , speaking with the French intonation he affected when he wished to speak contemptuously , and noticing Boris , Prince Andrew , paying no more heed to the general who ran after him imploring him to hear something more , nodded and turned to him with a cheerful smile . 
At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised , that in the army , besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in the military code , which he and the others knew in the regiment , there was another , more important , subordination , which made this tight-laced , purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew , for his own pleasure , chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskoy . 
More than ever was Boris resolved to serve in future not according to the written code , but under this unwritten law . 
He felt now that merely by having been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the general who at the front had the power to annihilate him , a lieutenant of the Guards . 
Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand . 
`` I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday . 
I was fussing about with Germans all day . 
We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions . 
When Germans start being accurate , there 's no end to it ! '' 
Boris smiled , as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to as something generally known . 
But it the first time he had heard Weyrother 's name , or even the term `` dispositions . '' 
`` Well , my dear fellow , so you still want to be an adjutant ? 
I have been thinking about you . '' 
`` Yes , I was thinking '' -- for some reason Boris could not help blushing -- `` of asking the commander in chief . 
He has had a letter from Prince Kuragin about me . 
I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards wo n't be in action , '' he added as if in apology . 
`` All right , all right . 
We 'll talk it over , '' replied Prince Andrew . 
`` Only let me report this gentleman 's business , and I shall be at your disposal . '' 
While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general , that gentleman -- evidently not sharing Boris ' conception of the advantages of the unwritten code of subordination -- looked so fixedly at the presumptuous lieutenant who had prevented his finishing what he had to say to the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfortable . 
He turned away and waited impatiently for Prince Andrew 's return from the commander in chief 's room . 
`` You see , my dear fellow , I have been thinking about you , '' said Prince Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the clavichord was . 
`` It 's no use your going to the commander in chief . 
He would say a lot of pleasant things , ask you to dinner '' -LRB- `` That would not be bad as regards the unwritten code , '' thought Boris -RRB- , `` but nothing more would come of it . 
There will soon be a battalion of us aides-de-camp and adjutants ! 
But this is what we 'll do : I have a good friend , an adjutant general and an excellent fellow , Prince Dolgorukov ; and though you may not know it , the fact is that now Kutuzov with his staff and all of us count for nothing . 
Everything is now centered round the Emperor . 
So we will go to Dolgorukov ; I have to go there anyhow and I have already spoken to him about you . 
We shall see whether he can not attach you to himself or find a place for you somewhere nearer the sun . '' 
Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a young man and help him to worldly success . 
Under cover of obtaining help of this kind for another , which from pride he would never accept for himself , he kept in touch with the circle which confers success and which attracted him . 
He very readily took up Boris ' cause and went with him to Dolgorukov . 
It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmutz occupied by the Emperors and their retinues . 
That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part . 
At that council , contrary to the views of the old generals Kutuzov and Prince Schwartzenberg , it had been decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte . 
The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris arrived at the palace to find Dolgorukov . 
Everyone at headquarters was still under the spell of the day 's council , at which the party of the young had triumphed . 
The voices of those who counseled delay and advised waiting for something else before advancing had been so completely silenced and their arguments confuted by such conclusive evidence of the advantages of attacking that what had been discussed at the council -- the coming battle and the victory that would certainly result from it -- no longer seemed to be in the future but in the past . 
All the advantages were on our side . 
Our enormous forces , undoubtedly superior to Napoleon 's , were concentrated in one place , the troops inspired by the Emperors ' presence were eager for action . 
The strategic position where the operations would take place was familiar in all its details to the Austrian General Weyrother : a lucky accident had ordained that the Austrian army should maneuver the previous year on the very fields where the French had now to be fought ; the adjacent locality was known and shown in every detail on the maps , and Bonaparte , evidently weakened , was undertaking nothing . 
Dolgorukov , one of the warmest advocates of an attack , had just returned from the council , tired and exhausted but eager and proud of the victory that had been gained . 
