They say great rewards will now be distributed , and surely a pardon would be granted ... '' `` Me petition the Empewo ' ! '' 
exclaimed Denisov , in a voice to which he tried hard to give the old energy and fire , but which sounded like an expression of irritable impotence . 
`` What for ? 
If I were a wobber I would ask mercy , but I 'm being court-martialed for bwinging wobbers to book . 
Let them twy me , I 'm not afwaid of anyone . 
I 've served the Tsar and my countwy honowably and have not stolen ! 
And am I to be degwaded ? 
... Listen , I 'm w ` iting to them stwaight . 
This is what I say : ` If I had wobbed the Tweasuwy ... ' '' `` It 's certainly well written , '' said Tushin , `` but that 's not the point , Vasili Dmitrich , '' and he also turned to Rostov . 
`` One has to submit , and Vasili Dmitrich does n't want to . 
You know the auditor told you it was a bad business . '' 
`` Well , let it be bad , '' said Denisov . 
`` The auditor wrote out a petition for you , '' continued Tushin , `` and you ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it . 
No doubt he '' -LRB- indicating Rostov -RRB- `` has connections on the staff . 
You wo n't find a better opportunity . '' 
`` Have n't I said I 'm not going to gwovel ? '' 
Denisov interrupted him , went on reading his paper . 
Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov , though he instinctively felt that the way advised by Tushin and the other officers was the safest , and though he would have been glad to be of service to Denisov . 
He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper . 
When the reading of Denisov 's virulent reply , which took more than an hour , was over , Rostov said nothing , and he spent the rest of the day in a most dejected state of mind amid Denisov 's hospital comrades , who had round him , telling them what he knew and listening to their stories . 
Denisov was moodily silent all the evening . 
Late in the evening , when Rostov was about to leave , he asked Denisov whether he had no commission for him . 
`` Yes , wait a bit , '' said Denisov , glancing round at the officers , and taking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window , where he had an inkpot , and sat down to write . 
`` It seems it 's no use knocking one 's head against a wall ! '' 
he said , coming from the window and giving Rostov a large envelope . 
In it was the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor , in which Denisov , without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat officials , simply asked for pardon . 
`` Hand it in . 
It seems ... '' He did not finish , but gave a painfully unnatural smile . 
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of Denisov 's affairs , Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor . 
On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in Tilsit . 
Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom he was in attendance , to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at Tilsit . 
`` I should like to see the great man , '' he said , alluding to Napoleon , whom hitherto he , like everyone else , had always called Buonaparte . 
`` You are speaking of Buonaparte ? '' 
asked the general , smiling . 
Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was being tested . 
`` I am speaking , Prince , of the Emperor Napoleon , '' he replied . 
The general patted him on the shoulder , with a smile . 
`` You will go far , '' he said , and took him to Tilsit with him . 
Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two Emperors met . 
He saw the raft , decorated with monograms , saw Napoleon pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river , saw the pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavern on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon 's arrival , saw both Emperors get into boats , and saw how Napoleon - reaching the raft first -- stepped quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him , and how they both retired into the pavilion . 
Since he had begun to move in the highest circles Boris had made it his habit to watch attentively all that went on around him and to note it down . 
At the time of the meeting at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore , and listened attentively to words spoken by important personages . 
At the moment the Emperors went into the pavilion he looked at his watch , and did not forget to look at it again when Alexander came out . 
The interview had lasted an hour and fifty-three minutes . 
He noted this down that same evening , among other facts he felt to be of historic importance . 
As the Emperor 's suite was a very small one , it was a matter of great importance , for a man who valued his success in the service , to be at Tilsit on the occasion of this interview between the two Emperors , and having succeeded in this , Boris felt that henceforth his position was fully assured . 
He had not only become known , but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted him . 
Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself , so that the latter knew his face , and all those at court , far from cold-shouldering him as at first when they considered him a newcomer , would now have been surprised had he been absent . 
Boris lodged with another adjutant , the Polish Count Zhilinski . 
Zhilinski , a Pole brought up in Paris , was rich , and passionately fond of the French , and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit , French officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining and lunching with him and Boris . 
