`` Yes , but what luck for Lazarev ! 
Twelve hundred francs ' pension for life . '' 
`` Here 's a cap , lads ! '' 
shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier , donning a shaggy French cap . 
`` It 's a fine thing ! 
First-rate ! '' 
`` Have you heard the password ? '' 
asked one Guards ' officer of another . 
`` The day before yesterday it was ` Napoleon , France , bravoure ' ; yesterday , ` Alexandre , Russie , grandeur . ' 
One day our Emperor gives it and next day Napoleon . 
Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George 's Cross to the bravest of the French Guards . 
It has to be done . 
He must respond in kind . '' 
Boris , too , with his friend Zhilinski , came to see the Preobrazhensk banquet . 
On his way back , he noticed Rostov standing by the corner of a house . 
`` Rostov ! 
How d'you do ? 
We missed one another , '' he said , and could not refrain from asking what was the matter , so strangely dismal and troubled was Rostov 's face . 
`` Nothing , nothing , '' replied Rostov . 
`` You 'll call round ? '' 
`` Yes , I will . '' 
Rostov stood at that corner for a long time , watching the feast from a distance . 
In his mind , a painful process was going on which he could not bring to a conclusion . 
Terrible doubts rose in his soul . 
Now he remembered Denisov with his changed expression , his submission , and the whole hospital , with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease . 
So vividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he looked round to see where the smell came from . 
Next he thought of that self-satisfied Bonaparte , with his small white hand , who was now an Emperor , liked and respected by Alexander . 
Then why those severed arms and legs and those dead men ? 
... Then again he thought of Lazarev rewarded and Denisov punished and unpardoned . 
He caught himself harboring such strange thoughts that he was frightened . 
The smell of the food the Preobrazhenskis were eating and a sense of hunger recalled him from these reflections ; he had to get something to eat before going away . 
He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning . 
There he found so many people , among them officers who , like himself , had come in civilian clothes , that he had difficulty in getting a dinner . 
Two officers of his own division joined him . 
The conversation naturally turned on the peace . 
The officers , his comrades , like most of the army , were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle of Friedland . 
They said that had we held out a little longer Napoleon would have been done for , as his troops had neither provisions nor ammunition . 
Nicholas ate and drank -LRB- chiefly the latter -RRB- in silence . 
He finished a couple of bottles of wine by himself . 
The process in his mind went on tormenting him without reaching a conclusion . 
He feared to give way to his thoughts , yet could not get rid of them . 
Suddenly , on one of the officers ' saying that it was humiliating to look at the French , Rostov began shouting with uncalled-for wrath , and therefore much to the surprise of the officers : `` How can you judge what 's best ? '' 
he cried , the blood suddenly rushing to his face . 
`` How can you judge the Emperor 's actions ? 
What right have we to argue ? 
We can not comprehend either the Emperor 's or his actions ! '' 
`` But I never said a word about the Emperor ! '' 
said the officer , justifying himself , and unable to understand Rostov 's outburst , except on the supposition that he was drunk . 
But Rostov did not listen to him . 
`` We are not diplomatic officials , we are soldiers and nothing more , '' he went on . 
