On seeing Alpatych he went up to him . 
`` You 're welcome , Yakov Alpatych . 
Folks are leaving the town , but you have come to it , '' said he . 
`` Why are they leaving the town ? '' 
asked Alpatych . 
`` That 's what I say . 
Folks are foolish ! 
Always afraid of the French . '' 
`` Women 's fuss , women 's fuss ! '' 
said Alpatych . 
`` Just what I think , Yakov Alpatych . 
What I say is : orders have been given not to let them in , so that must be right . 
And the peasants are asking three rubles for carting -- it is n't Christian ! '' 
Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding . 
He asked for a samovar and for hay for his horses , and when he had had his tea he went to bed . 
All night long troops were moving past the inn . 
Next morning Alpatych donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business . 
It was a sunny morning and by eight o'clock it was already hot . 
`` A good day for harvesting , '' thought Alpatych . 
From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning . 
At eight o'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound of musketry . 
Many people were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers , but cabs were still driving about , tradesmen stood at their shops , and service was being held in the churches as usual . 
Alpatych went to the shops , to government offices , to the post office , and to the Governor 's . 
In the offices and shops and at the post office everyone was talking about the army and about the enemy who was already attacking the town , everybody was asking what should be done , and all were trying to calm one another . 
In front of the Governor 's house Alpatych found a large number of people , Cossacks , and a traveling carriage of the Governor 's . 
At the porch he met two of the landed gentry , one of whom he knew . 
This man , an ex-captain of police , was saying angrily : `` It 's no joke , you know ! 
It 's all very well if you 're single . 
` One man though undone is but one , ' as the proverb says , but with thirteen in your family and all the property ... They 've brought us to utter ruin ! 
What sort of governors are they to do that ? 
They ought to be hanged -- the brigands ! 
... '' `` Oh come , that 's enough ! '' 
said the other . 
`` What do I care ? 
Let him hear ! 
We 're not dogs , '' said the ex-captain of police , and looking round he noticed Alpatych . 
`` Oh , Yakov Alpatych ! 
What have you come for ? '' 
`` To see the Governor by his excellency 's order , '' answered Alpatych , lifting his head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of his coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince ... `` He has ordered me to inquire into the position of affairs , '' he added . 
`` Yes , go and find out ! '' 
shouted the angry gentleman . 
`` They 've brought things to such a pass that there are no carts or anything ! 
... There it is again , do you hear ? '' 
said he , pointing in the direction whence came the sounds of firing . 
`` They 've brought us all to ruin ... the brigands ! '' 
he repeated , and descended the porch steps . 
Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs . 
In the waiting room were tradesmen , women , and officials , looking silently at one another . 
The door of the Governor 's room opened and they all rose and moved forward . 
An official ran out , said some words to a merchant , called a stout official with a cross hanging on his neck to follow him , and vanished again , evidently wishing to avoid the inquiring looks and questions addressed to him . 
