Rostov almost shouted , not looking Boris in the face . 
Boris smiled . 
`` On the contrary , I will do what I can . 
Only I thought ... '' At that moment Zhilinski 's voice was heard calling Boris . 
`` Well then , go , go , go ... '' said Rostov , and refusing supper and remaining alone in the little room , he walked up and down for a long time , hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room . 
Rostov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition on Denisov 's behalf . 
He could not himself go to the general in attendance as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do so , and Boris , even had he wished to , could not have done so on the following day . 
On that day , June 27 , the preliminaries of peace were signed . 
The Emperors exchanged decorations : Alexander received the Cross of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the First Degree , and a dinner had been arranged for the evening , given by a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhensk battalion . 
The Emperors were to be present at that banquet . 
Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris that , when the latter looked in after supper , he pretended to be asleep , and early next morning went away , avoiding Boris . 
In his civilian clothes and a round hat , he wandered about the town , staring at the French and their uniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and French Emperors were staying . 
In a square he saw tables being set up and preparations made for the dinner ; he saw the Russian and French colors draped from side to side of the streets , with hugh monograms A and N . 
In the windows of the houses also flags and bunting were displayed . 
`` Boris does n't want to help me and I do n't want to ask him . 
That 's settled , '' thought Nicholas . 
`` All is over between us , but I wo n't leave here without having done all I can for Denisov and certainly not without getting his letter to the Emperor . 
The Emperor ! 
... He is here ! '' 
thought Rostov , who had unconsciously returned to the house where Alexander lodged . 
Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite were assembling , evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out . 
`` I may see him at any moment , '' thought Rostov . 
`` If only I were to hand the letter direct to him and tell him all ... could they really arrest me for my civilian clothes ? 
Surely not ! 
He would understand on whose side justice lies . 
He understands everything , knows everything . 
Who can be more just , more magnanimous than he ? 
And even if they did arrest me for being here , what would it matter ? '' 
thought he , looking at an officer who was entering the house the Emperor occupied . 
`` After all , people do go in ... . 
It 's all nonsense ! 
I 'll go in and hand the letter to the Emperor myself so much the worse for Drubetskoy who drives me to it ! '' 
And suddenly with a determination he himself did not expect , Rostov felt for the letter in his pocket and went straight to the house . 
`` No , I wo n't miss my opportunity now , as I did after Austerlitz , '' he thought , expecting every moment to meet the monarch , and conscious of the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought . 
`` I will fall at his feet and beseech him . 
He will lift me up , will listen , and will even thank me . ' 
I am happy when I can do good , but to remedy injustice is the greatest happiness , ' '' Rostov fancied the sovereign saying . 
And passing people who looked after him with curiosity , he entered the porch of the Emperor 's house . 
A broad staircase led straight up from the entry , and to the right he saw a closed door . 
Below , under the staircase , was a door leading to the lower floor . 
`` Whom do you want ? '' 
someone inquired . 
`` To hand in a letter , a petition , to His Majesty , '' said Nicholas , with a tremor in his voice . 
`` A petition ? 
This way , to the officer on duty '' -LRB- he was shown the door leading downstairs -RRB- , `` only it wo n't be accepted . '' 
On hearing this indifferent voice , Rostov grew frightened at what he was doing ; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was so fascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run away , but the official who had questioned him opened the door , and Rostov entered . 
A short stout man of about thirty , in white breeches and high boots and a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on , standing in that room , and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches a new pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that , for some reason , attracted Rostov 's attention . 
This man was was speaking to someone in the adjoining room . 
`` A good figure and in her first bloom , '' he was saying , but on seeing Rostov , he stopped short and frowned . 
`` What is it ? 
