She has refused to evacuate Malta . 
She wanted to find , and still seeks , some secret motive in our actions . 
What answer did Novosiltsev get ? 
None . 
The English have not understood and can not understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for himself , but only desires the good of mankind . 
And what have they promised ? 
Nothing ! 
And what little they have promised they will not perform ! 
Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible , and that all Europe is powerless before him ... . 
And I do n't believe a word that Hardenburg says , or Haugwitz either . 
This famous Prussian neutrality is just a trap . 
I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny of our adored monarch . 
He will save Europe ! '' 
She suddenly paused , smiling at her own impetuosity . 
`` I think , '' said the prince with a smile , `` that if you had been sent instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of Prussia 's consent by assault . 
You are so eloquent . 
Will you give me a cup of tea ? '' 
`` In a moment . 
A propos , '' she added , becoming calm again , `` I am expecting two very interesting men tonight , le Vicomte de Mortemart , who is connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans , one of the best French families . 
He is one of the genuine emigres , the good ones . 
And also the Abbe Morio . 
Do you know that profound thinker ? 
He has been received by the Emperor . 
Had you heard ? '' 
`` I shall be delighted to meet them , '' said the prince . 
`` But tell me , '' he added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him , though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his visit , `` is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be appointed first secretary at Vienna ? 
The baron by all accounts is a poor creature . '' 
Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son , but others were trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for the baron . 
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was pleased with . 
`` Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister , '' was all she said , in a dry and mournful tone . 
As she named the Empress , Anna Pavlovna 's face suddenly assumed an expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with sadness , and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious patroness . 
She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke beaucoup d'estime , and again her face clouded over with sadness . 
The prince was silent and looked indifferent . 
But , with the womanly and courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her , Anna Pavlovna wished both to rebuke him -LRB- for daring to speak he had done of a man recommended to the Empress -RRB- and at the same time to console him , so she said : `` Now about your family . 
Do you know that since your daughter came out everyone has been enraptured by her ? 
They say she is amazingly beautiful . '' 
The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude . 
`` I often think , '' she continued after a short pause , drawing nearer to the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political and social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate conversation -- `` I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are distributed . 
Why has fate given you two such splendid children ? 
I do n't speak of Anatole , your youngest . 
I do n't like him , '' she added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows . 
`` Two such charming children . 
And really you appreciate them less than anyone , and so you do n't deserve to have them . '' 
And she smiled her ecstatic smile . 
`` I ca n't help it , '' said the prince . 
`` Lavater would have said I lack the bump of paternity . '' 
`` Do n't joke ; I mean to have a serious talk with you . 
Do you know I am dissatisfied with your younger son ? 
Between ourselves '' -LRB- and her face assumed its melancholy expression -RRB- , `` he was mentioned at Her Majesty 's and you were pitied ... '' The prince answered nothing , but she looked at him significantly , awaiting a reply . 
He frowned . 
