In the first case , if inevitability were possible without freedom we should have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws of inevitability itself , that is , a mere form without content . 
In the second case , if freedom were possible without inevitability we should have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space , time , and cause , which by the fact of its being unconditioned and unlimited would be nothing , or mere content without form . 
We should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man 's whole outlook on the universe is constructed -- the incomprehensible essence of life , and the laws defining that essence . 
Reason says : -LRB- 1 -RRB- space with all the forms of matter that give it visibility is infinite , and can not be imagined otherwise . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Time is infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- The connection between cause and effect has no beginning and can have no end . 
Consciousness says : -LRB- 1 -RRB- I alone am , and all that exists is but me , consequently I include space . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- I measure flowing time by the fixed moment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself as living , consequently I am outside time . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- I am beyond cause , for I feel myself to be the cause of every manifestation of my life . 
Reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability . 
Consciousness gives expression to the essence of freedom . 
Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life , in man 's consciousness . 
Inevitability without content is man 's reason in its three forms . 
Freedom is the thing examined . 
Inevitability is what examines . 
Freedom is the content . 
Inevitability is the form . 
Only by separating the two sources of cognition , related to one another as form to content , do we get the mutually exclusive and separately incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability . 
Only by uniting them do we get a clear conception of man 's life . 
Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define one another as form and content , no conception of life is possible . 
All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free will to inevitability , that is , of consciousness to the laws of reason . 
All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certain relation of the forces of nature to inevitability , or of the essence of life to the laws of reason . 
The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious of them ; we call those forces gravitation , inertia , electricity , animal force , and so on , but we are conscious of the force of life in man and we call that freedom . 
But just as the force of gravitation , incomprehensible in itself but felt by every man , is understood by us only to the extent to which we know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject -LRB- from the first knowledge that all bodies have weight , up to Newton 's law -RRB- , so too the force of free will , incomprehensible in itself but of which everyone is conscious , is intelligible to us only in as far as we know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject -LRB- from the fact that every man dies , up to the knowledge of the most complex economic and historic laws -RRB- . 
All knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under the laws of reason . 
Man 's free will differs from every other force in that man is directly conscious of it , but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from any other force . 
The forces of gravitation , electricity , or chemical affinity are only distinguished from one another in that they are differently defined by reason . 
Just so the force of man 's free will is distinguished by reason from the other forces of nature only by the definition reason gives it . 
Freedom , apart from necessity , that is , apart from the laws of reason that define it , differs in no way from gravitation , or heat , or the force that makes things grow ; for reason , it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life . 
And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies , the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity , or of chemical affinity , or of the vital force , forms the content of astronomy , physics , chemistry , botany , zoology , and so on , just in the same way does the force of free will form the content of history . 
But just as the subject of every science is the manifestation of this unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be the subject of metaphysics , even the manifestation of the force of free will in human beings in space , in time , and in dependence on cause forms the subject of history , while free will itself is the subject of metaphysics . 
In the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws of inevitability , what is unknown to us we call vital force . 
Vital force is only an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we know of the essence of life . 
So also in history what is known to us we call laws of inevitability , what is unknown we call free will . 
Free will is for history only an expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of human life . 
History examines the manifestations of man 's free will in connection with the external world in time and in dependence on cause , that is , it defines this freedom by the laws of reason , and so history is a science only in so far as this free will is defined by those laws . 
The recognition of man 's free will as something capable of influencing historical events , that is , as not subject to laws , is the same for history as the recognition of a free force moving the heavenly bodies would be for astronomy . 
That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws , that is , of any science whatever . 
If there is even a single body moving freely , then the laws of Kepler and Newton are negatived and no conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists . 
If any single action is due to free will , then not a single historical law can exist , nor any conception of historical events . 
For history , lines exist of the movement of human wills , one end of which is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which a consciousness of man 's will in the present moves in space , time , and dependence on cause . 
The more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes , the more evident are the laws of that movement . 
To discover and define those laws is the problem of history . 
From the standpoint from which the science of history now regards its subject on the path it now follows , seeking the causes of events in man 's freewill , a scientific enunciation of those laws is impossible , for however man 's free will may be restricted , as soon as we recognize it as a force not subject to law , the existence of law becomes impossible . 
Only by reducing this element of free will to the infinitesimal , that is , by regarding it as an infinitely small quantity , can we convince ourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes , and then instead of seeking causes , history will take the discovery of laws as its problem . 
The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods of thought which history must adopt are being worked out simultaneously with the self-destruction toward which -- ever dissecting and dissecting the causes of phenomena -- the old method of history is moving . 
All human sciences have traveled along that path . 
Arriving at infinitesimals , mathematics , the most exact of sciences , abandons the process of analysis and enters on the new process of the integration of unknown , infinitely small , quantities . 
Abandoning the conception of cause , mathematics seeks law , that is , the property common to all unknown , infinitely small , elements . 
In another form but along the same path of reflection the other sciences have proceeded . 
