`` It 's in charge of the queer fellow we saw without his boots . 
You can see everything from there ; let 's go there , Prince . '' 
`` Thank you very much , I will go on alone , '' said Prince Andrew , wishing to rid himself of this staff officer 's company , `` please do n't trouble yourself further . '' 
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone . 
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went , the more orderly and cheerful were the troops . 
The greatest disorder and depression had been in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven miles away from the French . 
At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm could be felt , but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the more confident was the appearance of our troops . 
The soldiers in their greatcoats were ranged in lines , the sergeants major and company officers were counting the men , poking the last man in each section in the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up . 
Soldiers scattered over the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and were building shelters with merry chatter and laughter ; around the fires sat others , dressed and undressed , drying their shirts and leg bands or mending boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers . 
In one company dinner was ready , and the soldiers were gazing eagerly at the steaming boiler , waiting till the sample , which a quartermaster sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log before his shelter , had been tasted . 
Another company , a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka , crowded round a pock-marked , broad-shouldered sergeant major who , tilting a keg , filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him . 
The soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces , emptied them , rolling the vodka in their mouths , and walked away from the sergeant major with brightened expressions , licking their lips and wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats . 
All their faces were as serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful encampment , and not within sight of the enemy before an action in which at least half of them would be left on the field . 
After passing a chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers -- fine fellows busy with similar peaceful affairs -- near the shelter of the regimental commander , higher than and different from the others , Prince Andrew came out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man . 
Two soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and striking him regularly on his bare back . 
The man shrieked unnaturally . 
A stout major was pacing up and down the line , and regardless of the screams kept repeating : `` It 's a shame for a soldier to steal ; a soldier must be honest , honorable , and brave , but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in him , he 's a scoundrel . 
Go on ! 
Go on ! '' 
So the swishing sound of the strokes , and the desperate but unnatural screams , continued . 
`` Go on , go on ! '' 
said the major . 
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant as he rode by . 
Prince Andrew , having reached the front line , rode along it . 
Our front line and that of the enemy were far apart on the right and left flanks , but in the center where the men with a flag of truce had passed that morning , the lines were so near together that the men could see one another 's faces and speak to one another . 
Besides the soldiers who formed the picket line on either side , there were many curious onlookers who , jesting and laughing , stared at their strange foreign enemies . 
Since early morning -- despite an injunction not to approach the picket line -- the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away . 
The soldiers forming the picket line , like showmen exhibiting a curiosity , no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight-seers and grew weary waiting to be relieved . 
Prince Andrew halted to have a look at the French . 
`` Look ! 
Look there ! '' 
one soldier was saying to another , pointing to a Russian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier . 
`` Hark to him jabbering ! 
Fine , is n't it ? 
It 's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with him . 
There now , Sidorov ! '' 
`` Wait a bit and listen . 
It 's fine ! '' 
answered Sidorov , who was considered an adept at French . 
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov . 
Prince Andrew recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying . 
Dolokhov had come from the left flank where their regiment was stationed , with his captain . 
`` Now then , go on , go on ! '' 
incited the officer , bending forward and trying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to him . 
`` More , please : more ! 
What 's he saying ? '' 
Dolokhov did not answer the captain ; he had been drawn into a hot dispute with the French grenadier . 
They were naturally talking about the campaign . 
The Frenchman , confusing the Austrians with the Russians , was trying to prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all the way from Ulm , while Dolokhov maintained that the Russians had not surrendered but had beaten the French . 
`` We have orders to drive you off here , and we shall drive you off , '' said Dolokhov . 
