Pierre , in reply , sincerely agreed with her as to Helene 's perfection of manner . 
If he ever thought of Helene , it was just of her beauty and her remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in society . 
The old aunt received the two young people in her corner , but seemed desirous of hiding her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to show her fear of Anna Pavlovna . 
She looked at her niece , as if inquiring what she was to do with these people . 
On leaving them , Anna Pavlovna again touched Pierre 's sleeve , saying : `` I hope you wo n't say that it is dull in my house again , '' and she glanced at Helene . 
Helene smiled , with a look implying that she did not admit the possibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted . 
The aunt coughed , swallowed , and said in French that she was very pleased to see Helene , then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome and the same look . 
In the middle of a dull and halting conversation , Helene turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave to everyone . 
Pierre was so used to that smile , and it had so little meaning for him , that he paid no attention to it . 
The aunt was just speaking of a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre 's father , Count Bezukhov , and showed them her own box . 
Princess Helene asked to see the portrait of the aunt 's husband on the box lid . 
`` That is probably the work of Vinesse , '' said Pierre , mentioning a celebrated miniaturist , and he leaned over the table to take the snuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table . 
He half rose , meaning to go round , but the aunt handed him the snuffbox , passing it across Helene 's back . 
Helene stooped forward to make room , and looked round with a smile . 
She was , as always at evening parties , wearing a dress such as was then fashionable , cut very low at front and back . 
Her bust , which had always seemed like marble to Pierre , was so close to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive the living charm of her neck and shoulders , so near to his lips that he need only have bent his head a little to have touched them . 
He was conscious of the warmth of her body , the scent of perfume , and the creaking of her corset as she moved . 
He did not see her marble beauty forming a complete whole with her dress , but all the charm of her body only covered by her garments . 
And having once seen this he could not help being aware it , just as we can not renew an illusion we have once seen through . 
`` So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am ? '' 
Helene seemed to say . 
`` You had not noticed that I am a woman ? 
Yes , I am a woman who may belong to anyone -- to you too , '' said her glance . 
And at that moment Pierre felt that Helene not only could , but must , be his wife , and that it could not be otherwise . 
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the altar with her . 
How and when this would be he did not know , he did not even know if it would be a good thing -LRB- he even felt , he knew not why , that it would be a bad thing -RRB- , but he knew it would happen . 
Pierre dropped his eyes , lifted them again , and wished once more to see her as a distant beauty far removed from him , as he had seen her every day until then , but he could no longer do it . 
He could not , any more than a man who has been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the mist and taking it for a tree can again take it for a tree after he has once recognized it to be a tuft of grass . 
She was terribly close to him . 
She already had power over him , and between them there was no longer any barrier except the barrier of his own will . 
`` Well , I will leave you in your little corner , '' came Anna Pavlovna 's voice , `` I see you are all right there . '' 
And Pierre , anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anything reprehensible , looked round with a blush . 
It seemed to him that everyone knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself . 
A little later when he went up to the large circle , Anna Pavlovna said to him : `` I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house ? '' 
This was true . 
The architect had told him that it was necessary , and Pierre , without knowing why , was having his enormous Petersburg house done up . 
`` That 's a good thing , but do n't move from Prince Vasili 's . 
It is good to have a friend like the prince , '' she said , smiling at Prince Vasili . 
`` I know something about that . 
Do n't I ? 
And you are still so young . 
You need advice . 
Do n't be angry with me for exercising an old woman 's privilege . '' 
She paused , as women always do , expecting something after they have mentioned their age . 
`` If you marry it will be a different thing , '' she continued , uniting them both in one glance . 
Pierre did not look at Helene nor she at him . 
But she was just as terribly close to him . 
He muttered something and colored . 
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what had happened . 
What had happened ? 
