Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to Mary Hendrikhovna , asking her to stir it with her finger . 
`` This is my cup , '' said he . 
`` Only dip your finger in it and I 'll drink it all up . '' 
When they had emptied the samovar , Rostov took a pack of cards and proposed that they should play `` Kings '' with Mary Hendrikhovna . 
They drew lots to settle who should make up her set . 
At Rostov 's suggestion it was agreed that whoever became `` King '' should have the right to kiss Mary Hendrikhovna 's hand , and that the `` Booby '' should go to refill and reheat the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke . 
`` Well , but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is ` King ' ? '' 
asked Ilyin . 
`` As it is , she is Queen , and her word is law ! '' 
They had hardly begun to play before the doctor 's disheveled head suddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna . 
He had been awake for some time , listening to what was being said , and evidently found nothing entertaining or amusing in what was going on . 
His face was sad and depressed . 
Without greeting the officers , he scratched himself and asked to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way . 
As soon as he had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and Mary Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became still more attractive to them . 
Returning from the yard , the doctor told his wife -LRB- who had ceased to smile so happily , and looked at him in alarm , awaiting her sentence -RRB- that the rain had ceased and they must go to sleep in their covered cart , or everything in it would be stolen . 
`` But I 'll send an orderly ... . 
Two of them ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` What an idea , doctor ! '' 
`` I 'll stand guard on it myself ! '' 
said Ilyin . 
`` No , gentlemen , you have had your sleep , but I have not slept for two nights , '' replied the doctor , and he sat down morosely beside his wife , waiting for the game to end . 
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife , the officers grew still merrier , and some of them could not refrain from laughter , for which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts . 
When he had gone , taking his wife with him , and had settled down with her in their covered cart , the officers lay down in the tavern , covering themselves with their wet cloaks , but they did not sleep for a long time ; now they exchanged remarks , recalling the doctor 's uneasiness and his wife 's delight , now they ran out into the porch and reported what was taking place in the covered trap . 
Several times Rostov , covering his head , tried to go to sleep , but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be resumed , to the accompaniment of unreasoning , merry , childlike laughter . 
It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep , when the quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town of Ostrovna . 
Still laughing and talking , the officers began hurriedly getting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar . 
But Rostov went off to his squadron without waiting for tea . 
Day was breaking , the rain had ceased , and the clouds were dispersing . 
It felt damp and cold , especially in clothes that were still moist . 
As they left the tavern in the twilight of the dawn , Rostov and Ilyin both glanced under the wet and glistening leather hood of the doctor 's cart , from under the apron of which his feet were sticking out , and in the middle of which his wife 's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing audible . 
`` She really is a dear little thing , '' said Rostov to Ilyin , who was following him . 
`` A charming woman ! '' 
said Ilyin , with all the gravity of a boy of sixteen . 
Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road . 
The command was heard to `` mount '' and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted . 
Rostov riding in front gave the order `` Forward ! '' 
and the hussars , with clanking sabers and subdued talk , their horses ' hoofs splashing in the mud , defiled in fours and moved along the broad road planted with birch trees on each side , following the infantry and a battery that had gone on in front . 
Tattered , blue-purple clouds , reddening in the east , were scudding before the wind . 
It was growing lighter and lighter . 
That curly grass which always grows by country roadsides became clearly visible , still wet with the night 's rain ; the drooping branches of the birches , also wet , swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of water to one side . 
The soldiers ' faces were more and more clearly visible . 
Rostov , always closely followed by Ilyin , rode along the side of the road between two rows of birch trees . 
When campaigning , Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not a regimental but a Cossack horse . 
A judge of horses and a sportsman , he had lately procured himself a large , fine , mettlesome , Donets horse , dun-colored , with light mane and tail , and when he rode it no one could outgallop him . 
To ride this horse was a pleasure to him , and he thought of the horse , of the morning , of the doctor 's wife , but not once of the impending danger . 
Formerly , when going into action , Rostov had felt afraid ; now he had not the least feeling of fear . 
He was fearless , not because he had grown used to being under fire -LRB- one can not grow used to danger -RRB- , but because he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger . 
He had grown accustomed when going into action to think about anything but what would seem most likely to interest him -- the impending danger . 
During the first period of his service , hard as he tried and much as he reproached himself with cowardice , he had not been able to do this , but with time it had come of itself . 
