`` Yes , I saw him , and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as a general engagement , '' repeated Dolgorukov , evidently prizing this general conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with Napoleon . 
`` If he were n't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview ? 
Why negotiate , and above all why retreat , when to retreat is so contrary to his method of conducting war ? 
Believe me , he is afraid , afraid of a general battle . 
His hour has come ! 
Mark my words ! '' 
`` But tell me , what is he like , eh ? '' 
said Prince Andrew again . 
`` He is a man in a gray overcoat , very anxious that I should call him ` Your Majesty , ' but who , to his chagrin , got no title from me ! 
That 's the sort of man he is , and nothing more , '' replied Dolgorukov , looking round at Bilibin with a smile . 
`` Despite my great respect for old Kutuzov , '' he continued , `` we should be a nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him a chance to escape , or to trick us , now that we certainly have him in our hands ! 
No , we must n't forget Suvorov and his rule -- not to put yourself in a position to be attacked , but yourself to attack . 
Believe me in war the energy of young men often shows the way better than all the experience of old Cunctators . '' 
`` But in what position are we going to attack him ? 
I have been at the outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces are situated , '' said Prince Andrew . 
He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan of attack he had himself formed . 
`` Oh , that is all the same , '' Dolgorukov said quickly , and getting up he spread a map on the table . 
`` All eventualities have been foreseen . 
If he is standing before Brunn ... '' And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother 's plan of a flanking movement . 
Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan , which might have been as good as Weyrother 's , but for the disadvantage that Weyrother 's had already been approved . 
As soon as Prince Andrew began to demonstrate the defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan , Prince Dolgorukov ceased to listen to him and gazed absent-mindedly not at the map , but at Prince Andrew 's face . 
`` There will be a council of war at Kutuzov 's tonight , though ; you can say all this there , '' remarked Dolgorukov . 
`` I will do so , '' said Prince Andrew , moving away from the map . 
`` Whatever are you bothering about , gentlemen ? '' 
said Bilibin , who , till then , had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and now was evidently ready with a joke . 
`` Whether tomorrow brings victory or defeat , the glory of our Russian arms is secure . 
Except your Kutuzov , there is not a single Russian in command of a column ! 
The commanders are : Herr General Wimpfen , le Comte de Langeron , le Prince de Lichtenstein , le Prince , de Hohenlohe , and finally Prishprish , and so on like all those Polish names . '' 
`` Be quiet , backbiter ! '' 
said Dolgorukov . 
`` It is not true ; there are now two Russians , Miloradovich , and Dokhturov , and there would be a third , Count Arakcheev , if his nerves were not too weak . '' 
`` However , I think General Kutuzov has come out , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` I wish you good luck and success , gentlemen ! '' 
he added and went out after shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin . 
On the way home , Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutuzov , who was sitting silently beside him , what he thought of tomorrow 's battle . 
Kutuzov looked sternly at his adjutant and , after a pause , replied : `` I think the battle will be lost , and so I told Count Tolstoy and asked him to tell the Emperor . 
What do you think he replied ? 
` But , my dear general , I am engaged with rice and cutlets , look after military matters yourself ! ' 
Yes ... That was the answer I got ! '' 
Shortly after nine o'clock that evening , Weyrother drove with his plans to Kutuzov 's quarters where the council of war was to be held . 
All the commanders of columns were summoned to the commander in chief 's and with the exception of Prince Bagration , who declined to come , were all there at the appointed time . 
Weyrother , who was in full control of the proposed battle , by his eagerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied and drowsy Kutuzov , who reluctantly played the part of chairman and president of the council of war . 
Weyrother evidently felt himself to be at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable . 
He was like a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart . 
Whether he was pulling it or being pushed by it he did not know , but rushed along at headlong speed with no time to consider what this movement might lead to . 
Weyrother had been twice that evening to the enemy 's picket line to reconnoiter personally , and twice to the Emperors , Russian and Austrian , to report and explain , and to his headquarters where he had dictated the dispositions in German , and now , much exhausted , he arrived at Kutuzov 's . 
He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to the commander in chief . 
He interrupted him , talked rapidly and indistinctly , without looking at the man he was addressing , and did not reply to questions put to him . 
He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful , weary , and distracted air , though at the same time he was haughty and self-confident . 
Kutuzov was occupying a nobleman 's castle of modest dimensions near Ostralitz . 
