Such as she are rare here , '' he thought , as Natasha , readjusting a rose that was slipping on her bodice , settled herself beside him . 
When the cotillion was over the old count in his blue coat came up to the dancers . 
He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them , and asked his daughter whether she was enjoying herself . 
Natasha did not answer at once but only looked up with a smile that said reproachfully : `` How can you ask such a question ? '' 
`` I have never enjoyed myself so much before ! '' 
she said , and Prince Andrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace her father and instantly dropped again . 
Natasha was happier than she had ever been in her life . 
She was at that height of bliss when one becomes completely kind and good and does not believe in the possibility of evil , unhappiness , or sorrow . 
At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the position his wife occupied in court circles . 
He was gloomy and absent-minded . 
A deep furrow ran across his forehead , and standing by a window he stared over his spectacles seeing no one . 
On her way to supper Natasha passed him . 
Pierre 's gloomy , unhappy look struck her . 
She stopped in front of him . 
She wished to help him , to bestow on him the superabundance of her own happiness . 
`` How delightful it is , Count ! '' 
said she . 
`` Is n't it ? '' 
Pierre smiled absent-mindedly , evidently not grasping what she said . 
`` Yes , I am very glad , '' he said . 
`` How can people be dissatisfied with anything ? '' 
thought Natasha . 
`` Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov ! '' 
In Natasha 's eyes all the people at the ball alike were good , kind , and splendid people , loving one another ; none of them capable of injuring another -- and so they ought all to be happy . 
Next day Prince Andrew thought of the ball , but his mind did not dwell on it long . 
`` Yes , it was a very brilliant ball , '' and then ... `` Yes , that little Rostova is very charming . 
There 's something fresh , original , un-Petersburg-like about her that distinguishes her . '' 
That was all he thought about yesterday 's ball , and after his morning tea he set to work . 
But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed for work and could get nothing done . 
He kept criticizing his own work , as he often did , and was glad when he heard someone coming . 
The visitor was Bitski , who served on various committees , frequented all the societies in Petersburg , and a passionate devotee of the new ideas and of Speranski , and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger -- one of those men who choose their opinions like their clothes according to the fashion , but who for that very reason appear to be the warmest partisans . 
Hardly had he got rid of his hat before he ran into Prince Andrew 's room with a preoccupied air and at once began talking . 
He had just heard particulars of that morning 's sitting of the Council of State opened by the Emperor , and he spoke of it enthusiastically . 
The Emperor 's speech had been extraordinary . 
It had been a speech such as only constitutional monarchs deliver . 
`` The Sovereign plainly said that the Council and Senate are estates of the realm , he said that the government must rest not on authority but on secure bases . 
The Emperor said that the fiscal system must be reorganized and the accounts published , '' recounted Bitski , emphasizing certain words and opening his eyes significantly . 
`` Ah , yes ! 
Today 's events mark an epoch , the greatest epoch in our history , '' he concluded . 
Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council of State , which he had so impatiently awaited and to which he had attached such importance , and was surprised that this event , now that it had taken place , did not affect him , and even seemed quite insignificant . 
He listened with quiet irony to Bitski 's enthusiastic account of it . 
A very simple thought occurred to him : `` What does it matter to me or to Bitski what the Emperor was pleased to say at the Council ? 
Can all that make me any happier or better ? '' 
And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interest Prince Andrew had felt in the impending reforms . 
He was going to dine that evening at Speranski 's , `` with only a few friends , '' as the host had said when inviting him . 
The prospect of that dinner in the intimate home circle of the man he so admired had greatly interested Prince Andrew , especially as he had not yet seen Speranski in his domestic surroundings , but now he felt disinclined to go to it . 
At the appointed hour , however , he entered the modest house Speranski owned in the Taurida Gardens . 
In the parqueted dining room this small house , remarkable for its extreme cleanliness -LRB- suggesting that of a monastery -RRB- , Prince Andrew , who was rather late , found the friendly gathering of Speranski 's intimate acquaintances already assembled at five o'clock . 
There were no ladies present except Speranski 's little daughter -LRB- long-faced like her father -RRB- and her governess . 
The other guests were Gervais , Magnitski , and Stolypin . 
