her look seemed to say . 
She saw her husband , but did not realize the significance of his appearance before her now . 
Prince Andrew went round the sofa and kissed her forehead . 
`` My darling ! '' 
he said -- a word he had never used to her before . 
`` God is merciful ... '' She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach . 
`` I expected help from you and I get none , none from you either ! '' 
said her eyes . 
She was not surprised at his having come ; she did not realize that he had come . 
His coming had nothing to do with her sufferings or with their relief . 
The pangs began again and Mary Bogdanovna advised Prince Andrew to leave the room . 
The doctor entered . 
Prince Andrew went out and , meeting Princess Mary , again joined her . 
They began talking in whispers , but their talk broke off at every moment . 
They waited and listened . 
`` Go , dear , '' said Princess Mary . 
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next to hers . 
A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became confused when she saw Prince Andrew . 
He covered his face with his hands and remained so for some minutes . 
Piteous , helpless , animal moans came through the door . 
Prince Andrew got up , went to the door , and tried to open it . 
Someone was holding it shut . 
`` You ca n't come in ! 
You ca n't ! '' 
said a terrified voice from within . 
He began pacing the room . 
The screaming ceased , and a few more seconds went by . 
Then suddenly a terrible shriek -- it could not be hers , she could not scream like that -- came from the bedroom . 
Prince Andrew ran to the door ; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant . 
`` What have they taken a baby in there for ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew in the first second . 
`` A baby ? 
What baby ... ? 
Why is there a baby there ? 
Or is the baby born ? '' 
Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail ; tears choked him , and leaning his elbows on the window sill be began to cry , sobbing like a child . 
The door opened . 
The doctor with his shirt sleeves tucked up , without a coat , pale and with a trembling jaw , came out of the room . 
Prince Andrew turned to him , but the doctor gave him a bewildered look and passed by without a word . 
A woman rushed out and seeing Prince Andrew stopped , hesitating on the threshold . 
He went into his wife 's room . 
She was lying dead , in the same position he had seen her in five minutes before and , despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of the cheeks , the same expression was on her charming childlike face with its upper lip covered with tiny black hair . 
`` I love you all , and have done no harm to anyone ; and what have you done to me ? '' 
-- said her charming , pathetic , dead face . 
In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed in Mary Bogdanovna 's trembling white hands . 
Two hours later Prince Andrew , stepping softly , went into his father 's room . 
The old man already knew everything . 
He was standing close to the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise round his son 's neck , and without a word he began to sob like a child . 
Three days later the little princess was buried , and Prince Andrew went up the steps to where the coffin stood , to give her the farewell kiss . 
And there in the coffin was the same face , though with closed eyes . 
