After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the line -LRB- the Guards -RRB- was already in action . 
`` So much the better ! 
I shall see it close , '' he thought . 
He was riding almost along the front line . 
A handful of men came galloping toward him . 
They were our Uhlans who with disordered ranks were returning from the attack . 
Rostov got out of their way , involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding , and galloped on . 
`` That is no business of mine , '' he thought . 
He had not ridden many hundred yards after that before he saw to his left , across the whole width of the field , an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white uniforms , mounted on black horses , trotting straight toward him and across his path . 
Rostov put his horse to full gallop to get out of the way of these men , and he would have got clear had they continued at the same speed , but they kept increasing their pace , so that some of the horses were already galloping . 
Rostov heard the thud of their hoofs and the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses , their figures , and even their faces , more and more distinctly . 
They were our Horse Guards , advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them . 
The Horse Guards were galloping , but still holding in their horses . 
Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command : `` Charge ! '' 
shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed . 
Rostov , fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on the French , galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go , but still was not in time to avoid them . 
The last of the Horse Guards , a huge pockmarked fellow , frowned angrily on seeing Rostov before him , with whom he would inevitably collide . 
This Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over -LRB- Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men and horses -RRB- had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish his whip before the eyes of the Guardsman 's horse . 
The heavy black horse , sixteen hands high , shied , throwing back its ears ; but the pockmarked Guardsman drove his huge spurs in violently , and the horse , flourishing its tail and extending its neck , galloped on yet faster . 
Hardly had the Horse Guards passed Rostov before he heard them shout , `` Hurrah ! '' 
and looking back saw that their foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry with red epaulets , probably French . 
He could see nothing more , for immediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and smoke enveloped everything . 
At that moment , as the Horse Guards , having passed him , disappeared in the smoke , Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where he was sent . 
This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that amazed the French themselves . 
Rostov was horrified to hear later that of all that mass of huge and handsome men , of all those brilliant , rich youths , officers and cadets , who had galloped past him on their thousand-ruble horses , only eighteen were left after the charge . 
`` Why should I envy them ? 
My chance is not lost , and maybe I shall see the Emperor immediately ! '' 
thought Rostov and galloped on . 
When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and around them cannon balls were flying , of which he was aware not so much because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on the soldiers ' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the officers . 
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a voice calling him by name . 
`` Rostov ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
he answered , not recognizing Boris . 
`` I say , we 've been in the front line ! 
Our regiment attacked ! '' 
said Boris with the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have been under fire for the first time . 
Rostov stopped . 
`` Have you ? '' 
he said . 
`` Well , how did it go ? '' 
`` We drove them back ! '' 
said Boris with animation , growing talkative . 
`` Can you imagine it ? '' 
and he began describing how the Guards , having taken up their position and seeing troops before them , thought they were Austrians , and all at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had unexpectedly to go into action . 
Rostov without hearing Boris to the end spurred his horse . 
`` Where are you off to ? '' 
asked Boris . 
`` With a message to His Majesty . '' 
`` There he is ! '' 
said Boris , thinking Rostov had said `` His Highness , '' and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders and frowning brows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and Horse Guards ' jacket , shouting something to a pale , white uniformed Austrian officer . 
