Despite the presence of the commander in chief , who attracted the attention of all the superior officers , the militiamen and soldiers continued their prayers without looking at him . 
When the service was over , Kutuzov stepped up to the icon , sank heavily to his knees , bowed to the ground , and for a long time tried vainly to rise , but could not do so on account of his weakness and weight . 
His white head twitched with the effort . 
At last he rose , kissed the icon as a child does with naively pouting lips , and again bowed till he touched the ground with his hand . 
The other generals followed his example , then the officers , and after them with excited faces , pressing on one another , crowding , panting , and pushing , scrambled the soldiers and militiamen . 
Staggering amid the crush , Pierre looked about him . 
`` Count Peter Kirilovich ! 
How did you get here ? '' 
said a voice . 
Pierre looked round . 
Boris Drubetskoy , brushing his knees with his hand -LRB- he had probably soiled them when he , too , had knelt before the icon -RRB- , came up to him smiling . 
Boris was elegantly dressed , with a slightly martial touch appropriate to a campaign . 
He wore a long coat and like Kutuzov had a whip slung across his shoulder . 
Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himself in the shade of the nearest house , on a bench which one Cossack had run to fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug . 
An immense and brilliant suite surrounded him . 
The icon was carried further , accompanied by the throng . 
Pierre stopped some thirty paces from Kutuzov , talking to Boris . 
He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the position . 
`` This is what you must do , '' said Boris . 
`` I will do the honors of the camp to you . 
You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsen will be . 
I am in attendance on him , you know ; I 'll mention it to him . 
But if you want to ride round the position , come along with us . 
We are just going to the left flank . 
Then when we get back , do spend the night with me and we 'll arrange a game of cards . 
Of course you know Dmitri Sergeevich ? 
Those are his quarters , '' and he pointed to the third house in the village of Gorki . 
`` But I should like to see the right flank . 
They say it 's very strong , '' said Pierre . 
`` I should like to start from the Moskva River and ride round the whole position . '' 
`` Well , you can do that later , but the chief thing is the left flank . '' 
`` Yes , yes . 
But where is Prince Bolkonski 's regiment ? 
Can you point it out to me ? '' 
`` Prince Andrew 's ? 
We shall pass it and I 'll take you to him . '' 
`` What about the left flank ? '' 
asked Pierre `` To tell you the truth , between ourselves , God only knows what state our left flank is in , '' said Boris confidentially lowering his voice . 
`` It is not at all what Count Bennigsen intended . 
He meant to fortify that knoll quite differently , but ... '' Boris shrugged his shoulders , `` his Serene Highness would not have it , or someone persuaded him . 
You see ... '' but Boris did not finish , for at that moment Kaysarov , Kutuzov 's adjutant , came up to Pierre . 
`` Ah , Kaysarov ! '' 
said Boris , addressing him with an unembarrassed smile , `` I was just trying to explain our position to the count . 
It is amazing how his Serene Highness could so the intentions of the French ! '' 
`` You mean the left flank ? '' 
asked Kaysarov . 
`` Yes , exactly ; the left flank is now extremely strong . '' 
Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff , Boris had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes . 
He had established himself with Count Bennigsen , who , like all on whom Boris had been in attendance , considered young Prince Drubetskoy an invaluable man . 
In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties : Kutuzov 's party and that of Bennigsen , the chief of staff . 
