The aim of cutting off Napoleon and his army never existed except in the imaginations of a dozen people . 
It could not exist because it was senseless and unattainable . 
The people had a single aim : to free their land from invasion . 
That aim was attained in the first place of itself , as the French ran away , and so it was only necessary not to stop their flight . 
Secondly it was attained by the guerrilla warfare which was destroying the French , and thirdly by the fact that a large Russian army was following the French , ready to use its strength in case their movement stopped . 
The Russian army had to act like a whip to a running animal . 
And the experienced driver knew it was better to hold the whip raised as a menace than to strike the running animal on the head . 
When seeing a dying animal a man feels a sense of horror : substance similar to his own is perishing before his eyes . 
But when it is a beloved and intimate human being that is dying , besides this horror at the extinction of life there is a severance , a spiritual wound , which like a physical wound is sometimes fatal and sometimes heals , but always aches and shrinks at any external irritating touch . 
After Prince Andrew 's death Natasha and Princess Mary alike felt this . 
Drooping in spirit and closing their eyes before the menacing cloud of death that overhung them , they dared not look life in the face . 
They carefully guarded their open wounds from any rough and painful contact . 
Everything : a carriage passing rapidly in the street , a summons to dinner , the maid 's inquiry what dress to prepare , or worse still any word of insincere or feeble sympathy , seemed an insult , painfully irritated the wound , interrupting that necessary quiet in which they both tried to listen to the stern and dreadful choir that still resounded in their imagination , and hindered their gazing into those mysterious limitless vistas that for an instant had opened out before them . 
Only when alone together were they free from such outrage and pain . 
They spoke little even to one another , and when they did it was of very unimportant matters . 
Both avoided any allusion to the future . 
To admit the possibility of a future seemed to them to insult his memory . 
Still more carefully did they avoid anything relating to him who was dead . 
It seemed to them that what they had lived through and experienced could not be expressed in words , and that any reference to the details of his life infringed the majesty and sacredness of the mystery that had been accomplished before their eyes . 
Continued abstention from speech , and constant avoidance of everything that might lead up to the subject -- this halting on all sides at the boundary of what they might not mention -- brought before their minds with still greater purity and clearness what they were both feeling . 
But pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and complete joy . 
Princess Mary , in her position as absolute and independent arbiter of her own fate and guardian and instructor of her nephew , was the first to be called back to life from that realm of sorrow in which she had dwelt for the first fortnight . 
She received letters from her relations to which she had to reply ; the room in which little Nicholas had been put was damp and he began to cough ; Alpatych came to Yaroslavl with reports on the state of their affairs and with advice and suggestions that they should return to Moscow to the house on the Vozdvizhenka Street , which had remained uninjured and needed only slight repairs . 
Life did not stand still and it was necessary to live . 
Hard as it was for Princess Mary to emerge from the realm of secluded contemplation in which she had lived till then , and sorry and almost ashamed as she felt to leave Natasha alone , yet the cares of life demanded her attention and she involuntarily yielded to them . 
She went through the accounts with Alpatych , conferred with Dessalles about her nephew , and gave orders and made preparations for the journey to Moscow . 
Natasha remained alone and , from the time Princess Mary began making preparations for departure , held aloof from her too . 
Princess Mary asked the countess to let Natasha go with her to Moscow , and both parents gladly accepted this offer , for they saw their daughter losing strength every day and thought that a change of scene and the advice of Moscow doctors would be good for her . 
`` I am not going anywhere , '' Natasha replied when this was proposed to her . 
`` Do please just leave me alone ! '' 
And she ran out of the room , with difficulty refraining from tears of vexation and irritation rather than of sorrow . 
After she felt herself deserted by Princes Mary and alone in her grief , Natasha spent most of the time in her room by herself , sitting huddled up feet and all in the corner of the sofa , tearing and twisting something with her slender nervous fingers and gazing intently and fixedly at whatever her eyes chanced to fall on . 
This solitude exhausted and tormented her but she was in absolute need of it . 
As soon as anyone entered she got up quickly , changed her position and expression , and picked up a book or some sewing , evidently waiting impatiently for the intruder to go . 
She felt all the time as if she might at any moment penetrate that on which -- with a terrible questioning too great for her strength - her spiritual gaze was fixed . 
One day toward the end of December Natasha , pale and thin , dressed in a black woolen gown , her plaited hair negligently twisted into a knot , was crouched feet and all in the corner of her sofa , nervously crumpling and smoothing out the end of her sash while she looked at a corner of the door . 
She was gazing in the direction in which he had gone -- to the other side of life . 
And that other side of life , of which she had never before thought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable , was now nearer and more akin and more comprehensible than this side of life , where everything was either emptiness and desolation or suffering and indignity . 
She was gazing where she knew him to be ; but she could not imagine him otherwise than as he had been here . 
She now saw him again as he had been at Mytishchi , at Troitsa , and at Yaroslavl . 
She saw his face , heard his voice , repeated his words and her own , and sometimes devised other words they might have spoken . 
There he is lying back in an armchair in his velvet cloak , leaning his head on his thin pale hand . 
His chest is dreadfully hollow and his shoulders raised . 
His lips are firmly closed , his eyes glitter , and a wrinkle comes and goes on his pale forehead . 
One of his legs twitches just perceptibly , but rapidly . 
Natasha knows that he is struggling with terrible pain . 
`` What is that pain like ? 
Why does he have that pain ? 
What does he feel ? 
How does it hurt him ? '' 
