Princess Mary , pale and with quivering chin , came out from that room and taking Natasha by the arm said something to her . 
Natasha neither saw nor heard her . 
She went in with rapid steps , pausing at the door for an instant as if struggling with herself , and then ran to her mother . 
The countess was lying in an armchair in a strange and awkward position , stretching out and beating her head against the wall . 
Sonya and the maids were holding her arms . 
`` Natasha ! 
Natasha ! 
... '' cried the countess . 
`` It 's not true ... it 's not true ... He 's lying ... Natasha ! '' 
she shrieked , pushing those around her away . 
`` Go away , all of you ; it 's not true ! 
Killed ! 
... ha , ha , ha ! 
... It 's not true ! '' 
Natasha put one knee on the armchair , stooped over her mother , embraced her , and with unexpected strength raised her , turned her face toward herself , and clung to her . 
`` Mummy ! 
... darling ! 
... I am here , my dearest Mummy , '' she kept on whispering , not pausing an instant . 
She did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her , demanded a pillow and hot water , and unfastened and tore open her mother 's dress . 
`` My dearest darling ... Mummy , my precious ! 
... '' she whispered incessantly , kissing her head , her hands , her face , and feeling her own irrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks . 
The countess pressed her daughter 's hand , closed her eyes , and became quiet for a moment . 
Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness , glanced vacantly around her , and seeing Natasha began to press her daughter 's head with all her strength . 
Then she turned toward her daughter 's face which was wincing with pain and gazed long at it . 
`` Natasha , you love me ? '' 
she said in a soft trustful whisper . 
`` Natasha , you would not deceive me ? 
You 'll tell me the whole truth ? '' 
Natasha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there was nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness . 
`` My darling Mummy ! '' 
she repeated , straining all the power of her love to find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed her mother . 
And again in a futile struggle with reality her mother , refusing to believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloom of life , escaped from reality into a world of delirium . 
Natasha did not remember how that day passed nor that night , nor the next day and night . 
She did not sleep and did not leave her mother . 
Her persevering and patient love seemed completely to surround the countess every moment , not explaining or consoling , but recalling her to life . 
During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes , and Natasha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes , but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak . 
The countess was sitting up in bed and speaking softly . 
`` How glad I am you have come . 
You are tired . 
Wo n't you have some tea ? '' 
Natasha went up to her . 
`` You have improved in looks and grown more manly , '' continued the countess , taking her daughter 's hand . 
`` Mamma ! 
What are you saying ... '' `` Natasha , he is no more , no more ! '' 
And embracing her daughter , the countess began to weep for the first time . 
Princess Mary postponed her departure . 
Sonya and the count tried to replace Natasha but could not . 
They saw that she alone was able to restrain her mother from unreasoning despair . 
For three weeks Natasha remained constantly at her mother 's side , sleeping on a lounge chair in her room , making her eat and drink , and talking to her incessantly because the mere sound of her tender , caressing tones soothed her mother . 
The mother 's wounded spirit could not heal . 
