He called for his horse and rode to his quarters . 
Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river , though boats were sent to their assistance . 
The majority struggled back to the bank from which they had started . 
The colonel and some of his men got across and with difficulty clambered out on the further bank . 
And as soon as they had got out , in their soaked and streaming clothes , they shouted `` Vivat ! '' 
and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but where he no longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy . 
That evening , between issuing one order that the forged Russian paper money prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as quickly as possible and another that a Saxon should be shot , on whom a letter containing information about the orders to the French army had been found , Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel who had needlessly plunged into the river should be enrolled in the Legion d'honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head . 
Quos vult perdere dementat . 
* * Those whom -LRB- God -RRB- wishes to destroy he drives mad . 
The Emperor of Russia had , meanwhile , been in Vilna for more than a month , reviewing troops and holding maneuvers . 
Nothing was ready for the war that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor had come from Petersburg . 
There was no general plan of action . 
The vacillation between the various plans that were proposed had even increased after the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month . 
Each of the three armies had its own commander in chief , but there was no supreme commander of all the forces , and the Emperor did not assume that responsibility himself . 
The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody - tired of waiting -- prepare for the war . 
All the efforts of those who surrounded the sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his time pleasantly and forget that war was impending . 
In June , after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates , by the courtiers , and by the Emperor himself , it occurred to one of the Polish aides-de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should be given for the Emperor by his aides-de-camp . 
This idea was eagerly received . 
The Emperor gave his consent . 
The aides-de-camp collected money by subscription . 
The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to the Emperor was invited to act as hostess . 
Count Bennigsen , being a landowner in the Vilna province , offered his country house for the fete , and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball , dinner , regatta , and fireworks at Zakret , Count Bennigsen 's country seat . 
The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen , and his vanguard , driving off the Cossacks , crossed the Russian frontier , Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by his aides-de-camp at Bennigsen 's country house . 
It was a gay and brilliant fete . 
Connoisseurs of such matters declared that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place . 
Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who had followed the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed the refined Polish ladies by her massive , so called Russian type of beauty . 
The Emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance . 
Boris Drubetskoy , having left his wife in Moscow and being for the present en garcon -LRB- as he phrased it -RRB- , was also there and , though not an aide-de-camp , had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses . 
Boris was now a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer sought patronage but stood on an equal footing with the highest of those of his own age . 
He was meeting Helene in Vilna after not having seen her for a long time and did not recall the past , but as Helene was enjoying the favors of a very important personage and Boris had only recently married , they met as good friends of long standing . 
At midnight dancing was still going on . 
Helene , not having a suitable partner , herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris . 
They were the third couple . 
Boris , coolly looking at Helene 's dazzling bare shoulders which emerged from a dark , gold-embroidered , gauze gown , talked to her of old acquaintances and at the same time , unaware of it himself and unnoticed by others , never for an instant ceased to observe the Emperor who was in the same room . 
The Emperor was not dancing , he stood in the doorway , stopping now one pair and now another with gracious words which he alone knew how to utter . 
As the mazurka began , Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev , one of those in closest attendance on the Emperor , went up to him and contrary to court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish lady . 
Having finished speaking to her , the Emperor looked inquiringly at Balashev and , evidently understanding that he only acted thus because there were important reasons for so doing , nodded slightly to the lady and turned to him . 
Hardly had Balashev begun to speak before a look of amazement appeared on the Emperor 's face . 
He took Balashev by the arm and crossed the room with him , unconsciously clearing a path seven yards wide as the people on both sides made way for him . 
Boris noticed Arakcheev 's excited face when the sovereign went out with Balashev . 
Arakcheev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and , sniffing with his red nose , stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor to address him . 
-LRB- Boris understood that Arakcheev envied Balashev and was displeased that evidently important news had reached the Emperor otherwise than through himself . -RRB- 
But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated garden without noticing Arakcheev who , holding his sword and glancing wrathfully around , followed some twenty paces behind them . 
All the time Boris was going through the figures of the mazurka , he was worried by the question of what news Balashev had brought and how he could find it out before others . 
In the figure in which he had to choose two ladies , he whispered to Helene that he meant to choose Countess Potocka who , he thought , had gone out onto the veranda , and glided over the parquet to the door opening into the garden , where , seeing Balashev and the Emperor returning to the veranda , he stood still . 
They were moving toward the door . 
Boris , fluttering as if he had not had time to withdraw , respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head . 
The Emperor , with the agitation of one who has been personally affronted , was finishing with these words : `` To enter Russia without declaring war ! 
I will not make peace as long as a single armed enemy remains in my country ! '' 
It seemed to Boris that it gave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words . 
