At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for a whole day . 
Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry , one of which was occupied by Prince Andrew . 
The wounded man was much better that day and Natasha was sitting with him . 
In the next room sat the count and countess respectfully conversing with the prior , who was calling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery . 
Sonya was there too , tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and Natasha were talking about . 
She heard the sound of their voices through the door . 
That door opened and Natasha came out , looking excited . 
Not noticing the monk , who had risen to greet her and was drawing back the wide sleeve on his right arm , she went up to Sonya and took her hand . 
`` Natasha , what are you about ? 
Come here ! '' 
said the countess . 
Natasha went up to the monk for his blessing , and advised her to pray for aid to God and His saint . 
As soon as the prior withdrew , Natasha took her friend by the hand and went with her into the unoccupied room . 
`` Sonya , will he live ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Sonya , how happy I am , and how unhappy ! 
... Sonya , dovey , everything is as it used to be . 
If only he lives ! 
He can not ... because ... because ... of '' and Natasha burst into tears . 
`` Yes ! 
I knew it ! 
Thank God ! '' 
murmured Sonya . 
`` He will live . '' 
Sonya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter 's fear and grief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one . 
Sobbing , she kissed and comforted Natasha . 
`` If only he lives ! '' 
she thought . 
Having wept , talked , and wiped away their tears , the two friends went together to Prince Andrew 's door . 
Natasha opened it cautiously and glanced into the room , Sonya standing beside her at the half-open door . 
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows . 
His pale face was calm , his eyes closed , and they could see his regular breathing . 
`` O , Natasha ! '' 
Sonya suddenly almost screamed , catching her companion 's arm and stepping back from the door . 
`` What ? 
What is it ? '' 
asked Natasha . 
`` It 's that , that ... '' said Sonya , with a white face and trembling lips . 
Natasha softly closed the door and went with Sonya to the window , not yet understanding what the latter was telling her . 
`` You remember , '' said Sonya with a solemn and frightened expression . 
`` You remember when I looked in the mirror for you ... at Otradnoe at Christmas ? 
Do you remember what I saw ? '' 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
cried Natasha opening her eyes wide , and vaguely recalling that Sonya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen lying down . 
`` You remember ? '' 
Sonya went on . 
`` I saw it then and told everybody , you and Dunyasha . 
I saw him lying on a bed , '' said she , making a gesture with her hand and a lifted finger at each detail , `` and that he had his eyes closed and was covered just with a pink quilt , and that his hands were folded , '' she concluded , convincing herself that the details she had just seen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror . 
She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that came into her head , but what she had invented then seemed to her now as real as any other recollection . 
She not only remembered what she had then said -- that he turned to look at her and smiled and was covered with something red -- but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and said that he was covered with a pink quilt and that his eyes were closed . 
