`` That 's where one crosses the Kolocha . 
You see down there where the rows of hay are lying in the hollow , there 's the bridge . 
That 's our center . 
Our right flank is over there '' -- he pointed sharply to the right , far away in the broken ground -- `` That 's where the Moskva River is , and we have thrown up three redoubts there , very strong ones . 
The left flank ... '' here the officer paused . 
`` Well , you see , that 's difficult to explain ... . 
Yesterday our left flank was there at Shevardino , you see , where the oak is , but now we have withdrawn our left wing -- now it is over there , do you see that village and the smoke ? 
That 's Semenovsk , yes , there , '' he pointed to Raevski 's knoll . 
`` But the battle will hardly be there . 
His having moved his troops there is only a ruse ; he will probably pass round to the right of the Moskva . 
But wherever it may be , many a man will be missing tomorrow ! '' 
he remarked . 
An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was giving these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking , but at this point , evidently not liking the officer 's remark , interrupted him . 
`` Gabions must be sent for , '' said he sternly . 
The officer appeared abashed , as though he understood that one might think of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speak to speak of it . 
`` Well , send number three company again , '' the officer replied hurriedly . 
`` And you , are you one of the doctors ? '' 
`` No , I 've come on my own , '' answered Pierre , and he went down the hill again , passing the militiamen . 
`` Oh , those damned fellows ! '' 
muttered the officer who followed him , holding his nose as he ran past the men at work . 
`` There they are ... bringing her , coming ... There they are ... They 'll be here in a minute ... '' voices were suddenly heard saying ; and officers , soldiers , and militiamen began running forward along the road . 
A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodino . 
First along the dusty road came the infantry in ranks , bareheaded and with arms reversed . 
From behind them came the sound of church singing . 
Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward the procession . 
`` They are bringing her , our Protectress ! 
... The Iberian Mother of God ! '' 
someone cried . 
`` The Smolensk Mother of God , '' another corrected him . 
The militiamen , both those who had been in the village and those who had been at work on the battery , threw down their spades and ran to meet the church procession . 
Following the battalion that marched along the dusty road came priests in their vestments -- one little old man in a hood with attendants and singers . 
Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large , dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover . 
This was the icon that had been brought from and had since accompanied the army . 
Behind , before , and on both sides , crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked , ran , and bowed to the ground . 
At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon ; the men who had been holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved by others , the chanters relit their censers , and service began . 
The hot rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decorating the icon . 
The singing did not sound loud under the open sky . 
An immense crowd of bareheaded officers , soldiers , and militiamen surrounded the icon . 
Behind the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities on a spot reserved for them . 
A bald general with general with a St. George 's Cross on his neck stood just behind the priest 's back , and without crossing himself -LRB- he was evidently a German -RRB- patiently awaited the end of the service , which he considered it necessary to hear to the end , probably to arouse the patriotism of the Russian people . 
Another general stood in a martial pose , crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest while looking about him . 
Standing among the crowd of peasants , Pierre recognized several acquaintances among these notables , but did not look at them -- his whole attention was absorbed in watching the serious expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were all gazing eagerly at the icon . 
As soon as the tired chanters , who were singing the service for the twentieth time that day , began lazily and mechanically to sing : `` Save from calamity Thy servants , O Mother of God , '' and the priest and deacon chimed in : `` For to Thee under God we all flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection , '' there again kindled in all those faces the same expression of consciousness of the solemnity of the impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the foot of the hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had met that morning ; and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back , and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard . 
The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre . 
Someone , a very important personage judging by the haste with which way was made for him , was approaching the icon . 
It was Kutuzov , who had been riding round the position and on his way back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held . 
Pierre recognized him at once by his peculiar figure , which distinguished him from everybody else . 
With a long overcoat on his his exceedingly stout , round-shouldered body , with uncovered white head and puffy face showing the white ball of the eye he had lost , Kutuzov walked with plunging , swaying gait into the crowd and stopped behind the priest . 
He crossed himself with an accustomed movement , bent till he touched the ground with his hand , and bowed his white head with a deep sigh . 
Behind Kutuzov was Bennigsen and the suite . 
