In the English Club , where all who were distinguished , important , and well informed forgathered when the news began to arrive in December , nothing was said about the war and the last battle , as though all were in a conspiracy of silence . 
The men who set the tone in conversation -- Count Rostopchin , Prince Yuri Dolgorukov , Valuev , Count Markov , and Prince Vyazemski -- did not show themselves at the Club , but met in private houses in intimate circles , and the Moscovites who took their opinions from others -- Ilya Rostov among them -- remained for a while without any definite opinion on the subject of the war and without leaders . 
The Moscovites felt that something was wrong and that to discuss the bad news was difficult , and so it was best to be silent . 
But after a while , just as a jury comes out of its room , the bigwigs who guided the Club 's opinion reappeared , and everybody began speaking clearly and definitely . 
Reasons were found for the incredible , unheard-of , and impossible event of a Russian defeat , everything became clear , and in all corners of Moscow the same things began to be said . 
These reasons were the treachery of the Austrians , a defective commissariat , the treachery of the Pole Przebyszewski and of the Frenchman Langeron , Kutuzov 's incapacity , and -LRB- it was whispered -RRB- the youth and inexperience of the sovereign , who had trusted worthless and insignificant people . 
But the army , the Russian army , everyone declared , was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor . 
The soldiers , officers , and generals were heroes . 
But the hero of heroes was Prince Bagration , distinguished by his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat from Austerlitz , where he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and had all day beaten back an enemy force twice as numerous as his own . 
What also conduced to Bagration 's being selected as Moscow 's hero was the fact that he had no connections in the city and was a stranger there . 
In his person , honor was shown to a simple fighting Russian soldier without connections and intrigues , and to one who was associated by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suvorov . 
Moreover , paying such honor to Bagration was the best way of expressing disapproval and dislike of Kutuzov . 
`` Had there been no Bagration , it would have been necessary to invent him , '' said the wit Shinshin , parodying the words of Voltaire . 
Kutuzov no one spoke of , except some who abused him in whispers , calling him a court weathercock and an old satyr . 
All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorukov 's saying : `` If you go on modeling and modeling you must get smeared with clay , '' suggesting consolation for our defeat by the memory of former victories ; and the words of Rostopchin , that French soldiers have to be incited to battle by highfalutin words , and Germans by logical arguments to show them that it is more dangerous to run away than to advance , but that Russian soldiers only need to be restrained and held back ! 
On all sides , new and fresh anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by our officers and men at Austerlitz . 
One had saved a standard , another had killed five Frenchmen , a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded . 
Berg was mentioned , by those who did not know him , as having , when wounded in the right hand , taken his sword in the left , and gone forward . 
Of Bolkonski , nothing was said , and only those who knew him intimately regretted that he had died so young , leaving a pregnant wife with his eccentric father . 
On that third of March , all the rooms in the English Club were filled with a hum of conversation , like the hum of bees swarming in springtime . 
The members and guests of the Club wandered hither and thither , sat , stood , met , and separated , some in uniform and some in evening dress , and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftans . 
Powdered footmen , in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings , stood at every door anxiously noting visitors ' every movement in order to offer their services . 
Most of those present were elderly , respected men with broad , self-confident faces , fat fingers , and resolute gestures and voices . 
This class of guests and members sat in certain habitual places and met in certain habitual groups . 
A minority of those present were casual guests -- chiefly young men , among whom were Denisov , Rostov , and Dolokhov -- who was now again an officer in the Semenov regiment . 
The faces of these young people , especially those who were militarymen , bore that expression of condescending respect for their elders which seems to say to the older generation , `` We are prepared to respect and honor you , but all the same remember that the future belongs to us . '' 
Nesvitski was there as an old member of the Club . 
Pierre , who at his wife 's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles , went about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull . 
Here , as elsewhere , he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to his wealth , and being in the habit of lording it over these people , he treated them with absent-minded contempt . 
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men , but by his wealth and connections he belonged to the groups old and honored guests , and so he went from one group to another . 
Some of the most important old men were the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully to hear the voices of well-known men . 
The largest circles formed round Count Rostopchin , Valuev , and Naryshkin . 
Rostopchin was describing how the Russians had been overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to force their way through them with bayonets . 
Valuev was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent from Petersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz . 
In the third circle , Naryshkin was speaking of the meeting of the Austrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in reply to the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals . 
Shinshin , standing close by , tried to make a joke , saying that Kutuzov had evidently failed to learn from Suvorov even so simple a thing as the art of crowing like a cock , but the elder members glanced severely at the wit , making him feel that in that place and on that day , it was improper to speak so of Kutuzov . 
Count Ilya Rostov , hurried and preoccupied , went about in his soft boots between the dining and drawing rooms , hastily greeting the important and unimportant , all of whom he knew , as if they were all equals , while his eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up young son , resting on him and winking joyfully at him . 
Young Rostov stood at a window with Dolokhov , whose acquaintance he had lately made and highly valued . 
The old count came up to them and pressed Dolokhov 's hand . 
`` Please come and visit us ... you know my brave boy ... been together out there ... both playing the hero ... Ah , Vasili Ignatovich ... How d'ye do , old fellow ? '' 
he said , turning to an old man who was passing , but before he had finished his greeting there was a general stir , and a footman who had run in announced , with a frightened face : `` He 's arrived ! '' 
Bells rang , the stewards rushed forward , and -- like rye shaken together in a shovel -- the guests who had been scattered about in different rooms came together and crowded in the large drawing room by the door of the ballroom . 
Bagration appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword , which , in accord with the Club custom , he had given up to the hall porter . 
He had no lambskin cap on his head , nor had he a loaded whip over his shoulder , as when Rostov had seen him on the eve of the battle of Austerlitz , but wore a tight new uniform with Russian and foreign Orders , and the Star of St. George on his left breast . 
Evidently just before coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed , which changed his appearance for the worse . 
There was something naively festive in his air , which , in conjunction with his firm and virile features , gave him a rather comical expression . 
Bekleshev and Theodore Uvarov , who had arrived with him , paused at the doorway to allow him , as the guest of honor , to enter first . 
Bagration was embarrassed , not wishing to avail himself of their courtesy , and this caused some delay at the doors , but after all he did at last enter first . 
He walked shyly and awkwardly over the parquet floor of the reception room , not knowing what to do with his hands ; he was more accustomed to walk over a plowed field under fire , as he had done at the head of the Kursk regiment at Schon Grabern -- and he would have found that easier . 
The committeemen met him at the first door and , expressing their delight at seeing such a highly honored guest , took possession of him as it were , without waiting for his reply , surrounded him , and led him to the drawing room . 
