He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is terrible , and now he has this authority of a commander in chief of the recruiting , granted by the Emperor . 
If I had been two hours late a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster 's clerk at Yukhnovna hanged , '' said Prince Andrew with a smile . 
`` So I am serving because I alone have any influence with my father , and now and then can save him from actions which would torment him afterwards . '' 
`` Well , there you see ! '' 
`` Yes , but it is not as you imagine , '' Prince Andrew continued . 
`` I did not , and do not , in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk who had stolen some boots from the recruits ; I should even have been very glad to see him hanged , but I was sorry for my father -- that again is for myself . '' 
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated . 
His eyes glittered feverishly while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no desire to do good to his neighbor . 
`` There now , you wish to liberate your serfs , '' he continued ; `` that is a very good thing , but not for you -- I do n't suppose you ever had anyone flogged or sent to Siberia -- and still less for your serfs . 
If they are beaten , flogged , or sent to Siberia , I do n't suppose they are any the worse off . 
In Siberia they lead the same animal life , and the stripes on their bodies heal , and they are happy as before . 
But it is a good thing for proprietors who perish morally , bring remorse upon themselves , stifle this remorse and grow callous , as a result of being able to inflict punishments justly and unjustly . 
It is those people I pity , and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs . 
You may not have seen , but I have seen , how good men brought up in those traditions of unlimited power , in time when they grow more irritable , become cruel and harsh , are conscious of it , but can not restrain themselves and grow more and more miserable . '' 
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father 's case . 
He did not reply . 
`` So that 's what I 'm sorry for -- human dignity , peace of mind , purity , and not the serfs ' backs and foreheads , which , beat and shave as you may , always remain the same backs and foreheads . '' 
`` No , no ! 
A thousand times no ! 
I shall never agree with you , '' said Pierre . 
In the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage and drove to Bald Hills . 
Prince Andrew , glancing at Pierre , broke the silence now and then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper . 
Pointing to the fields , he spoke of the improvements he was making in his husbandry . 
Pierre remained gloomily silent , answering in monosyllables and apparently immersed in his own thoughts . 
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy , had gone astray , did not see the true light , and that he , Pierre , ought to aid , enlighten , and raise him . 
But as soon as he thought of what he should say , he felt that Prince Andrew with one word , one argument , would upset all his teaching , and he shrank from beginning , afraid of exposing to possible ridicule what to him was precious and sacred . 
`` No , but why do you think so ? '' 
Pierre suddenly began , lowering his head and looking like a bull about to charge , `` why do you think so ? 
You should not think so . '' 
`` Think ? 
What about ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew with surprise . 
`` About life , about man 's destiny . 
It ca n't be so . 
I myself thought like that , and do you know what saved me ? 
Freemasonry ! 
No , do n't smile . 
Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect , as I thought it was : Freemasonry is the best expression of the best , the eternal , aspects of humanity . '' 
And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince Andrew . 
He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed from the bonds of State and Church , a teaching of equality , brotherhood , and love . 
`` Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life , all the rest is a dream , '' said Pierre . 
`` Understand , my dear fellow , that outside this union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree with you that nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out his life , like you , merely trying not to harm others . 
But make our fundamental convictions your own , join our brotherhood , give yourself up to us , let yourself be guided , and you will at once feel yourself , as I have felt myself , a part of that vast invisible chain the beginning of which is hidden in heaven , '' said Pierre . 
Prince Andrew , looking straight in front of him , listened in silence to Pierre 's words . 
More than once , when the noise of the wheels prevented his catching what Pierre said , he asked him to repeat it , and by the peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew 's eyes and by his silence , Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would not interrupt him or laugh at what he said . 
They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to cross by ferry . 
While the carriage and horses were being placed on it , they also stepped on the raft . 
Prince Andrew , leaning his arms on the raft railing , gazed silently at the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun . 
`` Well , what do you think about it ? '' 
Pierre asked . 
