And he immediately gave himself the answer : `` Well , I shall live . 
Ah , how splendid ! '' 
The very question that had formerly tormented him , the thing he had continually sought to find -- the aim of life -- no longer existed for him now . 
That search for the aim of life had not merely disappeared temporarily -- he felt that it no longer existed for him and could not present itself again . 
And this very absence of an aim gave him the complete , joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness at this time . 
He could not see an aim , for he now had faith -- not faith in any kind of rule , or words , or ideas , but faith in an ever-living , ever-manifest God . 
Formerly he had sought Him in aims he set himself . 
That search for an aim had been simply a search for God , and suddenly in his captivity he had learned not by words or reasoning but by direct feeling what his nurse had told him long ago : that God is here and everywhere . 
In his captivity he had learned that in Karataev God was greater , more infinite and unfathomable than in the Architect of the Universe recognized by the Freemasons . 
He felt like a man who after straining his eyes to see into the far distance finds what he sought at his very feet . 
All his life he had looked over the heads of the men around him , when he should have merely looked in front of him without straining his eyes . 
In the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutable infinite something . 
He had only felt that it must exist somewhere and had looked for it . 
In everything near and comprehensible he had only what was limited , petty , commonplace , and senseless . 
He had equipped himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space , where petty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemed to him great and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen . 
And such had European life , politics , Freemasonry , philosophy , and philanthropy seemed to him . 
But even then , at moments of weakness as he had accounted them , his mind had penetrated to those distances and he had there seen the same pettiness , worldliness , and senselessness . 
Now , however , he had learned to see the great , eternal , and infinite in everything , and therefore -- to see it and enjoy its contemplation -- he naturally threw away the telescope through which he had till now gazed over men 's heads , and gladly regarded the ever-changing , eternally great , unfathomable , and infinite life around him . 
And the closer he looked the more tranquil and happy he became . 
That dreadful question , `` What for ? '' 
which had formerly destroyed all his mental edifices , no longer existed for him . 
To that question , `` What for ? '' 
a simple answer was now always ready in his soul : `` Because there is a God , that God without whose will not one hair falls from a man 's head . '' 
In external ways Pierre had hardly changed at all . 
In appearance he was just what he used to be . 
As before he was absent-minded and seemed occupied not with what was before his eyes but with something special of his own . 
The difference between his former and present self was that formerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or was said to him , he had puckered his forehead painfully as if vainly seeking to distinguish something at a distance . 
At present he still forgot what was said to him and still did not see what was before his eyes , but he now looked with a scarcely perceptible and seemingly ironic smile at what was before him and listened to what was said , though evidently seeing and hearing something quite different . 
Formerly he had appeared to be a kindhearted but unhappy man , and so people had been inclined to avoid him . 
Now a smile at the joy of life always played round his lips , and sympathy for others , shone in his eyes with a questioning look as to whether they were as contented as he was , and people felt pleased by his presence . 
Previously he had talked a great deal , grew excited when he talked , and seldom listened ; now he was seldom carried away in conversation and knew how to listen so that people readily told him their most intimate secrets . 
The princess , who had never liked Pierre and had been particularly hostile to him since she had felt herself under obligations to him after the old count 's death , now after staying a short time in Orel - where she had come intending to show Pierre that in spite of his ingratitude she considered it her duty to nurse him -- felt to her surprise and vexation that she had become fond of him . 
Pierre did not in any way seek her approval , he merely studied her with interest . 
Formerly she had felt that he regarded her with indifference and irony , and so had shrunk into herself as she did with others and had shown him only the combative side of her nature ; but now he seemed to be trying to understand the most intimate places of her heart , and , mistrustfully at first but afterwards gratefully , she let him see the hidden , kindly sides of her character . 
The most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence more successfully , evoking memories of the best times of her youth and showing sympathy with them . 
Yet Pierre 's cunning consisted simply in finding pleasure in drawing out the human qualities of the embittered , hard , and -LRB- in her own way -RRB- proud princess . 
`` Yes , he is a very , very kind man when he is not under the influence of bad people but of people such as myself , '' thought she . 
His servants too -- Terenty and Vaska -- in their own way noticed the change that had taken place in Pierre . 
They considered that he had become much `` simpler . '' 
Terenty , when he had helped him undress and wished him good night , often lingered with his master 's boots in his hands and clothes over his arm , to see whether he would not start a talk . 
And Pierre , noticing that Terenty wanted a chat , generally kept him there . 
`` Well , tell me ... now , how did you get food ? '' 
he would ask . 
And Terenty would begin talking of the destruction of Moscow , and of the old count , and would stand for a long time holding the clothes and talking , or sometimes listening to Pierre 's stories , and then would go out into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his master and affection for him . 
The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day , though he considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every moment was of value to suffering humanity , would sit for hours with Pierre telling him his favorite anecdotes and his observations on the characters of his patients in general , and especially of the ladies . 
`` It 's a pleasure to talk to a man like that ; he is not like our provincials , '' he would say . 
There were several prisoners from the French army in Orel , and the doctor brought one of them , a young Italian , to see Pierre . 
This officer began visiting Pierre , and the princess used to make fun of the tenderness the Italian expressed for him . 
The Italian seemed happy only when he could come to see Pierre , talk with him , tell him about his past , his life at home , and his love , and pour out to him his indignation against the French and especially against Napoleon . 
`` If all Russians are in the least like you , it is sacrilege to fight such a nation , '' he said to Pierre . 
