The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry singers . 
`` Oh , the coxcombs ! '' 
he muttered reproachfully . 
`` It 's not the soldiers only , but I 've seen peasants today , too ... . 
The peasants -- even they have to go , '' said the soldier behind the cart , addressing Pierre with a sad smile . 
`` No distinctions made nowadays ... . 
They want the whole nation to fall on them -- in a word , it 's Moscow ! 
They want to make an end of it . '' 
In spite of the obscurity of the soldier 's words Pierre understood what he wanted to say and nodded approval . 
The road was clear again ; Pierre descended the hill and drove on . 
He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces , but only saw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of different branches of the service , who all looked with astonishment at his white hat and green tail coat . 
Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and eagerly addressed him . 
This was one of the head army doctors . 
He was driving toward Pierre in a covered gig , sitting beside a young surgeon , and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver 's seat to pull up . 
`` Count ! 
Your excellency , how come you to be here ? '' 
asked the doctor . 
`` Well , you know , I wanted to see ... '' `` Yes , yes , there will be something to see ... '' Pierre got out and talked to the doctor , explaining his intention of taking part in a battle . 
The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov . 
`` Why should you be God knows where out of sight , during the battle ? '' 
he said , exchanging glances with his young companion . 
`` Anyhow his Serene Highness knows you and will receive you graciously . 
That 's what you must do . '' 
The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry . 
`` You think so ? 
... Ah , I also wanted to ask you where our position is exactly ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` The position ? '' 
repeated the doctor . 
`` Well , that 's not my line . 
Drive past Tatarinova , a lot of digging is going on there . 
Go up the hillock and you 'll see . '' 
`` Can one see from there ? 
... If you would ... '' But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig . 
`` I would go with you but on my honor I 'm up to here '' -- and he pointed to his throat . 
`` I 'm galloping to the commander of the corps . 
How do matters stand ? 
... You know , Count , there 'll be a battle tomorrow . 
Out of an army of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded , and we have n't stretchers , or bunks , or dressers , or doctors enough for six thousand . 
We have ten thousand carts , but we need other things as well -- we must manage as best we can ! '' 
The strange thought that of the thousands of men , young and old , who had stared with merry surprise at his hat -LRB- perhaps the very men he had noticed -RRB- , twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death amazed Pierre . 
`` They may die tomorrow ; why are they thinking of anything but death ? '' 
And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozhaysk hill , the carts with the wounded , the ringing bells , the slanting rays of the sun , and the songs of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind . 
`` The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment think of what awaits them , but pass by , winking at the wounded . 
Yet from among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die , and they wonder at my hat ! 
Strange ! '' 
thought Pierre , continuing his way to Tatarinova . 
In front of a landowner 's house to the left of the road stood carriages , wagons , and crowds of orderlies and sentinels . 
The commander in chief was putting up there , but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and hardly any of the staff were there -- they had gone to the church service . 
Pierre drove on toward Gorki . 
