Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouacking close to the village and had already been sent for . 
`` Oh , but you were there ? '' 
said Prince Bagration , addressing Prince Andrew . 
`` Of course , we only just missed one another , '' said the staff officer , with a smile to Bolkonski . 
`` I had not the pleasure of seeing you , '' said Prince Andrew , coldly and abruptly . 
All were silent . 
Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way timidly from behind the backs of the generals . 
As he stepped past the generals in the crowded hut , feeling embarrassed as he always was by the sight of his superiors , he did not notice the staff of the banner and stumbled over it . 
Several of those present laughed . 
`` How was it a gun was abandoned ? '' 
asked Bagration , frowning , not so much at the captain as at those who were laughing , among whom Zherkov laughed loudest . 
Only now , when he was confronted by the stern authorities , did his guilt and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present themselves to Tushin in all their horror . 
He had been so excited that he had not thought about it until that moment . 
The officers ' laughter confused him still more . 
He stood before Bagration with his lower jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter : `` I do n't know ... your excellency ... I had no men ... your excellency . '' 
`` You might have taken some from the covering troops . '' 
Tushin did not say that there were no covering troops , though that was perfectly true . 
He was afraid of getting some other officer into trouble , and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy who has blundered looks at an examiner . 
The silence lasted some time . 
Prince Bagration , apparently not wishing to be severe , found nothing to say ; the others did not venture to intervene . 
Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows and his fingers twitched nervously . 
`` Your excellency ! '' 
Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt voice , '' you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin 's battery . 
I went there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out , two guns smashed , and no supports at all . '' 
Prince Bagration and Tushin looked with equal intentness at Bolkonski , who spoke with suppressed agitation . 
`` And , if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion , '' he continued , `` we owe today 's success chiefly to the action of that battery and the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company , '' and without awaiting a reply , Prince Andrew rose and left the table . 
Prince Bagration looked at Tushin , evidently reluctant to show distrust in Bolkonski 's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to credit it , bent his head , and told Tushin that he could go . 
Prince Andrew went out with him . 
`` Thank you ; you saved me , my dear fellow ! '' 
said Tushin . 
Prince Andrew gave him a look , but said nothing and went away . 
He felt sad and depressed . 
It was all so strange , so unlike what he had hoped . 
`` Who are they ? 
Why are they here ? 
What do they want ? 
And when will all this end ? '' 
thought Rostov , looking at the changing shadows before him . 
The pain in his arm became more and more intense . 
Irresistible drowsiness overpowered him , red rings danced before his eyes , and the impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged with the physical pain . 
It was they , these soldiers - wounded and unwounded -- it was they who were crushing , weighing down , and twisting the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder . 
To rid himself of them he closed his eyes . 
For a moment he dozed , but in that short interval innumerable things appeared to him in a dream : his mother and her large white hand , Sonya 's thin little shoulders , Natasha 's eyes and laughter , Denisov with his voice and mustache , and Telyanin and all that affair with Telyanin and Bogdanich . 
That affair was the same thing as this soldier with the harsh voice , and it was that affair and this soldier that were so agonizingly , incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and always dragging it in one direction . 
He tried to get away from them , but they would not for an instant let his shoulder move a hair 's breadth . 
It would not ache -- it would be well -- if only they did not pull it , but it was impossible to get rid of them . 
He opened his eyes and looked up . 
The black canopy of night hung less than a yard above the glow of the charcoal . 
Flakes of falling snow were fluttering in that light . 
Tushin had not returned , the doctor had not come . 
