he said . 
` When , and in what month ? ' 
He asked all about it and his heart began to ache . 
So he comes up to the old man like this , and falls down at his feet ! 
` You are perishing because of me , Daddy , ' he says . 
` It 's quite true , lads , that this man , ' he says , ` is being tortured innocently and for nothing ! 
I , ' he says , ` did that deed , and I put the knife under your head while you were asleep . 
Forgive me , Daddy , ' he says , ` for Christ 's sake ! ' '' 
Karataev paused , smiling joyously as he gazed into the fire , and he drew the logs together . 
`` And the old man said , ` God will forgive you , we are all sinners in His sight . 
I suffer for my own sins , ' and he wept bitter tears . 
Well , and what do you think , dear friends ? '' 
Karataev continued , his face brightening more and more with a rapturous smile as if what he now had to tell contained the chief charm and the whole meaning of his story : `` What do you think , dear fellows ? 
That murderer confessed to the authorities . ' 
I have taken six lives , ' he says -LRB- he was a great sinner -RRB- , ` but what I am most sorry for is this old man . 
Do n't let him suffer because of me . ' 
So he confessed and it was all written down and the papers sent off in due form . 
The place was a long way off , and while they were judging , what with one thing and another , filling in the papers all in due form -- the authorities I mean -- time passed . 
The affair reached the Tsar . 
After a while the Tsar 's decree came : to set the merchant free and give him a compensation that had been awarded . 
The paper arrived and they began to look for the old man . 
` Where is the old man who has been suffering innocently and in vain ? 
A paper has come from the Tsar ! ' 
so they began looking for him , '' here Karataev 's lower jaw trembled , `` but God had already forgiven him -- he was dead ! 
That 's how it was , dear fellows ! '' 
Karataev concluded and sat for a long time silent , gazing before him with a smile . 
And Pierre 's soul was dimly but joyfully filled not by the story itself but by its mysterious significance : by the rapturous joy that lit up Karataev 's face as he told it , and the mystic significance of that joy . 
`` A vos places ! '' 
* suddenly cried a voice . 
* `` To your places . '' 
A pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of something joyful and solemn was aroused among the soldiers of the convoy and the prisoners . 
From all sides came shouts of command , and from the left came smartly dressed cavalrymen on good horses , passing the prisoners at a trot . 
The expression on all faces showed the tension people feel at the approach of those in authority . 
The prisoners thronged together and were pushed off the road . 
The convoy formed up . 
`` The Emperor ! 
The Emperor ! 
The Marshal ! 
The Duke ! '' 
and hardly had the sleek cavalry passed , before a carriage drawn by six gray horses rattled by . 
Pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three-cornered hat with a tranquil look on his handsome , plump , white face . 
It was one of the marshals . 
His eye fell on Pierre 's large and striking figure , and in the expression with which he frowned and looked away Pierre thought he detected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy . 
The general in charge of the stores galloped after the carriage with a red and frightened face , whipping up his skinny horse . 
Several officers formed a group and some soldiers crowded round them . 
Their faces all looked excited and worried . 
`` What did he say ? 
What did he say ? '' 
Pierre heard them ask . 
While the marshal was passing , the prisoners had huddled together in a crowd , and Pierre saw Karataev whom he had not yet seen that morning . 
