He sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree . 
On his face , besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while telling the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently , there was now an expression of quiet solemnity . 
Karataev looked at Pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled with tears , evidently wishing him to come near that he might say something to him . 
But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself . 
He made as if he did not notice that look and moved hastily away . 
When the prisoners again went forward Pierre looked round . 
Karataev was still sitting at the side of the road under the birch tree and two Frenchmen were talking over his head . 
Pierre did not look round again but went limping up the hill . 
From behind , where Karataev had been sitting , came the sound of a shot . 
Pierre heard it plainly , but at that moment he remembered that he had not yet finished reckoning up how many stages still remained to Smolensk -- a calculation he had begun before the marshal went by . 
And he again started reckoning . 
Two French soldiers ran past Pierre , one of whom carried a lowered and smoking gun . 
They both looked pale , and in the expression on their faces -- one of them glanced timidly at Pierre -- there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of the young soldier at the execution . 
Pierre looked at the soldier and remembered that , two days before , that man had burned his shirt while drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him . 
Behind him , where Karataev had been sitting , the dog began to howl . 
`` What a stupid beast ! 
Why is it howling ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
His comrades , the prisoner soldiers walking beside him , avoided looking back at the place where the shot had been fired and the dog was howling , just as Pierre did , but there was a set look on all their faces . 
The stores , the prisoners , and the marshal 's baggage train stopped at the village of Shamshevo . 
The men crowded together round the campfires . 
Pierre went up to the fire , ate some roast horseflesh , lay down with his back to the fire , and immediately fell asleep . 
He again slept as he had done at Mozhaysk after the battle of Borodino . 
Again real events mingled with dreams and again someone , he or another , gave expression to his thoughts , and even to the same thoughts that had been expressed in his dream at Mozhaysk . 
`` Life is everything . 
Life is God . 
Everything changes and moves and that movement is God . 
And while there is life there is joy in consciousness of the divine . 
To love life is to love God . 
Harder and more blessed than all else is to love this life in one 's sufferings , in innocent sufferings . '' 
`` Karataev ! '' 
came to Pierre 's mind . 
And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten , kindly old man who had given him geography lessons in Switzerland . 
`` Wait a bit , '' said the old man , and showed Pierre a globe . 
This globe was alive -- a vibrating ball without fixed dimensions . 
Its whole surface consisted of drops closely pressed together , and all these drops moved and changed places , sometimes several of them merging into one , sometimes one dividing into many . 
Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much space as possible , but others striving to do the same compressed it , sometimes destroyed it , and sometimes merged with it . 
`` That is life , '' said the old teacher . 
`` How simple and clear it is , '' thought Pierre . 
`` How is it I did not know it before ? '' 
`` God is in the midst , and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect Him to the greatest extent . 
And it grows , merges , disappears from the surface , sinks to the depths , and again emerges . 
There now , Karataev has spread out and disappeared . 
Do you understand , my child ? '' 
said the teacher . 
`` Do you understand , damn you ? '' 
shouted a voice , and Pierre woke up . 
He lifted himself and sat up . 
A Frenchman who had just pushed a Russian soldier away was squatting by the fire , engaged in roasting a piece of meat stuck on a ramrod . 
His sleeves were rolled up and his sinewy , hairy , red hands with their short fingers deftly turned the ramrod . 
