-LRB- This was Sonya . -RRB- 
Princess Mary ran up the steps . 
`` This way , this way ! '' 
said the girl , with the same artificial smile , and the princess found herself in the hall facing an elderly woman of Oriental type , who came rapidly to meet her with a look of emotion . 
This was the countess . 
She embraced Princess Mary and kissed her . 
`` Mon enfant ! '' 
she muttered , `` je vous aime et vous connais depuis longtemps . '' 
* * `` My child ! 
I love you and have known you a long time . '' 
Despite her excitement , Princess Mary realized that this was the countess and that it was necessary to say something to her . 
Hardly knowing how she did it , she contrived to utter a few polite phrases in French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her , and asked : `` How is he ? '' 
`` The doctor says that he is not in danger , '' said the countess , but as she spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh , and her gesture conveyed a contradiction of her words . 
`` Where is he ? 
Can I see him -- can I ? '' 
asked the princess . 
`` One moment , Princess , one moment , my dear ! 
Is this his son ? '' 
said the countess , turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles . 
`` There will be room for everybody , this is a big house . 
Oh , what a lovely boy ! '' 
The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room , where Sonya was talking to Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
The countess caressed the boy , and the old count came in and welcomed the princess . 
He had changed very much since Princess Mary had last seen him . 
Then he had been a brisk , cheerful , self-assured old man ; now he seemed a pitiful , bewildered person . 
While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as if asking everyone whether he was doing the right thing . 
After the destruction of Moscow and of his property , thrown out of his accustomed groove he seemed to have lost the sense of his own significance and to feel that there was no longer a place for him in life . 
In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible , and her vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see him they should be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire her nephew , the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt the necessity of submitting , for a time , to this new order of things which she had entered . 
She knew it to be necessary , and though it was hard for her she was not vexed with these people . 
`` This is my niece , '' said the count , introducing Sonya -- `` You do n't know her , Princess ? '' 
Princess Mary turned to Sonya and , trying to stifle the hostile feeling that arose in her toward the girl , she kissed her . 
But she felt oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far from what was in her own heart . 
`` Where is he ? '' 
she asked again , addressing them all . 
`` He is downstairs . 
Natasha is with him , '' answered Sonya , flushing . 
`` We have sent to ask . 
I think you must be tired , Princess . '' 
Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary 's eyes . 
She turned away and was about to ask the countess again how to go to him , when light , impetuous , and seemingly buoyant steps were heard at the door . 
The princess looked round and saw Natasha coming in , almost running -- that Natasha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in Moscow long since . 
But hardly had the princess looked at Natasha 's face before she realized that here was a real comrade in her grief , and consequently a friend . 
She ran to meet her , embraced her , and began to cry on her shoulder . 
As soon as Natasha , sitting at the head of Prince Andrew 's bed , heard of Princess Mary 's arrival , she softly left his room and hastened to her with those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary . 
There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran into the drawing room -- that of love -- boundless love for him , for her , and for all that was near to the man she loved ; and of pity , suffering for others , and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helping them . 
It was plain that at that moment there was in Natasha 's heart no thought of herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew . 
Princess Mary , with her acute sensibility , understood all this at the first glance at Natasha 's face , and wept on her shoulder with sorrowful pleasure . 
`` Come , come to him , Mary , '' said Natasha , leading her into the other room . 
Princess Mary raised her head , dried her eyes , and turned to Natasha . 
She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn everything . 
