they shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leg had been torn off . 
`` There , lads ... oh , oh ! '' 
they mimicked the peasants , `` they do n't like it at all ! '' 
Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt , and after every loss , the liveliness increased more and more . 
As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly and rapidly from an approaching thundercloud , so , as if in opposition to what was taking place , the lightning of hidden fire growing more and more intense glowed in the faces of these men . 
Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know what was happening there ; he was entirely absorbed in watching this fire which burned ever more brightly and which he felt was flaming up in the same way in his own soul . 
At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front of the battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated . 
From the battery they could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on their muskets . 
A general with his suite came to the battery , and after speaking to the colonel gave Pierre an angry look and went away again having ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down , so as to be less exposed to fire . 
After this from amid the ranks of infantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts of command , and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry moved forward . 
Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck by a pale young officer who , letting his sword hang down , was walking backwards and kept glancing uneasily around . 
The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their long-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard . 
A few minutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from that direction . 
Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in the battery . 
Several men were lying about who had not been removed . 
Around the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily . 
No one any longer took notice of Pierre . 
Once or twice he was shouted at for being in the way . 
The senior officer moved with big , rapid strides from one gun to another with a frowning face . 
The young officer , with his face still more flushed , commanded the men more scrupulously than ever . 
The soldiers handed up the charges , turned , loaded , and did their business with strained smartness . 
They gave little jumps as they walked , as though they were on springs . 
The stormcloud had come upon them , and in every face the fire which Pierre had watched kindle burned up brightly . 
Pierre standing beside the commanding officer . 
The young officer , his hand to his shako , ran up to his superior . 
`` I have the honor to report , sir , that only eight rounds are left . 
Are we to continue firing ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Grapeshot ! '' 
the senior shouted , without answering the question , looking over the wall of the trench . 
Suddenly something happened : the young officer gave a gasp and bending double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing . 
Everything became strange , confused , and misty in Pierre 's eyes . 
One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork , a soldier , or a gun . 
Pierre , who had not noticed these sounds before , now heard nothing else . 
On the right of the battery soldiers shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
were running not forwards but backwards , it seemed to Pierre . 
A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he was standing , crumbling down the earth ; a black ball flashed before his eyes and at the same instant plumped into something . 
Some militiamen who were entering the battery ran back . 
`` All with grapeshot ! '' 
shouted the officer . 
The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informed him -LRB- as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of some wine asked for -RRB- that there were no more charges . 
`` The scoundrels ! 
What are they doing ? '' 
shouted the officer , turning to Pierre . 
The officer 's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered under his frowning brow . 
`` Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes ! '' 
he yelled , angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men . 
`` I 'll go , '' said Pierre . 
The officer , without answering him , strode across to the opposite side . 
`` Do n't fire ... . 
