`` Vous voyez le malheureux Mack , '' he uttered in a broken voice . 
Kutuzov 's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly immobile for a few moments . 
Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave and his forehead became smooth again , he bowed his head respectfully , closed his eyes , silently let Mack enter his room before him , and closed the door himself behind him . 
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct . 
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with orders which showed that the Russian troops , who had hitherto been inactive , would also soon have to meet the enemy . 
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest lay in the general progress of the war . 
When he saw Mack and heard the details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost , understood all the difficulties of the Russian army 's position , and vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to play . 
Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of the humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week 's time he might , perhaps , see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the French since Suvorov met them . 
He feared that Bonaparte 's genius might outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops , and at the same time could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced . 
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his room to write to his father , to whom he wrote every day . 
In the corridor he met Nesvitski , with whom he shared a room , and the wag Zherkov ; they were as usual laughing . 
`` Why are you so glum ? '' 
asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew 's pale face and glittering eyes . 
`` There 's nothing to be gay about , '' answered Bolkonski . 
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov , there came toward them from the other end of the corridor , Strauch , an Austrian general who on Kutuzov 's staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army , and the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening . 
There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass the three officers quite easily , but Zherkov , pushing Nesvitski aside with his arm , said in a breathless voice , `` They 're coming ! 
... they 're coming ! 
... Stand aside , make way , please make way ! '' 
The generals were passing by , looking as if they wished to avoid embarrassing attentions . 
On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenly appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress . 
`` Your excellency , '' said he in German , stepping forward and addressing the Austrian general , `` I have the honor to congratulate you . '' 
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the other , awkwardly , like a child at a dancing lesson . 
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but , seeing the seriousness of his stupid smile , could not but give him a moment 's attention . 
He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening . 
`` I have the honor to congratulate you . 
General Mack has arrived , quite well , only a little bruised just here , '' he added , pointing with a beaming smile to his head . 
The general frowned , turned away , and went on . 
`` Gott , wie naiv ! '' 
* said he angrily , after he had gone a few steps . 
* `` Good God , what simplicity ! '' 
Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew , but Bolkonski , turning still paler , pushed him away with an angry look and turned to Zherkov . 
The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance of Mack , the news of his defeat , and the thought of what lay before the Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkov 's untimely jest . 
`` If you , sir , choose to make a buffoon of yourself , '' he said sharply , with a slight trembling of the lower jaw , `` I ca n't prevent your doing so ; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence , I will teach you to behave yourself . '' 
Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazed at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
I only congratulated them , '' said Zherkov . 
`` I am not jesting with you ; please be silent ! '' 
cried Bolkonski , and taking Nesvitski 's arm he left Zherkov , who did not know what to say . 
`` Come , what 's the matter , old fellow ? '' 
said Nesvitski trying to soothe him . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his excitement . 
`` Do n't you understand that either we are officers serving our Tsar and our country , rejoicing in the successes and grieving at the misfortunes of our common cause , or we are merely lackeys who care nothing for their master 's business . 
Quarante mille hommes massacres et l'armee de nos allies detruite , et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire , '' * he said , as if strengthening his views by this French sentence . 
`` C'est bien pour un garcon de rein comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un ami , mais pas pour vous , pas pour vous . 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- Only a hobbledehoy could amuse himself in this way , '' he added in Russian -- but pronouncing the word with a French accent - having noticed that Zherkov could still hear him . 
* `` Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies destroyed , and you find that a cause for jesting ! '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- `` It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow of whom you have made a friend , but not for you , not for you . '' 
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer , but he turned and went out of the corridor . 
The Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau . 
