Tell me . 
You must tell me ! '' 
He was silent . 
`` I do n't understand your why , Count , '' she continued , `` but it 's hard for me ... I confess it . 
For some reason you wish to deprive me of our former friendship . 
And that hurts me . '' 
There were tears in her eyes and in her voice . 
`` I have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hard for me to bear ... . 
Excuse me , good-by ! '' 
and suddenly she began to cry and was hurrying from the room . 
`` Princess , for God 's sake ! '' 
he exclaimed , trying to stop her . 
`` Princess ! '' 
She turned round . 
For a few seconds they gazed silently into one another 's eyes -- and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly became possible , inevitable , and very near . 
In the winter of 1813 Nicholas married Princess Mary and moved to Bald Hills with his wife , his mother , and Sonya . 
Within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts without selling any of his wife 's property , and having received a small inheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre as well . 
In another three years , by 1820 , he had so managed his affairs that he was able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and was negotiating to buy back Otradnoe -- that being his pet dream . 
Having started farming from necessity , he soon grew so devoted to it that it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation . 
Nicholas was a plain farmer : he did not like innovations , especially the English ones then coming into vogue . 
He laughed at theoretical treatises on estate management , disliked factories , the raising of expensive products , and the buying of expensive seed corn , and did not make a hobby of any particular part of the work on his estate . 
He always had before his mind 's eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it . 
The chief thing in his eyes was not the nitrogen in the soil , nor the oxygen in the air , nor manures , nor special plows , but that most important agent by which nitrogen , oxygen , manure , and plow were made effective -- the peasant laborer . 
When Nicholas first began farming and began to understand its different branches , it was the serf who especially attracted his attention . 
The peasant seemed to him not merely a tool , but also a judge of farming and an end in himself . 
At first he watched the serfs , trying to understand their aims and what they considered good and bad , and only pretended to direct them and give orders while in reality learning from them their methods , their manner of speech , and their judgment of what was good and bad . 
Only when he had understood the peasants ' tastes and aspirations , had learned to talk their language , to grasp the hidden meaning of their words , and felt akin to them did he begin boldly to manage his serfs , that is , to perform toward them the duties demanded of him . 
And Nicholas ' management produced very brilliant results . 
Guided by some gift of insight , on taking up the management of the estates he at once unerringly appointed as bailiff , village elder , and delegate , the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had they had the right to choose , and these posts never changed hands . 
Before analyzing the properties of manure , before entering into the debit and credit -LRB- as he ironically called it -RRB- , he found out how many cattle the peasants had and increased the number by all possible means . 
He kept the peasant families together in the largest groups possible , not allowing the family groups to divide into separate households . 
He was hard alike on the lazy , the depraved , and the weak , and tried to get them expelled from the commune . 
He was as careful of the sowing and reaping of the peasants ' hay and corn as of his own , and few landowners had their crops sown and harvested so early and so well , or got so good a return , as did Nicholas . 
He disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs -- the `` drones '' as he called them -- and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity . 
When a decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf , especially if one had to be punished , he always felt undecided and consulted everybody in the house ; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscripted instead of a land worker he did so without the least hesitation . 
He never felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants . 
He knew that his every decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions . 
He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man , or to make things easy for or reward anyone , merely because he felt inclined to do so . 
He could not have said by what standard he judged what he should or should not do , but the standard was quite firm and definite in his own mind . 
Often , speaking with vexation of some failure or irregularity , he would say : `` What can one do with our Russian peasants ? '' 
and imagined that he could not bear them . 
Yet he loved `` our Russian peasants '' and their way of life with his whole soul , and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one way and manner of farming which produced good results . 
Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband 's and regretted that she could not share it ; but she could not understand the joys and vexations he derived from that world , to her so remote and alien . 
She could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy when , after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in the fields or on the threshing floor , he returned from the sowing or mowing or reaping to have tea with her . 
She did not understand why he spoke with such admiration and delight of the farming of the thrifty and well-to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin , who with his family had carted corn all night ; or of the fact that his -LRB- Nicholas ' -RRB- sheaves were already stacked before anyone else had his harvest in . 
She did not understand why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his mustache and winked so joyfully , when warm steady rain began to fall on the dry and thirsty shoots of the young oats , or why when the wind carried away a threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return from the barn , flushed , sunburned , and perspiring , with a smell of wormwood and gentian in his hair and , gleefully rubbing his hands , would say : `` Well , one more day and my grain and the peasants ' will all be under cover . '' 
Still less did she understand why he , kindhearted and always ready to anticipate her wishes , should become almost desperate when she brought him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her to be excused some work ; why he , that kind Nicholas , should obstinately refuse her , angrily asking her not to interfere in what was not her business . 
She felt he had a world apart , which he loved passionately and which had laws she had not fathomed . 
Sometimes when , trying to understand him , she spoke of the good work he was doing for his serfs , he would be vexed and reply : `` Not in the least ; it never entered my head and I would n't do that for their good ! 
That 's all poetry and old wives ' talk -- all that doing good to one 's neighbor ! 
