All were silent . 
The officers rose . 
Prince Andrew went out of the shed with them , giving final orders to the adjutant . 
After they had gone Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation when they heard the clatter of three horses ' hoofs on the road not far from the shed , and looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognized Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack . 
They rode close by continuing to converse , and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these words : `` Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden . 
Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug Preis geben , '' * said one of them . 
* `` The war must be extended widely . 
I can not sufficiently commend that view . '' 
`` Oh , ja , '' said the other , `` der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwachen , so kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtung nehmen . '' 
* * `` Oh , yes , the only aim is to weaken the enemy , so of course one can not take into account the loss of private individuals . '' 
`` Oh , no , '' agreed the other . 
`` Extend widely ! '' 
said Prince Andrew with an angry snort , when they had ridden past . 
`` In that ` extend ' were my father , son , and sister , at Bald Hills . 
That 's all the same to him ! 
That 's what I was saying to you -- those German gentlemen wo n't win the battle tomorrow but will only make all the mess they can , because they have nothing in their German heads but theories not worth an empty eggshell and have n't in their hearts the one thing needed tomorrow -- that which Timokhin has . 
They have yielded up all Europe to him , and have now come to teach us . 
Fine teachers ! '' 
and again his voice grew shrill . 
`` So you think we shall win tomorrow 's battle ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Yes , yes , '' answered Prince Andrew absently . 
`` One thing I would do if I had the power , '' he began again , `` I would not take prisoners . 
Why take prisoners ? 
It 's chivalry ! 
The French have destroyed my home and are on their way to destroy Moscow , they have outraged and are outraging me every moment . 
They are my enemies . 
In my opinion they are all criminals . 
And so thinks Timokhin and the whole army . 
They should be executed ! 
Since they are my foes they can not be my friends , whatever may have been said at Tilsit . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' muttered Pierre , looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew . 
`` I quite agree with you ! '' 
The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and all that day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved . 
He now understood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of the impending battle . 
All he had seen that day , all the significant and stern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing , were lit up for him by a new light . 
He understood that latent heat -LRB- as they say in physics -RRB- of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen , and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly , and as it were lightheartedly . 
`` Not take prisoners , '' Prince Andrew continued : `` That by itself would quite change the whole war and make it less cruel . 
As it is we have played at war -- that 's what 's vile ! 
We play at magnanimity and all that stuff . 
Such magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity and sensibility of a lady who faints when she sees a calf being killed : she is so kind-hearted that she ca n't look at blood , but enjoys eating the calf served up with sauce . 
They talk to us of the rules of war , of chivalry , of flags of truce , of mercy to the unfortunate and so on . 
It 's all rubbish ! 
I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805 ; they humbugged us and we humbugged them . 
They plunder other people 's houses , issue false paper money , and worst of all they kill my children and my father , and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes ! 
Take no prisoners , but kill and be killed ! 
He who has come to this as I have through the same sufferings ... '' Prince Andrew , who had thought it was all the same to him whether or not Moscow was taken as Smolensk had been , was suddenly checked in his speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat . 
He paced up and down a few times in silence , but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lips quivered as he began speaking . 
`` If there was none of this magnanimity in war , we should go to war only when it was worth while going to certain death , as now . 
Then there would not be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michael Ivanovich . 
