she said to her husband , looking around with the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball . 
`` Let 's come , quick , quick ! '' 
And with a glance round , she smiled at Tikhon , at her husband , and at the footman who accompanied them . 
`` Is that Mary practicing ? 
Let 's go quietly and take her by surprise . '' 
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression . 
`` You 've grown older , Tikhon , '' he said in passing to the old man , who kissed his hand . 
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord came , the pretty , fair haired Frenchwoman , Mademoiselle Bourienne , rushed out apparently beside herself with delight . 
`` Ah ! 
what joy for the princess ! '' 
exclaimed she : `` At last ! 
I must let her know . '' 
`` No , no , please not ... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne , '' said the little princess , kissing her . 
`` I know you already through my sister-in-law 's friendship for you . 
She was not expecting us ? '' 
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata . 
Prince Andrew stopped and made a grimace , as if expecting something unpleasant . 
The little princess entered the room . 
The passage broke off in the middle , a cry was heard , then Princess Mary 's heavy tread and the sound of kissing . 
When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses , who had only met once before for a short time at his wedding , were in each other 's arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened to touch . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her heart , with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to laugh . 
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned , as lovers of music do when they hear a false note . 
The two women let go of one another , and then , as if afraid of being too late , seized each other 's hands , kissing them and pulling them away , and again began kissing each other on the face , and then to Prince Andrew 's surprise both began to cry and kissed again . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry . 
Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease , but to the two women it seemed quite natural that they should cry , and apparently it never entered their heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting . 
`` Ah ! 
my dear ! 
... Ah ! 
Mary ! '' 
they suddenly exclaimed , and then laughed . 
`` I dreamed last night ... '' -- `` You were not expecting us ? 
... '' - `` Ah ! 
Mary , you have got thinner ? 
... '' `` And you have grown stouter ! 
... '' `` I knew the princess at once , '' put in Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
`` And I had no idea ! 
... '' exclaimed Princess Mary . 
`` Ah , Andrew , I did not see you . '' 
Prince Andrew and his sister , hand in hand , kissed one another , and he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever . 
Princess Mary had turned toward her brother , and through her tears the loving , warm , gentle look of her large luminous eyes , very beautiful at that moment , rested on Prince Andrew 's face . 
The little princess talked incessantly , her short , downy upper lip continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of glittering teeth and sparkling eyes . 
She told of an accident they had had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in her condition , and immediately after that informed them that she had left all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have to dress in here ; and that Andrew had quite changed , and that Kitty Odyntsova had married an old man , and that there was a suitor for Mary , a real one , but that they would talk of that later . 
Princess Mary was still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full of love and sadness . 
It was plain that she was following a train of thought independent of her sister-in-law 's words . 
In the midst of a description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother : `` So you are really going to the war , Andrew ? '' 
she said sighing . 
Lise sighed too . 
`` Yes , and even tomorrow , '' replied her brother . 
`` He is leaving me here , God knows why , when he might have had promotion ... '' Princess Mary did not listen to the end , but continuing her train of thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure . 
`` Is it certain ? '' 
