`` Is she clever ? '' 
she asked . 
Pierre considered . 
`` I think not , '' he said , `` and yet -- yes . 
She does not deign to be clever ... . 
Oh no , she is simply enchanting , and that is all . '' 
Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly . 
`` Ah , I so long to like her ! 
Tell her so if you see her before I do . '' 
`` I hear they are expected very soon , '' said Pierre . 
Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her future sister-in-law as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to accustom the old prince to her . 
Boris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg , so with the same object in view he came to Moscow . 
There he wavered between the two richest heiresses , Julie and Princess Mary . 
Though Princess Mary despite her plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie , he , without knowing why , felt awkward about paying court to her . 
When they had last met on the old prince 's name day , she had answered at random all his attempts to talk sentimentally , evidently not listening to what he was saying . 
Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily , though in a manner peculiar to herself . 
She was twenty-seven . 
After the death of her brothers she had become very wealthy . 
She was by now decidedly plain , but thought herself not merely as good-looking as before but even far more attractive . 
She was confirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had become a very wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grew the less dangerous she became to men , and the more freely they could associate with her and avail themselves of her suppers , soirees , and the animated company that assembled at her house , without incurring any obligation . 
A man who would have been afraid ten years before of going every day to the house when there was a girl of seventeen there , for fear of compromising her and committing himself , would now go boldly every day and treat her not as a marriageable girl but as a sexless acquaintance . 
That winter the Karagins ' house was the most agreeable and hospitable in Moscow . 
In addition to the formal evening and dinner parties , a large company , chiefly of men , gathered there every day , supping at midnight and staying till three in the morning . 
Julie never missed a ball , a promenade , or a play . 
Her dresses were always of the latest fashion . 
But in spite of that she seemed to be disillusioned about everything and told everyone that she did not believe either in friendship or in love , or any of the joys of life , and expected peace only `` yonder . '' 
She adopted the tone of one who has suffered a great disappointment , like a girl who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived by him . 
Though nothing of the kind had happened to her she was regarded in that light , and had even herself come to believe that she had suffered much in life . 
This melancholy , which did not prevent her amusing herself , did not hinder the young people who came to her house from passing the time pleasantly . 
Every visitor who came to the house paid his tribute to the melancholy mood of the hostess , and then amused himself with society gossip , dancing , intellectual games , and bouts rimes , which were in vogue at the Karagins ' . 
Only a few of these young men , among them Boris , entered more deeply into Julie 's melancholy , and with these she had prolonged conversations in private on the vanity of all worldly things , and to them she showed her albums filled with mournful sketches , maxims , and verses . 
To Boris , Julie was particularly gracious : she regretted his early disillusionment with life , offered him such consolation of friendship as she who had herself suffered so much could render , and showed him her album . 
Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote : `` Rustic trees , your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me . '' 
On another page he drew a tomb , and wrote : La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille . 
Ah ! 
contre les douleurs il n ' y a pas d'autre asile . 
* * Death gives relief and death is peaceful . 
Ah ! 
from suffering there is no other refuge . 
Julia said this was charming `` There is something so enchanting in the smile of melancholy , '' she said to Boris , repeating word for word a passage she had copied from a book . 
`` It is a ray of light in the darkness , a shade between sadness and despair , showing the possibility of consolation . '' 
In reply Boris wrote these lines : Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible , Toi , sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible , Tendre melancholie , ah , viens me consoler , Viens calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite , Et mele une douceur secrete A ces pleurs que je sens couler . 
* * Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul , Thou , without whom happiness would for me be impossible , Tender melancholy , ah , come to console me , Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat , And mingle a secret sweetness With these tears that I feel to be flowing . 
For Boris , Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp . 
Boris read Poor Liza aloud to her , and more than once interrupted the reading because of the emotions that choked him . 
Meeting at large gatherings Julie and Boris looked on one another as the only souls who understood one another in a world of indifferent people . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , who often visited the Karagins , while playing cards with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie 's dowry -LRB- she was to have two estates in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests -RRB- . 
Anna Mikhaylovna regarded the refined sadness that united her son to the wealthy Julie with emotion , and resignation to the Divine will . 
`` You are always charming and melancholy , my dear Julie , '' she said to the daughter . 
`` Boris says his soul finds repose at your house . 
