Ermolov had been to see Bennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him to use his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the offensive . 
`` If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you are asking for . 
I need only advise anything and his Highness is sure to do the opposite , '' replied Bennigsen . 
The Cossack 's report , confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out , was the final proof that events had matured . 
The tightly coiled spring was released , the clock began to whirr and the chimes to play . 
Despite all his supposed power , his intellect , his experience , and his knowledge of men , Kutuzov -- having taken into consideration the Cossack 's report , a note from Bennigsen who sent personal reports to the Emperor , the wishes he supposed the Emperor to hold , and the fact that all the generals expressed the same wish -- could no longer check the inevitable movement , and gave the order to do what he regarded as useless and harmful -- gave his approval , that is , to the accomplished fact . 
Bennigsen 's note and the Cossack 's information that the left flank of the French was unguarded were merely final indications that it was necessary to order an attack , and it was fixed for the fifth of October . 
On the morning of the fourth of October Kutuzov signed the dispositions . 
Toll read them to Ermolov , asking him to attend to the further arrangements . 
`` All right -- all right . 
I have n't time just now , '' replied Ermolov , and left the hut . 
The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good . 
As in the Austerlitz dispositions , it was written -- though not in German this time : `` The First Column will march here and here , '' `` the Second Column will march there and there , '' and so on ; and on paper , all these columns arrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy . 
Everything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions , and as is always the case , not a single column reached its place at the appointed time . 
When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been prepared , an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermolov to deal with . 
A young officer of the Horse Guards , Kutuzov 's orderly , pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him , went to Ermolov 's quarters . 
`` Gone away , '' said Ermolov 's orderly . 
The officer of the Horse Guards went to a general with whom Ermolov was often to be found . 
`` No , and the general 's out too . '' 
The officer , mounting his horse , rode off to someone else . 
`` No , he 's gone out . '' 
`` If only they do n't make me responsible for this delay ! 
What a nuisance it is ! '' 
thought the officer , and he rode round the whole camp . 
One man said he had seen Ermolov ride past with some other generals , others said he must have returned home . 
The officer searched till six o'clock in the evening without even stopping to eat . 
Ermolov was nowhere to be found and no one knew where he was . 
The officer snatched a little food at a comrade 's , and rode again to the vanguard to find Miloradovich . 
Miloradovich too was away , but here he was told that he had gone to a ball at General Kikin 's and that Ermolov was probably there too . 
`` But where is it ? '' 
`` Why , there , over at Echkino , '' said a Cossack officer , pointing to a country house in the far distance . 
`` What , outside our line ? '' 
`` They 've put two regiments as outposts , and they 're having such a spree there , it 's awful ! 
Two bands and three sets of singers ! '' 
The officer rode out beyond our lines to Echkino . 
While still at a distance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier 's dance song proceeding from the house . 
`` In the meadows ... in the meadows ! '' 
he heard , accompanied by whistling and the sound of a torban , drowned every now and then by shouts . 
These sounds made his spirits rise , but at the same time he was afraid that he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order entrusted to him . 
It was already past eight o'clock . 
He dismounted and went up into the porch of a large country house which had remained intact between the Russian and French forces . 
In the refreshment room and the hall , footmen were bustling about with wine and viands . 
Groups of singers stood outside the windows . 
The officer was admitted and immediately saw all the chief generals of the army together , and among them Ermolov 's big imposing figure . 
They all had their coats unbuttoned and were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces , laughing loudly . 
In the middle of the room a short handsome general with a red face was dancing the trepak with much spirit and agility . 
`` Ha , ha , ha ! 
Bravo , Nicholas Ivanych ! 
Ha , ha , ha ! '' 
The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such a moment he was doubly to blame , and he would have preferred to wait ; but one of the generals espied him and , hearing what he had come about , informed Ermolov . 
