And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne , with her ribbon and pretty face , and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him , but him she could not see , she only saw something large , brilliant , and handsome moving toward her as she entered the room . 
Prince Vasili approached first , and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her hand and answered his question by saying that , on the contrary , she remembered him quite well . 
Then Anatole came up to her . 
She still could not see him . 
She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly , and she touched with her lips a white forehead , over which was beautiful light-brown hair smelling of pomade . 
When she looked up at him she was struck by his beauty . 
Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button of his uniform , his chest expanded and his back drawn in , slightly swinging one foot , and , with his head a little bent , looked with beaming face at the princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all . 
Anatole was not quick-witted , nor ready or eloquent in conversation , but he had the faculty , so invaluable in society , of composure and imperturbable self-possession . 
If a man lacking in self-confidence remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find something to say , the effect is bad . 
But Anatole was dumb , swung his foot , and smilingly examined the princess ' hair . 
It was evident that he could be silent in this way for a very long time . 
`` If anyone finds this silence inconvenient , let him talk , but I do n't want to , '' he seemed to say . 
Besides this , in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in them curiosity , awe , and even love -- a supercilious consciousness of his own superiority . 
It was was as if he said to them : `` I know you , I know you , but why should I bother about you ? 
You 'd be only too glad , of course . '' 
Perhaps he did not really think this when he met women - even probably he did not , for in general he thought very little -- but his looks and manner gave that impression . 
The princess felt this , and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect to interest him , she turned to his father . 
The conversation was general and animated , thanks to Princess Lise 's voice and little downy lip that lifted over her white teeth . 
She met Prince Vasili with that playful manner often employed by lively chatty people , and consisting in the assumption that between the person they so address and themselves there are some semi-private , long-established jokes and amusing reminiscences , though no such reminiscences really exist -- just as none existed in this case . 
Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the little princess also drew Anatole , whom she hardly knew , into these amusing recollections of things that had never occurred . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences . 
`` Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to ourselves , dear prince , '' said the little princess -LRB- of course , in French -RRB- to Prince Vasili . 
`` It 's not as at Annette 's * receptions where you always ran away ; you remember cette chere Annette ! '' 
* Anna Pavlovna . 
`` Ah , but you wo n't talk politics to me like Annette ! '' 
`` And our little tea table ? '' 
`` Oh , yes ! '' 
`` Why is it you were never at Annette 's ? '' 
the little princess asked Anatole . 
`` Ah , I know , I know , '' she said with a sly glance , `` your brother Hippolyte told me about your goings on . 
Oh ! '' 
and she shook her finger at him , `` I have even heard of your doings in Paris ! '' 
`` And did n't Hippolyte tell you ? '' 
asked Prince Vasili , turning to his son and seizing the little princess ' arm as if she would have run away and he had just managed to catch her , `` did n't he tell you how he himself was pining for the dear princess , and how she showed him the door ? 
Oh , she is a pearl among women , Princess , '' he added , turning to Princess Mary . 
When Paris was mentioned , Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections . 
She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole had left Paris and how he had liked that city . 
Anatole answered the Frenchwoman very readily and , looking at her with a smile , talked to her about her native land . 
When he saw the pretty little Bourienne , Anatole came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either . 
`` Not at all bad ! '' 
he thought , examining her , `` not at all bad , that little companion ! 
I hope she will bring her along with her when we 're married , la petite est gentille . '' 
* * The little one is charming . 
The old prince dressed leisurely in his study , frowning and considering what he was to do . 
The coming of these visitors annoyed him . 
`` What are Prince Vasili and that son of his to me ? 
Prince Vasili is a shallow braggart and his son , no doubt , is a fine specimen , '' he grumbled to himself . 
What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle , one about which he always deceived himself . 
The question was whether he could ever bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband . 
The prince never directly asked himself that question , knowing beforehand that he would have to answer it justly , and justice clashed not only with his feelings but with the very possibility of life . 
