`` In token of generosity I ask you to give me all your valuables . '' 
`` But I have nothing here , '' replied Pierre , supposing that he was asked to give up all he possessed . 
`` What you have with you : watch , money , rings ... '' Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch , but could not manage for some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger . 
When that had been done , the Rhetor said : `` In token of obedience , I ask you to undress . '' 
Pierre took off his coat , waistcoat , and left boot according to the Rhetor 's instructions . 
The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre 's left breast , and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers to above the knee . 
Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right boot also and was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to save this stranger the trouble , but the Mason told him that was not necessary and gave him a slipper for his left foot . 
With a childlike smile of embarrassment , doubt , and self-derision , which appeared on his face against his will , Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and legs apart , before his brother Rhetor , and awaited his further commands . 
`` And now , in token of candor , I ask you to reveal to me your chief passion , '' said the latter . 
`` My passion ! 
I have had so many , '' replied Pierre . 
`` That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the path of virtue , '' said the Mason . 
Pierre paused , seeking a reply . 
`` Wine ? 
Gluttony ? 
Idleness ? 
Laziness ? 
Irritability ? 
Anger ? 
Women ? '' 
He went over his vices in his mind , not knowing to which of them to give the pre-eminence . 
`` Women , '' he said in a low , scarcely audible voice . 
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this answer . 
At last he moved up to Pierre and , taking the kerchief that lay on the table , again bound his eyes . 
`` For the last time I say to you -- turn all your attention upon yourself , put a bridle on your senses , and seek blessedness , not in passion but in your own heart . 
The source of blessedness is not without us but within ... '' Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion . 
Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre , not the Rhetor but Pierre 's sponsor , Willarski , whom he recognized by his voice . 
To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre replied : `` Yes , yes , I agree , '' and with a beaming , childlike smile , his fat chest uncovered , stepping unevenly and timidly in one slippered and one booted foot , he advanced , while Willarski held a sword to his bare chest . 
He was conducted from that room along passages that turned backwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the Lodge . 
Willarski coughed , he was answered by the Masonic knock with mallets , the doors opened before them . 
A bass voice -LRB- Pierre was still blindfold -RRB- questioned him as to who he was , when and where he was born , and so on . 
Then he was again led somewhere still blindfold , and as they went along he was told allegories of the toils of his pilgrimage , of holy friendship , of the Eternal Architect of the universe , and of the courage with which he should endure toils and dangers . 
During these wanderings , Pierre noticed that he was spoken of now as the `` Seeker , '' now as the `` Sufferer , '' and now as the `` Postulant , '' to the accompaniment of various knockings with mallets and swords . 
As he was being led up to some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty among his conductors . 
He heard those around him disputing in whispers and one of them insisting that he should be led along a certain carpet . 
After that they took his right hand , placed it on something , and told him to hold a pair of compasses to his left breast with the other hand and to repeat after someone who read aloud an oath of fidelity to the laws of the Order . 
The candles were then extinguished and some spirit lighted , as Pierre knew by the smell , and he was told that he would now see the lesser light . 
The bandage was taken off his eyes and , by the faint light of the burning spirit , Pierre , as in a dream , saw several men standing before him , wearing aprons like the Rhetor 's and holding swords in their hands pointed at his breast . 
Among them stood a man whose white shirt was stained with blood . 
On seeing this , Pierre moved forward with his breast toward the swords , meaning them to pierce it . 
But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once blindfolded again . 
`` Now thou hast seen the lesser light , '' uttered a voice . 
Then the candles were relit and he was told that he would see the full light ; the bandage was again removed and more than ten voices said together : `` Sic transit gloria mundi . '' 
Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the room and at the people in it . 
Round a long table covered with black sat some twelve men in garments like those he had already seen . 
Some of them Pierre had met in Petersburg society . 
In the President 's chair sat a young man he did not know , with a peculiar cross hanging from his neck . 
On his right sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre had met at Anna Pavlovna 's two years before . 
There were also present a very distinguished dignitary and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the Kuragins ' . 
All maintained a solemn silence , listening to the words of the President , who held a mallet in his hand . 
