They talked of peace but did not believe in its possibility ; others talked of a battle but also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement . 
Bagration , knowing Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant , received him with distinction and special marks of favor , explaining to him that there would probably be an engagement that day or the next , and giving him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join the rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat , `` which is also very important . '' 
`` However , there will hardly be an engagement today , '' said Bagration as if to reassure Prince Andrew . 
`` If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard , but if he wishes to stay with me , let him ... he 'll be of use here if he 's a brave officer , '' thought Bagration . 
Prince Andrew , without replying , asked the prince 's permission to ride round the position to see the disposition of the forces , so as to know his bearings should he be sent to execute an order . 
The officer on duty , a handsome , elegantly dressed man with a diamond ring on his forefinger , who was fond of speaking French though he spoke it badly , offered to conduct Prince Andrew . 
On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who seemed to be seeking something , and soldiers dragging doors , benches , and fencing from the village . 
`` There now , Prince ! 
We ca n't stop those fellows , '' said the staff officer pointing to the soldiers . 
`` The officers do n't keep them in hand . 
And there , '' he pointed to a sutler 's tent , `` they crowd in and sit . 
This morning I turned them all out and now look , it 's full again . 
I must go there , Prince , and scare them a bit . 
It wo n't take a moment . '' 
`` Yes , let 's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese , '' said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything . 
`` Why did n't you mention it , Prince ? 
I would have offered you something . '' 
They dismounted and entered the tent . 
Several officers , with flushed and weary faces , were sitting at the table eating and drinking . 
`` Now what does this mean , gentlemen ? '' 
said the staff officer , in the reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more than once . 
`` You know it wo n't do to leave your posts like this . 
The prince gave orders that no one should leave his post . 
Now you , Captain , '' and he turned to a thin , dirty little artillery officer who without his boots -LRB- he had given them to the canteen keeper to dry -RRB- , in only his stockings , rose when they entered , smiling not altogether comfortably . 
`` Well , are n't you ashamed of yourself , Captain Tushin ? '' 
he continued . 
`` One would think that as an artillery officer you would set a good example , yet here you are without your boots ! 
The alarm will be sounded and you 'll be in a pretty position without your boots ! '' 
-LRB- The staff officer smiled . -RRB- 
`` Kindly return to your posts , gentlemen , all of you , all ! '' 
he added in a tone of command . 
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer Tushin , who silent and smiling , shifting from one stockinged foot to the other , glanced inquiringly with his large , intelligent , kindly eyes from Prince Andrew to the staff officer . 
`` The soldiers say it feels easier without boots , '' said Captain Tushin smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position , evidently wishing to adopt a jocular tone . 
But before he had finished he felt that his jest was unacceptable and had not come off . 
He grew confused . 
`` Kindly return to your posts , '' said the staff officer trying to preserve his gravity . 
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer 's small figure . 
There was something peculiar about it , quite unsoldierly , rather comic , but extremely attractive . 
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on . 
Having ridden beyond the village , continually meeting and overtaking soldiers and officers of various regiments , they saw on their left some entrenchments being thrown up , the freshly dug clay of which showed up red . 
Several battalions of soldiers , in their shirt sleeves despite the cold wind , swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants ; spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the bank by unseen hands . 
Prince Andrew and the officer rode up , looked at the entrenchment , and went on again . 
Just behind it they came upon some dozens of soldiers , continually replaced by others , who ran from the entrenchment . 
They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines . 
`` Voila l'agrement des camps , monsieur le Prince , '' * said the staff officer . 
* `` This is a pleasure one gets in camp , Prince . '' 
They rode up the opposite hill . 
From there the French could already be seen . 
Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position . 
`` That 's our battery , '' said the staff officer indicating the highest point . 
