Three weeks passed in this way . 
Natasha had no desire to go out anywhere and wandered from room to room like a shadow , idle and listless ; she wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the evenings . 
She blushed continually and was irritable . 
It seemed to her that everybody knew about her disappointment and was laughing at her and pitying her . 
Strong as was her inward grief , this wound to her vanity intensified her misery . 
Once she came to her mother , tried to say something , and suddenly began to cry . 
Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why it is being punished . 
The countess began to soothe Natasha , who after first listening to her mother 's words , suddenly interrupted her : `` Leave off , Mamma ! 
I do n't think , and do n't want to think about it ! 
He just came and then left off , left off ... '' Her voice trembled , and she again nearly cried , but recovered and went on quietly : `` And I do n't at all want to get married . 
And I am afraid of him ; I have now become quite calm , quite calm . '' 
The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which she knew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in the mornings , and that day she returned to the old way of life which she had abandoned since the ball . 
Having finished her morning tea she went to the ballroom , which she particularly liked for its loud resonance , and began singing her solfeggio . 
When she had finished her first exercise she stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that particularly pleased her . 
She listened joyfully -LRB- as though she had not expected it -RRB- to the charm of the notes reverberating , filling the whole empty ballroom , and slowly dying away ; and all at once she felt cheerful . 
`` What 's the good of making so much of it ? 
Things are nice as it is , '' she said to herself , and she began walking up and down the room , not stepping simply on the resounding parquet but treading with each step from the heel to the toe -LRB- she had on a new and favorite pair of shoes -RRB- and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the toe as gladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice . 
Passing a mirror she glanced into it . 
`` There , that 's me ! '' 
the expression of her face seemed to say as she caught sight of herself . 
`` Well , and very nice too ! 
I need nobody . '' 
A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room but she would not let him , and having closed the door behind him continued her walk . 
That morning she had returned to her favorite mood -- love of , and delight in , herself . 
`` How charming that Natasha is ! '' 
she said again , speaking as some third , collective , male person . 
`` Pretty , a good voice , young , and in nobody 's way if only they leave her in peace . '' 
But however much they left her in peace she could not now be at peace , and immediately felt this . 
In the hall the porch door opened , and someone asked , `` At home ? '' 
and then footsteps were heard . 
Natasha was looking at the mirror , but did not see herself . 
She listened to the sounds in the hall . 
When she saw herself , her face was pale . 
It was he . 
She knew this for certain , though she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors . 
Pale and agitated , Natasha ran into the drawing room . 
`` Mamma ! 
Bolkonski has come ! '' 
she said . 
`` Mamma , it is awful , it is unbearable ! 
I do n't want ... to be tormented ? 
What am I to do ? 
... '' Before the countess could answer , Prince Andrew entered the room with an agitated and serious face . 
As soon as he saw Natasha his face brightened . 
He kissed the countess ' hand and Natasha 's , and sat down beside the sofa . 
`` It is long since we had the pleasure ... '' began the countess , but Prince Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question , obviously in haste to say what he had to . 
`` I have not been to see all this time because I have been at my father 's . 
I had to talk over a very important matter with him . 
I only got back last night , '' he said glancing at Natasha ; `` I want to have a talk with you , Countess , '' he added after a moment 's pause . 
The countess lowered her eyes , sighing deeply . 
