An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him a gold snuffbox , which he took . 
`` Yes , it has happened luckily for you , '' he said , raising the open snuffbox to his nose . 
`` You are fond of travel , and in three days you will see Moscow . 
You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital . 
You will have a pleasant journey . '' 
De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel -LRB- of which he had not till then been aware -RRB- . 
`` Ha , what 's this ? '' 
asked Napoleon , noticing that all the courtiers were looking at something concealed under a cloth . 
With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turning his back to the Emperor retired two steps , twitching off the cloth at the same time , and said : `` A present to Your Majesty from the Empress . '' 
It was a portrait , painted in bright colors by Gerard , of the son borne to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria , the boy whom for some reason everyone called `` The King of Rome . '' 
A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball . 
The ball represented the terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter . 
Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depicting the so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick , the allegory apparently seemed to Napoleon , as it had done to all who had seen it in Paris , quite clear and very pleasing . 
`` The King of Rome ! '' 
he said , pointing to the portrait with a graceful gesture . 
`` Admirable ! '' 
With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of his face at will , he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look of pensive tenderness . 
He felt that what he now said and did would be historical , and it seemed to him that it would now be best for him -- whose grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ball with the terrestrial globe -- to show , in contrast to that grandeur , the simplest paternal tenderness . 
His eyes grew dim , he moved forward , glanced round at a chair -LRB- which seemed to place itself under him -RRB- , and sat down on it before the portrait . 
At a single gesture from him everyone went out on tiptoe , leaving the great man to himself and his emotion . 
Having sat still for a while he touched -- himself not knowing why - the thick spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait , rose , and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty . 
He ordered the portrait to be carried outside his tent , that the Old Guard , stationed round it , might not be deprived of the pleasure of seeing the King of Rome , the son and heir of their adored monarch . 
And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting with him , they heard , as Napoleon had anticipated , the rapturous cries of the officers and men of the Old Guard who had run up to see the portrait . 
`` Vive l'Empereur ! 
Vive le roi de Rome ! 
Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
came those ecstatic cries . 
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset 's presence dictated his order of the day to the army . 
`` Short and energetic ! '' 
he remarked when he had read over the proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections . 
It ran : Soldiers ! 
This is the battle you have so longed for . 
Victory depends on you . 
It is essential for us ; it will give us all we need : comfortable quarters and a speedy return to our country . 
Behave as you did at Austerlitz , Friedland , Vitebsk , and Smolensk . 
Let our remotest posterity recall your achievements this day with pride . 
Let it be said of each of you : `` He was in the great battle before Moscow ! '' 
`` Before Moscow ! '' 
repeated Napoleon , and inviting M. de Beausset , who was so fond of travel , to accompany him on his ride , he went out of the tent to where the horses stood saddled . 
`` Your Majesty is too kind ! '' 
replied de Beausset to the invitation to accompany the Emperor ; he wanted to sleep , did not know how to ride and was afraid of doing so . 
But Napoleon nodded to the traveler , and de Beausset had to mount . 
When Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his son 's portrait grew still louder . 
Napoleon frowned . 
`` Take him away ! '' 
he said , pointing with a gracefully majestic gesture to the portrait . 
`` It is too soon for him to see a field of battle . '' 
De Beausset closed his eyes , bowed his head , and sighed deeply , to indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor 's words . 
On the twenty-fifth of August , so his historians tell us , Napoleon spent the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality , considering plans submitted to him by his marshals , and personally giving commands to his generals . 
The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolocha had been dislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the twenty-fourth , and part of the line -- the left flank -- had been drawn back . 
