Yet some fate constantly threw them together . 
`` What can have happened ? 
And what can they want with me ? '' 
thought he as he dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna 's . 
`` If only Prince Andrew would hurry up and come and marry her ! '' 
thought he on his way to the house . 
On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him . 
`` Pierre ! 
Been back long ? '' 
someone shouted . 
Pierre raised his head . 
In a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering the dashboard with snow , Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashed past . 
Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of military dandies , the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his head slightly bent . 
His face was fresh and rosy , his white-plumed hat , tilted to one side , disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkled with powdery snow . 
`` Yes , indeed , that 's a true sage , '' thought Pierre . 
`` He sees nothing beyond the pleasure of the moment , nothing troubles him and so he is always cheerful , satisfied , and serene . 
What would n't I give to be like him ! '' 
he thought enviously . 
In Marya Dmitrievna 's anteroom the footman who helped him off with his fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom . 
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at the window , with a thin , pale , and spiteful face . 
She glanced round at him , frowned , and left the room with an expression of cold dignity . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
asked Pierre , entering Marya Dmitrievna 's room . 
`` Fine doings ! '' 
answered Dmitrievna . 
`` For fifty-eight years have I lived in this world and never known anything so disgraceful ! '' 
And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him , Marya Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrew without her parents ' knowledge and that the cause of this was Anatole Kuragin into whose society Pierre 's wife had thrown her and with whom Natasha had tried to elope during her father 's absence , in order to be married secretly . 
Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was told him , scarcely able to believe his own ears . 
That Prince Andrew 's deeply loved affianced wife -- the same Natasha Rostova who used to be so charming -- should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already secretly married -LRB- as Pierre knew -RRB- , and should be so in love with him as to agree to run away with him , was something Pierre could not conceive and could not imagine . 
He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha , whom he had known from a child , with this new conception of her baseness , folly , and cruelty . 
He thought of his wife . 
`` They are all alike ! '' 
he said to himself , reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate enough to be tied to a bad woman . 
But still he pitied Prince Andrew to the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride , and the more he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with disgust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom with such a look of cold dignity . 
He did not know that Natasha 's soul was overflowing with despair , shame , and humiliation , and that it was not her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity and severity . 
`` But how get married ? '' 
said Pierre , in answer to Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` He could not marry -- he is married ! '' 
`` Things get worse from hour to hour ! '' 
ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` A nice youth ! 
What a scoundrel ! 
And she 's expecting him -- expecting him since yesterday . 
She must be told ! 
Then at least she wo n't go on expecting him . '' 
After hearing the details of Anatole 's marriage from Pierre , and giving vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse , Marya Dmitrievna told Pierre why she had sent for him . 
She was afraid that the count or Bolkonski , who might arrive at any moment , if they knew of this affair -LRB- which she hoped to hide from them -RRB- might challenge Anatole to a duel , and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to leave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again . 
Pierre -- only now realizing the danger to the old count , Nicholas , and Prince Andrew -- promised to do as she wished . 
Having briefly and exactly explained her wishes to him , she let him go to the drawing room . 
`` Mind , the count knows nothing . 
