That city is taken ; the Russian army suffers heavier losses than the opposing armies had suffered in the former war from Austerlitz to Wagram . 
But suddenly instead of those chances and that genius which hitherto had so consistently led him by an uninterrupted series of successes to the predestined goal , an innumerable sequence of inverse chances occur -- from the cold in his head at Borodino to the sparks which set Moscow on fire , and the frosts -- and instead of genius , stupidity and immeasurable baseness become evident . 
The invaders flee , turn back , flee again , and all the chances are now not for Napoleon but always against him . 
A countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with a remarkable resemblance to the preceding movement from west to east . 
Attempted drives from east to west -- similar to the contrary movements of 1805 , 1807 , and 1809 -- precede the great westward movement ; there is the same coalescence into a group of enormous dimensions ; the same adhesion of the people of Central Europe to the movement ; the same hesitation midway , and the same increasing rapidity as the goal is approached . 
Paris , the ultimate goal , is reached . 
The Napoleonic government and army are destroyed . 
Napoleon himself is no longer of any account ; all his actions are evidently pitiful and mean , but again an inexplicable chance occurs . 
The allies detest Napoleon whom they regard as the cause of their sufferings . 
Deprived of power and authority , his crimes and his craft exposed , he should have appeared to them what he appeared ten years previously and one year later -- an outlawed brigand . 
But by some strange chance no one perceives this . 
His part is not yet ended . 
The man who ten years before and a year later was considered an outlawed brigand is sent to an island two days ' sail from France , which for some reason is presented to him as his dominion , and guards are given to him and millions of money are paid him . 
The flood of nations begins to subside into its normal channels . 
The waves of the great movement abate , and on the calm surface eddies are formed in which float the diplomatists , who imagine that they have caused the floods to abate . 
But the smooth sea again suddenly becomes disturbed . 
The diplomatists think that their disagreements are the cause of this fresh pressure of natural forces ; they anticipate war between their sovereigns ; the position seems to them insoluble . 
But the wave they feel to be rising does not come from the quarter they expect . 
It rises again from the same point as before -- Paris . 
The last backwash of the movement from the west occurs : a backwash which serves to solve the apparently insuperable diplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period of history . 
The man who had devastated France returns to France alone , without any conspiracy and without soldiers . 
Any guard might arrest him , but by strange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the man they cursed the day before and will curse again a month later . 
This man is still needed to justify the final collective act . 
That act is performed . 
The last role is played . 
The actor is bidden to disrobe and wash off his powder and paint : he will not be wanted any more . 
And some years pass during which he plays a pitiful comedy to himself in solitude on his island , justifying his actions by intrigues and lies when the justification is no longer needed , and displaying to the whole world what it was that people had mistaken for strength as long as an unseen hand directed his actions . 
The manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped the actor shows him to us . 
`` See what you believed in ! 
This is he ! 
Do you now see that it was not he but I who moved you ? '' 
But dazed by the force of the movement , it was long before people understood this . 
Still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life of Alexander I , the man who stood at the head of the countermovement from east to west . 
What was needed for him who , overshadowing others , stood at the head of that movement from east to west ? 
What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy with European affairs , but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests ; a moral superiority over those sovereigns of the day who co-operated with him ; a mild and attractive personality ; and a personal grievance against Napoleon . 
And all this was found in Alexander I ; all this had been prepared by innumerable so-called chances in his life : his education , his early liberalism , the advisers who surrounded him , and by Austerlitz , and Tilsit , and Erfurt . 
During the national war he was inactive because he was not needed . 
But as soon as the necessity for a general European war presented itself he appeared in his place at the given moment and , uniting the nations of Europe , led them to the goal . 
The goal is reached . 
After the final war of 1815 Alexander possesses all possible power . 
How does he use it ? 
Alexander I -- the pacifier of Europe , the man who from his early years had striven only for his people 's welfare , the originator of the liberal innovations in his fatherland -- now that he seemed to possess the utmost power and therefore to have the possibility of bringing about the welfare of his peoples -- at the time when Napoleon in exile was drawing up childish and mendacious plans of how he would have made mankind happy had he retained power -- Alexander I , having fulfilled his mission and feeling the hand of God upon him , suddenly recognizes the insignificance of that supposed power , turns away from it , and gives it into the hands of contemptible men whom he despises , saying only : `` Not unto us , not unto us , but unto Thy Name ! 
... I too am a man like the rest of you . 
Let me live like a man and think of my soul and of God . '' 
As the sun and each atom of ether is a sphere complete in itself , and yet at the same time only a part of a whole too immense for man to comprehend , so each individual has within himself his own aims and yet has them to serve a general purpose incomprehensible to man . 
A bee settling on a flower has stung a child . 
And the child is afraid of bees and declares that bees exist to sting people . 
A poet admires the bee sucking from the chalice of a flower and says it exists to suck the fragrance of flowers . 
A beekeeper , seeing the bee collect pollen from flowers and carry it to the hive , says that it exists to gather honey . 
Another beekeeper who has studied the life of the hive more closely says that the bee gathers pollen dust to feed the young bees and rear a queen , and that it exists to perpetuate its race . 
