Natasha too , with her quick instinct , had instantly noticed her brother 's condition . 
But , though she noticed it , she was herself in such high spirits at that moment , so far from sorrow , sadness , or self-reproach , that she purposely deceived herself as young people often do . 
`` No , I am too happy now to spoil my enjoyment by sympathy with anyone 's sorrow , '' she felt , and she said to herself : `` No , I must be mistaken , he must be feeling happy , just as I am . '' 
`` Now , Sonya ! '' 
she said , going to the very middle of the room , where she considered the resonance was best . 
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly , as ballet dancers do , Natasha , rising energetically from her heels to her toes , stepped to the middle of the room and stood still . 
`` Yes , that 's me ! '' 
she seemed to say , answering the rapt gaze with which Denisov followed her . 
`` And what is she so pleased about ? '' 
thought Nicholas , looking at his sister . 
`` Why is n't she dull and ashamed ? '' 
Natasha took the first note , her throat swelled , her chest rose , her eyes became serious . 
At that moment she was oblivious of her surroundings , and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone may produce at the same intervals hold for the same time , but which leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill you and make you weep . 
Natasha , that winter , had for the first time begun to sing seriously , mainly because Denisov so delighted in her singing . 
She no longer sang as a child , there was no longer in her singing that comical , childish , painstaking effect that had been in it before ; but she did not yet sing well , as all the connoisseurs who heard her said : `` It is not trained , but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained . '' 
Only they generally said this some time after she had finished singing . 
While that untrained voice , with its incorrect breathing and labored transitions , was sounding , even the connoisseurs said nothing , but only delighted in it and wished to hear it again . 
In her voice there was a virginal freshness , an unconsciousness of her own powers , and an as yet untrained velvety softness , which so mingled with her lack of art in singing that it seemed as if nothing in that voice could be altered without spoiling it . 
`` What is this ? '' 
thought Nicholas , listening to her with widely opened eyes . 
`` What has happened to her ? 
How she is singing today ! '' 
And suddenly the whole world centered for him on anticipation of the next note , the next phrase , and everything in the world was divided into three beats : `` Oh mio crudele affetto . '' 
... One , two , three ... one , two , three ... One ... `` Oh mio crudele affetto . '' 
... One , two , three ... One . 
`` Oh , this senseless life of ours ! '' 
thought Nicholas . 
`` All this misery , and money , and Dolokhov , and anger , and honor -- it 's all nonsense ... but this is real ... . 
Now then , Natasha , now then , dearest ! 
Now then , darling ! 
How will she take that si ? 
She 's taken it ! 
Thank God ! '' 
And without noticing that he was singing , to strengthen the si he sung a second , a third below the high note . 
`` Ah , God ! 
How fine ! 
Did I really take it ? 
How fortunate ! '' 
he thought . 
Oh , how that chord vibrated , and how moved was something that was finest in Rostov 's soul ! 
And this something was apart from everything else in the world and above everything in the world . 
`` What were losses , and Dolokhov , and words of honor ? 
... All nonsense ! 
One might kill and rob and yet be happy ... '' It was long since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as he did that day . 
But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than reality again presented itself . 
He got up without saying a word and went downstairs to his own room . 
A quarter of an hour later the old count came in from his Club , cheerful and contented . 
Nicholas , hearing him drive up , went to meet him . 
`` Well -- had a good time ? '' 
said the old count , smiling gaily and proudly at his son . 
