Apart from the fact that he had asked me several times whether N. and S. were members of our lodge -LRB- a question to which I could not reply -RRB- and that according to my observation he is incapable of feeling respect for our holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied with the outer man to desire spiritual improvement , I had no cause to doubt him , but he seemed to me insincere , and all the time I stood alone with him in the dark temple it seemed to me that he was smiling contemptuously at my words , and I wished really to stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it . 
I could not be eloquent , nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the Brothers and to the Grand Master . 
Great Architect of Nature , help me to find the true path out of the labyrinth of lies ! 
After this , three pages were left blank in the diary , and then the following was written : I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Brother V. , who advised me to hold fast by brother A. Though I am unworthy , much was revealed to me . 
Adonai is the name of the creator of the world . 
Elohim is the name of the ruler of all . 
The third name is the name unutterable which means the All . 
Talks with Brother V. strengthen , refresh , and support me in the path of virtue . 
In his presence doubt has no place . 
The distinction between the poor teachings of mundane science and our sacred all-embracing teaching is clear to me . 
Human sciences dissect everything to comprehend it , and kill everything to examine it . 
In the holy science of our order all is one , all is known in its entirety and life . 
The Trinity -- the three elements of matter -- are sulphur , mercury , and salt . 
Sulphur is of an oily and fiery nature ; in combination with salt by its fiery nature it arouses a desire in the latter by means of which it attracts mercury , seizes it , holds it , and in combination produces other bodies . 
Mercury is a fluid , volatile , spiritual essence . 
Christ , the Holy Spirit , Him ! 
... 3rd December Awoke late , read the Scriptures but was apathetic . 
Afterwards went and paced up and down the large hall . 
I wished to meditate , but instead my imagination pictured an occurrence of four years ago , when Dolokhov , meeting me in Moscow after our duel , said he hoped I was enjoying perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife 's absence . 
At the time I gave him no answer . 
Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in my mind gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies . 
I recollected myself and drove away that thought only when I found myself glowing with anger , but I did not sufficiently repent . 
Afterwards Boris Drubetskoy came and began relating various adventures . 
His coming vexed me from the first , and I said something disagreeable to him . 
He replied . 
I flared up and said much that was unpleasant and even rude to him . 
He became silent , and I recollected myself only when it was too late . 
My God , I can not get on with him at all . 
The cause of this is my egotism . 
I set myself above him and so become much worse than he , for he is lenient to my rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him . 
O God , grant that in his presence I may rather see my own vileness , and behave so that he too may benefit . 
After dinner I fell asleep and as I was drowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in my left ear , `` Thy day ! '' 
I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and was suddenly surrounded by dogs , but I went on undismayed . 
Suddenly a smallish dog seized my left thigh with its teeth and would not let go . 
I began to throttle it with my hands . 
Scarcely had I torn it off before another , a bigger one , began biting me . 
I lifted it up , but the higher I lifted it the bigger and heavier it grew . 
And suddenly Brother A. came and , taking my arm , led me to a building to enter which we had to pass along a narrow plank . 
I stepped on it , but it bent and gave way and I began to clamber up a fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands . 
After much effort I dragged myself up , so that my leg hung down on one side and my body on the other . 
I looked round and saw Brother A. standing on the fence and pointing me to a broad avenue and garden , and in the garden was a large and beautiful building . 
I woke up . 
O Lord , great Architect of Nature , help me to tear from myself these dogs -- my passions especially the last , which unites in itself the strength of all the former ones , and aid me to enter that temple of virtue to a vision of which I attained in my dream . 
7th December I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sitting in my house , and that I was very glad and wished to entertain him . 
It seemed as if I chattered incessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that this could not please him , and I wished to come close to him and embrace him . 
But as soon as I drew near I saw that his face had changed and grown young , and he was quietly telling me something about the teaching of our order , but so softly that I could not hear it . 
Then it seemed that we all left the room and something strange happened . 
We were sitting or lying on the floor . 
He was telling me something , and I wished to show him my sensibility , and not listening to what he was saying I began picturing to myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God sanctifying me . 
And tears came into my eyes , and I was glad he noticed this . 
