O'er all barriers on ! 
Courage conquest guarantees ; Have we not Bagration ? 
He brings foe men to their knees , ... etc. . 
As soon as the singing was over , another and another toast was proposed and Count Ilya Rostov became more and more moved , more glass was smashed , and the shouting grew louder . 
They drank to Bekleshev , Naryshkin , Uvarov , Dolgorukov , Apraksin , Valuev , to the committee , to all the Club members and to all the Club guests , and finally to Count Ilya Rostov separately , as the organizer of the banquet . 
At that toast , the count took out his handkerchief and , covering his face , wept outright . 
Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov . 
As usual , he ate and drank much , and eagerly . 
But those who knew him intimately noticed that some great change had come over him that day . 
He was silent all through dinner and looked about , blinking and scowling , or , with fixed eyes and a look of complete absent-mindedness , kept rubbing the bridge of his nose . 
His face was depressed and gloomy . 
He seemed to see and hear nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by some depressing and unsolved problem . 
The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given by the princess , his cousin , at Moscow , concerning Dolokhov 's intimacy with his wife , and by an anonymous letter he had received that morning , which in the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw badly through his spectacles , but that his wife 's connection with Dolokhov was a secret to no one but himself . 
Pierre absolutely disbelieved both the princess ' hints and the letter , but he feared now to look at Dolokhov , who was sitting opposite him . 
Every time he chanced to meet Dolokhov 's handsome insolent eyes , Pierre felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul and turned quickly away . 
Involuntarily recalling his wife 's past and her relations with Dolokhov , Pierre saw clearly that what was said in the letter might be true , or might at least seem to be true had it not referred to his wife . 
He involuntarily remembered how Dolokhov , who had fully recovered his former position after the campaign , had returned to Petersburg and come to him . 
Availing himself of his friendly relations with Pierre as a boon companion , Dolokhov had come straight to his house , and Pierre had put him up and lent him money . 
Pierre recalled how Helene had smilingly expressed disapproval of Dolokhov 's living at their house , and how cynically Dolokhov had praised his wife 's beauty to him and from that time till they came to Moscow had not left them for a day . 
`` Yes , he is very handsome , '' thought Pierre , `` and I know him . 
It would be particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule me , just because I have exerted myself on his behalf , befriended him , and helped him . 
I know and understand what a spice that would add to the pleasure of deceiving me , if it really were true . 
Yes , if it were true , but I do not believe it . 
I have no right to , and ca n't , believe it . '' 
He remembered the expression Dolokhov 's face assumed in his moments of cruelty , as when tying the policeman to the bear and dropping them into the water , or when he challenged a man to a duel without any reason , or shot a post-boy 's horse with a pistol . 
That expression was often on Dolokhov 's face when looking at him . 
`` Yes , he is a bully , '' thought Pierre , `` to kill a man means nothing to him . 
It must seem to him that everyone is afraid of him , and that must please him . 
He must think that I , too , am afraid of him -- and in fact I am afraid of him , '' he thought , and again he felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul . 
Dolokhov , Denisov , and Rostov were now sitting opposite Pierre and seemed very gay . 
Rostov was talking merrily to his two friends , one of whom was a dashing hussar and the other a notorious duelist and rake , and every now and then he glanced ironically at Pierre , whose preoccupied , absent-minded , and massive figure was a very noticeable one at the dinner . 
Rostov looked inimically at Pierre , first because Pierre appeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian , the husband of a beauty , and in a word -- an old woman ; and secondly because Pierre in his preoccupation and absent-mindedness had not recognized Rostov and had not responded to his greeting . 
When the Emperor 's health was drunk , Pierre , lost in thought , did not rise or lift his glass . 
`` What are you about ? '' 
shouted Rostov , looking at him in an ecstasy of exasperation . 
`` Do n't you hear it 's His Majesty the Emperor 's health ? '' 
Pierre sighed , rose submissively , emptied his glass , and , waiting till all were seated again , turned with his kindly smile to Rostov . 
`` Why , I did n't recognize you ! '' 
he said . 
But Rostov was otherwise engaged ; he was shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
`` Why do n't you renew the acquaintance ? '' 
said Dolokhov to Rostov . 
`` Confound him , he 's a fool ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` One should make up to the husbands of pretty women , '' said Denisov . 
Pierre did not catch what they were saying , but knew they were talking about him . 
He reddened and turned away . 
`` Well , now to the health of handsome women ! '' 
said Dolokhov , and with a serious expression , but with a smile lurking at the corners of his mouth , he turned with his glass to Pierre . 
`` Here 's to the health of lovely women , Peterkin -- and their lovers ! '' 
