All our important business here is now settled , and I ought to have been off long ago . 
Here is something I have received from the chancellor . 
I asked him for you , and you have been entered in the diplomatic corps and made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber . 
The diplomatic career now lies open before you . '' 
Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these words were pronounced , Pierre , who had so long been considering his career , wished to make some suggestion . 
But Prince Vasili interrupted him in the special deep cooing tone , precluding the possibility of interrupting his speech , which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was needed . 
`` Mais , mon cher , I did this for my own sake , to satisfy my conscience , and there is nothing to thank me for . 
No one has ever complained yet of being too much loved ; and besides , you are free , you could throw it up tomorrow . 
But you will see everything for yourself when you get to Petersburg . 
It is high time for you to get away from these terrible recollections . '' 
Prince Vasili sighed . 
`` Yes , yes , my boy . 
And my valet can go in your carriage . 
Ah ! 
I was nearly forgetting , '' he added . 
`` You know , mon cher , your father and I had some accounts to settle , so I have received what was due from the Ryazan estate and will keep it ; you wo n't require it . 
We 'll go into the accounts later . '' 
By `` what was due from the Ryazan estate '' Prince Vasili meant several thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre 's peasants , which the prince had retained for himself . 
In Petersburg , as in Moscow , Pierre found the same atmosphere of gentleness and affection . 
He could not refuse the post , or rather the rank -LRB- for he did nothing -RRB- , that Prince Vasili had procured for him , and acquaintances , invitations , and social occupations were so numerous that , even more than in Moscow , he felt a sense of bewilderment , bustle , and continual expectation of some good , always in front of him but never attained . 
Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg . 
The Guards had gone to the front ; Dolokhov had been reduced to the ranks ; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces ; Prince Andrew was abroad ; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he used to like to spend them , or to open his mind by intimate talks with a friend older than himself and whom he respected . 
His whole time was taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili 's house in the company of the stout princess , his wife , and his beautiful daughter Helene . 
Like the others , Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of attitude toward him that had taken place in society . 
Formerly in Anna Pavlovna 's presence , Pierre had always felt that what he was saying was out of place , tactless and unsuitable , that remarks which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish as soon as he uttered them , while on the contrary Hippolyte 's stupidest remarks came out clever and apt . 
Now everything Pierre said was charmant . 
Even if Anna Pavlovna did not say so , he could see that she wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty . 
In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna Pavlovna 's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added : `` You will find the beautiful Helene here , whom it is always delightful to see . '' 
When he read that sentence , Pierre felt for the first time that some link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and Helene , and that thought both alarmed him , as if some obligation were being imposed on him which he could not fulfill , and pleased him as an entertaining supposition . 
Anna Pavlovna 's `` At Home '' was like the former one , only the novelty she offered her guests this time was not Mortemart , but a diplomatist fresh from Berlin with the very latest details of the Emperor Alexander 's visit to Potsdam , and of how the two august friends had pledged themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold the cause of justice against the enemy of the human race . 
Anna Pavlovna received Pierre with a shade of melancholy , evidently relating to the young man 's recent loss by the death of Count Bezukhov -LRB- everyone constantly considered it a duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly afflicted by the death of the father he had hardly known -RRB- , and her melancholy was just like the august melancholy she showed at the mention of her most august Majesty the Empress Marya Fedorovna . 
Pierre felt flattered by this . 
Anna Pavlovna arranged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitual skill . 
The large group , in which were Prince Vasili and the generals , had the benefit of the diplomat . 
Another group was at the tea table . 
Pierre wished to join the former , but Anna Pavlovna -- who was in the excited condition of a commander on a battlefield to whom thousands of new and brilliant ideas occur which there is hardly time to put in action -- seeing Pierre , touched his sleeve with her finger , saying : `` Wait a bit , I have something in view for you this evening . '' 
-LRB- She glanced at Helene and smiled at her . -RRB- 
`` My dear Helene , be charitable to my poor aunt who adores you . 
Go and keep her company for ten minutes . 
And that it will not be too dull , here is the dear count who will not refuse to accompany you . '' 
The beauty went to the aunt , but Anna Pavlovna detained Pierre , looking as if she had to give some final necessary instructions . 
`` Is n't she exquisite ? '' 
she said to Pierre , pointing to the stately beauty as she glided away . 
`` And how she carries herself ! 
For so young a girl , such tact , such masterly perfection of manner ! 
It comes from her heart . 
Happy the man who wins her ! 
With her the least worldly of men would occupy a most brilliant position in society . 
Do n't you think so ? 
I only wanted to know your opinion , '' and Anna Pavlovna let Pierre go . 
