Natasha lifted her up , hugged her , and , smiling through her tears , began comforting her . 
`` Sonya , do n't believe her , darling ! 
Do n't believe her ! 
Do you remember how we and Nicholas , all three of us , talked in the sitting room after supper ? 
Why , we settled how everything was to be . 
I do n't quite remember how , but do n't you remember that it could all be arranged and how nice it all was ? 
There 's Uncle Shinshin 's brother has married his first cousin . 
And we are only second cousins , you know . 
And Boris says it is quite possible . 
You know I have told him all about it . 
And he is so clever and so good ! '' 
said Natasha . 
`` Do n't you cry , Sonya , dear love , darling Sonya ! '' 
and she kissed her and laughed . 
`` Vera 's spiteful ; never mind her ! 
And all will come right and she wo n't say anything to Mamma . 
Nicholas will tell her himself , and he does n't care at all for Julie . '' 
Natasha kissed her on the hair . 
Sonya sat up . 
The little kitten brightened , its eyes shone , and it seemed ready to lift its tail , jump down on its soft paws , and begin playing with the ball of worsted as a kitten should . 
`` Do you think so ? 
... Really ? 
Truly ? '' 
she said , quickly smoothing her frock and hair . 
`` Really , truly ! '' 
answered Natasha , pushing in a crisp lock that had strayed from under her friend 's plaits . 
Both laughed . 
`` Well , let 's go and sing ` The Brook . ' '' 
`` Come along ! '' 
`` Do you know , that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny ! '' 
said Natasha , stopping suddenly . 
`` I feel so happy ! '' 
And she set off at a run along the passage . 
Sonya , shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest , ran after Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed face and light , joyous steps . 
At the visitors ' request the young people sang the quartette , `` The Brook , '' with which everyone was delighted . 
Then Nicholas sang a song he had just learned : At nighttime in the moon 's fair glow How sweet , as fancies wander free , To feel that in this world there 's one Who still is thinking but of thee ! 
That while her fingers touch the harp Wafting sweet music music the lea , It is for thee thus swells her heart , Sighing its message out to thee ... A day or two , then bliss unspoilt , But oh ! 
till then I can not live ! 
... He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to get ready to dance in the large hall , and the sound of the feet and the coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery . 
Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged him , as a man recently returned from abroad , in a political conversation in which several others joined but which bored Pierre . 
When the music began Natasha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said , laughing and blushing : `` Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers . '' 
`` I am afraid of mixing the figures , '' Pierre replied ; `` but if you will be my teacher ... '' And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender little girl . 
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up , Pierre sat down with his little partner . 
Natasha was perfectly happy ; she was dancing with a grown-up man , who had been abroad . 
She was sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady . 
She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold . 
Assuming quite the pose of a society woman -LRB- heaven knows when and where she had learned it -RRB- she talked with her partner , fanning herself and smiling over the fan . 
`` Dear , dear ! 
Just look at her ! '' 
exclaimed the countess as she crossed the ballroom , pointing to Natasha . 
