`` Pierre was right when he said one must believe in the possibility of happiness in order to be happy , and now I do believe in it . 
Let the dead bury their dead , but while one has life one must live and be happy ! '' 
thought he . 
One morning Colonel Berg , whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody in Moscow and Petersburg , came to see him . 
Berg arrived in an immaculate brand-new uniform , with his hair pomaded and brushed forward over his temples as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair . 
`` I have just been to see the countess , your wife . 
Unfortunately she could not grant my request , but I hope , Count , I shall be more fortunate with you , '' he said with a smile . 
`` What is it you wish , Colonel ? 
I am at your service . '' 
`` I have now quite settled in my new rooms , Count '' -LRB- Berg said this with perfect conviction that this information could not but be agreeable -RRB- , `` and so I wish to arrange just a small party for my own and my wife 's friends . '' 
-LRB- He smiled still more pleasantly . -RRB- 
`` I wished to ask the countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and to supper . '' 
Only Countess Helene , considering the society of such people as the Bergs beneath her , could be cruel enough to refuse such an invitation . 
Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a small but select company , and why this would give him pleasure , and why though he grudged spending money on cards or anything harmful , he was prepared to run into some expense for the sake of good society -- that Pierre could not refuse , and promised to come . 
`` But do n't be late , Count , if I may venture to ask ; about ten minutes to eight , please . 
We shall make up a rubber . 
Our general is coming . 
He is very good to me . 
We shall have supper , Count . 
So you will do me the favor . '' 
Contrary to his habit of being late , Pierre on that day arrived at the Bergs ' house , not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight . 
Having prepared everything necessary for the party , the Bergs were really for their guests ' arrival . 
In their new , clean , and light study with its small busts and pictures and new furniture sat Berg and his wife . 
Berg , closely buttoned up in his new uniform , sat beside his wife explaining to her that one always could and should be acquainted with people above one , because only then does one get satisfaction from acquaintances . 
`` You can get to know something , you can ask for something . 
See how I managed from my first promotion . '' 
-LRB- Berg measured his life not by years but by promotions . -RRB- 
`` My comrades are still nobodies , while I am only waiting for a vacancy to command a regiment , and have the happiness to be your husband . '' 
-LRB- He rose and kissed Vera 's hand , and on the way to her straightened out a turned-up corner of the carpet . -RRB- 
`` And how have I obtained all this ? 
Chiefly by knowing how to choose my aquaintances . 
It goes without saying that one must be conscientious and methodical . '' 
Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman , and paused , reflecting that this dear wife of his was after all but a weak woman who could not understand all that constitutes a man 's dignity , what it was ein Mann zu sein . 
* Vera at the same time smiling with a sense of superiority over her good , conscientious husband , who all the same understood life wrongly , as according to Vera all men did . 
Berg , judging by his wife , thought all women weak and foolish . 
Vera , judging only by her husband and generalizing from that observation , supposed that all men , though they understand nothing and are conceited and selfish , ascribe common sense to themselves alone . 
* To be a man . 
Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully , so as not to crush her lace fichu for which he had paid a good price , kissing her straight on the lips . 
`` The only thing is , we must n't have children too soon , '' he continued , following an unconscious sequence of ideas . 
`` Yes , '' answered Vera , `` I do n't at all want that . 
We must live for society . '' 
`` Princess Yusupova wore one exactly like this , '' said Berg , pointing to the fichu with a happy and kindly smile . 
Just then Count Bezukhov was announced . 
Husband and wife glanced at one another , both smiling with self-satisfaction , and each mentally claiming the honor of this visit . 
`` This is what what comes of knowing how to make acquaintances , '' thought Berg . 
`` This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself . '' 
`` But please do n't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests , '' said Vera , `` because I know what interests each of them and what to say to different people . '' 
Berg smiled again . 
`` It ca n't be helped : men must sometimes have masculine conversation , '' said he . 
They received Pierre in their small , new drawing-room , where it was impossible to sit down anywhere without disturbing its symmetry , neatness , and order ; so it was quite comprehensible and not strange that Berg , having generously offered to disturb the symmetry of an armchair or of the sofa for his dear guest , but being apparently painfully undecided on the matter himself , eventually left the visitor to settle the question of selection . 
