he squeaked . 
`` Fire , Medvedev ! '' 
Bagration called to him , and Tushin , raising three fingers to his cap with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute but like a priest 's benediction , approached the general . 
Though Tushin 's guns had been intended to cannonade the valley , he was firing incendiary balls at the village of Schon Grabern visible just opposite , in front of which large masses of French were advancing . 
No one had given Tushin orders where and at what to fire , but after consulting his sergeant major , Zakharchenko , for whom he had great respect , he had decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to the village . 
`` Very good ! '' 
said Bagration in reply to the officer 's report , and began deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended before him . 
The French had advanced nearest on our right . 
Below the height on which the Kiev regiment was stationed , in the hollow where the rivulet flowed , the soul-stirring rolling and crackling of musketry was heard , and much farther to the right beyond the dragoons , the officer of the suite pointed out to Bagration a French column that was outflanking us . 
To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood . 
Prince Bagration ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the right flank . 
The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that if these battalions went away , the guns would remain without support . 
Prince Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked at him in silence . 
It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer 's remark was just and that really no answer could be made to it . 
But at that moment an adjutant galloped up with a message from the commander of the regiment in the hollow and news that immense masses of the French were coming down upon them and that his regiment was in disorder and was retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers . 
Prince Bagration bowed his head in sign of assent and approval . 
He rode off at a walk to the right and sent an adjutant to the dragoons with orders to attack the French . 
But this adjutant returned half an hour later with the news that the commander of the dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in the ground , as a heavy fire had been opened on him and he was losing men uselessly , and so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the wood . 
`` Very good ! '' 
said Bagration . 
As he was leaving the battery , firing was heard on the left also , and as it was too far to the left flank for him to have time to go there himself , Prince Bagration sent Zherkov to tell the general in command -LRB- the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutuzov at Braunau -RRB- that he must retreat as quickly as possible behind the hollow in the rear , as the right flank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy 's attack very long . 
About Tushin and the battalion that had been in support of his battery all was forgotten . 
Prince Andrew listened attentively to Bagration 's colloquies with the commanding officers and the orders he gave them and , to his surprise , found that no orders were really given , but that Prince Bagration tried to make it appear that everything done by necessity , by accident , or by the will of subordinate commanders was done , if not by his direct command , at least in accord with his intentions . 
Prince Andrew noticed , however , that though what happened was due to chance and was independent of the commander 's will , owing to the tact Bagration showed , his presence was very valuable . 
Officers who approached him with disturbed countenances became calm ; soldiers and officers greeted him gaily , grew more cheerful in his presence , and were evidently anxious to display their courage before him . 
Prince Bagration , having reached the highest point of our right flank , began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where on account of the smoke nothing could be seen . 
The nearer they got to the hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearness of the actual battlefield . 
They began to meet wounded men . 
One with a bleeding head and no cap was being dragged along by two soldiers who supported him under the arms . 
There was a gurgle in his throat and he was spitting blood . 
A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or mouth . 
Another was walking sturdily by himself but without his musket , groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt , while blood from it was streaming over his greatcoat as from a bottle . 
He had that moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than suffering . 
Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men lying on the ground ; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were unwounded . 
The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily , and despite the general 's presence were talking loudly and gesticulating . 
In front of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the smoke , and an officer catching sight of Bagration rushed shouting after the crowd of retreating soldiers , ordering them back . 
Bagration rode up to the ranks along which shots crackled now here and now there , drowning the sound of voices and the shouts of command . 
The whole air reeked with smoke . 
The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it . 
Some were using their ramrods , others putting powder on the touchpans or taking charges from their pouches , while others were firing , though who they were firing at could not be seen for the smoke which there was no wind to carry away . 
A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets were often heard . 
`` What is this ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew approaching the crowd of soldiers . 
`` It ca n't be an attack , for they are not moving ; it ca n't be a square -- for they are not drawn up for that . '' 
The commander of the regiment , a thin , feeble-looking old man with a pleasant smile -- his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes , giving him a mild expression , rode up to Bagration and welcomed him as a host welcomes an honored guest . 
He reported that his regiment had been attacked by French cavalry and that , though the attack had been repulsed , he had lost more than half his men . 
He said the attack had been repulsed , employing this military term to describe what had occurred to his regiment , but in reality he did not himself know what had happened during that half-hour to the troops entrusted to him , and could not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his regiment had been broken up . 
All he knew was that at the commencement of the action balls and shells began flying all over his regiment and hitting men and that afterwards someone had shouted `` Cavalry ! '' 
and our men had begun firing . 
They were still firing , not at the cavalry which had disappeared , but at French infantry who had come into the hollow and were firing at our men . 
