-LRB- He smiled ironically . -RRB- 
`` But even if he also took up a position in the Thuerassa , he merely saves us a great deal of trouble and all our arrangements to the minutest detail remain the same . '' 
`` How is that ? 
... '' began Prince Andrew , who had for long been waiting an opportunity to express his doubts . 
Kutuzov here woke up , coughed heavily , and looked round at the generals . 
`` Gentlemen , the dispositions for tomorrow -- or rather for today , for it is past midnight -- can not now be altered , '' said he . 
`` You have heard them , and we shall all do our duty . 
But before a battle , there is nothing more important ... '' he paused , `` than to have a good sleep . '' 
He moved as if to rise . 
The generals bowed and retired . 
It was past midnight . 
Prince Andrew went out . 
The council of war , at which Prince Andrew had not been able to express his opinion as he had hoped to , left on him a vague and uneasy impression . 
Whether Dolgorukov and Weyrother , or Kutuzov , Langeron , and the others who did not approve of the plan of attack , were right -- he did not know . 
`` But was it really not possible for Kutuzov to state his views plainly to the Emperor ? 
Is it possible that on account of court and personal considerations tens of thousands of lives , and my life , my life , '' he thought , `` must be risked ? '' 
`` Yes , it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow , '' he thought . 
And suddenly , at this thought of death , a whole series of most distant , most intimate , memories rose in his imagination : he remembered his last parting from his father and his wife ; he remembered the days when he first loved her . 
He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for her and for himself , and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he went out of the hut in which he was billeted with Nesvitski and began to walk up and down before it . 
The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed mysteriously . 
`` Yes , tomorrow , tomorrow ! '' 
he thought . 
`` Tomorrow everything may be over for me ! 
All these memories will be no more , none of them will have any meaning for me . 
Tomorrow perhaps , even certainly , I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall have to show all I can do . '' 
And his fancy pictured the battle , its loss , the concentration of fighting at one point , and the hesitation of all the commanders . 
And then that happy moment , that Toulon for which he had so long waited , presents itself to him at last . 
He firmly and clearly expresses his opinion to Kutuzov , to Weyrother , and to the Emperors . 
All are struck by the justness of his views , but no one undertakes to carry them out , so he takes a regiment , a division - stipulates that no one is to interfere with his arrangements -- leads his division to the decisive point , and gains the victory alone . 
`` But death and suffering ? '' 
suggested another voice . 
Prince Andrew , however , did not answer that voice and went on dreaming of his triumphs . 
The dispositions for the next battle are planned by him alone . 
Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov 's staff , but he does everything alone . 
The next battle is won by him alone . 
Kutuzov is removed and he is appointed ... `` Well and then ? '' 
asked the other voice . 
`` If before that you are not ten times wounded , killed , or betrayed , well ... what then ? 
... '' `` Well then , '' Prince Andrew answered himself , `` I do n't know what will happen and do n't want to know , and ca n't , but if I want this -- want glory , want to be known to men , want to be loved by them , it is not my fault that I want it and want nothing but that and live only for that . 
Yes , for that alone ! 
I shall never tell anyone , but , oh God ! 
what am I to do if I love nothing but fame and men 's esteem ? 
Death , wounds , the loss of family -- I fear nothing . 
And precious and dear as many persons are to me -- father , sister , wife - those dearest to me -- yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems , I would give them all at once for a moment of glory , of triumph over men , of love from men I do n't know and never shall know , for the love of these men here , '' he thought , as he listened to voices in Kutuzov 's courtyard . 
The voices were those of the orderlies who were packing up ; one voice , probably a coachman 's , was teasing Kutuzov 's old cook whom Prince Andrew knew , and who was called Tit . 
He was saying , `` Tit , I say , Tit ! '' 
`` Well ? '' 
returned the old man . 
`` Go , Tit , thresh a bit ! '' 
said the wag . 
