The beast wounded at Borodino was lying where the fleeing hunter had left him ; but whether he was still alive , whether he was strong and merely lying low , the hunter did not know . 
Suddenly the beast was heard to moan . 
The moan of that wounded beast -LRB- the French army -RRB- which betrayed its calamitous condition was the sending of Lauriston to Kutuzov 's camp with overtures for peace . 
Napoleon , with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was right , wrote to Kutuzov the first words that occurred to him , though they were meaningless . 
MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV : I am sending one of my adjutants-general to discuss several interesting questions with you . 
I beg your Highness to credit what he says to you , especially when he expresses the sentiment of esteem and special regard I have long entertained for your person . 
This letter having no other object , I pray God , monsieur le Prince Koutouzov , to keep you in His holy and gracious protection ! 
NAPOLEON MOSCOW , OCTOBER 30 , 1812 Kutuzov replied : `` I should be cursed by posterity were I looked on as the initiator of a settlement of any sort . 
Such is the present spirit of my nation . '' 
But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his troops from attacking . 
During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow and the Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino , a change had taken place in the relative strength of the two armies -- both in spirit and in number -- as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russian side . 
Though the condition and numbers of the French army were unknown to the Russians , as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking at once showed itself by countless signs . 
These signs were : Lauriston 's mission ; the abundance of provisions at Tarutino ; the reports coming in from all sides of the inactivity and disorder of the French ; the flow of recruits to our regiments ; the fine weather ; the long rest the Russian soldiers had enjoyed , and the impatience to do what they had been assembled for , which usually shows itself in an army that has been resting ; curiosity as to what the French army , so long lost sight of , was doing ; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up to the French stationed at Tarutino ; the news of easy successes gained by peasants and guerrilla troops over the French , the envy aroused by this ; the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long as the French were in Moscow , and -LRB- above all -RRB- a dim consciousness in every soldier 's mind that the relative strength of the armies had changed and that the advantage was now on our side . 
There was a substantial change in the relative strength , and an advance had become inevitable . 
And at once , as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as the minute hand has completed a full circle , this change was shown by an increased activity , whirring , and chiming in the higher spheres . 
The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff , and also by the Emperor from Petersburg . 
Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow had been received in Petersburg , a detailed plan of the whole campaign had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance . 
Though this plan had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands , it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action . 
Kutuzov only replied that movements arranged from a distance were always difficult to execute . 
So fresh instructions were sent for the solution of difficulties that might be encountered , as well as fresh people who were to watch Kutuzov 's actions and report upon them . 
Besides this , the whole staff of the Russian army was now reorganized . 
The posts left vacant by Bagration , who had been killed , and by Barclay , who had gone away in dudgeon , had to be filled . 
Very serious consideration was given to the question whether it would be better to put A in B 's place and B in D 's , or on the contrary to put D in A 's place , and so on -- as if anything more than A 's or B 's satisfaction depended on this . 
As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennigsen , his Chief of Staff , the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor , and these transfers , a more than usually complicated play of parties was going on among the staff of the army . 
A was undermining B , D was undermining C , and so on in all possible combinations and permutations . 
In all these plottings the subject of intrigue was generally the conduct of the war , which all these men believed they were directing ; but this affair of the war went on independently of them , as it had to go : that is , never in the way people devised , but flowing always from the essential attitude of the masses . 
Only in the highest spheres did all these schemes , crossings , and interminglings appear to be a true reflection of what had to happen . 
Prince Michael Ilarionovich ! 
-LRB- wrote the Emperor on the second of October in a letter that reached Kutuzov after the battle at Tarutino -RRB- Since September 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy . 
Your last reports were written on the twentieth , and during all this time not only has no action been taken against the enemy or for the relief of the ancient capital , but according to your last report you have even retreated farther . 
Serpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Tula with its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army , is in danger . 
From General Wintzingerode 's reports , I see that an enemy corps of ten thousand men is moving on the Petersburg road . 
Another corps of several thousand men is moving on Dmitrov . 
A third has advanced along the Vladimir road , and a fourth , rather considerable detachment is stationed between Ruza and Mozhaysk . 
Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as the twenty-fifth . 
In view of all this information , when the enemy has scattered his forces in large detachments , and with Napoleon and his Guards in Moscow , is it possible that the enemy 's forces confronting you are so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive ? 
On the contrary , he is probably pursuing you with detachments , or at most with an army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you . 
It would seem that , availing yourself of these circumstances , you might advantageously attack a weaker one and annihilate him , or at least oblige him to retreat , retaining in our hands an important part of the provinces now occupied by the enemy , and thereby averting danger from Tula and other towns in the interior . 
You will be responsible if the enemy is able to direct a force of any size against Petersburg to threaten this capital in which it has not been possible to retain many troops ; for with the army entrusted to you , and acting with resolution and energy , you have ample means to avert this fresh calamity . 
Remember that you have still to answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow . 
You have experienced my readiness to reward you . 
That readiness will not weaken in me , but I and Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal , firmness , and success which your intellect , military talent , and the courage of the troops you command justify us in expecting . 
But by the time this letter , which proved that the real relation of the forces had already made itself felt in Petersburg , was dispatched , Kutuzov had found himself unable any longer to restrain the army he commanded from attacking and a battle had taken place . 
On the second of October a Cossack , Shapovalov , who was out scouting , killed one hare and wounded another . 
Following the wounded hare he made his way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of Murat 's army , encamped there without any precautions . 
The Cossack laughingly told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the French . 
A cornet , hearing the story , informed his commander . 
The Cossack was sent for and questioned . 
The Cossack officers wished to take advantage of this chance to capture some horses , but one of the superior officers , who was acquainted with the higher authorities , reported the incident to a general on the staff . 
The state of things on the staff had of late been exceedingly strained . 
