Meanwhile another column was to have attacked the French from the front , but Kutuzov accompanied that column . 
He well knew that nothing but confusion would come of this battle undertaken against his will , and as far as was in his power held the troops back . 
He did not advance . 
He rode silently on his small gray horse , indolently answering suggestions that they should attack . 
`` The word attack is always on your tongue , but you do n't see that we are unable to execute complicated maneuvers , '' said he to Miloradovich who asked permission to advance . 
`` We could n't take Murat prisoner this morning or get to the place in time , and nothing can be done now ! '' 
he replied to someone else . 
When Kutuzov was informed that at the French rear -- where according to the reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody -- there were now two battalions of Poles , he gave a sidelong glance at Ermolov who was behind him and to whom he had not spoken since the previous day . 
`` You see ! 
They are asking to attack and making plans of all kinds , but as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready , and the enemy , forewarned , takes measures accordingly . '' 
Ermolov screwed up his eyes and smiled faintly on hearing these words . 
He understood that for him the storm had blown over , and that Kutuzov would content himself with that hint . 
`` He 's having a little fun at my expense , '' said Ermolov softly , nudging with his knee Raevski who was at his side . 
Soon after this , Ermolov moved up to Kutuzov and respectfully remarked : `` It is not too late yet , your Highness -- the enemy has not gone away - if you were to order an attack ! 
If not , the Guards will not so much as see a little smoke . '' 
Kutuzov did not reply , but when they reported to him that Murat 's troops were in retreat he ordered an advance , though at every hundred paces he halted for three quarters of an hour . 
The whole battle consisted in what Orlov-Denisov 's Cossacks had done : the rest of the army merely lost some hundreds of men uselessly . 
In consequence of this battle Kutuzov received a diamond decoration , and Bennigsen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles , others also received pleasant recognitions corresponding to their various grades , and following the battle fresh changes were made in the staff . 
`` That 's how everything is done with us , all topsy-turvy ! '' 
said the Russian officers and generals after the Tarutino battle , letting it be understood that some fool there is doing things all wrong but that we ourselves should not have done so , just as people speak today . 
But people who talk like that either do not know what they are talking about or deliberately deceive themselves . 
No battle -- Tarutino , Borodino , or Austerlitz -- takes place as those who planned it anticipated . 
That is an essential condition . 
A countless number of free forces -LRB- for nowhere is man freer than during a battle , where it is a question of life and death -RRB- influence the course taken by the fight , and that course never can be known in advance and never coincides with the direction of any one force . 
If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a given body , the direction of its motion can not coincide with any one of those forces , but will always be a mean -- what in mechanics is represented by the diagonal of a parallelogram of forces . 
If in the descriptions given by historians , especially French ones , we find their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previously formed plans , the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptions are false . 
The battle of Tarutino obviously did not attain the aim Toll had in view -- to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by the dispositions ; nor that which Count Orlov-Denisov may have had in view - to take Murat prisoner ; nor the result of immediately destroying the whole corps , which Bennigsen and others may have had in view ; nor the aim of the officer who wished to go into action to distinguish himself ; nor that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he got , and so on . 
But if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what all the Russians of that day desired -- to drive the French out of Russia and destroy their army -- it is quite clear that the battle of Tarutino , just because of its incongruities , was exactly what was wanted at that stage of the campaign . 
It would be difficult and even impossible to imagine any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this battle . 
With a minimum of effort and insignificant losses , despite the greatest confusion , the most important results of the whole campaign were attained : the transition from retreat to advance , an exposure of the weakness of the French , and the administration of that shock which Napoleon 's army had only awaited to begin its flight . 
Napoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa ; there can be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains in the hands of the French . 
The Russians retreat and abandon their ancient capital . 
Moscow , abounding in provisions , arms , munitions , and incalculable wealth , is in Napoleon 's hands . 
The Russian army , only half the strength of the French , does not make a single attempt to attack for a whole month . 
Napoleon 's position is most brilliant . 
He can either fall on the Russian army with double its strength and destroy it ; negotiate an advantageous peace , or in case of a refusal make a menacing move on Petersburg , or even , in the case of a reverse , return to Smolensk or Vilna ; or remain in Moscow ; in short , no special genius would seem to be required to retain the brilliant position the French held at that time . 
For that , only very simple and easy steps were necessary : not to allow the troops to loot , to prepare winter clothing -- of which there was sufficient in Moscow for the whole army -- and methodically to collect the provisions , of which -LRB- according to the French historians -RRB- there were enough in Moscow to supply the whole army for six months . 
Yet Napoleon , that greatest of all geniuses , who the historians declare had control of the army , took none of these steps . 
He not merely did nothing of the kind , but on the contrary he used his power to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the courses open to him . 
Of all that Napoleon might have done : wintering in Moscow , advancing on Petersburg or on Nizhni-Novgorod , or retiring by a more northerly or more southerly route -LRB- say by the road Kutuzov afterwards took -RRB- , nothing more stupid or disastrous can be imagined than what he actually did . 
He remained in Moscow till October , letting the troops plunder the city ; then , hesitating whether to leave a garrison behind him , he quitted Moscow , approached Kutuzov without joining battle , turned to the right and reached Malo-Yaroslavets , again without attempting to break through and take the road Kutuzov took , but retiring instead to Mozhaysk along the devastated Smolensk road . 
Nothing more stupid than that could have been devised , or more disastrous for the army , as the sequel showed . 
Had Napoleon 's aim been to destroy his army , the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series of actions that would so completely have accomplished that purpose , independently of anything the Russian army might do . 
Napoleon , the man of genius , did this ! 
But to say that he destroyed his army because he wished to , or because he was very stupid , would be as unjust as to say that he had brought his troops to Moscow because he wished to and because he was very clever and a genius . 
In both cases his personal activity , having no more force than the personal activity of any soldier , merely coincided with the laws that guided the event . 
The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon 's faculties as having weakened in Moscow , and do so only because the results did not justify his actions . 
He employed all his ability and strength to do the best he could for himself and his army , as he had done previously and as he did subsequently in 1813 . 
His activity at that time was no less astounding than it was in Egypt , in Italy , in Austria , and in Prussia . 
We do not know for certain in how far his genius was genuine in Egypt -- where forty centuries looked down upon his grandeur -- for his great exploits there are all told us by Frenchmen . 
