`` I desire peace , no less than the Emperor Alexander , '' he began . 
`` Have I not for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it ? 
I have waited eighteen months for explanations . 
But in order to begin negotiations , what is demanded of me ? '' 
he said , frowning and making an energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump hand . 
`` The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen , sire , '' replied Balashev . 
`` The Niemen ? '' 
repeated Napoleon . 
`` So now you want me to retire beyond the Niemen -- only the Niemen ? '' 
repeated Napoleon , looking straight at Balashev . 
The latter bowed his head respectfully . 
Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania , only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded . 
Napoleon turned quickly and began to pace the room . 
`` You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen before commencing negotiations , but in just the same way two months ago the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder , and yet you are willing to negotiate . '' 
He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and again stopped in front of Balashev . 
Balashev noticed that his left leg was quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern expression . 
This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon was conscious of . 
`` The vibration of my left calf is a great sign with me , '' he remarked at a later date . 
`` Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to a Prince of Baden , but not to me ! '' 
Napoleon almost screamed , quite to his own surprise . 
`` If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could not accept such conditions . 
You say I have begun this war ! 
But who first joined his army ? 
The Emperor Alexander , not I ! 
And you offer me negotiations when I have expended millions , when you are in alliance with England , and when your position is a bad one . 
You offer me negotiations ! 
But what is the aim of your alliance with England ? 
What has she given you ? '' 
he continued hurriedly , evidently no longer trying to show the advantages of peace and discuss its possibility , but only to prove his own rectitude and power and Alexander 's errors and duplicity . 
The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with the intention of demonstrating the advantages of his position and showing that he was nevertheless willing to negotiate . 
But he had begun talking , and the more he talked the less could he control his words . 
The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and insult Alexander -- just what he had least desired at the commencement of the interview . 
`` I hear you have made peace with Turkey ? '' 
Balashev bowed his head affirmatively . 
`` Peace has been concluded ... '' he began . 
But Napoleon did not let him speak . 
He evidently wanted to do all the talking himself , and continued to talk with the sort of eloquence and unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone . 
`` Yes , I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtaining Moldavia and Wallachia ; I would have given your sovereign those provinces as I gave him Finland . 
Yes , '' he went on , `` I promised and would have given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia , and now he wo n't have those splendid provinces . 
Yet he might have united them to his empire and in a single reign would have extended Russia from the Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube . 
Catherine the Great could not have done more , '' said Napoleon , growing more and more excited as he paced up and down the room , repeating to Balashev almost the very words he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit . 
`` All that , he would have owed to my friendship . 
Oh , what a splendid reign ! '' 
he repeated several times , then paused , drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox , lifted it to his nose , and greedily sniffed at it . 
`` What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander 's might have been ! '' 
He looked compassionately at Balashev , and as soon as the latter tried to make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him . 
`` What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained through my friendship ? '' 
demanded Napoleon , shrugging his shoulders in perplexity . 
`` But no , he has preferred to surround himself with my enemies , and with whom ? 
With Steins , Armfeldts , Bennigsens , and Wintzingerodes ! 
