Is she happy ? 
No ! 
But why this is so I do n't know ... '' As he said this he rose , went to his sister , and , stooping , kissed her forehead . 
His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful , kindly , and unaccustomed brightness , but he was looking not at his sister but over her head toward the darkness of the open doorway . 
`` Let us go to her , I must say good-by . 
Or -- go and wake and I 'll come in a moment . 
Petrushka ! '' 
he called to his valet : `` Come here , take these away . 
Put this on the seat and this to the right . '' 
Princess Mary rose and moved to the door , then stopped and said : `` Andrew , if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him to give you the love you do not feel , and your prayer would have been answered . '' 
`` Well , may be ! '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` Go , Masha ; I 'll come immediately . '' 
On the way to his sister 's room , in the passage which connected one wing with the other , Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling sweetly . 
It was the third time that day that , with an ecstatic and artless smile , she had met him in secluded passages . 
`` Oh ! 
I thought you were in your room , '' she said , for some reason blushing and dropping her eyes . 
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly came over his face . 
He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead and hair , without looking at her eyes , with such contempt that the Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word . 
When he reached his sister 's room his wife was already awake and her merry voice , hurrying one word after another , came through the open door . 
She was speaking as usual in French , and as if after long self-restraint she wished to make up for lost time . 
`` No , but imagine the old Countess Zubova , with false curls and her mouth full of false teeth , as if she were trying to cheat old age ... . 
Ha , ha , ha ! 
Mary ! '' 
This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same laugh Prince Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some five times . 
He entered the room softly . 
The little princess , plump and rosy , was sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands , talking incessantly , repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases . 
Prince Andrew came up , stroked her hair , and asked if she felt rested after their journey . 
She answered him and continued her chatter . 
The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch . 
It was an autumn night , so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole . 
Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch . 
The immense house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows . 
The domestic serfs were crowding in the hall , waiting to bid good-by to the young prince . 
The members of the household were all gathered in the reception hall : Michael Ivanovich , Mademoiselle Bourienne , Princess Mary , and the little princess . 
Prince Andrew had been called to his father 's study as the latter wished to say good-by to him alone . 
All were waiting for them to come out . 
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age spectacles and white dressing gown , in which he received no one but his son , sat at the table writing . 
He glanced round . 
`` Going ? '' 
And he went on writing . 
`` I 've come to say good-by . '' 
`` Kiss me here , '' and he touched his cheek : `` Thanks , thanks ! '' 
`` What do you thank me for ? '' 
`` For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman 's apron strings . 
The Service before everything . 
Thanks , thanks ! '' 
And he went on writing , so that his quill spluttered and squeaked . 
`` If you have anything to say , say it . 
These two things can be done together , '' he added . 
