The commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east . 
For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement to Moscow it was necessary : -LRB- 1 -RRB- that they should form themselves into a military group of a size able to endure a collision with the warlike military group of the east , -LRB- 2 -RRB- that they should abandon all established traditions and customs , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- that during their military movement they should have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to them the deceptions , robberies , and murders which would have to be committed during that movement . 
And beginning with the French Revolution the old inadequately large group was destroyed , as well as the old habits and traditions , and step by step a group was formed of larger dimensions with new customs and traditions , and a man was produced who would stand at the head of the coming movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done . 
A man without convictions , without habits , without traditions , without a name , and not even a Frenchman , emerges -- by what seem the strangest chances -- from among all the seething French parties , and without joining any one of them is borne forward to a prominent position . 
The ignorance of his colleagues , the weakness and insignificance of his opponents , the frankness of his falsehoods , and the dazzling and self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the army . 
The brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy , his opponents ' reluctance to fight , and his own childish audacity and self-confidence secure him military fame . 
Innumerable so called chances accompany him everywhere . 
The disfavor into which he falls with the rulers of France turns to his advantage . 
His attempts to avoid his predestined path are unsuccessful : he is not received into the Russian service , and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothing . 
During the war in Italy he is several times on the verge of destruction and each time is saved in an unexpected manner . 
Owing to various diplomatic considerations the Russian armies -- just those which might have destroyed his prestige -- do not appear upon the scene till he is no longer there . 
On his return from Italy he finds the government in Paris in a process of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped out and destroyed . 
And by chance an escape from this dangerous position presents itself in the form of an aimless and senseless expedition to Africa . 
Again so-called chance accompanies him . 
Impregnable Malta surrenders without a shot ; his most reckless schemes are crowned with success . 
The enemy 's fleet , which subsequently did not let a single boat pass , allows his entire army to elude it . 
In Africa a whole series of outrages are committed against the almost unarmed inhabitants . 
And the men who commit these crimes , especially their leader , assure themselves that this is admirable , this is glory - it resembles Caesar and Alexander the Great and is therefore good . 
This ideal of glory and grandeur -- which consists not merely in considering nothing wrong that one does but in priding oneself on every crime one commits , ascribing to it an incomprehensible supernatural significance -- that ideal , destined to guide this man and his associates , had scope for its development in Africa . 
Whatever he does succeeds . 
The plague does not touch him . 
The cruelty of murdering prisoners is not imputed to him as a fault . 
His childishly rash , uncalled-for , and ignoble departure from Africa , leaving his comrades in distress , is set down to his credit , and again the enemy 's fleet twice lets him slip past . 
When , intoxicated by the crimes he has committed so successfully , he reaches Paris , the dissolution of the republican government , which a year earlier might have ruined him , has reached its extreme limit , and his presence there now as a newcomer free from party entanglements can only serve to exalt him -- and though he himself has no plan , he is quite ready for his new role . 
He had no plan , he was afraid of everything , but the parties snatched at him and demanded his participation . 
He alone -- with his ideal of glory and grandeur developed in Italy and Egypt , his insane self-adulation , his boldness in crime and frankness in lying -- he alone could justify what had to be done . 
He is needed for the place that awaits him , and so almost apart from his will and despite his indecision , his lack of a plan , and all his mistakes , he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizing power and the conspiracy is crowned with success . 
He is pushed into a meeting of the legislature . 
In alarm he wishes to flee , considering himself lost . 
He pretends to fall into a swoon and says senseless things that should have ruined him . 
But the once proud and shrewd rulers of France , feeling that their part is played out , are even more bewildered than he , and do not say the words they should have said to destroy him and retain their power . 
Chance , millions of chances , give him power , and all men as if by agreement co-operate to confirm that power . 
Chance forms the characters of the rulers of France , who submit to him ; chance forms the character of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government ; chance contrives a plot against him which not only fails to harm him but confirms his power . 
Chance puts the Duc d'Enghien in his hands and unexpectedly causes him to kill him -- thereby convincing the mob more forcibly than in any other way that he had the right , since he had the might . 
Chance contrives that though he directs all his efforts to prepare an expedition against England -LRB- which would inevitably have ruined him -RRB- he never carries out that intention , but unexpectedly falls upon Mack and the Austrians , who surrender without a battle . 
Chance and genius give him the victory at Austerlitz ; and by chance all men , not only the French but all Europe -- except England which does not take part in the events about to happen -- despite their former horror and detestation of his crimes , now recognize his authority , the title he has given himself , and his ideal of grandeur and glory , which seems excellent and reasonable to them all . 
As if measuring themselves and preparing for the coming movement , the western forces push toward the east several times in 1805 , 1806 , 1807 , and 1809 , gaining strength and growing . 
In 1811 the group of people that had formed in France unites into one group with the peoples of Central Europe . 
The strength of the justification of the man who stands at the head of the movement grows with the increased size of the group . 
During the ten-year preparatory period this man had formed relations with all the crowned heads of Europe . 
The discredited rulers of the world can oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of glory and grandeur . 
One after another they hasten to display their insignificance before him . 
The King of Prussia sends his wife to seek the great man 's mercy ; the Emperor of Austria considers it a favor that this man receives a daughter the Caesars into his bed ; the Pope , the guardian of all that the nations hold sacred , utilizes religion for the aggrandizement of the great man . 
It is not Napoleon who prepares himself for the accomplishment of his role , so much as all those round him who prepare him to take on himself the whole responsibility for what is happening and has to happen . 
There is no step , no crime or petty fraud he commits , which in the mouths of those around him is not at once represented as a great deed . 
The most suitable fete the Germans can devise for him is a celebration of Jena and Auerstadt . 
Not only is he great , but so are his ancestors , his brothers , his stepsons , and his brothers-in-law . 
Everything is done to deprive him of the remains of his reason and to prepare him for his terrible part . 
And when he is ready so too are the forces . 
The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal -- Moscow . 
