He could see no way out of this situation . 
The idea of marrying some rich woman , which was suggested to him by his female relations , was repugnant to him . 
The other way out -- his mother 's death -- never entered his head . 
He wished for nothing and hoped for nothing , and deep in his heart experienced a gloomy and stern satisfaction in an uncomplaining endurance of his position . 
He tried to avoid his old acquaintances with their commiseration and offensive offers of assistance ; he avoided all distraction and recreation , and even at home did nothing but play cards with his mother , pace silently up and down the room , and smoke one pipe after another . 
He seemed carefully to cherish within himself the gloomy mood which alone enabled him to endure his position . 
At the beginning of winter Princess Mary came to Moscow . 
From reports current in town she learned how the Rostovs were situated , and how `` the son has sacrificed himself for his mother , '' as people were saying . 
`` I never expected anything else of him , '' said Princess Mary to herself , feeling a joyous sense of her love for him . 
Remembering her friendly relations with all the Rostovs which had made her almost a member of the family , she thought it her duty to go to see them . 
But remembering her relations with Nicholas in Voronezh she was shy about doing so . 
Making a great effort she did however go to call on them a few weeks after her arrival in Moscow . 
Nicholas was the first to meet her , as the countess ' room could only be reached through his . 
But instead of being greeted with pleasure as she had expected , at his first glance at her his face assumed a cold , stiff , proud expression she had not seen on it before . 
He inquired about her health , led the way to his mother , and having sat there for five minutes left the room . 
When the princess came out of the countess ' room Nicholas met her again , and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her to the anteroom . 
To her remarks about his mother 's health he made no reply . 
`` What 's that to you ? 
Leave me in peace , '' his looks seemed to say . 
`` Why does she come prowling here ? 
What does she want ? 
I ca n't bear these ladies and all these civilities ! '' 
said he aloud in Sonya 's presence , evidently unable to repress his vexation , after the princess ' carriage had disappeared . 
`` Oh , Nicholas , how can you talk like that ? '' 
cried Sonya , hardly able to conceal her delight . 
`` She is so kind and Mamma is so fond of her ! '' 
Nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speaking of the princess any more . 
But after her visit the old countess spoke of her several times a day . 
She sang her praises , insisted that her son must call on her , expressed a wish to see her often , but yet always became ill-humored when she began to talk about her . 
Nicholas tried to keep silence when his mother spoke of the princess , but his silence irritated her . 
`` She is a very admirable and excellent young woman , '' said she , `` and you must go and call on her . 
You would at least be seeing somebody , and I think it must be dull for you only seeing us . '' 
`` But I do n't in the least want to , Mamma . '' 
`` You used to want to , and now you do n't . 
Really I do n't understand you , my dear . 
One day you are dull , and the next you refuse to see anyone . '' 
`` But I never said I was dull . '' 
`` Why , you said yourself you do n't want even to see her . 
She is a very admirable young woman and you always liked her , but now suddenly you have got some notion or other in your head . 
You hide everything from me . '' 
`` Not at all , Mamma . '' 
`` If I were asking you to do something disagreeable now -- but I only ask you to return a call . 
One would think mere politeness required it ... . 
Well , I have asked you , and now I wo n't interfere any more since you have secrets from your mother . '' 
`` Well , then , I 'll go if you wish it . '' 
`` It does n't matter to me . 
I only wish it for your sake . '' 
Nicholas sighed , bit his mustache , and laid out the cards for a patience , trying to divert his mother 's attention to another topic . 
The same conversation was repeated next day and the day after , and the day after that . 
After her visit to the Rostovs and her unexpectedly chilly reception by Nicholas , Princess Mary confessed to herself that she had been right in not wishing to be the first to call . 
