What are you waiting for ? '' 
he cried angrily to the dressers . 
His very first , remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince Andrew 's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily to undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him . 
The doctor bent down over the wound , felt it , and sighed deeply . 
Then he made a sign to someone , and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to lose consciousness . 
When he came to himself the splintered portions of his thighbone had been extracted , the torn flesh cut away , and the wound bandaged . 
Water was being sprinkled on his face . 
As soon as Prince Andrew opened his eyes , the doctor bent over , kissed him silently on the lips , and hurried away . 
After the sufferings he had been enduring , Prince Andrew enjoyed a blissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time . 
All the best and happiest moments of his life -- especially his earliest childhood , when he used to be undressed and put to bed , and when leaning over him his nurse sang him to sleep and he , burying his head in the pillow , felt happy in the mere consciousness of life - returned to his memory , not merely as something past but as something present . 
The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whose head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew : they were lifting him up and trying to quiet him . 
`` Show it to me ... . 
Oh , ooh ... Oh ! 
Oh , ooh ! '' 
his frightened moans could be heard , subdued by suffering and broken by sobs . 
Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep . 
Whether because he was dying without glory , or because he was sorry to part with life , or because of those memories of a childhood that could not return , or because he was suffering and others were suffering and that man near him was groaning so piteously -- he felt like weeping childlike , kindly , and almost happy tears . 
The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted blood and with the boot still on . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh , ooh ! '' 
he sobbed , like a woman . 
The doctor who had been standing beside him , preventing Prince Andrew from seeing his face , moved away . 
`` My God ! 
What is this ? 
Why is he here ? '' 
said Prince Andrew to himself . 
In the miserable , sobbing , enfeebled man whose leg had just been amputated , he recognized Anatole Kuragin . 
Men were supporting him in their arms and offering him a glass of water , but his trembling , swollen lips could not grasp its rim . 
Anatole was sobbing painfully . 
`` Yes , it is he ! 
Yes , that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me , '' thought Prince Andrew , not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him . 
`` What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life ? '' 
he asked himself without finding an answer . 
And suddenly a new unexpected memory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself to him . 
He remembered Natasha as he had seen her for the first time at the ball in 1810 , with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happy face ready for rapture , and love and tenderness for her , stronger and more vivid than ever , awoke in his soul . 
He now remembered the connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly gazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes . 
He remembered everything , and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy heart . 
Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender loving tears for his fellow men , for himself , and for his own and their errors . 
`` Compassion , love of our brothers , for those who love us and for those who hate us , love of our enemies ; yes , that love which God preached on earth and which Princess Mary taught me and I did not understand -- that is what made me sorry to part with life , that is what remained for me had I lived . 
But now it is too late . 
I know it ! '' 
The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded , together with the heaviness of his head and the news that some twenty generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded , and the consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm , produced an unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at the killed and wounded , thereby , he considered , testing his strength of mind . 
This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame that strength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and his greatness . 
He rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to the Shevardino knoll , where he sat on his campstool , his sallow face swollen and heavy , his eyes dim , his nose red , and his voice hoarse , involuntarily listening , with downcast eyes , to the sounds of firing . 
With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action , in which he regarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest . 
A personal , human feeling for a brief moment got the better of the artificial phantasm of life he had served so long . 
He felt in his own person the sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield . 
The heaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility of suffering and death for himself . 
At that moment he did not desire Moscow , or victory , or glory -LRB- what need had he for any more glory ? -RRB- . 
The one thing he wished for was rest , tranquillity , and freedom . 
