` Monsieur Kiril is a man of education , who speaks French . 
He is a Russian seigneur who has had misfortunes , but he is a man . 
He knows what 's what ... . 
If he wants anything and asks me , he wo n't get a refusal . 
When one has studied , you see , one likes education and well-bred people . ' 
It is for your sake I mention it , Monsieur Kiril . 
The other day if it had not been for you that affair would have ended ill . '' 
And after chatting a while longer , the corporal went away . 
-LRB- The affair he had alluded to had happened a few days before -- a fight between the prisoners and the French soldiers , in which Pierre had succeeded in pacifying his comrades . -RRB- 
Some of the prisoners who had heard Pierre talking to the corporal immediately asked what the Frenchman had said . 
While Pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leaving Moscow , a thin , sallow , tattered French soldier came up to the door of the shed . 
Rapidly and timidly raising his fingers to his forehead by way of greeting , he asked Pierre whether the soldier Platoche to whom he had given a shirt to sew was in that shed . 
A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued to them , which they had given out to the prisoners to make up into boots and shirts for them . 
`` Ready , ready , dear fellow ! '' 
said Karataev , coming out with a neatly folded shirt . 
Karataev , on account of the warm weather and for convenience at work , was wearing only trousers and a tattered shirt as black as soot . 
His hair was bound round , workman fashion , with a wisp of lime-tree bast , and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever . 
`` A promise is own brother to performance ! 
I said Friday and here it is , ready , '' said Platon , smiling and unfolding the shirt he had sewn . 
The Frenchman glanced around uneasily and then , as if overcoming his hesitation , rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt . 
He had a long , greasy , flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow , thin bare body , but no shirt . 
He was evidently afraid the prisoners looking on would laugh at him , and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly . 
None of the prisoners said a word . 
`` See , it fits well ! '' 
Platon kept repeating , pulling the shirt straight . 
The Frenchman , having pushed his head and hands through , without raising his eyes , looked down at the shirt and examined the seams . 
`` You see , dear man , this is not a sewing shop , and I had no proper tools ; and , as they say , one needs a tool even to kill a louse , '' said Platon with one of his round smiles , obviously pleased with his work . 
`` It 's good , quite good , thank you , '' said the Frenchman , in French , `` but there must be some linen left over . 
`` It will fit better still when it sets to your body , '' said Karataev , still admiring his handiwork . 
`` You 'll be nice and comfortable ... '' `` Thanks , thanks , old fellow ... . 
But the bits left over ? '' 
said the Frenchman again and smiled . 
He took out an assignation ruble note and gave it to Karataev . 
`` But give me the pieces that are over . '' 
Pierre saw that Platon did not want to understand what the Frenchman was saying , and he looked on without interfering . 
Karataev thanked the Frenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work . 
The Frenchman insisted on having the pieces returned that were left over and asked Pierre to translate what he said . 
`` What does he want the bits for ? '' 
said Karataev . 
`` They 'd make fine leg bands for us . 
Well , never mind . '' 
And Karataev , with a suddenly changed and saddened expression , took a small bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and gave it to the Frenchman without looking at him . 
`` Oh dear ! '' 
muttered Karataev and went away . 
The Frenchman looked at the linen , considered for a moment , then looked inquiringly at Pierre and , as if Pierre 's look had told him something , suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice : `` Platoche ! 
Eh , Platoche ! 
Keep them yourself ! '' 
And handing back the odd bits he turned and went out . 
`` There , look at that , '' said Karataev , swaying his head . 
`` People said they were not Christians , but they too have souls . 
