She saw him tender and amused as he was when he put on the little icon . 
`` Did he believe ? 
Had he repented of his unbelief ? 
Was he now there ? 
There in the realms of eternal peace and blessedness ? '' 
she thought . 
`` Father , tell me how it happened , '' she asked through her tears . 
`` Go ! 
Go ! 
Killed in battle , where the best of Russian men and Russia 's glory were led to destruction . 
Go , Princess Mary . 
Go and tell Lise . 
I will follow . '' 
When Princess Mary returned from her father , the little princess sat working and looked up with that curious expression of inner , happy calm peculiar to pregnant women . 
It was evident that her eyes did not see Princess Mary but were looking within ... into herself ... at something joyful and mysterious taking place within her . 
`` Mary , '' she said , moving away from the embroidery frame and lying back , `` give me your hand . '' 
She took her sister-in-law 's hand and held it below her waist . 
Her eyes were smiling expectantly , her downy lip rose and remained lifted in childlike happiness . 
Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her sister-in-law 's dress . 
`` There , there ! 
Do you feel it ? 
I feel so strange . 
And do you know , Mary , I am going to love him very much , '' said Lise , looking with bright and happy eyes at her sister-in-law . 
Princess Mary could not lift her head , she was weeping . 
`` What is the matter , Mary ? '' 
`` Nothing ... only I feel sad ... sad about Andrew , '' she said , wiping away her tears on her sister-in-law 's knee . 
Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began trying to prepare her sister-in-law , and every time began to cry . 
Unobservant as was the little princess , these tears , the cause of which she did not understand , agitated her . 
She said nothing but looked about uneasily as if in search of something . 
Before dinner the old prince , of whom she was always afraid , came into her room with a peculiarly restless and malign expression and went out again without saying a word . 
She looked at Princess Mary , then sat thinking for a while with that expression of attention to something within her that is only seen in pregnant women , and suddenly began to cry . 
`` Has anything come from Andrew ? '' 
she asked . 
`` No , you know it 's too soon for news . 
But my father is anxious and I feel afraid . '' 
`` So there 's nothing ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' answered Princess Mary , looking firmly with her radiant eyes at her sister-in-law . 
She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide the terrible news from her till after her confinement , which was expected within a few days . 
Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hid their grief in their own way . 
The old prince would not cherish any hope : he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed , and though he sent an official to Austria to seek for traces of his son , he ordered a monument from Moscow which he intended to erect in his own garden to his memory , and he told everybody that his son had been killed . 
He tried not to change his former way of life , but his strength failed him . 
He walked less , ate less , slept less , and became weaker every day . 
Princess Mary hoped . 
She prayed for her brother as living and was always awaiting news of his return . 
`` Dearest , '' said the little princess after breakfast on the morning of the nineteenth March , and her downy little lip rose from old habit , but as sorrow was manifest in every smile , the sound of every word , and even every footstep in that house since the terrible news had come , so now the smile of the little princess -- influenced by the general mood though without knowing its cause -- was such as to remind one still more of the general sorrow . 
`` Dearest , I 'm afraid this morning 's fruschtique * -- as Foka the cook calls it -- has disagreed with me . '' 
* Fruhstuck : breakfast . 
`` What is the matter with you , my darling ? 
You look pale . 
Oh , you are very pale ! '' 
