The feeling , `` It has begun ! 
Here it is ! '' 
was seen even on Prince Bagration 's hard brown face with its half-closed , dull , sleepy eyes . 
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face and wished he could tell what , if anything , this man was thinking and feeling at that moment . 
`` Is there anything at all behind that impassive face ? '' 
Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked . 
Prince Bagration bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew told him , and said , `` Very good ! '' 
in a tone that seemed to imply that everything that took place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen . 
Prince Andrew , out of breath with his rapid ride , spoke quickly . 
Prince Bagration , uttering his words with an Oriental accent , spoke particularly slowly , as if to impress the fact that there was no need to hurry . 
However , he put his horse to a trot in the direction of Tushin 's battery . 
Prince Andrew followed with the suite . 
Behind Prince Bagration rode an officer of the suite , the prince 's personal adjutant , Zherkov , an orderly officer , the staff officer on duty , riding a fine bobtailed horse , and a civilian -- an accountant who had asked permission to be present at the battle out of curiosity . 
The accountant , a stout , full-faced man , looked around him with a naive smile of satisfaction and presented a strange appearance among the hussars , Cossacks , and adjutants , in his camlet coat , as he jolted on his horse with a convoy officer 's saddle . 
`` He wants to see a battle , '' said Zherkov to Bolkonski , pointing to the accountant , `` but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach already . '' 
`` Oh , leave off ! '' 
said the accountant with a beaming but rather cunning smile , as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkov 's joke , and purposely trying to appear stupider than he really was . 
`` It is very strange , mon Monsieur Prince , '' said the staff officer . 
-LRB- He remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a prince , but could not get it quite right . -RRB- 
By this time they were all approaching Tushin 's battery , and a ball struck the ground in front of them . 
`` What 's that that has fallen ? '' 
asked the accountant with a naive smile . 
`` A French pancake , '' answered Zherkov . 
`` So that 's what they hit with ? '' 
asked the accountant . 
`` How awful ! '' 
He seemed to swell with satisfaction . 
He had hardly finished speaking when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly ended with a thud into something soft ... f-f-flop ! 
and a Cossack , riding a little to their right and behind the accountant , crashed to earth with his horse . 
Zherkov and the staff officer bent over their saddles and turned their horses away . 
The accountant stopped , facing the Cossack , and examined him with attentive curiosity . 
The Cossack was dead , but the horse still struggled . 
Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes , looked round , and , seeing the cause of the confusion , turned away with indifference , as if to say , `` Is it worth while noticing trifles ? '' 
He reined in his horse with the case of a skillful rider and , slightly bending over , disengaged his saber which had caught in his cloak . 
It was an old-fashioned saber of a kind no longer in general use . 
Prince Andrew remembered the story of Suvorov giving his saber to Bagration in Italy , and the recollection was particularly pleasant at that moment . 
They had reached the battery at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield . 
`` Whose company ? '' 
asked Prince Bagration of an artilleryman standing by the ammunition wagon . 
He asked , `` Whose company ? '' 
but he really meant , `` Are you frightened here ? '' 
and the artilleryman understood him . 
`` Captain Tushin 's , your excellency ! '' 
shouted the red-haired , freckled gunner in a merry voice , standing to attention . 
`` Yes , yes , '' muttered Bagration as if considering something , and he rode past the limbers to the farthest cannon . 
As he approached , a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and his suite , and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see the gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quickly back to its former position . 
A huge , broad-shouldered gunner , Number One , holding a mop , his legs far apart , sprang to the wheel ; while Number Two with a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon 's mouth . 
The short , round-shouldered Captain Tushin , stumbling over the tail of the gun carriage , moved forward and , not noticing the general , looked out shading his eyes with his small hand . 
`` Lift it two lines more and it will be just right , '' cried he in a feeble voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note , ill suited to his weak figure . 
`` Number Two ! '' 
