`` And I should be ashamed to write to Boris . 
I 'm not going to . '' 
`` Why should you be ashamed ? '' 
`` Well , I do n't know . 
It 's awkward and would make me ashamed . '' 
`` And I know why she 'd be ashamed , '' said Petya , offended by Natasha 's previous remark . 
`` It 's because she was in love with that fat one in spectacles '' -LRB- that was how Petya described his namesake , the new Count Bezukhov -RRB- `` and now she 's in love with that singer '' -LRB- he meant Natasha 's Italian singing master -RRB- , `` that 's why she 's ashamed ! '' 
`` Petya , you 're a stupid ! '' 
said Natasha . 
`` Not more stupid than you , madam , '' said the nine-year-old Petya , with the air of an old brigadier . 
The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna 's hints at dinner . 
On retiring to her own room , she sat in an armchair , her eyes fixed on a miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox , while the tears kept coming into her eyes . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , with the letter , came on tiptoe to the countess ' door and paused . 
`` Do n't come in , '' she said to the old count who was following her . 
`` Come later . '' 
And she went in , closing the door behind her . 
The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened . 
At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices , then Anna Mikhaylovna 's voice alone in a long speech , then a cry , then silence , then both voices together with glad intonations , and then footsteps . 
Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door . 
Her face wore the proud expression of a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the public to appreciate his skill . 
`` It is done ! '' 
she said to the count , pointing triumphantly to the countess , who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and in the other the letter , and pressing them alternately to her lips . 
When she saw the count , she stretched out her arms to him , embraced his bald head , over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait , and in order to press them again to her lips , she slightly pushed away the bald head . 
Vera , Natasha , Sonya , and Petya now entered the room , and the reading of the letter began . 
After a brief description of the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part , and his promotion , Nicholas said that he kissed his father 's and mother 's hands asking for their blessing , and that he kissed Vera , Natasha , and Petya . 
Besides that , he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling , Madame Schoss , and his old nurse , and asked them to kiss for him `` dear Sonya , whom he loved and thought of just the same as ever . '' 
When she heard this Sonya blushed so that tears came into her eyes and , unable to bear the looks turned upon her , ran away into the dancing hall , whirled round it at full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon , and , flushed and smiling , plumped down on the floor . 
The countess was crying . 
`` Why are you crying , Mamma ? '' 
asked Vera . 
`` From all he says one should be glad and not cry . '' 
This was quite true , but the count , the countess , and Natasha looked at her reproachfully . 
`` And who is it she takes after ? '' 
thought the countess . 
Nicholas ' letter was read over hundreds of times , and those who were considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess , for she did not let it out of her hands . 
The tutors came , and the nurses , and Dmitri , and several acquaintances , and the countess reread the letter each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh proofs of Nikolenka 's virtues . 
How strange , how extraordinary , how joyful it seemed , that her son , the scarcely perceptible motion of whose tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her , that son about whom she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count , that son who had first learned to say `` pear '' and then `` granny , '' that this son should now be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings , a manly warrior doing some kind of man 's work of his own , without help or guidance . 
The universal experience of ages , showing that children do grow imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood , did not exist for the countess . 
Her son 's growth toward manhood , at each of its stages , had seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the millions of human beings who grew up in the same way . 
As twenty years before , it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived somewhere under her heart would ever cry , suck her breast , and begin to speak , so now she could not believe that that little creature could be this strong , brave man , this model son and officer that , judging by this letter , he now was . 
`` What a style ! 
How charmingly he describes ! '' 
said she , reading the descriptive part of the letter . 
`` And what a soul ! 
Not a word about himself ... . 
Not a word ! 
About some Denisov or other , though he himself , I dare say , is braver than any of them . 
He says nothing about his sufferings . 
What a heart ! 
How like him it is ! 
