All he cared about was gaiety and women , and as according to his ideas there was nothing dishonorable in these tastes , and he was incapable of considering what the gratification of his tastes entailed for others , he honestly considered himself irreproachable , sincerely despised rogues and bad people , and with a tranquil conscience carried his head high . 
Rakes , those male Magdalenes , have a secret feeling of innocence similar to that which female Magdalenes have , based on the same hope of forgiveness . 
`` All will be forgiven her , for she loved much ; and all will be forgiven him , for he enjoyed much . '' 
Dolokhov , who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile and his Persian adventures , and was leading a life of luxury , gambling , and dissipation , associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kuragin and made use of him for his own ends . 
Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and audacity . 
Dolokhov , who needed Anatole Kuragin 's name , position , and connections as a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set , made use of him and amused himself at his expense without letting the other feel it . 
Apart from the advantage he derived from Anatole , the very process of dominating another 's will was in itself a pleasure , a habit , and a necessity to Dolokhov . 
Natasha had made a strong impression on Kuragin . 
At supper after the opera he described to Dolokhov with the air of a connoisseur the attractions of her arms , shoulders , feet , and hair and expressed his intention of making love to her . 
Anatole had no notion and was incapable of considering what might come of such love-making , as he never had any notion of the outcome of any of his actions . 
`` She 's first-rate , my dear fellow , but not for us , '' replied Dolokhov . 
`` I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner , '' said Anatole . 
`` Eh ? '' 
`` You 'd better wait till she 's married ... '' `` You know , I adore little girls , they lose their heads at once , '' pursued Anatole . 
`` You have been caught once already by a ` little girl , ' '' said Dolokhov who knew of Kuragin 's marriage . 
`` Take care ! '' 
`` Well , that ca n't happen twice ! 
Eh ? '' 
said Anatole , with a good-humored laugh . 
The day after the opera the Rostovs went nowhere and nobody came to see them . 
Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about something which they concealed from Natasha . 
Natasha guessed they were talking about the old prince and planning something , and this disquieted and offended her . 
She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a manservant to the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he had come . 
He had not arrived . 
She suffered more now than during her first days in Moscow . 
To her impatience and pining for him were now added the unpleasant recollection of her interview with Princess Mary and the old prince , and a fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the cause . 
She continually fancied that either he would never come or that something would happen to her before he came . 
She could no longer think of him by herself calmly and continuously as she had done before . 
As soon as she began to think of him , the recollection of the old prince , of Princess Mary , of the theater , and of Kuragin mingled with her thoughts . 
The question again presented itself whether she was not guilty , whether she had not already broken faith with Prince Andrew , and again she found herself recalling to the minutest detail every word , every gesture , and every shade in the play of expression on the face of the man who had been able to arouse in her such an incomprehensible and terrifying feeling . 
To the family Natasha seemed livelier than usual , but she was far less tranquil and happy than before . 
On Sunday morning Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass at her parish church -- the Church of the Assumption built over the graves of victims of the plague . 
`` I do n't like those fashionable churches , '' she said , evidently priding herself on her independence of thought . 
`` God is the same every where . 
We have an excellent priest , he conducts the service decently and with dignity , and the deacon is the same . 
What holiness is there in giving concerts in the choir ? 
I do n't like it , it 's just self-indulgence ! '' 
Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them . 
Her whole house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays ; neither she nor the servants worked , and they all wore holiday dress and went to church . 
At her table there were extra dishes at dinner , and the servants had vodka and roast goose or suckling pig . 
But in nothing in the house was the holiday so noticeable as in Marya Dmitrievna 's broad , stern face , which on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity . 
After Mass , when they had finished their coffee in the dining room where the loose covers had been removed from the furniture , a servant announced that the carriage was ready , and Marya Dmitrievna rose with a stern air . 
She wore her holiday shawl , in which she paid calls , and announced that she was going to see Prince Nicholas Bolkonski to have an explanation with him about Natasha . 
After she had gone , a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Roguet waited on the Rostovs , and Natasha , very glad of this diversion , having shut herself into a room adjoining the drawing room , occupied herself trying on the new dresses . 
Just as she had put on a bodice without sleeves and only tacked together , and was turning her head to see in the glass how the back fitted , she heard in the drawing room the animated sounds of her father 's voice and another 's -- a woman 's - that made her flush . 
It was Helene . 
Natasha had not time to take off the bodice before the door opened and Countess Bezukhova , dressed in a purple velvet gown with a high collar , came into the room beaming with good-humored amiable smiles . 
`` Oh , my enchantress ! '' 
she cried to the blushing Natasha . 
`` Charming ! 
