Lord Jesus Christ , holy Saint Nicholas , Frola and Lavra ! 
Lord Jesus Christ , have mercy on us and save us ! '' 
he concluded , then bowed to the ground , got up , sighed , and sat down again on his heap of straw . 
`` That 's the way . 
Lay me down like a stone , O God , and raise me up like a loaf , '' he muttered as he lay down , pulling his coat over him . 
`` What prayer was that you were saying ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Eh ? '' 
murmured Platon , who had almost fallen asleep . 
`` What was I saying ? 
I was praying . 
Do n't you pray ? '' 
`` Yes , I do , '' said Pierre . 
`` But what was that you said : Frola and Lavra ? '' 
`` Well , of course , '' replied Platon quickly , `` the horses ' saints . 
One must pity the animals too . 
Eh , the rascal ! 
Now you 've curled up and got warm , you daughter of a bitch ! '' 
said Karataev , touching the dog that lay at his feet , and again turning over he fell asleep immediately . 
Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distance outside , and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed , but inside it was quiet and dark . 
For a long time Pierre did not sleep , but lay with eyes open in the darkness , listening to the regular snoring of Platon who lay beside him , and he felt that the world that had been shattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and on new and unshakable foundations . 
Twenty-three soldiers , three officers , and two officials were confined in the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained for four weeks . 
When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures to him except Platon Karataev , who always remained in his mind a most vivid and precious memory and the personification of everything Russian , kindly , and round . 
When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn the first impression of him , as of something round , was fully confirmed : Platon 's whole figure -- in a French overcoat girdled with a cord , a soldier 's cap , and bast shoes -- was round . 
His head was quite round , his back , chest , shoulders , and even his arms , which he held as if ever ready to embrace something , were rounded , his pleasant smile and his large , gentle brown eyes were also round . 
Platon Karataev must have been fifty , judging by his stories of campaigns he had been in , told as by an old soldier . 
He did not himself know his age and was quite unable to determine it . 
But his brilliantly white , strong teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he laughed -- as he often did -- were all sound and good , there was not a gray hair in his beard or on his head , and his whole body gave an impression of suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance . 
His face , despite its fine , rounded wrinkles , had an expression of innocence and youth , his voice was pleasant and musical . 
But the chief peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness . 
It was evident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say , and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an irresistible persuasiveness . 
His physical strength and agility during the first days of his imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue and sickness meant . 
Every night before lying down , he said : `` Lord , lay me down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf ! '' 
and every morning on getting up , he said : `` I lay down and curled up , I get up and shake myself . '' 
And indeed he only had to lie down , to fall asleep like a stone , and he only had to shake himself , to be ready without a moment 's delay for some work , just as children are ready to play directly they awake . 
He could do everything , not very well but not badly . 
He baked , cooked , sewed , planed , and mended boots . 
He was always busy , and only at night allowed himself conversation -- of which he was fond -- and songs . 
He did not sing like a trained singer who knows he is listened to , but like the birds , evidently giving vent to the sounds in the same way that one stretches oneself or walks about to get rid of stiffness , and the sounds were always high-pitched , mournful , delicate , and almost feminine , and his face at such times was very serious . 
Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow , he seemed to have thrown off all that had been forced upon him - everything military and alien to himself -- and had returned to his former peasant habits . 
`` A soldier on leave -- a shirt outside breeches , '' he would say . 
He did not like talking about his life as a soldier , though he did not complain , and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once during the whole of his army service . 
When he related anything it was generally some old and evidently precious memory of his `` Christian '' life , as he called his peasant existence . 
The proverbs , of which his talk was full , were for the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers employ , but those folk sayings which taken without a context seem so insignificant , but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significance of profound wisdom . 
He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous occasion , yet both would be right . 
He liked to talk and he talked well , adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings which Pierre thought he invented himself , but the chief charm of his talk lay in the fact that the commonest events -- sometimes just such as Pierre had witnessed without taking notice of them - assumed in Karataev 's a character of solemn fitness . 
He liked to hear the folk tales one of the soldiers used to tell of an evening -LRB- they were always the same -RRB- , but most of all he liked to hear stories of real life . 
He would smile joyfully when listening to such stories , now and then putting in a word or asking a question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clear to himself . 
Karataev had no attachments , friendships , or love , as Pierre understood them , but loved and lived affectionately with everything life brought him in contact with , particularly with man -- not any particular man , but those with whom he happened to be . 
He loved his dog , his comrades , the French , and Pierre who was his neighbor , but Pierre felt that in spite of Karataev 's affectionate tenderness for him -LRB- by which he unconsciously gave Pierre 's spiritual life its due -RRB- he would not have grieved for a moment at parting from him . 
