`` My head , be it good or bad , must depend on itself , '' said he , rising from the bench , and he rode to Fili where his carriages were waiting . 
The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in the better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov 's hut . 
The men , women , and children of the large peasant family crowded into the back room across the passage . 
Only Malasha , Andrew 's six-year-old granddaughter whom his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugar while drinking his tea , remained on the top of the brick oven in the larger room . 
Malasha looked down from the oven with shy delight at the faces , uniforms , and decorations of the generals , who one after another came into the room and sat down on the broad benches in the corner under the icons . 
`` Granddad '' himself , as Malasha in her own mind called Kutuzov , sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven . 
He sat , sunk deep in a folding armchair , and continually cleared his throat and pulled at the collar of his coat which , though it was unbuttoned , still seemed to pinch his neck . 
Those who entered went up one by one to the field marshal ; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others . 
His adjutant Kaysarov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facing Kutuzov , but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysarov understood that his Serene Highness did not wish his face to be seen . 
Round the peasant 's deal table , on which lay maps , plans , pencils , and papers , so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in another bench and put it beside the table . 
Ermolov , Kaysarov , and Toll , who had just arrived , sat down on this bench . 
In the foremost place , immediately under the icons , sat Barclay de Tolly , his high forehead merging into his bald crown . 
He had a St. George 's Cross round his neck and looked pale and ill . 
He had been feverish for two days and was now shivering and in pain . 
Beside him sat Uvarov , who with rapid gesticulations was giving him some information , speaking in low tones as they all did . 
Chubby little Dokhturov was listening attentively with eyebrows raised and arms folded on his stomach . 
On the other side sat Count Ostermann-Tolstoy , seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts . 
His broad head with its bold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand . 
Raevski , twitching forward the black hair on his temples as was his habit , glanced now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a look of impatience . 
Konovnitsyn 's firm , handsome , and kindly face was lit up by a tender , sly smile . 
His glance met Malasha 's , and the expression of his eyes caused the little girl to smile . 
They were all waiting for Bennigsen , who on the pretext of inspecting the position was finishing his savory dinner . 
They waited for him from four till six o'clock and did not begin their deliberations all that time talked in low tones of other matters . 
Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his corner and draw toward the table , but not near enough for the candles that had been placed there to light up his face . 
Bennigsen opened the council with the question : `` Are we to abandon Russia 's ancient and sacred capital without a struggle , or are we to defend it ? '' 
A prolonged and general silence followed . 
There was a frown on every face and only Kutuzov 's angry grunts and occasional cough broke the silence . 
All eyes were gazing at him . 
Malasha too looked at `` Granddad . '' 
She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered ; he seemed about to cry , but this did not last long . 
`` Russia 's ancient and sacred capital ! '' 
he suddenly said , repeating Bennigsen 's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention to the false note in them . 
`` Allow me to tell you , your excellency , that that question has no meaning for a Russian . '' 
-LRB- He lurched his heavy body forward . -RRB- 
`` Such a question can not be put ; it is senseless ! 
The question I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military one . 
The question is that of saving Russia . 
Is it better to give up Moscow without a battle , or by accepting battle to risk losing the army as well as Moscow ? 
That is the question on which I want your opinion , '' and he sank back in his chair . 
The discussion began . 
Bennigsen did not yet consider his game lost . 
Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at Fili was impossible , but imbued with Russian patriotism and the love of Moscow , he proposed to move troops from the right to the left flank during the night and attack the French right flank the following day . 
Opinions were divided , and arguments were advanced for and against that project . 
Ermolov , Dokhturov , and Raevski agreed with Bennigsen . 
Whether feeling it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandoning the capital or guided by other , personal considerations , these generals seemed not to understand that this council could not alter the inevitable course of events and that Moscow was in effect already abandoned . 
The other generals , however , understood it and , leaving aside the question of Moscow , of the direction the army should take in its retreat . 
Malasha , who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her , understood the meaning of the council differently . 
It seemed to her that it was only a personal struggle between `` Granddad '' and `` Long-coat '' as she termed Bennigsen . 
She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to one another , and in her heart she sided with `` Granddad . '' 
In the midst of the conversation she noticed `` Granddad '' give Bennigsen a quick , subtle glance , and then to her joys he saw that `` Granddad '' said something to `` Long-coat '' which settled him . 
