`` What ? 
Saw the real Mack ? 
With hands and feet ? '' 
`` Into action ! 
Into action ! 
Bring him a bottle for such news ! 
But how did you come here ? '' 
`` I 've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil , Mack . 
An Austrian general complained of me . 
I congratulated him on Mack 's arrival ... What 's the matter , Rostov ? 
You look as if you 'd just come out of a hot bath . '' 
`` Oh , my dear fellow , we 're in such a stew here these last two days . '' 
The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by Zherkov . 
They were under orders to advance next day . 
`` We 're going into action , gentlemen ! '' 
`` Well , thank God ! 
We 've been sitting here too long ! '' 
Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna , destroying behind him the bridges over the rivers Inn -LRB- at Braunau -RRB- and Traun -LRB- near Linz -RRB- . 
On October 23 the Russian troops were crossing the river Enns . 
At midday the Russian baggage train , the artillery , and columns of troops were defiling through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge . 
It was a warm , rainy , autumnal day . 
The wide expanse that opened out before the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the bridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain , and then , suddenly spread out in the sunlight , far-distant objects could be clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished . 
Down below , the little town could be seen with its white , red-roofed houses , its cathedral , and its bridge , on both sides of which streamed jostling masses of Russian troops . 
At the bend of the Danube , vessels , an island , and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of the Enns and the Danube became visible , and the rocky left bank of the Danube covered with pine forests , with a mystic background of green treetops and bluish gorges . 
The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a wild virgin pine forest , and far away on the other side of the Enns the enemy 's horse patrols could be discerned . 
Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command of the rearguard stood with a staff officer , scanning the country through his fieldglass . 
A little behind them Nesvitski , who had been sent to the rearguard by the commander in chief , was sitting on the trail of a gun carriage . 
A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and a flask , and Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and real doppelkummel . 
The officers gladly gathered round him , some on their knees , some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass . 
`` Yes , the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool . 
It 's a fine place ! 
Why are you not eating anything , gentlemen ? '' 
Nesvitski was saying . 
`` Thank you very much , Prince , '' answered one of the officers , pleased to be talking to a staff officer of such importance . 
`` It 's a lovely place ! 
We passed close to the park and saw two deer ... and what a splendid house ! '' 
`` Look , Prince , '' said another , who would have dearly liked to take another pie but felt shy , and therefore pretended to be examining the countryside -- `` See , our infantrymen have already got there . 
Look there in the meadow behind the village , three of them are dragging something . 
They 'll ransack that castle , '' he remarked with evident approval . 
`` So they will , '' said Nesvitski . 
`` No , but what I should like , '' added he , munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth , `` would be to slip in over there . '' 
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery , and his eyes narrowed and gleamed . 
`` That would be fine , gentlemen ! '' 
The officers laughed . 
`` Just to flutter the nuns a bit . 
They say there are Italian girls among them . 
On my word I 'd give five years of my life for it ! '' 
`` They must be feeling dull , too , '' said one of the bolder officers , laughing . 
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to the general , who looked through his field glass . 
`` Yes , so it is , so it is , '' said the general angrily , lowering the field glass and shrugging his shoulders , `` so it is ! 
