He went to the cot in confusion , sure that he would find it empty and that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby . 
He drew the curtain aside and for some time his frightened , restless eyes could not find the baby . 
At last he saw him : the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across the bed with his head lower than the pillow , and was smacking his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly . 
Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that , as if he had already lost him . 
He bent over him and , as his sister had taught him , tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish . 
The soft forehead was moist . 
Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand ; even the hair was wet , so profusely had the child perspired . 
He was not dead , but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent . 
Prince Andrew longed to snatch up , to squeeze , to hold to his heart , this helpless little creature , but dared not do so . 
He stood over him , gazing at his head and at the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket . 
He heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of the cot . 
He did not look round , but still gazing at the infant 's face listened to his regular breathing . 
The dark shadow was Princess Mary , who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps , lifted the curtain , and dropped it again behind her . 
Prince Andrew recognized her without looking and held out his hand to her . 
She pressed it . 
`` He has perspired , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` I was coming to tell you so . '' 
The child moved slightly in his sleep , smiled , and rubbed his forehead against the pillow . 
Prince Andrew looked at his sister . 
In the dim shadow of the curtain her luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy that were in them . 
She leaned over to her brother and kissed him , slightly catching the curtain of the cot . 
Each made the other a warning gesture and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishing to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the world . 
Prince Andrew was the first to move away , ruffling his hair against the muslin of the curtain . 
`` Yes , this is the one thing left me now , '' he said with a sigh . 
Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood , Pierre went to the Kiev province , where he had the greatest number of serfs , taking with him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to what he should do on his estates . 
When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office and explained to them his intentions and wishes . 
He told them that steps would be taken immediately to free his serfs -- and that till then they were not to be overburdened with labor , women while nursing their babies were not to be sent to work , assistance was to be given to the serfs , punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal , and hospitals , asylums , and schools were to be established on all the estates . 
Some of the stewards -LRB- there were semiliterate foremen among them -RRB- listened with alarm , supposing these words to mean that the young count was displeased with their management and embezzlement of money , some after their first fright were amused by Pierre 's lisp and the new words they had not heard before , others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked , while the cleverest among them , including the chief steward , understood from this speech how they could best handle the master for their own ends . 
The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre 's intentions , but remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into the general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory . 
Despite Count Bezukhov 's enormous wealth , since he had come into an income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year , Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him an allowance of ten thousand rubles . 
He had a dim perception of the following budget : About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank , about 30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow , the town house , and the allowance to the three princesses ; about 15,000 was given in pensions and the same amount for asylums ; 150,000 alimony was sent to the countess ; about 70,00 went for interest on debts . 
The building of a new church , previously begun , had cost about 10,000 in each of the last two years , and he did not know how the rest , about 100,000 rubles , was spent , and almost every year he was obliged to borrow . 
Besides this the chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests , or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops . 
So the first task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or inclination -- practical business . 
He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward . 
But he felt that this did not forward matters at all . 
He felt that these consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with them or make them move . 
On the one hand , the chief steward put the state of things to him in the very worst light , pointing out the necessity of paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor , to which Pierre did not agree . 
On the other hand , Pierre demanded that steps should be taken to liberate the serfs , which the steward met by showing the necessity of first paying off the loans from the Land Bank , and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation . 
The steward did not say it was quite impossible , but suggested selling the forests in the province of Kostroma , the land lower down the river , and the Crimean estate , in order to make it possible : all of which operations according to him were connected with such complicated measures -- the removal of injunctions , petitions , permits , and so on -- that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied : `` Yes , yes , do so . '' 
Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled him to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and only tried to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it . 
The steward for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these consultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to himself . 
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew , and strangers hastened to make his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer , the largest landowner of the province . 
Temptations to Pierre 's greatest weakness -- the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the Lodge -- were so strong that he could not resist them . 
Again whole days , weeks , and months of his life passed in as great a rush and were as much occupied with evening parties , dinners , lunches , and balls , giving him no time for reflection , as in Petersburg . 
Instead of the new life he had hoped to lead he still lived the old life , only in new surroundings . 
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not fulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example of moral life , and that of the seven virtues he lacked two -- morality and the love of death . 
He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled another of the precepts -- that of reforming the human race - and had other virtues -- love of his neighbor , and especially generosity . 
In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to Petersburg . 
On the way he intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his orders had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God had entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit . 
