Countess Mary well knew that mood of his , and when she herself was in a good frame of mind quietly waited till he had had his soup and then began to talk to him and make him admit that there was no cause for his ill-humor . 
But today she quite forgot that and was hurt that he should be angry with her without any reason , and she felt unhappy . 
She asked him where he had been . 
He replied . 
She again inquired whether everything was going well on the farm . 
Her unnatural tone made him wince unpleasantly and he replied hastily . 
`` Then I 'm not mistaken , '' thought Countess Mary . 
`` Why is he cross with me ? '' 
She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wished to end the conversation . 
She knew her remarks sounded unnatural , but could not refrain from asking some more questions . 
Thanks to Denisov the conversation at table soon became general and lively , and she did not talk to her husband . 
When they left the table and went as usual to thank the old countess , Countess Mary held out her hand and kissed her husband , and asked him why he was angry with her . 
`` You always have such strange fancies ! 
I did n't even think of being angry , '' he replied . 
But the word always seemed to her to imply : `` Yes , I am angry but I wo n't tell you why . '' 
Nicholas and his wife lived together so happily that even Sonya and the old countess , who felt jealous and would have liked them to disagree , could find nothing to reproach them with ; but even they had their moments of antagonism . 
Occasionally , and it was always just after they had been happiest together , they suddenly had a feeling of estrangement and hostility , which occurred most frequently during Countess Mary 's pregnancies , and this was such a time . 
`` Well , messieurs et mesdames , '' said Nicholas loudly and with apparent cheerfulness -LRB- it seemed to Countess Mary that he did it on purpose to vex her -RRB- , `` I have been on my feet since six this morning . 
Tomorrow I shall have to suffer , so today I 'll go and rest . '' 
And without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting room and lay down on the sofa . 
`` That 's always the way , '' thought Countess Mary . 
`` He talks to everyone except me . 
I see ... I see that I am repulsive to him , especially when I am in this condition . '' 
She looked down at her expanded figure and in the glass at her pale , sallow , emaciated face in which her eyes now looked larger than ever . 
And everything annoyed her -- Denisov 's shouting and laughter , Natasha 's talk , and especially a quick glance Sonya gave her . 
Sonya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feeling irritated . 
Having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anything of what they were saying , she softly left the room and went to the nursery . 
The children were playing at `` going to Moscow '' in a carriage made of chairs and invited her to go with them . 
She sat down and played with them a little , but the thought of her husband and his unreasonable crossness worried her . 
She got up and , walking on tiptoe with difficulty , went to the small sitting room . 
`` Perhaps he is not asleep ; I 'll have an explanation with him , '' she said to herself . 
Little Andrew , her eldest boy , imitating his mother , followed her on tiptoe . 
She not notice him . 
`` Mary , dear , I think he is asleep -- he was so tired , '' said Sonya , meeting her in the large sitting room -LRB- it seemed to Countess Mary that she crossed her path everywhere -RRB- . 
`` Andrew may wake him . '' 
Countess Mary looked round , saw little Andrew following her , felt that Sonya was right , and for that very reason flushed and with evident difficulty refrained from saying something harsh . 
She made no reply , but to avoid obeying Sonya beckoned to Andrew to follow her quietly and went to the door . 
Sonya went away by another door . 
From the room in which Nicholas was sleeping came the sound of his even breathing , every slightest tone of which was familiar to his wife . 
As she listened to it she saw before her his smooth handsome forehead , his mustache , and his whole face , as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the night when he slept . 
Nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat . 
And at that moment little Andrew shouted from outside the door : `` Papa ! 
Mamma 's standing here ! '' 
Countess Mary turned pale with fright and made signs to the boy . 
He grew silent , and quiet ensued for a moment , terrible to Countess Mary . 
She knew how Nicholas disliked being waked . 
Then through the door she heard Nicholas clearing his throat again and stirring , and his voice said crossly : `` I ca n't get a moment 's peace ... . 
Mary , is that you ? 
Why did you bring him here ? '' 
`` I only came in to look and did not notice ... forgive me ... '' Nicholas coughed and said no more . 
