The princess seemed to see nothing more extraordinary in that than if he had seen Anna Semenovna . 
`` Do you know her ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` I have seen the princess , '' she replied . 
`` I heard that they were arranging a match for her with young Rostov . 
It would be a very good thing for the Rostovs , they are said to be utterly ruined . '' 
`` No ; I mean do you know Natasha Rostova ? '' 
`` I heard about that affair of hers at the time . 
It was a great pity . '' 
`` No , she either does n't understand or is pretending , '' thought Pierre . 
`` Better not say anything to her either . '' 
The princess too had prepared provisions for Pierre 's journey . 
`` How kind they all are , '' thought Pierre . 
`` What is surprising is that they should trouble about these things now when it can no longer be of interest to them . 
And all for me ! '' 
On the same day the Chief of Police came to Pierre , inviting him to send a representative to the Faceted Palace to recover things that were to be returned to their owners that day . 
`` And this man too , '' thought Pierre , looking into the face of the Chief of Police . 
`` What a fine , good-looking officer and how kind . 
Fancy bothering about such trifies now ! 
And they actually say he is not honest and takes bribes . 
What nonsense ! 
Besides , why should n't he take bribes ? 
That 's the way he was brought up , and everybody does it . 
But what a kind , pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks at me . '' 
Pierre went to Princess Mary 's to dinner . 
As he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burned down , he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins . 
The picturesqueness of the chimney stacks and tumble-down walls of the burned-out quarters of the town , stretching out and concealing one another , reminded him of the Rhine and the Colosseum . 
The cabmen he met and their passengers , the carpenters cutting the timber for new houses with axes , the women hawkers , and the shopkeepers , all looked at him with cheerful beaming eyes that seemed to say : `` Ah , there he is ! 
Let 's see what will come of it ! '' 
At the entrance to Princess Mary 's house Pierre felt doubtful whether he had really been there the night before and really seen Natasha and talked to her . 
`` Perhaps I imagined it ; perhaps I shall go in and find no one there . '' 
But he had hardly entered the room before he felt her presence with his whole being by the loss of his sense of freedom . 
She was in the same black dress with soft folds and her hair was done the same way as the day before , yet she was quite different . 
Had she been like this when he entered the day before he could not for a moment have failed to recognize her . 
She was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as Prince Andrew 's fiancee . 
A bright questioning light shone in her eyes , and on her face was a friendly and strangely roguish expression . 
Pierre dined with them and would have spent the whole evening there , but Princess Mary was going to vespers and Pierre left the house with her . 
Next day he came early , dined , and stayed the whole evening . 
Though Princess Mary and Natasha were evidently glad to see their visitor and though all Pierre 's interest was now centered in that house , by the evening they had talked over everything and the conversation passed from one trivial topic to another and repeatedly broke off . 
He stayed so long that Princess Mary and Natasha exchanged glances , evidently wondering when he would go . 
Pierre noticed this but could not go . 
He felt uneasy and embarrassed , but sat on because he simply could not get up and take his leave . 
Princess Mary , foreseeing no end to this , rose first , and complaining of a headache began to say good night . 
`` So you are going to Petersburg tomorrow ? '' 
she asked . 
`` No , I am not going , '' Pierre replied hastily , in a surprised tone and as though offended . 
`` Yes ... no ... to Petersburg ? 
Tomorrow -- but I wo n't say good-by yet . 
I will call round in case you have any commissions for me , '' said he , standing before Princess Mary and turning red , but not taking his departure . 
Natasha gave him her hand and went out . 
