Sonya sat down before the glasses , got the right position , and began looking . 
`` Now , Miss Sonya is sure to see something , '' whispered Dunyasha ; `` while you do nothing but laugh . '' 
Sonya heard this and Natasha 's whisper : `` I know she will . 
She saw something last year . '' 
For about three minutes all were silent . 
`` Of course she will ! '' 
whispered Natasha , but did not finish ... suddenly Sonya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered her eyes with her hand . 
`` Oh , Natasha ! '' 
she cried . 
`` Did you see ? 
Did you ? 
What was it ? '' 
exclaimed Natasha , holding up the looking glass . 
Sonya had not seen anything , she was just wanting to blink and to get up when she heard Natasha say , `` Of course she will ! '' 
She did not wish to disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha , but it was hard to sit still . 
She did not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her when she covered her eyes . 
`` You saw him ? '' 
urged Natasha , seizing her hand . 
`` Yes . 
Wait a bit ... I. . . 
saw him , '' Sonya could not help saying , not yet knowing whom Natasha meant by him , Nicholas or Prince Andrew . 
`` But why should n't I say I saw something ? 
Others do see ! 
Besides who can tell whether I saw anything or not ? '' 
flashed through Sonya 's mind . 
`` Yes , I saw him , '' she said . 
`` How ? 
Standing or lying ? '' 
`` No , I saw ... At first there was nothing , then I saw him lying down . '' 
`` Andrew lying ? 
Is he ill ? '' 
asked Natasha , her frightened eyes fixed on her friend . 
`` No , on the contrary , on the contrary ! 
His face was cheerful , and he turned to me . '' 
And when saying this she herself fancied she had really seen what she described . 
`` Well , and then , Sonya ? 
... '' `` After that , I could not make out what there was ; something blue and red ... '' `` Sonya ! 
When will he come back ? 
When shall I see him ! 
O , God , how afraid I am for him and for myself and about everything ! 
... '' Natasha began , and without replying to Sonya 's words of comfort she got into bed , and long after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless , gazing at the moonlight through the frosty windowpanes . 
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love for Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her . 
The countess , who had long noticed what was going on between them and was expecting this declaration , listened to him in silence and then told her son that he might marry whom he pleased , but that neither she nor his father would give their blessing to such a marriage . 
Nicholas , for the first time , felt that his mother was displeased with him and that , despite her love for him , she would not give way . 
Coldly , without looking at her son , she sent for her husband and , when he came , tried briefly and coldly to inform him of the facts , in her son 's presence , but unable to restrain herself she burst into tears of vexation and left the room . 
The old count began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his purpose . 
Nicholas replied that he could not go back on his word , and his father , sighing and evidently disconcerted , very soon became silent and went in to the countess . 
In all his encounters with his son , the count was always conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted the family fortune , and so he could not be angry with him for refusing to marry an heiress and choosing the dowerless Sonya . 
On this occasion , he was only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had not been in disorder , no better wife for Nicholas than Sonya could have been wished for , and that no one but himself with his Mitenka and his uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the family finances . 
The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their son again , but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and , with a cruelty neither of them expected , reproached her niece for trying to catch Nicholas and for ingratitude . 
