Dessalles said something about Vitebsk . 
Now I 'll read it . '' 
He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table -- on which stood a glass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle -- moved close to the bed , and putting on his spectacles he began reading . 
Only now in the stillness of the night , reading it by the faint light under the green shade , did he grasp its meaning for a moment . 
`` The French at Vitebsk , in four days ' march they may be at Smolensk ; perhaps are already there ! 
Tikhon ! '' 
Tikhon jumped up . 
`` No , no , I do n't want anything ! '' 
he shouted . 
He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes . 
And there rose before him the Danube at bright noonday : reeds , the Russian camp , and himself a young general without a wrinkle on his ruddy face , vigorous and alert , entering Potemkin 's gaily colored tent , and a burning sense of jealousy of `` the favorite '' agitated him now as strongly as it had done then . 
He recalled all the words spoken at that first meeting with Potemkin . 
And he saw before him a plump , rather sallow-faced , short , stout woman , the Empress Mother , with her smile and her words at her first gracious reception of him , and then that same face on the catafalque , and the encounter he had with Zubov over her coffin about his right to kiss her hand . 
`` Oh , quicker , quicker ! 
To get back to that time and have done with all the present ! 
Quicker , quicker -- and that they should leave me in peace ! '' 
Bald Hills , Prince Nicholas Bolkonski 's estate , lay forty miles east from Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow . 
The same evening that the prince gave his instructions to Alpatych , Dessalles , having asked to see Princess Mary , told her that , as the prince was not very well and was taking no steps to secure his safety , though from Prince Andrew 's letter it was evident that to remain at Bald Hills might be dangerous , he respectfully advised her to send a letter by Alpatych to the Provincial Governor at Smolensk , asking him to let her know the state of affairs and the extent of the danger to which Bald Hills was exposed . 
Dessalles wrote this letter to the Governor for Princess Mary , she signed it , and it was given to Alpatych with instructions to hand it to the Governor and to come back as quickly as possible if there was danger . 
Having received all his orders Alpatych , wearing a white beaver hat - a present from the prince -- and carrying a stick as the prince did , went out accompanied by his family . 
Three well-fed roans stood ready harnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood . 
The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed with paper . 
The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive with ringing bells ; but on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them . 
His satellites -- the senior clerk , a countinghouse clerk , a scullery maid , a cook , two old women , a little pageboy , the coachman , and various domestic serfs -- were seeing him off . 
His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on and behind his back . 
His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle , and one of the coachmen helped him into the vehicle . 
`` There ! 
There ! 
Women 's fuss ! 
Women , women ! '' 
said Alpatych , puffing and speaking rapidly just as the prince did , and he climbed into the trap . 
After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done , Alpatych , not trying to imitate the prince now , lifted the hat from his bald head and crossed himself three times . 
`` If there is anything ... come back , Yakov Alpatych ! 
For Christ 's sake think of us ! '' 
cried his wife , referring to the rumors of war and the enemy . 
`` Women , women ! 
Women 's fuss ! '' 
muttered Alpatych to himself and started on his journey , looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the still-green , thickly growing oats , and at other quite black fields just being plowed a second time . 
As he went along he looked with pleasure at the year 's splendid crop of corn , scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there were already being reaped , made his calculations as to the sowing and the harvest , and asked himself whether he had not forgotten any of the prince 's orders . 
Having baited the horses twice on the way , he arrived at the town toward evening on the fourth of August . 
Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the road . 
As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distant firing , but these did not impress him . 
What struck him most was the sight of a splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and which was being mown down by the soldiers , evidently for fodder . 
This fact impressed Alpatych , but in thinking about his own business he soon forgot it . 
All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been bounded by the will of the prince , and he never went beyond that limit . 
Everything not connected with the execution of the prince 's orders did not interest and did not even exist for Alpatych . 
On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he put up in the Gachina suburb across the Dnieper , at the inn kept by Ferapontov , where he had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years . 
Some thirty years ago Ferapontov , by Alpatych 's advice , had bought a wood from the prince , had begun to trade , and now had a house , an inn , and a corn dealer 's shop in that province . 
He was a stout , dark , red-faced peasant in the forties , with thick lips , a broad knob of a nose , similar knobs over his black frowning brows , and a round belly . 
Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt , Ferapontov was standing before his shop which opened onto the street . 
