As soon as day dawned the march began . 
The artillery and baggage wagons moved noiselessly through the deep dust that rose to the very hubs of the wheels , and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft , choking , hot dust that never cooled even at night . 
Some of this dust was kneaded by the feet and wheels , while the rest rose and hung like a cloud over the troops , settling in eyes , ears , hair , and nostrils , and worst of all in the lungs of the men and beasts as they moved along that road . 
The higher the sun rose the higher rose that cloud of dust , and through the screen of its hot fine particles one could look with naked eye at the sun , which showed like a huge crimson ball in the unclouded sky . 
There was no wind , and the men choked in that motionless atmosphere . 
They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and mouths . 
When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wells and fought for the water and drank it down to the mud . 
Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment , and the management of that regiment , the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving and giving orders , engrossed him . 
The burning of Smolensk and its abandonment made an epoch in his life . 
A novel feeling of anger against the foe made him forget his own sorrow . 
He was entirely devoted to the affairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind to his men and officers . 
In the regiment they called him `` our prince , '' were proud of him and loved him . 
But he was kind and gentle only to those of his regiment , to Timokhin and the like -- people quite new to him , belonging to a different world and who could not know and understand his past . 
As soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the staff , he bristled up immediately and grew spiteful , ironical , and contemptuous . 
Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant to him , and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himself to trying to do his duty and not to be unfair . 
In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light to Prince Andrew , especially after the abandonment of Smolensk on the sixth of August -LRB- he considered that it could and should have been defended -RRB- and after his sick father had had to flee to Moscow , abandoning to pillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had built and peopled . 
But despite this , thanks to his regiment , Prince Andrew had something to think about entirely apart from general questions . 
Two days previously he had received news that his father , son , and sister had left for Moscow ; and though there was nothing for him to do at Bald Hills , Prince Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own grief decided that he must ride there . 
He ordered his horse to be saddled and , leaving his regiment on the march , rode to his father 's estate where he had been born and spent his childhood . 
Riding past the pond where there used always to be dozens of women chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wooden beetles , Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that the little washing wharf , torn from its place and half submerged , was floating on its side in the middle of the pond . 
He rode to the keeper 's lodge . 
No one at the stone entrance gates of the drive and the door stood open . 
Grass had already begun to grow on the garden paths , and horses and calves were straying in the English park . 
Prince Andrew rode up to the hothouse ; some of the glass panes were broken , and of the trees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up . 
He called for Taras the gardener , but no one replied . 
Having gone round the corner of the hothouse to the ornamental garden , he saw that the carved garden fence was broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with the fruit . 
An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often seen at the gate was sitting on a green garden seat , plaiting a bast shoe . 
He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up . 
He was sitting on the seat the old prince used to like to sit on , and beside him strips of bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia . 
Prince Andrew rode up to the house . 
Several limes in the old garden had been cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front of the house among the rosebushes . 
The shutters were all closed , except at one window which was open . 
A little serf boy , seeing Prince Andrew , ran into the house . 
Alpatych , having sent his family away , was alone at Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading the Lives of the Saints . 
On hearing that Prince Andrew had come , he went out with his spectacles on his nose , buttoning his coat , and , hastily stepping up , without a word began weeping and kissing Prince Andrew 's knee . 
Then , vexed at his own weakness , he turned away and began to report on the position of affairs . 
Everything precious and valuable had been removed to Bogucharovo . 
Seventy quarters of grain had also been carted away . 
The hay and the spring corn , of which Alpatych said there had been a remarkable crop that year , had been commandeered by the troops and mown down while still green . 
The peasants were ruined ; some of them too had gone to Bogucharovo , only a few remained . 
Without waiting to hear him out , Prince Andrew asked : `` When did my father and sister leave ? '' 
meaning when did they leave for Moscow . 
Alpatych , understanding the question to refer to their departure for Bogucharovo , replied that they had left on the seventh and again went into details concerning the estate management , asking for instructions . 
`` Am I to let the troops have the oats , and to take a receipt for them ? 
We have still six hundred quarters left , '' he inquired . 
`` What am I to say to him ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew , looking down on the old man 's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression on his face that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions were and only asked them to allay his grief . 
`` Yes , let them have it , '' replied Prince Andrew . 
`` If you noticed some disorder in the garden , '' said Alpatych , `` it was impossible to prevent it . 
Three regiments have been here and spent the night , dragoons mostly . 
