Prince Bagration bowed his head as a sign that this was exactly what he had desired and expected . 
Turning to his adjutant he ordered him to bring down the two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs whom they had just passed . 
Prince Andrew was struck by the changed expression on Prince Bagration 's face at this moment . 
It expressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water . 
The dull , sleepy expression was no longer there , nor the affectation of profound thought . 
The round , steady , hawk 's eyes looked before him eagerly and rather disdainfully , not resting on anything although his movements were still slow and measured . 
The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration , entreating him to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were . 
`` Please , your excellency , for God 's sake ! '' 
he kept saying , glancing for support at an officer of the suite who turned away from him . 
`` There , you see ! '' 
and he drew attention to the bullets whistling , singing , and hissing continually around them . 
He spoke in the tone of entreaty and reproach that a carpenter uses to a gentleman who has picked up an ax : `` We are used to it , but you , sir , will blister your hands . '' 
He spoke as if those bullets could not kill him , and his half-closed eyes gave still more persuasiveness to his words . 
The staff officer joined in the colonel 's appeals , but Bagration did not reply ; he only gave an order to cease firing and re-form , so as to give room for the two approaching battalions . 
While he was speaking , the curtain of smoke that had concealed the hollow , driven by a rising wind , began to move from right to left as if drawn by an invisible hand , and the hill opposite , with the French moving about on it , opened out before them . 
All eyes fastened involuntarily on this French column advancing against them and winding down over the uneven ground . 
One could already see the soldiers ' shaggy caps , distinguish the officers from the men , and see the standard flapping against its staff . 
`` They march splendidly , '' remarked someone in Bagration 's suite . 
The head of the column had already descended into the hollow . 
The clash would take place on this side of it ... The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up and moved to the right ; from behind it , dispersing the laggards , came two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order . 
Before they had reached Bagration , the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in step could be heard . 
On their left flank , nearest to Bagration , marched a company commander , a fine round-faced man , with a stupid and happy expression -- the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed . 
At that moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow he would appear as he passed the commander . 
With the self-satisfaction of a man on parade , he stepped lightly with his muscular legs as if sailing along , stretching himself to his full height without the smallest effort , his ease contrasting with the heavy tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him . 
He carried close to his leg a narrow unsheathed sword -LRB- small , curved , and not like a real weapon -RRB- and looked now at the superior officers and now back at the men without losing step , his whole powerful body turning flexibly . 
It was as if all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passing the commander in the best possible manner , and feeling that he was doing it well he was happy . 
`` Left ... left ... left ... '' he seemed to repeat to himself at each alternate step ; and in time to this , with stern but varied faces , the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets marched in step , and each one of these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be repeating to himself at each alternate step , `` Left ... left ... left ... '' A fat major skirted a bush , puffing and falling out of step ; a soldier who had fallen behind , his face showing alarm at his defection , ran at a trot , panting to catch up with his company . 
A cannon ball , cleaving the air , flew over the heads of Bagration and his suite , and fell into the column to the measure of `` Left ... left ! '' 
`` Close up ! '' 
came the company commander 's voice in jaunty tones . 
The soldiers passed in a semicircle round something where the ball had fallen , and an old trooper on the flank , a noncommissioned officer who had stopped beside the dead men , ran to catch up his line and , falling into step with a hop , looked back angrily , and through the ominous silence and the regular tramp of feet beating the ground in unison , one seemed to hear left ... left ... left . 
`` Well done , lads ! '' 
said Prince Bagration . 
`` Glad to do our best , your ex ` len-lency ! '' 
came a confused shout from the ranks . 
A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes on Bagration as he shouted , with an expression that seemed to say : `` We know that ourselves ! '' 
Another , without looking round , as though fearing to relax , shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on . 
The order was given to halt and down knapsacks . 
Bagration rode round the ranks that had marched past him and dismounted . 
He gave the reins to a Cossack , took off and handed over his felt coat , stretched his legs , and set his cap straight . 
The head of the French column , with its officers leading , appeared from below the hill . 
`` Forward , with God ! '' 
said Bagration , in a resolute , sonorous voice , turning for a moment to the front line , and slightly swinging his arms , he went forward uneasily over the rough field with the awkward gait of a cavalryman . 
Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading him forward , and experienced great happiness . 
The French were already near . 
Prince Andrew , walking beside Bagration , could clearly distinguish their bandoliers , red epaulets , and even their faces . 
-LRB- He distinctly saw an old French officer who , with gaitered legs and turned-out toes , climbed the hill with difficulty . -RRB- 
Prince Bagration gave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in front of the ranks . 
Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the French , smoke appeared all along their uneven ranks , and musket shots sounded . 
Several of our men fell , among them the round-faced officer who had marched so gaily and complacently . 
