And the order to retreat carries us past the turn to the Kaluga road . 
And after the adjutant comes the commissary general asking where the stores are to be taken , and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to go , and a courier from Petersburg brings a letter from the sovereign which does not admit of the possibility of abandoning Moscow , and the commander in chief 's rival , the man who is undermining him -LRB- and there are always not merely one but several such -RRB- , presents a new project diametrically opposed to that of turning to the Kaluga road , and the commander in chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his energy and a respectable general who has been overlooked in the distribution of rewards comes to complain , and the inhabitants of the district pray to be defended , and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in and gives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer previously sent ; and a spy , a prisoner , and a general who has been on reconnaissance , all describe the position of the enemy 's army differently . 
People accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these inevitable conditions of a commander in chief 's actions describe to us , for instance , the position of the army at Fili and assume that the commander in chief could , on the first of September , quite freely decide whether to abandon Moscow or defend it ; whereas , with the Russian army less than four miles from Moscow , no such question existed . 
When had that question been settled ? 
At Drissa and at Smolensk and most palpably of all on the twenty-fourth of August at Shevardino and on the twenty-sixth at Borodino , and each day and hour and minute of the retreat from Borodino to Fili . 
When Ermolov , having been sent by Kutuzov to inspect the position , told the field marshal that it was impossible to fight there before Moscow and that they must retreat , Kutuzov looked at him in silence . 
`` Give me your hand , '' said he and , turning it over so as to feel the pulse , added : `` You are not well , my dear fellow . 
Think what you are saying ! '' 
Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscow without a battle . 
On the Poklonny Hill , four miles from the Dorogomilov gate of Moscow , Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside . 
A great crowd of generals gathered round him , and Count Rostopchin , who had come out from Moscow , joined them . 
This brilliant company separated into several groups who all discussed the advantages and disadvantages of the position , the state of the army , the plans suggested , the situation of Moscow , and military questions generally . 
Though they had not been summoned for the purpose , and though it was not so called , they all felt that this was really a council of war . 
The conversations all dealt with public questions . 
If anyone gave or asked for personal news , it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to general matters . 
No jokes , or laughter , or smiles even , were seen among all these men . 
They evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the height the situation demanded . 
And all these groups , while talking among themselves , tried to keep near the commander in chief -LRB- whose bench formed the center of the gathering -RRB- and to speak so that he might overhear them . 
The commander in chief listened to what was being said and sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks , but did not himself take part in the conversations or express any opinion . 
After hearing what was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turned away with an air of disappointment , as though they were not speaking of anything he wished to hear . 
Some discussed the position that had been chosen , criticizing not the position itself so much as the mental capacity of those who had chosen it . 
Others argued that a mistake had been made earlier and that a battle should have been fought two days before . 
Others again spoke of the battle of Salamanca , which was described by Crosart , a newly arrived Frenchman in a Spanish uniform . 
-LRB- This Frenchman and one of the German princes serving with the Russian army were discussing the siege of Saragossa and considering the possibility of defending Moscow in a similar manner . -RRB- 
Count Rostopchin was telling a fourth group that he was prepared to die with the city train bands under the walls of the capital , but that he still could not help regretting having been left in ignorance of what was happening , and that had he known it sooner things would have been different ... . 
A fifth group , displaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions , discussed the direction the troops would now have to take . 
A sixth group was talking absolute nonsense . 
Kutuzov 's expression grew more and more preoccupied and gloomy . 
From all this talk he saw only one thing : that to defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meaning of those words , that is to say , so utterly impossible that if any senseless commander were to give orders to fight , confusion would result but the battle would still not take place . 
It would not take place because the commanders not merely all recognized the position to be impossible , but in their conversations were only discussing what would happen after its inevitable abandonment . 
How could the commanders lead their troops to a field of battle they considered impossible to hold ? 
The lower-grade officers and even the soldiers -LRB- who too reason -RRB- also considered the position impossible and therefore could not go to fight , fully convinced as they were of defeat . 
If Bennigsen insisted on the position being defended and others still discussed it , the question was no longer important in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue . 
This Kutuzov knew well . 
Bennigsen , who had chosen the position , warmly displayed his Russian patriotism -LRB- Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincing -RRB- by insisting that Moscow must be defended . 
His aim was as clear as daylight to Kutuzov : if the defense failed , to throw the blame on Kutuzov who had brought the army as far as the Sparrow Hills without giving battle ; if it succeeded , to claim the success as his own ; or if battle were not given , to clear himself of the crime of abandoning Moscow . 
But this intrigue did not now occupy the old man 's mind . 
One terrible question absorbed him and to that question he heard no reply from anyone . 
The question for him now was : `` Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach Moscow , and when did I do so ? 
When was it decided ? 
Can it have been yesterday when I ordered Platov to retreat , or was it the evening before , when I had a nap and told Bennigsen to issue orders ? 
Or was it earlier still ? 
... When , when was this terrible affair decided ? 
Moscow must be abandoned . 
The army must retreat and the order to do so must be given . '' 
To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to resigning the command of the army . 
And not only did he love power to which he was accustomed -LRB- the honours awarded to Prince Prozorovski , under whom he had served in Turkey , galled him -RRB- , but he was convinced that he was destined to save Russia and that that was why , against the Emperor 's wish and by the will of the people , he had been chosen commander in chief . 
He was convinced that he alone could maintain command of the army in these difficult circumstances , and that in all the world he alone could encounter the invincible Napoleon without fear , and he was horrified at the thought of the order he had to issue . 
But something had to be decided , and these conversations around him which were assuming too free a character must be stopped . 
He called the most important generals to him . 
