Idiot ! '' 
shouted Pierre , abusing his coachman -- a thing he rarely did . 
`` Home , I told you ! 
And drive faster , blockhead ! '' 
`` I must get away this very day , '' he murmured to himself . 
At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the Lobnoe Place , Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no longer remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day that it seemed to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the man ought to have known it for himself . 
On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey -- his head coachman who knew everything , could do anything , and was known to all Moscow - that he would leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk , and that his saddle horses should be sent there . 
This could not all be arranged that day , so on Evstafey 's representation Pierre had to put off his departure till next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance . 
On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain , and after dinner Pierre left Moscow . 
When changing horses that night in Perkhushkovo , he learned that there had been a great battle that evening . 
-LRB- This was the battle of Shevardino . -RRB- 
He was told that there in Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firing , but nobody could answer his questions as to who had won . 
At dawn next day Pierre was approaching Mozhaysk . 
Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it , and at the hostel where Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room to be had . 
It was full of officers . 
Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it , troops were stationed or on the march . 
Cossacks , foot and horse soldiers , wagons , caissons , and cannon were everywhere . 
Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could , and the farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea of troops the more was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and joyful feeling he had not experienced before . 
It was a feeling akin to what he had felt at the Sloboda Palace during the Emperor 's visit -- a sense of the necessity of undertaking something and sacrificing something . 
He now experienced a glad consciousness that everything that constitutes men 's happiness -- the comforts of life , wealth , even life itself -- is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away , compared with something ... With what ? 
Pierre could not say , and he did not try to determine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight in sacrificing everything . 
He was not occupied with the question of what to sacrifice for ; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new and joyous sensation . 
On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt was fought , on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side , and on the twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself took place . 
Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and accepted ? 
Why was the battle of Borodino fought ? 
There was not the least sense in it for either the French or the Russians . 
Its immediate result for the Russians was , and was bound to be , that we were brought nearer to the destruction of Moscow -- which we feared more than anything in the world ; and for the French its immediate result was that they were brought nearer to the destruction of their whole army -- which they feared more than anything in the world . 
What the result must be was quite obvious , and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle . 
If the commanders had been guided by reason , it would seem that it must have been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen hundred miles and giving battle with a probability of losing a quarter of his army , he was advancing to certain destruction , and it must have been equally clear to Kutuzov that by accepting battle and risking the loss of a quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow . 
For Kutuzov this was mathematically clear , as it is that if when playing draughts I have one man less and go on exchanging , I shall certainly lose , and therefore should not exchange . 
When my opponent has sixteen men and I have fourteen , I am only one eighth weaker than he , but when I have exchanged thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am . 
Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the French was about as five to six , but after that battle it was little more than one to two : previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and twenty thousand ; afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a hundred thousand . 
Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the battle , while Napoleon , who was said to be a commander of genius , gave it , losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines of communication still more . 
If it is said that he expected to end the campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by occupying Vienna , there is much evidence to the contrary . 
Napoleon 's historians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards he wished to stop , knew the danger of his extended position , and knew that the occupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campaign , for he had seen at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him , and had not received a single reply to his repeated announcements of his wish to negotiate . 
In giving and accepting battle at Borodino , Kutuzov acted involuntarily and irrationally . 
But later on , to fit what had occurred , the historians provided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius the generals who , of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved and involuntary . 
The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish the whole interest of the story , and we are still unable to accustom ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are meaningless . 
On the other question , how the battle of Borodino and the preceding battle of Shevardino were fought , there also exists a definite and well-known , but quite false , conception . 
All the historians describe the affair as follows : The Russian army , they say , in its retreat from Smolensk sought out for itself the best position for a general engagement and found such a position at Borodino . 
The Russians , they say , fortified this position in advance on the left of the highroad -LRB- from Moscow to Smolensk -RRB- and almost at a right angle to it , from Borodino to Utitsa , at the very place where the battle was fought . 
In front of this position , they say , a fortified outpost was set up on the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy . 
On the twenty-fourth , we are told , Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it , and , on the twenty-sixth , attacked the whole Russian army , which was in position on the field of Borodino . 
So the histories say , and it is all quite wrong , as anyone who cares to look into the matter can easily convince himself . 
The Russians did not seek out the best position but , on the contrary , during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodino . 
They did not stop at any one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to occupy a position he had not himself chosen , because the popular demand for a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough , and because Miloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia , and for many other reasons . 
The fact is that other positions they had passed were stronger , and that the position at Borodino -LRB- the one where the battle was fought -RRB- , far from being strong , was no more a position than any other spot one might find in the Russian Empire by sticking a pin into the map at hazard . 
Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of Borodino to the left of , and at a right angle to , the highroad -LRB- that is , the position on which the battle took place -RRB- , but never till the twenty-fifth of August , 1812 , did they think that a battle might be fought there . 
This was shown first by the fact that there were no entrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed , and secondly , by the position of the Shevardino Redoubt . 
That redoubt was quite senseless in front of the position where the battle was accepted . 
