Nesvitski with an angry face , red and unlike himself , was shouting to Kutuzov that if he did not ride away at once he would certainly be taken prisoner . 
Kutuzov remained in the same place and without answering drew out a handkerchief . 
Blood was flowing from his cheek . 
Prince Andrew forced his way to him . 
`` You are wounded ? '' 
he asked , hardly able to master the trembling of his lower jaw . 
`` The wound is not here , it is there ! '' 
said Kutuzov , pressing the handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers . 
`` Stop them ! '' 
he shouted , and at the same moment , probably realizing that it was impossible to stop them , spurred his horse and rode to the right . 
A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it . 
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by them it was difficult to get out again . 
One was shouting , `` Get on ! 
Why are you hindering us ? '' 
Another in the same place turned round and fired in the air ; a third was striking the horse Kutuzov himself rode . 
Having by a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men , Kutuzov , with his suite diminished by more than half , rode toward a sound of artillery fire near by . 
Having forced his way out of the crowd of fugitives , Prince Andrew , trying to keep near Kutuzov , saw on the slope of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing and Frenchmen running toward it . 
Higher up stood some Russian infantry , neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the fleeing crowd . 
A mounted general separated himself from the infantry and approached Kutuzov . 
Of Kutuzov 's suite only four remained . 
They were all pale and exchanged looks in silence . 
`` Stop those wretches ! '' 
gasped Kutuzov to the regimental commander , pointing to the flying soldiers ; but at that instant , as if to punish him for those words , bullets flew hissing across the regiment and across Kutuzov 's suite like a flock of little birds . 
The French had attacked the battery and , seeing Kutuzov , were firing at him . 
After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg ; several soldiers fell , and a second lieutenant who was holding the flag let it fall from his hands . 
It swayed and fell , but caught on the muskets of the nearest soldiers . 
The soldiers started firing without orders . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around ... `` Bolkonski ! '' 
he whispered , his voice trembling from a consciousness of the feebleness of age , `` Bolkonski ! '' 
he whispered , pointing to the disordered battalion and at the enemy , `` what 's that ? '' 
But before he had finished speaking , Prince Andrew , feeling tears of shame and anger choking him , had already leapt from his horse and run to the standard . 
`` Forward , lads ! '' 
he shouted in a voice piercing as a child 's . 
`` Here it is ! '' 
thought he , seizing the staff of the standard and hearing with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him . 
Several soldiers fell . 
`` Hurrah ! '' 
shouted Prince Andrew , and , scarcely able to hold up the heavy standard , he ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalion would follow him . 
And really he only ran a few steps alone . 
One soldier moved and then another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting `` Hurrah ! '' 
and overtook him . 
A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag that was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew 's hands , but he was immediately killed . 
Prince Andrew again seized the standard and , dragging it by the staff , ran on with the battalion . 
In front he saw our artillerymen , some of whom were fighting , while others , having abandoned their guns , were running toward him . 
He also saw French infantry soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turning the guns round . 
Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty paces of the cannon . 
He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasingly and to right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and dropped . 
