All right then , sit down . '' 
He took the exercise book containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair with his foot . 
`` For tomorrow ! '' 
said he , quickly finding the page and making a scratch from one paragraph to another with his hard nail . 
The princess bent over the exercise book on the table . 
`` Wait a bit , here 's a letter for you , '' said the old man suddenly , taking a letter addressed in a woman 's hand from a bag hanging above the table , onto which he threw it . 
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the princess ' face . 
She took it quickly and bent her head over it . 
`` From Heloise ? '' 
asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still sound , yellowish teeth . 
`` Yes , it 's from Julie , '' replied the princess with a timid glance and a timid smile . 
`` I 'll let two more letters pass , but the third I 'll read , '' said the prince sternly ; `` I 'm afraid you write much nonsense . 
I 'll read the third ! '' 
`` Read this if you like , Father , '' said the princess , blushing still more and holding out the letter . 
`` The third , I said the third ! '' 
cried the prince abruptly , pushing the letter away , and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the exercise book containing geometrical figures . 
`` Well , madam , '' he began , stooping over the book close to his daughter and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat , so that she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old age and tobacco , which she had known so long . 
`` Now , madam , these triangles are equal ; please note that the angle ABC ... '' The princess looked in a scared way at her father 's eyes glittering close to her ; the red patches on her face came and went , and it was plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her fear would prevent her understanding any of her father 's further explanations , however clear they might be . 
Whether it was the teacher 's fault or the pupil 's , this same thing happened every day : the princess ' eyes grew dim , she could not see and could not hear anything , but was only conscious of her stern father 's withered face close to her , of his breath and the smell of him , and could think only of how to get away quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace . 
The old man was beside himself : moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily backward and forward , made efforts to control himself and not become vehement , but almost always did become vehement , scolded , and sometimes flung the exercise book away . 
The princess gave a wrong answer . 
`` Well now , is n't she a fool ! '' 
shouted the prince , pushing the book aside and turning sharply away ; but rising immediately , he paced up and down , lightly touched his daughter 's hair and sat down again . 
He drew up his chair , and continued to explain . 
`` This wo n't do , Princess ; it wo n't do , '' said he , when Princess Mary , having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day 's lesson , was about to leave : `` Mathematics are most important , madam ! 
I do n't want to have you like our silly ladies . 
Get used to it and you 'll like it , '' and he patted her cheek . 
`` It will drive all the nonsense out of your head . '' 
She turned to go , but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut book from the high desk . 
`` Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent you . 
Religious ! 
I do n't interfere with anyone 's belief ... I have looked at it . 
Take it . 
Well , now go . 
Go . '' 
He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her . 
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad , scared expression that rarely left her and which made her plain , sickly face yet plainer . 
She sat down at her writing table , on which stood miniature portraits and which was littered with books and papers . 
The princess was as untidy as her father was tidy . 
She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke the seal of her letter . 
It was from her most intimate friend from childhood ; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs ' name-day party . 
Julie wrote in French : Dear and precious Friend , How terrible and frightful a thing is separation ! 
Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness are wrapped up in you , and that in spite of the distance separating us our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds , my heart rebels against fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I can not overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since we parted . 
Why are we not together as we were last summer , in your big study , on the blue sofa , the confidential sofa ? 
Why can not I now , as three months ago , draw fresh moral strength from your look , so gentle , calm , and penetrating , a look I loved so well and seem to see before me as I write ? 
Having read thus far , Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror which stood on her right . 
It reflected a weak , ungraceful figure and thin face . 
Her eyes , always sad , now looked with particular hopelessness at her reflection in the glass . 
`` She flatters me , '' thought the princess , turning away and continuing to read . 
But Julie did not flatter her friend , the princess ' eyes -- large , deep and luminous -LRB- it seemed as if at times there radiated from them shafts of warm light -RRB- -- were so beautiful that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an attraction more powerful than that of beauty . 
