All Denisov 's Moscow friends gave him a farewell entertainment at the gypsies ' , with the result that he had no recollection of how he was put in the sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey . 
After Denisov 's departure , Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow , without going out of the house , waiting for the money his father could not at once raise , and he spent most of his time in the girls ' room . 
Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever . 
It was as if she wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her love him all the more , but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of her . 
He filled the girls ' albums with verses and music , and having at last sent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his receipt , he left at the end of November , without taking leave of any of his acquaintances , to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland . 
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg . 
At the Torzhok post station , either there were no horses or the postmaster would not supply them . 
Pierre was obliged to wait . 
Without undressing , he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table , put his big feet in their overboots on the table , and began to reflect . 
`` Will you have the portmanteaus brought in ? 
And a bed got ready , and tea ? '' 
asked his valet . 
Pierre gave no answer , for he neither heard nor saw anything . 
He had begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same question -- one so important that he took no notice of what went on around him . 
Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to Petersburg earlier or later , or whether he secured accommodation at this station , but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it was a matter of indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for the rest of his life . 
The postmaster , his wife , the valet , and a peasant woman selling Torzhok embroidery came into the room offering their services . 
Without changing his careless attitude , Pierre looked at them over his spectacles unable to understand what they wanted or how they could go on living without having solved the problems that so absorbed him . 
He had been engrossed by the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from Sokolniki after the duel and had spent that first agonizing , sleepless night . 
But now , in the solitude of the journey , they seized him with special force . 
No matter what he thought about , he always returned to these same questions which he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself . 
It was as if the thread of the chief screw which held his life together were stripped , so that the screw could not get in or out , but went on turning uselessly in the same place . 
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to wait only two hours , when , come what might , he would let his excellency have the courier horses . 
It was plain that he was lying and only wanted to get more money from the traveler . 
`` Is this good or bad ? '' 
Pierre asked himself . 
`` It is good for me , bad for another traveler , and for himself it 's unavoidable , because he needs money for food ; the man said an officer had once given him a thrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horses . 
But the officer thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible . 
And I , '' continued Pierre , `` shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured , and Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal , and a year later they executed those who executed him -- also for some reason . 
What is bad ? 
What is good ? 
What should one love and what hate ? 
What does one live for ? 
And what am I ? 
What is life , and what is death ? 
What power governs all ? '' 
There was no answer to any of these questions , except one , and that not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them . 
The answer was : `` You 'll die and all will end . 
You 'll die and know all , or cease asking . '' 
But dying was also dreadful . 
The Torzhok peddler woman , in a whining voice , went on offering her wares , especially a pair of goatskin slippers . 
`` I have hundreds of rubles I do n't know what to do with , and she stands in her tattered cloak looking timidly at me , '' he thought . 
`` And what does she want the money for ? 
As if that money could add a hair 's breadth to happiness or peace of mind . 
Can anything in the world make her or me less a prey to evil and death ? 
-- death which ends all and must come today or tomorrow -- at any rate , in an instant as compared with eternity . '' 
And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread , and again it turned uselessly in the same place . 
His servant handed him a half-cut novel , in the form of letters , by Madame de Souza . 
He began reading about the sufferings and virtuous struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld . 
`` And why did she resist her seducer when she loved him ? '' 
he thought . 
