The troops of the left flank , infantry and hussars alike , felt that the commander did not himself know what to do , and this irresolution communicated itself to the men . 
`` If only they would be quick ! '' 
thought Rostov , feeling that at last the time had come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so often heard from his fellow hussars . 
`` Fo ` ward , with God , lads ! '' 
rang out Denisov 's voice . 
`` At a twot fo ` ward ! '' 
The horses ' croups began to sway in the front line . 
Rook pulled at the reins and started of his own accord . 
Before him , on the right , Rostov saw the front lines of his hussars and still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but took to be the enemy . 
Shots could be heard , but some way off . 
`` Faster ! '' 
came the word of command , and Rostov felt Rook 's flanks drooping as he broke into a gallop . 
Rostov anticipated his horse 's movements and became more and more elated . 
He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him . 
This tree had been in the middle of the line that had seemed so terrible -- and now he had crossed that line and not only was there nothing terrible , but everything was becoming more and more happy and animated . 
`` Oh , how I will slash at him ! '' 
thought Rostov , gripping the hilt of his saber . 
`` Hur-a-a-a-ah ! '' 
came a roar of voices . 
`` Let anyone come my way now , '' thought Rostov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at a full gallop so that he outstripped the others . 
Ahead , the enemy was already visible . 
Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep over the squadron . 
Rostov raised his saber , ready to strike , but at that instant the trooper Nikitenko , who was galloping ahead , shot away from him , and Rostov felt as in a dream that he continued to be carried forward with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same spot . 
From behind him Bondarchuk , an hussar he knew , jolted against him and looked angrily at him . 
Bondarchuk 's horse swerved and galloped past . 
`` How is it I am not moving ? 
I have fallen , I am killed ! '' 
Rostov asked and answered at the same instant . 
He was alone in the middle of a field . 
Instead of the moving horses and hussars ' backs , he saw nothing before him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him . 
There was warm blood under his arm . 
`` No , I am wounded and the horse is killed . '' 
Rook tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back , pinning his rider 's leg . 
Blood was flowing from his head ; he struggled but could not rise . 
Rostov also tried to rise but fell back , his sabretache having become entangled in the saddle . 
Where our men were , and where the French , he did not know . 
There was no one near . 
Having disentangled his leg , he rose . 
`` Where , on which side , was now the line that had so sharply divided the two armies ? '' 
he asked himself and could not answer . 
`` Can something bad have happened to me ? '' 
he wondered as he got up : and at that moment he felt that something superfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm . 
The wrist felt as if it were not his . 
He examined his hand carefully , vainly trying to find blood on it . 
`` Ah , here are people coming , '' he thought joyfully , seeing some men running toward him . 
`` They will help me ! '' 
In front came a man wearing a strange shako and a blue cloak , swarthy , sunburned , and with a hooked nose . 
Then came two more , and many more running behind . 
One of them said something strange , not in Russian . 
In among the hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a Russian hussar . 
