This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritated Prince Andrew , he knew not why . 
He was unpleasantly struck , too , by the excessive contempt for others that he observed in Speranski , and by the diversity of lines of argument he used to support his opinions . 
He made use of every kind of mental device , except analogy , and passed too boldly , it seemed to Prince Andrew , from one to another . 
Now he would take up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers ; now that of a satirist , and laugh ironically at his opponents ; now grow severely logical , or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics . 
-LRB- This last resource was one he very frequently employed . -RRB- 
He would transfer a question to metaphysical heights , pass on to definitions of space , time , and thought , and , having deduced the refutation he needed , would again descend to the level of the original discussion . 
In general the trait of Speranski 's mentality which struck Prince Andrew most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and authority of reason . 
It was evident that the thought could never occur to him which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural , namely , that it is after all impossible to express all one thinks ; and that he had never felt the doubt , `` Is not all I think and believe nonsense ? '' 
And it was just this peculiarity of Speranski 's mind that particularly attracted Prince Andrew . 
During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt a passionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt for Bonaparte . 
The fact that Speranski was the son of a village priest , and that stupid people might meanly despise him on account of his humble origin -LRB- as in fact many did -RRB- , caused Prince Andrew to cherish his sentiment for him the more , and unconsciously to strengthen it . 
On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him , having mentioned the Commission for the Revision of the Code of Laws , Speranski told him sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty years , had cost millions , and had done nothing except that Rosenkampf had stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of the different codes . 
`` And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent , '' said he . 
`` We want to give the Senate new juridical powers , but we have no laws . 
That is why it is a sin for men like you , Prince , not to serve in these times ! '' 
Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence was needed which he did not possess . 
`` But nobody possesses it , so what would you have ? 
It is a vicious circle from which we must break a way out . '' 
A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army Regulations and -- what he had not at all expected -- was chairman of a section of the committee for the revision of the laws . 
At Speranski 's request he took the first part of the Civil Code that was being drawn up and , with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the Institutes of Justinian , he worked at formulating the section on Personal Rights . 
Nearly two years before this , in 1808 , Pierre on returning to Petersburg after visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading position among the Petersburg Freemasons . 
He arranged dining and funeral lodge meetings , enrolled new members , and busied himself uniting various lodges and acquiring authentic charters . 
He gave money for the erection of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms , in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular . 
He supported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in Petersburg . 
His life meanwhile continued as before , with the same infatuations and dissipations . 
He liked to dine and drink well , and though he considered it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the bachelor circles in which he moved . 
Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions , however , Pierre at the end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried to rest upon it , the more Masonic ground on which he stood gave way under him . 
At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him the closer bound he involuntarily became to the order . 
When he had joined the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidently steps onto the smooth surface of a bog . 
When he put his foot down it sank in . 
To make quite sure of the firmness the ground , he put his other foot down and sank deeper still , became stuck in it , and involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog . 
Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg -- he had of late stood aside from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges , and lived almost entirely in Moscow . 
All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew in ordinary life , and it was difficult for him to regard them merely as Brothers in Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D. , whom he knew in society mostly as weak and insignificant men . 
Under the Masonic aprons and insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in ordinary life . 
Often after collecting alms , and reckoning up twenty to thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a dozen members , of whom half were as well able to pay as himself , Pierre remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote all his belongings to his neighbor , and doubts on which he tried not to dwell arose in his soul . 
He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories . 
In the first he put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodges or in human affairs , but were exclusively occupied with the mystical science of the order : with questions of the threefold designation of God , the three primordial elements -- sulphur , mercury , and salt -- or the meaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple of Solomon . 
Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones chiefly belonged , including , Pierre thought , Joseph Alexeevich himself , but he did not share their interests . 
His heart was not in the mystical aspect of Freemasonry . 
In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like him , seeking and vacillating , who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straight and comprehensible path , but hoped to do so . 
In the third category he included those Brothers -LRB- the majority -RRB- who saw nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies , and prized the strict performance of these forms without troubling about their purport or significance . 
Such were Willarski and even the Grand Master of the principal lodge . 
Finally , to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged , particularly those who had lately joined . 
These according to Pierre 's observations were men who had no belief in anything , nor desire for anything , but joined the Freemasons merely to associate with the wealthy young Brothers who were influential through their connections or rank , and of whom there were very many in the lodge . 
Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing . 
Freemasonry , at any rate as he saw it here , sometimes seemed to him based merely on externals . 
He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself , but suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated from its original principles . 
And so toward the end of the year he went abroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of the order . 
In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg . 
Our Freemasons knew from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtained the confidence of many highly placed persons , had been initiated into many mysteries , had been raised to a higher grade , and was bringing back with him much that might conduce to the advantage of the Masonic cause in Russia . 
