shouted laughing voices through the door . 
The handsome Vera , who produced such an irritating and unpleasant effect on everyone , smiled and , evidently unmoved by what had been said to her , went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf . 
Looking at her own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and calmer . 
In the drawing room the conversation was still going on . 
`` Ah , my dear , '' said the countess , `` my life is not all roses either . 
Do n't I know that at the rate we are living our means wo n't last long ? 
It 's all the Club and his easygoing nature . 
Even in the country do we get any rest ? 
Theatricals , hunting , and heaven knows what besides ! 
But do n't let 's talk about me ; tell me how you managed everything . 
I often wonder at you , Annette -- how at your age you can rush off alone in a carriage to Moscow , to Petersburg , to those ministers and great people , and know how to deal with them all ! 
It 's quite astonishing . 
How did you get things settled ? 
I could n't possibly do it . '' 
`` Ah , my love , '' answered Anna Mikhaylovna , `` God grant you never know what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love to distraction ! 
One learns many things then , '' she added with a certain pride . 
`` That lawsuit taught me much . 
When I want to see one of those big people I write a note : ` Princess So-and-So desires an interview with So and-So , ' and then I take a cab and go myself two , three , or four times -- till I get what I want . 
I do n't mind what they think of me . '' 
`` Well , and to whom did you apply about Bory ? '' 
asked the countess . 
`` You see yours is already an officer in the Guards , while my Nicholas is going as a cadet . 
There 's no one to interest himself for him . 
To whom did you apply ? '' 
`` To Prince Vasili . 
He was so kind . 
He at once agreed to everything , and put the matter before the Emperor , '' said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna enthusiastically , quite forgetting all the humiliation she had endured to gain her end . 
`` Has Prince Vasili aged much ? '' 
asked the countess . 
`` I have not seen him since we acted together at the Rumyantsovs ' theatricals . 
I expect he has forgotten me . 
He paid me attentions in those days , '' said the countess , with a smile . 
`` He is just the same as ever , '' replied Anna Mikhaylovna , `` overflowing with amiability . 
His position has not turned his head at all . 
He said to me , ' I am sorry I can do so little for you , dear Princess . 
I am at your command . ' 
Yes , he is a fine fellow and a very kind relation . 
But , Nataly , you know my love for my son : I would do anything for his happiness ! 
And my affairs are in such a bad way that my position is now a terrible one , '' continued Anna Mikhaylovna , sadly , dropping her voice . 
`` My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no progress . 
Would you believe it , I have literally not a penny and do n't know how to equip Boris . '' 
She took out her handkerchief and began to cry . 
`` I need five hundred rubles , and have only one twenty-five-ruble note . 
I am in such a state ... . 
My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov . 
If he will not assist his godson -- you know he is Bory 's godfather -- and allow him something for his maintenance , all my trouble will have been thrown away ... . 
I shall not be able to equip him . '' 
The countess ' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence . 
`` I often think , though , perhaps it 's a sin , '' said the princess , `` that here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich , all alone ... that tremendous fortune ... and what is his life worth ? 
It 's a burden to him , and Bory 's life is only just beginning ... '' `` Surely he will leave something to Boris , '' said the countess . 
