He wrote letters to his daughters and to Madame de Stael , read novels , liked the society of pretty women , jested with generals , officers , and soldiers , and never contradicted those who tried to prove anything to him . 
When Count Rostopchin at the Yauza bridge galloped up to Kutuzov with personal reproaches for having caused the destruction of Moscow , and said : `` How was it you promised not to abandon Moscow without a battle ? '' 
Kutuzov replied : `` And I shall not abandon Moscow without a battle , '' though Moscow was then already abandoned . 
When Arakcheev , coming to him from the Emperor , said that Ermolov ought to be appointed chief of the artillery , Kutuzov replied : `` Yes , I was just saying so myself , '' though a moment before he had said quite the contrary . 
What did it matter to him -- who then alone amid a senseless crowd understood the whole tremendous significance of what was happening -- what did it matter to him whether Rostopchin attributed the calamities of Moscow to him or to himself ? 
Still less could it matter to him who was appointed chief of the artillery . 
Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man -- who by experience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and the words serving as their expression are not what move people -- use quite meaningless words that happened to enter his head . 
But that man , so heedless of his words , did not once during the whole time of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the single aim toward which he moved throughout the whole war . 
Obviously in spite of himself , in very diverse circumstances , he repeatedly expressed his real thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood . 
Beginning with the battle of Borodino , from which time his disagreement with those about him began , he alone said that the battle of Borodino was a victory , and repeated this both verbally and in his dispatches and reports up to the time of his death . 
He alone said that the loss of Moscow is not the loss of Russia . 
In reply to Lauriston 's proposal of peace , he said : There can be no peace , for such is the people 's will . 
He alone during the retreat of the French said that all our maneuvers are useless , everything is being accomplished of itself better than we could desire ; that the enemy must be offered `` a golden bridge '' ; that neither the Tarutino , the Vyazma , nor the Krasnoe battles were necessary ; that we must keep some force to reach the frontier with , and that he would not sacrifice a single Russian for ten Frenchmen . 
And this courtier , as he is described to us , who lies to Arakcheev to please the Emperor , he alone -- incurring thereby the Emperor 's displeasure -- said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontier is useless and harmful . 
Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning of the events . 
His actions -- without the smallest deviation -- were all directed to one and the same threefold end : -LRB- 1 -RRB- to brace all his strength for conflict with the French , -LRB- 2 -RRB- to defeat them , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- to drive them out of Russia , minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our people and of our army . 
This procrastinator Kutuzov , whose motto was `` Patience and Time , '' this enemy of decisive action , gave battle at Borodino , investing the preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity . 
This Kutuzov who before the battle of Austerlitz began said that it would be lost , he alone , in contradiction to everyone else , declared till his death that Borodino was a victory , despite the assurance of generals that the battle was lost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire after winning a battle was unprecedented . 
He alone during the whole retreat insisted that battles , which were useless then , should not be fought , and that a new war should not be begun nor the frontiers of Russia crossed . 
It is easy now to understand the significance of these events -- if only we abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims that existed only in the heads of a dozen individuals -- for the events and results now lie before us . 
But how did that old man , alone , in opposition to the general opinion , so truly discern the importance of the people 's view of the events that in all his activity he was never once untrue to it ? 
The source of that extraordinary power of penetrating the meaning of the events then occuring lay in the national feeling which he possessed in full purity and strength . 
Only the recognition of the fact that he possessed this feeling caused the people in so strange a manner , contrary to the Tsar 's wish , to select him -- an old man in disfavor -- to be their representative in the national war . 
And only that feeling placed him on that highest human pedestal from which he , the commander in chief , devoted all his powers not to slaying and destroying men but to saving and showing pity on them . 
That simple , modest , and therefore truly great , figure could not be cast in the false mold of a European hero -- the supposed ruler of men -- that history has invented . 
To a lackey no man can be great , for a lackey has his own conception of greatness . 
The fifth of November was the first day of what is called the battle of Krasnoe . 
Toward evening -- after much disputing and many mistakes made by generals who did not go to their proper places , and after adjutants had been sent about with counterorders -- when it had become plain that the enemy was everywhere in flight and that there could and would be no battle , Kutuzov left Krasnoe and went to Dobroe whither his headquarters had that day been transferred . 
The day was clear and frosty . 
Kutuzov rode to Dobroe on his plump little white horse , followed by an enormous suite of discontented generals who whispered among themselves behind his back . 
All along the road groups of French prisoners captured that day -LRB- there were seven thousand of them -RRB- were crowding to warm themselves at campfires . 
Near Dobroe an immense crowd of tattered prisoners , buzzing with talk and wrapped and bandaged in anything they had been able to get hold of , were standing in the road beside a long row of unharnessed French guns . 
At the approach of the commander in chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed on Kutuzov who , wearing a white cap with a red band and a padded overcoat that bulged on his round shoulders , moved slowly along the road on his white horse . 
One of the generals was reporting to him where the guns and prisoners had been captured . 
Kutuzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the general was saying . 
He screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as he gazed attentively and fixedly at these prisoners , who presented a specially wretched appearance . 
Most of them were disfigured by frost-bitten noses and cheeks , and nearly all had red , swollen and festering eyes . 
One group of the French stood close to the road , and two of them , one of whom had his face covered with sores , were tearing a piece of raw flesh with their hands . 
There was something horrible and bestial in the fleeting glance they threw at the riders and in the malevolent expression with which , after a glance at Kutuzov , the soldier with the sores immediately turned away and went on with what he was doing . 
Kutuzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers . 
He puckered his face , screwed up his eyes , and pensively swayed his head . 
At another spot he noticed a Russian soldier laughingly patting a Frenchman on the shoulder , saying something to him in a friendly manner , and Kutuzov with the same expression on his face again swayed his head . 
`` What were you saying ? '' 
he asked the general , who continuing his report directed the commander in chief 's attention to some standards captured from the French and standing in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment . 
`` Ah , the standards ! '' 
said Kutuzov , evidently detaching himself with difficulty from the thoughts that preoccupied him . 
He looked about him absently . 
Thousands of eyes were looking at him from all sides awaiting a word from him . 
He stopped in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment , sighed deeply , and closed his eyes . 
One of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carrying the standards to advance and surround the commander in chief with them . 
