Eh ? '' 
he asked , turning to the assistant . 
The assistant looked fagged out . 
He was evidently vexed and impatient for the talkative doctor to go . 
`` Major Denisov , '' Rostov said again . 
`` He was wounded at Molliten . '' 
`` Dead , I fancy . 
Eh , Makeev ? '' 
queried the doctor , in a tone of indifference . 
The assistant , however , did not confirm the doctor 's words . 
`` Is he tall and with reddish hair ? '' 
asked the doctor . 
Rostov described Denisov 's appearance . 
`` There was one like that , '' said the doctor , as if pleased . 
`` That one is dead , I fancy . 
However , I 'll look up our list . 
We had a list . 
Have you got it , Makeev ? '' 
`` Makar Alexeevich has the list , '' answered the assistant . 
`` But if you 'll step into the officers ' wards you 'll see for yourself , '' he added , turning to Rostov . 
`` Ah , you 'd better not go , sir , '' said the doctor , `` or you may have to stay here yourself . '' 
But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to show him the way . 
`` Only do n't blame me ! '' 
the doctor shouted up after him . 
Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor . 
The smell was so strong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and collect his strength before he could go on . 
A door opened to the right , and an emaciated sallow man on crutches , barefoot and in underclothing , limped out and , leaning against the doorpost , looked with glittering envious eyes at those who were passing . 
Glancing in at the door , Rostov saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats . 
`` May I go in and look ? '' 
`` What is there to see ? '' 
said the assistant . 
But , just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in , Rostov entered the soldiers ' ward . 
The foul air , to which he had already begun to get used in the corridor , was still stronger here . 
It was a little different , more pungent , and one felt that this was where it originated . 
In the long room , brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows , the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls , and leaving a passage in the middle . 
Most of them were unconscious and paid no attention to the newcomers . 
Those who were conscious raised themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces , and all looked intently at Rostov with the same expression of hope , of relief , reproach , and envy of another 's health . 
Rostov went to the middle of the room and looking through the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same thing there . 
He stood still , looking silently around . 
He had not at all expected such a sight . 
Just before him , almost across the middle of the passage on the bare floor , lay a sick man , probably a Cossack to judge by the cut of his hair . 
The man lay on his back , his huge arms and legs outstretched . 
His face was purple , his eyes were rolled back so that only the whites were seen , and on his bare legs and arms which were still red , the veins stood out like cords . 
He was knocking the back of his head against the floor , hoarsely uttering some word which he kept repeating . 
Rostov listened and made out the word . 
It was `` drink , drink , a drink ! '' 
Rostov glanced round , looking for someone who would put this man back in his place and bring him water . 
`` Who looks after the sick here ? '' 
he asked the assistant . 
Just then a commissariat soldier , a hospital orderly , came in from the next room , marching stiffly , and drew up in front of Rostov . 
