In that case the dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack . 
If they attack our center we , having the center battery on this high ground , shall withdraw the left flank under its cover , and retreat to the dip by echelons . '' 
So he reasoned ... . 
All the time he had been beside the gun , he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly , but as often happens had not understood a word of what they were saying . 
Suddenly , however , he was struck by a voice coming from the shed , and its tone was so sincere that he could not but listen . 
`` No , friend , '' said a pleasant and , as it seemed to Prince Andrew , a familiar voice , `` what I say is that if it were possible to know what is beyond death , none of us would be afraid of it . 
That 's so , friend . '' 
Another , a younger voice , interrupted him : `` Afraid or not , you ca n't escape it anyhow . '' 
`` All the same , one is afraid ! 
Oh , you clever people , '' said a third manly voice interrupting them both . 
`` Of course you artillery men are very wise , because you can take everything along with you -- vodka and snacks . '' 
And the owner of the manly voice , evidently an infantry officer , laughed . 
`` Yes , one is afraid , '' continued the first speaker , he of the familiar voice . 
`` One is afraid of the unknown , that 's what it is . 
Whatever we may say about the soul going to the sky ... we know there is no sky but only an atmosphere . '' 
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer . 
`` Well , stand us some of your herb vodka , Tushin , '' it said . 
`` Why , '' thought Prince Andrew , `` that 's the captain who stood up in the sutler 's hut without his boots . '' 
He recognized the agreeable , philosophizing voice with pleasure . 
`` Some herb vodka ? 
Certainly ! '' 
said Tushin . 
`` But still , to conceive a future life ... '' He did not finish . 
Just then there was a whistle in the air ; nearer and nearer , faster and louder , louder and faster , a cannon ball , as if it had not finished saying what was necessary , thudded into the ground near the shed with super human force , throwing up a mass of earth . 
The ground seemed to groan at the terrible impact . 
And immediately Tushin , with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth and his kind , intelligent face rather pale , rushed out of the shed followed by the owner of the manly voice , a dashing infantry officer who hurried off to his company , buttoning up his coat as he ran . 
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery , looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball . 
His eyes ran rapidly over the wide space , but he only saw that the hitherto motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was a battery to their left . 
The smoke above it had not yet dispersed . 
Two mounted Frenchmen , probably adjutants , were galloping up the hill . 
A small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill , probably to strengthen the front line . 
The smoke of the first shot had not yet dispersed before another puff appeared , followed by a report . 
The battle had begun ! 
Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back to Grunth to find Prince Bagration . 
He heard the cannonade behind him growing louder and more frequent . 
Evidently our guns had begun to reply . 
From the bottom of the slope , where the parleys had taken place , came the report of musketry . 
Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte 's stern letter , and Murat , humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault , had at once moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russian wings , hoping before evening and before the arrival of the Emperor to crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him . 
`` It has begun . 
Here it is ! '' 
thought Prince Andrew , feeling the blood rush to his heart . 
`` But where and how will my Toulon present itself ? '' 
Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinking vodka a quarter of an hour before , he saw everywhere the same rapid movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready , and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled his heart . 
`` It has begun ! 
Here it is , dreadful but enjoyable ! '' 
was what the face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say . 
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up , he saw , in the light of the dull autumn evening , mounted men coming toward him . 
The foremost , wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding a white horse , was Prince Bagration . 
Prince Andrew stopped , waiting for him to come up ; Prince Bagration reined in his horse and recognizing Prince Andrew nodded to him . 
He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew told him what he had seen . 
