Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to Mary Hendrikhovna , asking her to stir it with her finger . 
`` This is my cup , '' said he . 
`` Only dip your finger in it and I 'll drink it all up . '' 
When they had emptied the samovar , Rostov took a pack of cards and proposed that they should play `` Kings '' with Mary Hendrikhovna . 
They drew lots to settle who should make up her set . 
At Rostov 's suggestion it was agreed that whoever became `` King '' should have the right to kiss Mary Hendrikhovna 's hand , and that the `` Booby '' should go to refill and reheat the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke . 
`` Well , but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is ` King ' ? '' 
asked Ilyin . 
`` As it is , she is Queen , and her word is law ! '' 
They had hardly begun to play before the doctor 's disheveled head suddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna . 
He had been awake for some time , listening to what was being said , and evidently found nothing entertaining or amusing in what was going on . 
His face was sad and depressed . 
Without greeting the officers , he scratched himself and asked to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way . 
As soon as he had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and Mary Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became still more attractive to them . 
Returning from the yard , the doctor told his wife -LRB- who had ceased to smile so happily , and looked at him in alarm , awaiting her sentence -RRB- that the rain had ceased and they must go to sleep in their covered cart , or everything in it would be stolen . 
`` But I 'll send an orderly ... . 
Two of them ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` What an idea , doctor ! '' 
`` I 'll stand guard on it myself ! '' 
said Ilyin . 
`` No , gentlemen , you have had your sleep , but I have not slept for two nights , '' replied the doctor , and he sat down morosely beside his wife , waiting for the game to end . 
Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife , the officers grew still merrier , and some of them could not refrain from laughter , for which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts . 
When he had gone , taking his wife with him , and had settled down with her in their covered cart , the officers lay down in the tavern , covering themselves with their wet cloaks , but they did not sleep for a long time ; now they exchanged remarks , recalling the doctor 's uneasiness and his wife 's delight , now they ran out into the porch and reported what was taking place in the covered trap . 
Several times Rostov , covering his head , tried to go to sleep , but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be resumed , to the accompaniment of unreasoning , merry , childlike laughter . 
It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep , when the quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town of Ostrovna . 
Still laughing and talking , the officers began hurriedly getting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar . 
But Rostov went off to his squadron without waiting for tea . 
Day was breaking , the rain had ceased , and the clouds were dispersing . 
It felt damp and cold , especially in clothes that were still moist . 
As they left the tavern in the twilight of the dawn , Rostov and Ilyin both glanced under the wet and glistening leather hood of the doctor 's cart , from under the apron of which his feet were sticking out , and in the middle of which his wife 's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing audible . 
`` She really is a dear little thing , '' said Rostov to Ilyin , who was following him . 
`` A charming woman ! '' 
said Ilyin , with all the gravity of a boy of sixteen . 
Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road . 
The command was heard to `` mount '' and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted . 
Rostov riding in front gave the order `` Forward ! '' 
and the hussars , with clanking sabers and subdued talk , their horses ' hoofs splashing in the mud , defiled in fours and moved along the broad road planted with birch trees on each side , following the infantry and a battery that had gone on in front . 
Tattered , blue-purple clouds , reddening in the east , were scudding before the wind . 
It was growing lighter and lighter . 
That curly grass which always grows by country roadsides became clearly visible , still wet with the night 's rain ; the drooping branches of the birches , also wet , swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of water to one side . 
The soldiers ' faces were more and more clearly visible . 
Rostov , always closely followed by Ilyin , rode along the side of the road between two rows of birch trees . 
When campaigning , Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not a regimental but a Cossack horse . 
A judge of horses and a sportsman , he had lately procured himself a large , fine , mettlesome , Donets horse , dun-colored , with light mane and tail , and when he rode it no one could outgallop him . 
To ride this horse was a pleasure to him , and he thought of the horse , of the morning , of the doctor 's wife , but not once of the impending danger . 
Formerly , when going into action , Rostov had felt afraid ; now he had not the least feeling of fear . 
He was fearless , not because he had grown used to being under fire -LRB- one can not grow used to danger -RRB- , but because he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger . 
He had grown accustomed when going into action to think about anything but what would seem most likely to interest him -- the impending danger . 
During the first period of his service , hard as he tried and much as he reproached himself with cowardice , he had not been able to do this , but with time it had come of itself . 
Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees , occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand , sometimes touching his horse 's side with his foot , or , without turning round , handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him , with as calm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride . 
He glanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin , who talked much and in great agitation . 
He knew from experience the tormenting expectation of terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time could help him . 
As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds , the wind fell , as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morning after the storm ; drops still continued to fall , but vertically now , and all was still . 
The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it . 
A few minutes later it reappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud , tearing its edge . 
Everything grew bright and glittered . 
And with that light , and as if in reply to it , came the sound of guns ahead of them . 
Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of that firing , Count Ostermann-Tolstoy 's adjutant came galloping from Vitebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road . 
The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery -- which had also quickened their pace -- rode down a hill , and passing through an empty and deserted village again ascended . 
The horses began to lather and the men to flush . 
`` Halt ! 
Dress your ranks ! '' 
the order of the regimental commander was heard ahead . 
`` Forward by the left . 
Walk , march ! '' 
came the order from in front . 
And the hussars , passing along the line of troops on the left flank of our position , halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line . 
To the right stood our infantry in a dense column : they were the reserve . 
Higher up the hill , on the very horizon , our guns were visible through the wonderfully clear air , brightly illuminated by slanting morning sunbeams . 
In front , beyond a hollow dale , could be seen the enemy 's columns and guns . 
Our advanced line , already in action , could be heard briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale . 
At these sounds , long unheard , Rostov 's spirits rose , as at the strains of the merriest music . 
Trap-ta-ta-tap ! 
cracked the shots , now together , now several quickly one after another . 
Again all was silent and then again it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and exploding them . 
The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour . 
A cannonade began . 
Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron , halted , spoke to the commander of the regiment , and rode up the hill to the guns . 
After Ostermann had gone , a command rang out to the Uhlans . 
`` Form column ! 
Prepare to charge ! '' 
The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry to pass . 
The Uhlans started , the streamers on their spears fluttering , and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to the left . 
As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill , the hussars were ordered up the hill to support the battery . 
As they took the places vacated by the Uhlans , bullets came from the front , whining and whistling , but fell spent without taking effect . 
The sounds , which he had not heard for so long , had an even more pleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds of firing . 
Drawing himself up , he viewed the field of battle opening out before him from the hill , and with his whole soul followed the movement of the Uhlans . 
They swooped down close to the French dragoons , something confused happened there amid the smoke , and five minutes later our Uhlans were galloping back , not to the place they had occupied but more to the left , and among the orange-colored Uhlans on chestnut horses and behind them , in a large group , blue French dragoons on gray horses could be seen . 
Rostov , with his keen sportsman 's eye , was one of the first to catch sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans . 
Nearer and nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoons pursuing them . 
He could already see how these men , who looked so small at the foot of the hill , jostled and overtook one another , waving their arms and their sabers in the air . 
Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt . 
He felt instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now , the latter could not withstand them , but if a charge was to be made it must be done now , at that very moment , or it would be too late . 
He looked around . 
A captain , standing beside him , was gazing like himself with eyes fixed on the cavalry below them . 
`` Andrew Sevastyanych ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` You know , we could crush them ... '' `` A fine thing too ! '' 
replied the captain , `` and really ... '' Rostov , without waiting to hear him out , touched his horse , galloped to the front of his squadron , and before he had time to finish giving the word of command , the whole squadron , sharing his feeling , was following him . 
Rostov himself did not know how or why he did it . 
He acted as he did when hunting , without reflecting or considering . 
He saw the dragoons near and that they were galloping in disorder ; he knew they could not withstand an attack -- knew there was only that moment and that if he let it slip it would not return . 
The bullets were whining and whistling so stimulatingly around him and his horse was so eager to go that he could not restrain himself . 
He touched his horse , gave the word of command , and immediately , hearing behind him the tramp of the horses of his deployed squadron , rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons . 
Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace instinctively changed to a gallop , which grew faster and faster as they drew nearer to our Uhlans and the French dragoons who galloped after them . 
The dragoons were now close at hand . 
On seeing the hussars , the foremost began to turn , while those behind began to halt . 
With the same feeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf , Rostov gave rein to his Donets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the dragoons ' disordered lines . 
One Uhlan stopped , another who was on foot flung himself to the ground to avoid being knocked over , and a riderless horse fell in among the hussars . 
Nearly all the French dragoons were galloping back . 
Rostov , picking out one on a gray horse , dashed after him . 
On the way he came upon a bush , his gallant horse cleared it , and almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that he would immediately overtake the enemy he had selected . 
That Frenchman , by his uniform an officer , was going at a gallop , crouching on his gray horse and urging it on with his saber . 
In another moment Rostov 's horse dashed its breast against the hindquarters of the officer 's horse , almost knocking it over , and at the same instant Rostov , without knowing why , raised his saber and struck the Frenchman with it . 
The instant he had done this , all Rostov 's animation vanished . 
The officer fell , not so much from the blow -- which had but slightly cut his arm above the elbow -- as from the shock to his horse and from fright . 
Rostov reined in his horse , and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he had vanquished . 
The French dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on the ground , the other being caught in the stirrup . 
His eyes , screwed up with fear as if he every moment expected another blow , gazed up at Rostov with shrinking terror . 
His pale and mud-stained face -- fair and young , with a dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes -- was not an enemy 's face at all suited to a battlefield , but a most ordinary , homelike face . 
Before Rostov had decided what to do with him , the officer cried , `` I surrender ! '' 
He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the stirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov 's face . 
Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into the saddle . 
On all sides , the hussars were busy with the dragoons ; one was wounded , but though his face was bleeding , he would not give up his horse ; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him ; a third was being helped by an hussar to mount his horse . 
In front , the French infantry were firing as they ran . 
The hussars galloped hastily back with their prisoners . 
Rostov galloped back with the rest , aware of an unpleasant feeling of depression in his heart . 
Something vague and confused , which he could not at all account for , had come over him with the capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him . 
Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returning hussars , sent for Rostov , thanked him , and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor and would recommend him for a St. George 's Cross . 
When sent for by Count Ostermann , Rostov , remembering that he had charged without orders , felt sure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of discipline . 
Ostermann 's flattering words and promise of a reward should therefore have struck him all the more pleasantly , but he still felt that same vaguely disagreeable feeling of moral nausea . 
`` But what on earth is worrying me ? '' 
he asked himself as he rode back from the general . 
`` Ilyin ? 
No , he 's safe . 
Have I disgraced myself in any way ? 
No , that 's not it . '' 
Something else , resembling remorse , tormented him . 
`` Yes , oh yes , that French officer with the dimple . 
And I remember how my arm paused when I raised it . '' 
Rostov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them to have a look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin . 
He was sitting in his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about him ; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound . 
He glanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting . 
Rostov still had the same indefinite feeling , as of shame . 
All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostov , without being dull or angry , was silent , thoughtful , and preoccupied . 
He drank reluctantly , tried to remain alone , and kept turning something over in his mind . 
Rostov was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his , which to his amazement had gained him the St. George 's Cross and even given him a reputation for bravery , and there was something he could not at all understand . 
`` So others are even more afraid than I am ! '' 
he thought . 
`` So that 's all there is in what is called heroism ! 
And heroism ! 
And did I do it for my country 's sake ? 
And how was he to blame , with his dimple and blue eyes ? 
And how frightened he was ! 
He thought that I should kill him . 
Why should I kill him ? 
My hand trembled . 
And they have given me a St. George 's Cross ... . 
I ca n't make it out at all . '' 
But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach no clear solution of what puzzled him so , the wheel of fortune in the service , as often happens , turned in his favor . 
After the affair at Ostrovna he was brought into notice , received command of an hussar battalion , and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen . 
On receiving news of Natasha 's illness , the countess , though not quite well yet and still weak , went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of the household , and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna 's house to their own and settled down in town . 
Natasha 's illness was so serious that , fortunately for her and for her parents , the consideration of all that had caused the illness , her conduct and the breaking off of her engagement , receded into the background . 
She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consider in how far she was to blame for what had happened . 
She could not eat or sleep , grew visibly thinner , coughed , and , as the doctors made them feel , was in danger . 
They could not think of anything but how to help her . 
Doctors came to see her singly and in consultation , talked much in French , German , and Latin , blamed one another , and prescribed a great variety of medicines for all the diseases known to them , but the simple idea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the disease Natasha was suffering from , as no disease suffered by a live man can be known , for every living person has his own peculiarities and always has his own peculiar , personal , novel , complicated disease , unknown to medicine -- not a disease of the lungs , liver , skin , heart , nerves , and so on mentioned in medical books , but a disease consisting of one of the innumerable combinations of the maladies of those organs . 
This simple thought could not occur to the doctors -LRB- as it can not occur to a wizard that he is unable to work his charms -RRB- because the business of their lives was to cure , and they received money for it and had spent the best years of their lives on that business . 
But , above all , that thought was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were really useful , as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family . 
Their usefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances for the most part harmful -LRB- the harm was scarcely perceptible , as they were given in small doses -RRB- , but they were useful , necessary , and indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and of those who loved her -- and that is why there are , and always will be , pseudo-healers , wise women , homeopaths , and allopaths . 
They satisfied that eternal human need for hope of relief , for sympathy , and that something should be done , which is felt by those who are suffering . 
They satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child , when it wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt . 
A child knocks itself and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching spot rubbed or kissed , and it feels better when this is done . 
The child can not believe that the strongest and wisest of its people have no remedy for its pain , and the hope of relief and the expression of its mother 's sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it . 
The doctors were of use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her bump , assuring her that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist 's in the Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box of a ruble and seventy kopeks , and if she took those powders in boiled water at intervals of precisely two hours , neither more nor less . 
What would Sonya and the count and countess have done , how would they have looked , if nothing had been done , if there had not been those pills to give by the clock , the warm drinks , the chicken cutlets , and all the other details of life ordered by the doctors , the carrying out of which supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle ? 
How would the count have borne his dearly loved daughter 's illness had he not known that it was costing him a thousand rubles , and that he would not grudge thousands more to benefit her , or had he not known that if her illness continued he would not grudge yet other thousands and would take her abroad for consultations there , and had he not been able to explain the details of how Metivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms , but Frise had , and Mudrov had diagnosed them even better ? 
What would the countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid for not strictly obeying the doctor 's orders ? 
`` You 'll never get well like that , '' she would say , forgetting her grief in her vexation , `` if you wo n't obey the doctor and take your medicine at the right time ! 
You must n't trifle with it , you know , or it may turn to pneumonia , '' she would go on , deriving much comfort from the utterance of that foreign word , incomprehensible to others as well as to herself . 
What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she had not undressed during the first three nights , in order to be ready to carry out all the doctor 's injunctions with precision , and that she still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be administered ? 
Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices were being made for her sake , and to know that she had to take medicine at certain hours , though she declared that no medicine would cure her and that it was all nonsense . 
And it was even pleasant to be able to show , by disregarding the orders , that she did not believe in medical treatment and did not value her life . 
The doctor came every day , felt her pulse , looked at her tongue , and regardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her . 
But when he had gone into another room , to which the countess hurriedly followed him , he assumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head said that though there was danger , he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine and one must wait and see , that the malady was chiefly mental , but ... And the countess , trying to conceal the action from herself and from him , slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patient with a more tranquil mind . 
The symptoms of Natasha 's illness were that she ate little , slept little , coughed , and was always low-spirited . 
The doctors said that she could not get on without medical treatment , so they kept her in the stifling atmosphere of the town , and the Rostovs did not move to the country that summer of 1812 . 
In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of such things made a large collection , and in spite of being deprived of the country life to which she was accustomed , youth prevailed . 
Natasha 's grief began to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life , it ceased to press so painfully on her heart , it gradually faded into the past , and she began to recover physically . 
Natasha was calmer but no happier . 
She not merely avoided all external forms of pleasure -- balls , promenades , concerts , and theaters - but she never laughed without a sound of tears in her laughter . 
She could not sing . 
As soon as she began to laugh , or tried to sing by herself , tears choked her : tears of remorse , tears at the recollection of those pure times which could never return , tears of vexation that she should so uselessly have ruined her young life which might have been so happy . 
Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a blasphemy , in face of her sorrow . 
Without any need of self-restraint , no wish to coquet ever entered her head . 
She said and felt at that time that no man was more to her than Nastasya Ivanovna , the buffoon . 
Something stood sentinel within her and forbade her every joy . 
Besides , she had lost all the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full of hope . 
The previous autumn , the hunting , `` Uncle , '' and the Christmas holidays spent with Nicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenest and most painfully . 
What would she not have given to bring back even a single day of that time ! 
But it was gone forever . 
Her presentiment at the time had not deceived her -- that that state of freedom and readiness for any enjoyment would not return again . 
Yet it was necessary to live on . 
It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly imagined , but worse , much worse , than anybody else in the world . 
But this was not enough . 
She knew that , and asked herself , `` What next ? '' 
But there was nothing to come . 
There was no joy in life , yet life was passing . 
Natasha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to anyone , but wanted nothing for herself . 
She kept away from everyone in the house and felt at ease only with her brother Petya . 
She liked to be with him better than with the others , and when alone with him she sometimes laughed . 
She hardly ever left the house and of those who came to see them was glad to see only one person , Pierre . 
It would have been impossible to treat her with more delicacy , greater care , and at the same time more seriously than did Count Bezukhov . 
Natasha unconsciously felt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society . 
But she was not even grateful to him for it ; nothing good on Pierre 's part seemed to her to be an effort , it seemed so natural for him to be kind to everyone that there was no merit in his kindness . 
Sometimes Natasha noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence , especially when he wanted to do something to please her , or feared that something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her . 
She noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness , which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her . 
After those involuntary words -- that if he were free he would have asked on his knees for her hand and her love -- uttered at a moment when she was so strongly agitated , Pierre never spoke to Natasha of his feelings ; and it seemed plain to her that those words , which had then so comforted her , were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoken to comfort a crying child . 
It was not because Pierre was a married man , but because Natasha felt very strongly with him that moral barrier the absence of which she had experienced with Kuragin that it never entered her head that the relations between him and herself could lead to love on her part , still less on his , or even to the kind of tender , self-conscious , romantic friendship between a man and a woman of which she had known several instances . 
Before the end of the fast of St. Peter , Agrafena Ivanovna Belova , a country neighbor of the Rostovs , came to Moscow to pay her devotions at the shrines of the Moscow saints . 
She suggested that Natasha should fast and prepare for Holy Communion , and Natasha gladly welcomed the idea . 
Despite the doctor 's orders that she should not go out early in the morning , Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for the sacrament , not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostov family by attending three services in their own house , but as Agrafena Ivanovna did , by going to church every day for a week and not once missing Vespers , Matins , or Mass. . 
The countess was pleased with Natasha 's zeal ; after the poor results of the medical treatment , in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer might help her daughter more than medicines and , though not without fear and concealing it from the doctor , she agreed to Natasha 's wish and entrusted her to Belova . 
Agrafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natasha at three in the morning , but generally found her already awake . 
She was afraid of being late for Matins . 
Hastily washing , and meekly putting on her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla , Natasha , shivering in the fresh air , went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn . 
By Agrafena Ivanovna 's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their own parish , but at a church where , according to the devout Agrafena Ivanovna , the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life . 
There were never many people in the church ; Natasha always stood beside Belova in the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin , let into the screen before the choir on the left side , and a feeling , new to her , of humility before something great and incomprehensible , seized her when at that unusual morning hour , gazing at the dark face of the Virgin illuminated by the candles burning before it and by the morning light falling from the window , she listened to the words of the service which she tried to follow with understanding . 
When she understood them her personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its own . 
When she did not understand , it was sweeter still to think that the wish to understand everything is pride , that it is impossible to understand all , that it is only necessary to believe and to commit oneself to God , whom she felt guiding her soul at those moments . 
She crossed herself , bowed low , and when she did not understand , in horror at her own vileness , simply asked God to forgive her everything , everything , to have mercy upon her . 
The prayers to which she surrendered herself most of all were those of repentance . 
On her way home at an early hour when she met no one but bricklayers going to work or men sweeping the street , and everybody within the houses was still asleep , Natasha experienced a feeling new to her , a sense of the possibility of correcting her faults , the possibility of a new , clean life , and of happiness . 
During the whole week she spent in this way , that feeling grew every day . 
And the happiness of taking communion , or `` communing '' as Agrafena Ivanovna , joyously playing with the word , called it , seemed to Natasha so great that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday . 
But the happy day came , and on that memorable Sunday , when , dressed in white muslin , she returned home after communion , for the first time for many months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the life that lay before her . 
The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously . 
`` She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening , '' said he , evidently sincerely satisfied with his success . 
`` Only , please be particular about it . 
`` Be quite easy , '' he continued playfully , as he adroitly took the gold coin in his palm . 
`` She will soon be singing and frolicking about . 
The last medicine has done her a very great deal of good . 
She has freshened up very much . '' 
The countess , with a cheerful expression on her face , looked down at her nails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room . 
At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the war began to spread in Moscow ; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to the people , and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow . 
And as up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received , exaggerated reports became current about them and about the position of Russia . 
It was said that the Emperor was leaving the army because it was in danger , it was said that Smolensk had surrendered , that Napoleon had an army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia . 
On the eleventh of July , which was Saturday , the manifesto was received but was not yet in print , and Pierre , who was at the Rostovs ' , promised to come to dinner next day , Sunday , and bring a copy of the manifesto and appeal , which he would obtain from Count Rostopchin . 
That Sunday , the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis ' private chapel as usual . 
It was a hot July day . 
Even at ten o'clock , when the Rostovs got out of their carriage at the chapel , the sultry air , the shouts of hawkers , the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd , the dusty leaves of the trees on the boulevard , the sounds of the band and the white trousers of a battalion marching to parade , the rattling of wheels on the cobblestones , and the brilliant , hot sunshine were all full of that summer languor , that content and discontent with the present , which is most strongly felt on a bright , hot day in town . 
All the Moscow notabilities , all the Rostovs ' acquaintances , were at the Razumovskis ' chapel , for , as if expecting something to happen , many wealthy families who usually left town for their country estates had not gone away that summer . 
As Natasha , at her mother 's side , passed through the crowd behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them , she heard a young man speaking about her in too loud a whisper . 
`` That 's Rostova , the one who ... '' `` She 's much thinner , but all the same she 's pretty ! '' 
She heard , or thought she heard , the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski . 
But she was always imagining that . 
It always seemed to her that everyone who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened to her . 
With a sinking heart , wretched as she always was now when she found herself in a crowd , Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace walked -- as women can walk -- with the more repose and stateliness the greater the pain and shame in her soul . 
She knew for certain that she was pretty , but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to . 
On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late , and particularly so on this bright , hot summer day in town . 
`` It 's Sunday again -- another week past , '' she thought , recalling that she had been here the Sunday before , `` and always the same life that is no life , and the same surroundings in which it used to be so easy to live . 
I 'm pretty , I 'm young , and I know that now I am good . 
I used to be bad , but now I know I am good , '' she thought , `` but yet my best years are slipping by and are no good to anyone . '' 
She stood by her mother 's side and exchanged nods with acquaintances near her . 
From habit she scrutinized the ladies ' dresses , condemned the bearing of a lady standing close by who was not crossing herself properly but in a cramped manner , and again she thought with vexation that she was herself being judged and was judging others , and suddenly , at the sound of the service , she felt horrified at her own vileness , horrified that the former purity of her soul was again lost to her . 
A comely , fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the souls of the worshipers . 
The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed , the curtain was slowly drawn , and from behind it a soft mysterious voice pronounced some words . 
Tears , the cause of which she herself did not understand , made Natasha 's breast heave , and a joyous but oppressive feeling agitated her . 
`` Teach me what I should do , how to live my life , how I may grow good forever , forever ! '' 
she pleaded . 
The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and , holding his thumb extended , drew his long hair from under his dalmatic and , making the sign of the cross on his breast , began in a loud and solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer ... `` In peace let us pray unto the Lord . '' 
`` As one community , without distinction of class , without enmity , united by brotherly love -- let us pray ! '' 
thought Natasha . 
`` For the peace that is from above , and for the salvation of our souls . '' 
`` For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us , '' prayed Natasha . 
When they prayed for the warriors , she thought of her brother and Denisov . 
When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea , she remembered Prince Andrew , prayed for him , and asked God to forgive her all the wrongs she had done him . 
When they prayed for those who love us , she prayed for the members of her own family , her father and mother and Sonya , realizing for the first time how wrongly she had acted toward them , and feeling all the strength of her love for them . 
When they prayed for those who hate us , she tried to think of her enemies and people who hated her , in order to pray for them . 
She included among her enemies the creditors and all who had business dealings with her father , and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her she remembered Anatole who had done her so much harm -- and though he did not hate her she gladly prayed for him as for an enemy . 
Only at prayer did she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole , as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe and devotion to God . 
When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod , she bowed very low and made the sign of the cross , saying to herself that even if she did not understand , still she could not doubt , and at any rate loved the governing Synod and prayed for it . 
When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his breast and said , `` Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ the Lord ! '' 
`` Commit ourselves to God , '' Natasha inwardly repeated . 
`` Lord God , I submit myself to Thy will ! '' 
she thought . 
`` I want nothing , wish for nothing ; teach me what to do and how to use my will ! 
Take me , take me ! '' 
prayed Natasha , with impatient emotion in her heart , not crossing herself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting some invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself , from her regrets , desires , remorse , hopes , and sins . 
The countess looked round several times at her daughter 's softened face and shining eyes and prayed God to help her . 
Unexpectedly , in the middle of the service , and not in the usual order Natasha knew so well , the deacon brought out a small stool , the one he knelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday , and placed it before the doors of the sanctuary screen . 
The priest came out with his purple velvet biretta on his head , adjusted his hair , and knelt down with an effort . 
Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in surprise . 
Then came the prayer just received from the Synod -- a prayer for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion . 
`` Lord God of might , God of our salvation ! '' 
began the priest in that voice , clear , not grandiloquent but mild , in which only the Slav clergy read and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart . 
`` Lord God of might , God of our salvation ! 
Look this day in mercy and blessing on Thy humble people , and graciously hear us , spare us , and have mercy upon us ! 
This foe confounding Thy land , desiring to lay waste the whole world , rises against us ; these lawless men are gathered together to overthrow Thy kingdom , to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem , Thy beloved Russia ; to defile Thy temples , to overthrow Thine altars , and to desecrate our holy shrines . 
How long , O Lord , how long shall the wicked triumph ? 
How long shall they wield unlawful power ? 
`` Lord God ! 
Hear us when we pray to Thee ; strengthen with Thy might our most gracious sovereign lord , the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich ; be mindful of his uprightness and meekness , reward him according to his righteousness , and let it preserve us , Thy chosen Israel ! 
Bless his counsels , his undertakings , and his work ; strengthen his kingdom by Thine almighty hand , and give him victory over his enemy , even as Thou gavest Moses the victory over Amalek , Gideon over Midian , and David over Goliath . 
Preserve his army , put a bow of brass in the hands of those who have armed themselves in Thy Name , and gird their loins with strength for the fight . 
Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us ; confound and put to shame those who have devised evil against us , may they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust before the wind , and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them to flight ; may they be ensnared when they know it not , and may the plots they have laid in secret be turned against them ; let them fall before Thy servants ' feet and be laid low by our hosts ! 
Lord , Thou art able to save both great and small ; Thou art God , and man can not prevail against Thee ! 
`` God of our fathers ! 
Remember Thy bounteous mercy and loving-kindness which are from of old ; turn not Thy face from us , but be gracious to our unworthiness , and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard not our transgressions and iniquities ! 
Create in us a clean heart and renew a right spirit within us , strengthen us all in Thy faith , fortify our hope , inspire us with true love one for another , arm us with unity of spirit in the righteous defense of the heritage Thou gavest to us and to our fathers , and let not the scepter of the wicked be exalted against the destiny of those Thou hast sanctified . 
`` O Lord our God , in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust , let us not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy , and give us a token of Thy blessing , that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it and be put to shame and perish , and may all the nations know that Thou art the Lord and we are Thy people . 
Show Thy mercy upon us this day , O Lord , and grant us Thy salvation ; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice in Thy mercy ; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath the feet of Thy faithful servants ! 
For Thou art the defense , the succor , and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee , and to Thee be all glory , to Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , now and forever , world without end . 
Amen . '' 
In Natasha 's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her strongly . 
She listened to every word about the victory of Moses over Amalek , of Gideon over Midian , and of David over Goliath , and about the destruction of `` Thy Jerusalem , '' and she prayed to God with the tenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowing , but without fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer . 
She shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of righteousness , for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope , and its animation by love . 
But she could not pray that her enemies might be trampled under foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more of them that she might pray for them . 
But neither could she doubt the righteousness of the prayer that was being read on bended knees . 
She felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe at the thought of the punishment that overtakes men for their sins , and especially of her own sins , and she prayed to God to forgive them all , and her too , and to give them all , and her too , peace and happiness . 
And it seemed to her that God heard her prayer . 
From the day when Pierre , after leaving the Rostovs ' with Natasha 's grateful look fresh in his mind , had gazed at the comet that seemed to be fixed in the sky and felt that something new was appearing on his own horizon -- from that day the problem of the vanity and uselessness of all earthly things , that had incessantly tormented him , no longer presented itself . 
That terrible question `` Why ? '' 
`` Wherefore ? '' 
which had come to him amid every occupation , was now replaced , not by another question or by a reply to the former question , but by her image . 
When he listened to , or himself took part in , trivial conversations , when he read or heard of human baseness or folly , he was not horrified as formerly , and did not ask himself why men struggled so about these things when all is so transient and incomprehensible -- but he remembered her as he had last seen her , and all his doubts vanished -- not because she had answered the questions that had haunted him , but because his conception of her transferred him instantly to another , a brighter , realm of spiritual activity in which no one could be justified or guilty -- a realm of beauty and love which it was worth living for . 
Whatever worldly baseness presented itself to him , he said to himself : `` Well , supposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar , and the country and the Tsar confer honors upon him , what does that matter ? 
She smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again , and I love her , and no one will ever know it . '' 
And his soul felt calm and peaceful . 
Pierre still went into society , drank as much and led the same idle and dissipated life , because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs ' there were other hours he had to spend somehow , and the habits and acquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him along irresistibly . 
But latterly , when more and more disquieting reports came from the seat of war and Natasha 's health began to improve and she no longer aroused in him the former feeling of careful pity , an ever-increasing restlessness , which he could not explain , took possession of him . 
He felt that the condition he was in could not continue long , that a catastrophe was coming which would change his whole life , and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that approaching catastrophe . 
One of his brother Masons had revealed to Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon , drawn from the Revelation of St. John . 
In chapter 13 , verse 18 , of the Apocalypse , it is said : Here is wisdom . 
Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast : for it is the number of a man ; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six . 
And in the fifth verse of the same chapter : And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies ; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months . 
The French alphabet , written out with the same numerical values as the Hebrew , in which the first nine letters denote units and the others tens , will have the following significance : a b c d e f g h i k 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 l m n o p q r s 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 t u v w x y 100 110 120 130 140 150 z 160 Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers , it appears that the sum of them is 666 , and that Napoleon therefore the beast foretold in the Apocalypse . 
Moreover , by applying the same system to the words quarante-deux , * which was the term allowed to the beast that `` spoke great things and blasphemies , '' the same number 666 was obtained ; from which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon 's power had come in the year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two . 
This prophecy pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what would put an end to the power of the beast , that is , of Napoleon , and tried by the same system of using letters as numbers and adding them up , to find an answer to the question that engrossed him . 
He wrote the words L'Empereur Alexandre , La nation russe and added up their numbers , but the sums were either more or less than 666 . 
Once when making such calculations he wrote down his own name in French , Comte Pierre Besouhoff , but the sum of the numbers did not come right . 
Then he changed the spelling , substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le , still without obtaining the desired result . 
Then it occurred to him : if the answer to the question were contained in his name , his nationality would also be given in the answer . 
So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding up the numbers got 671 . 
This was only five too much , and five was represented by e , the very letter elided from the article le before the word Empereur . 
By omitting the e , though incorrectly , Pierre got the answer he sought . 
L'russe Besuhof made 666 . 
This discovery excited him . 
How , or by what means , he was connected with the great event foretold in the Apocalypse he did not know , but he did not doubt that connection for a moment . 
His love for Natasha , Antichrist , Napoleon , the invasion , the comet , 666 , L'Empereur Napoleon , and L'russe Besuhof -- all this had to mature and culminate , to lift him out of that spellbound , petty sphere of Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to a great achievement and great happiness . 
* Forty-two . 
On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read , Pierre had promised the Rostovs to bring them , from Count Rostopchin whom he knew well , both the appeal to the people and the news from the army . 
In the morning , when he went to call at Rostopchin 's he met there a courier fresh from the army , an acquaintance of his own , who often danced at Moscow balls . 
`` Do , please , for heaven 's sake , relieve me of something ! '' 
said the courier . 
`` I have a sackful of letters to parents . '' 
Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father . 
Pierre took that letter , and Rostopchin also gave him the Emperor 's appeal to Moscow , which had just been printed , the last army orders , and his own most recent bulletin . 
Glancing through the army orders , Pierre found in one of them , in the lists of killed , wounded , and rewarded , the name of Nicholas Rostov , awarded a St. George 's Cross of the Fourth Class for courage shown in the Ostrovna affair , and in the same order the name of Prince Andrew Bolkonski , appointed to the command of a regiment of Chasseurs . 
Though he did not want to remind the Rostovs of Bolkonski , Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by the news of their son 's having received a decoration , so he sent that printed army order and Nicholas ' letter to the Rostovs , keeping the appeal , the bulletin , and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner . 
His conversation with Count Rostopchin and the latter 's tone of anxious hurry , the meeting with the courier who talked casually of how badly things were going in the army , the rumors of the discovery of spies in Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised to be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn , and the talk of the Emperor 's being expected to arrive next day -- all aroused with fresh force that feeling of agitation and expectation in Pierre which he had been conscious of ever since the appearance of the comet , and especially since the beginning of the war . 
He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done so had he not been hindered , first , by his membership of the Society of Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual peace and the abolition of war , and secondly , by the fact that when he saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talking patriotism , he somehow felt ashamed to take the step . 
But the chief reason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in the vague idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast , 666 ; that his part in the great affair of setting a limit to the power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemous things had been predestined from eternity , and that therefore he ought not to undertake anything , but wait for what was bound to come to pass . 
A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that day , as usual on Sundays . 
Pierre came early so as to find them alone . 
He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he not been so tall , so broad of limb , and so strong that he carried his bulk with evident ease . 
He went up the stairs , puffing and muttering something . 
His coachman did not even ask whether he was to wait . 
He knew that when his master was at the Rostovs ' he stayed till midnight . 
The Rostovs ' footman rushed eagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take his hat and stick . 
Pierre , from club habit , always left both hat and stick in the anteroom . 
The first person he saw in the house was Natasha . 
Even before he saw her , while taking off his cloak , he heard her . 
She was practicing solfa exercises in the music room . 
He knew that she had not sung since her illness , and so the sound of her voice surprised and delighted him . 
He opened the door softly and saw her , in the lilac dress she had worn at church , walking about the room singing . 
She had her back to him when he opened the door , but when , turning quickly , she saw his broad , surprised face , she blushed and came rapidly up to him . 
`` I want to try to sing again , '' she said , adding as if by way of excuse , `` it is , at least , something to do . '' 
`` That 's capital ! '' 
`` How glad I am you 've come ! 
I am so happy today , '' she said , with the old animation Pierre had not seen in her for along time . 
`` You know Nicholas has received a St. George 's Cross ? 
I am so proud of him . '' 
`` Oh yes , I sent that announcement . 
But I do n't want to interrupt you , '' he added , and was about to go to the drawing room . 
Natasha stopped him . 
`` Count , is it wrong of me to sing ? '' 
she said blushing , and fixing her eyes inquiringly on him . 
`` No ... Why should it be ? 
On the contrary ... But why do you ask me ? '' 
`` I do n't know myself , '' Natasha answered quickly , `` but I should not like to do anything you disapproved of . 
I believe in you completely . 
You do n't know how important you are to me , how much you 've done for me ... '' She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words . 
`` I saw in that same army order that he , Bolkonski '' -LRB- she whispered the name hastily -RRB- , `` is in Russia , and in the army again . 
What do you think ? '' 
-- she was speaking hurriedly , evidently afraid her strength might fail her -- `` Will he ever forgive me ? 
Will he not always have a bitter feeling toward me ? 
What do you think ? 
What do you think ? '' 
`` I think ... '' Pierre replied , `` that he has nothing to forgive ... . 
If I were in his place ... '' By association of ideas , Pierre was at once carried back to the day when , trying to comfort her , he had said that if he were not himself but the best man in the world and free , he would ask on his knees for her hand ; and the same feeling of pity , tenderness , and love took possession of him and the same words rose to his lips . 
But she did not give him time to say them . 
`` Yes , you ... you ... '' she said , uttering the word you rapturously - `` that 's a different thing . 
I know no one kinder , more generous , or better than you ; nobody could be ! 
Had you not been there then , and now too , I do n't know what would have become of me , because ... '' Tears suddenly rose in her eyes , she turned away , lifted her music before her eyes , began singing again , and again began walking up and down the room . 
Just then Petya came running in from the drawing room . 
Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and resembled Natasha . 
He was preparing to enter the university , but he and his friend Obolenski had lately , in secret , agreed to join the hussars . 
Petya had come rushing out to talk to his namesake about this affair . 
He had asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted in the hussars . 
Pierre walked up and down the drawing room , not listening to what Petya was saying . 
Petya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention . 
`` Well , what about my plan ? 
Peter Kirilych , for heaven 's sake ! 
You are my only hope , '' said Petya . 
`` Oh yes , your plan . 
To join the hussars ? 
I 'll mention it , I 'll bring it all up today . '' 
`` Well , mon cher , have you got the manifesto ? '' 
asked the old count . 
`` The countess has been to Mass at the Razumovskis ' and heard the new prayer . 
She says it 's very fine . '' 
`` Yes , I 've got it , '' said Pierre . 
`` The Emperor is to be here tomorrow ... there 's to be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility , and they are talking of a levy of ten men per thousand . 
Oh yes , let me congratulate you ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , thank God ! 
Well , and what news from the army ? '' 
`` We are again retreating . 
They say we 're already near Smolensk , '' replied Pierre . 
`` O Lord , O Lord ! '' 
exclaimed the count . 
`` Where is the manifesto ? '' 
`` The Emperor 's appeal ? 
Oh yes ! '' 
Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the papers , but could not find them . 
Still slapping his pockets , he kissed the hand of the countess who entered the room and glanced uneasily around , evidently expecting Natasha , who had left off singing but had not yet come into the drawing room . 
`` On my word , I do n't know what I 've done with it , '' he said . 
`` There he is , always losing everything ! '' 
remarked the countess . 
Natasha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face and sat down looking silently at Pierre . 
As soon as she entered , Pierre 's features , which had been gloomy , suddenly lighted up , and while still searching for the papers he glanced at her several times . 
`` No , really ! 
I 'll drive home , I must have left them there . 
I 'll certainly ... '' `` But you 'll be late for dinner . '' 
`` Oh ! 
And my coachman has gone . '' 
But Sonya , who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom , had found them in Pierre 's hat , where he had carefully tucked them under the lining . 
Pierre was about to begin reading . 
`` No , after dinner , '' said the old count , evidently expecting much enjoyment from that reading . 
At dinner , at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new chevalier of St. George , Shinshin told them the town news , of the illness of the old Georgian princess , of Metivier 's disappearance from Moscow , and of how some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchin and accused of being a French `` spyer '' -LRB- so Count Rostopchin had told the story -RRB- , and how Rostopchin let him go and assured the people that he was `` not a spire at all , but only an old German ruin . '' 
`` People are being arrested ... '' said the count . 
`` I 've told the countess she should not speak French so much . 
It 's not the time for it now . '' 
`` And have you heard ? '' 
Shinshin asked . 
`` Prince Golitsyn has engaged a master to teach him Russian . 
It is becoming dangerous to speak French in the streets . '' 
`` And how about you , Count Peter Kirilych ? 
If they call up the militia , you too will have to mount a horse , '' remarked the old count , addressing Pierre . 
Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all through dinner , seeming not to grasp what was said . 
He looked at the count . 
`` Oh yes , the war , '' he said . 
`` No ! 
What sort of warrior should I make ? 
And yet everything is so strange , so strange ! 
I ca n't make it out . 
I do n't know , I am very far from having military tastes , but in these times no one can answer for himself . '' 
After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair and with a serious face asked Sonya , who was considered an excellent reader , to read the appeal . 
`` To Moscow , our ancient Capital ! 
`` The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces . 
He comes to despoil our beloved country , '' Sonya read painstakingly in her high-pitched voice . 
The count listened with closed eyes , heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages . 
Natasha sat erect , gazing with a searching look now at her father and now at Pierre . 
Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round . 
The countess shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression in the manifesto . 
In all these words she saw only that the danger threatening her son would not soon be over . 
Shinshin , with a sarcastic smile on his lips , was evidently preparing to make fun of anything that gave him the opportunity : Sonya 's reading , any remark of the count 's , or even the manifesto itself should no better pretext present itself . 
After reading about the dangers that threatened Russia , the hopes the Emperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobility , Sonya , with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was being paid to her , read the last words : `` We ourselves will not delay to appear among our people in that Capital and in others parts of our realm for consultation , and for the direction of all our levies , both those now barring the enemy 's path and those freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear . 
May the ruin he hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head , and may Europe delivered from bondage glorify the name of Russia ! '' 
`` Yes , that 's it ! '' 
cried the count , opening his moist eyes and sniffing repeatedly , as if a strong vinaigrette had been held to his nose ; and he added , `` Let the Emperor but say the word and we 'll sacrifice everything and begrudge nothing . '' 
Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on the count 's patriotism , Natasha jumped up from her place and ran to her father . 
`` What a darling our Papa is ! '' 
she cried , kissing him , and she again looked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned to her with her better spirits . 
`` There ! 
Here 's a patriot for you ! '' 
said Shinshin . 
`` Not a patriot at all , but simply ... '' Natasha replied in an injured tone . 
`` Everything seems funny to you , but this is n't at all a joke ... '' `` A joke indeed ! '' 
put in the count . 
`` Let him but say the word and we 'll all go ... . 
We 're not Germans ! '' 
`` But did you notice , it says , ` for consultation ' ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` Never mind what it 's for ... '' At this moment , Petya , to whom nobody was paying any attention , came up to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voice that was now deep and now shrill : `` Well , Papa , I tell you definitely , and Mamma too , it 's as you please , but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army , because I ca n't ... that 's all ... '' The countess , in dismay , looked up to heaven , clasped her hands , and turned angrily to her husband . 
`` That comes of your talking ! '' 
said she . 
But the count had already recovered from his excitement . 
`` Come , come ! '' 
