Nicholas and his attendant , with `` Uncle '' and his huntsman , were all riding round the wolf , crying `` ulyulyu ! '' 
shouting and preparing to dismount each moment that the wolf crouched back , and starting forward again every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she would be safe . 
Already , at the beginning of this chase , Daniel , hearing the ulyulyuing , had rushed out from the wood . 
He saw Karay seize the wolf , and checked his horse , supposing the affair to be over . 
But when he saw that the horsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herself and ran for safety , Daniel set his chestnut galloping , not at the wolf but straight toward the wood , just as Karay had run to cut the animal off . 
As a result of this , he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been stopped a second time by `` Uncle 's '' borzois . 
Daniel galloped up silently , holding a naked dagger in his left hand and thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip as if it were a flail . 
Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut , breathing heavily , panted past him , and he heard the fall of a body and saw Daniel lying on the wolf 's back among the dogs , trying to seize her by the ears . 
It was evident to the dogs , the hunters , and to the wolf herself that all was now over . 
The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and tried to rise , but the borzois stuck to her . 
Daniel rose a little , took a step , and with his whole weight , as if lying down to rest , fell on the wolf , seizing her by the ears . 
Nicholas was about to stab her , but Daniel whispered , `` Do n't ! 
We 'll gag her ! '' 
and , changing his position , set his foot on the wolf 's neck . 
A stick was thrust between her jaws and she was fastened with a leash , as if bridled , her legs were bound together , and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side . 
With happy , exhausted faces , they laid the old wolf , alive , on a shying and snorting horse and , accompanied by the dogs yelping at her , took her to the place where they were all to meet . 
The hounds had killed two of the cubs and the borzois three . 
The huntsmen assembled with their booty and their stories , and all came to look at the wolf , which , with her broad-browed head hanging down and the bitten stick between her jaws , gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men surrounding her . 
When she was touched , she jerked her bound legs and looked wildly yet simply at everybody . 
Old Count Rostov also rode up and touched the wolf . 
`` Oh , what a formidable one ! '' 
said he . 
`` A formidable one , eh ? '' 
he asked Daniel , who was standing near . 
`` Yes , your excellency , '' answered Daniel , quickly doffing his cap . 
The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with Daniel . 
`` Ah , but you are a crusty fellow , friend ! '' 
said the count . 
For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy , childlike , meek , and amiable smile . 
The old count went home , and Natasha and Petya promised to return very soon , but as it was still early the hunt went farther . 
At midday they put the hounds into a ravine thickly overgrown with young trees . 
Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips . 
Facing him lay a field of winter rye , there his own huntsman stood alone in a hollow behind a hazel bush . 
The hounds had scarcely been loosed before Nicholas heard one he knew , Voltorn , giving tongue at intervals ; other hounds joined in , now pausing and now again giving tongue . 
A moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been found , and the whole pack , joining together , rushed along the ravine toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas . 
He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of the ravine , he even saw the hounds , and was expecting a fox to show itself at any moment on the ryefield opposite . 
The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois , and Nicholas saw a queer , short-legged red fox with a fine brush going hard across the field . 
The borzois bore down on it ... . 
Now they drew close to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and sharper curves , trailing its brush , when suddenly a strange white borzoi dashed in followed by a black one , and everything was in confusion ; the borzois formed a star-shaped figure , scarcely swaying their bodies and with tails turned away from the center of the group . 
Two huntsmen galloped up to the dogs ; one in a red cap , the other , a stranger , in a green coat . 
`` What 's this ? '' 
thought Nicholas . 
`` Where 's that huntsman from ? 
He is not ` Uncle 's ' man . '' 
The huntsmen got the fox , but stayed there a long time without strapping it to the saddle . 
Their horses , bridled and with high saddles , stood near them and there too the dogs were lying . 
The huntsmen waved their arms and did something to the fox . 
Then from that spot came the sound of a horn , with the signal agreed on in case of a fight . 
`` That 's Ilagin 's huntsman having a row with our Ivan , '' said Nicholas ' groom . 
Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and Petya to him , and rode at a footpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds together . 
Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on . 
Nicholas dismounted , and with Natasha and Petya , who had ridden up , stopped near the hounds , waiting to see how the matter would end . 
Out of the bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting and rode toward his young master , with the fox tied to his crupper . 
While still at a distance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully , but he was pale and breathless and his face was angry . 
One of his eyes was black , but he probably was not even aware of it . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
asked Nicholas . 
`` A likely thing , killing a fox our dogs had hunted ! 
And it was my gray bitch that caught it ! 
Go to law , indeed ! 
... He snatches at the fox ! 
I gave him one with the fox . 
Here it is on my saddle ! 
Do you want a taste of this ? 
... '' said the huntsman , pointing to his dagger and probably imagining himself still speaking to his foe . 
Nicholas , not stopping to talk to the man , asked his sister and Petya to wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy 's , Ilagin 's , hunting party was . 
The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field , and there , surrounded by inquiring sympathizers , recounted his exploits . 
The facts were that Ilagin , with whom the Rostovs had a quarrel and were at law , hunted over places that belonged by custom to the Rostovs , and had now , as if purposely , sent his men to the very woods the Rostovs were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had chased . 
Nicholas , though he had never seen Ilagin , with his usual absence of moderation in judgment , hated him cordially from reports of his arbitrariness and violence , and regarded him as his bitterest foe . 
He rode in angry agitation toward him , firmly grasping his whip and fully prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punish his enemy . 
Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentleman in a beaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome raven-black horse , accompanied by two hunt servants . 
Instead of an enemy , Nicholas found in Ilagin a stately and courteous gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young count 's acquaintance . 
Having ridden up to Nicholas , Ilagin raised his beaver cap and said he much regretted what had occurred and would have the man punished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone else 's borzois . 
He hoped to become better acquainted with the count and invited him to draw his covert . 
Natasha , afraid that her brother would do something dreadful , had followed him in some excitement . 
Seeing the enemies exchanging friendly greetings , she rode up to them . 
Ilagin lifted his beaver cap still higher to Natasha and said , with a pleasant smile , that the young countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as well as in her beauty , of which he had heard much . 
To expiate his huntsman 's offense , Ilagin pressed the Rostovs to come to an upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept for himself and which , he said , swarmed with hares . 
Nicholas agreed , and the hunt , now doubled , moved on . 
The way to Iligin 's upland was across the fields . 
The hunt servants fell into line . 
The masters rode together . 
`` Uncle , '' Rostov , and Ilagin kept stealthily glancing at one another 's dogs , trying not to be observed by their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to their own borzois . 
Rostov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small , pure-bred , red-spotted bitch on Ilagin 's leash , slender but with muscles like steel , a delicate muzzle , and prominent black eyes . 
He had heard of the swiftness of Ilagin 's borzois , and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival to his own Milka . 
In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Ilagin about the year 's harvest , Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch . 
`` A fine little bitch , that ! '' 
said he in a careless tone . 
`` Is she swift ? '' 
`` That one ? 
Yes , she 's a good dog , gets what she 's after , '' answered Ilagin indifferently , of the red-spotted bitch Erza , for which , a year before , he had given a neighbor three families of house serfs . 
`` So in your parts , too , the harvest is nothing to boast of , Count ? '' 
he went on , continuing the conversation they had begun . 
And considering it polite to return the young count 's compliment , Ilagin looked at his borzois and picked out Milka who attracted his attention by her breadth . 
`` That black-spotted one of yours is fine -- well shaped ! '' 
said he . 
`` Yes , she 's fast enough , '' replied Nicholas , and thought : `` If only a full-grown hare would cross the field now I 'd show you what sort of borzoi she is , '' and turning to his groom , he said he would give a ruble to anyone who found a hare . 
`` I do n't understand , '' continued Ilagin , `` how some sportsmen can be so jealous about game and dogs . 
For myself , I can tell you , Count , I enjoy riding in company such as this ... what could be better ? '' 
-LRB- he again raised his cap to Natasha -RRB- `` but as for counting skins and what one takes , I do n't care about that . '' 
`` Of course not ! '' 
`` Or being upset because someone else 's borzoi and not mine catches something . 
All I care about is to enjoy seeing the chase , is it not so , Count ? 
For I consider that ... '' `` A-tu ! '' 
came the long-drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers-in , who had halted . 
He stood on a knoll in the stubble , holding his whip aloft , and again repeated his long-drawn cry , `` A-tu ! '' 
-LRB- This call and the uplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting hare . -RRB- 
`` Ah , he has found one , I think , '' said Ilagin carelessly . 
`` Yes , we must ride up ... . 
Shall we both course it ? '' 
answered Nicholas , seeing in Erza and `` Uncle 's '' red Rugay two rivals he had never yet had a chance of pitting against his own borzois . 
`` And suppose they outdo my Milka at once ! '' 
he thought as he rode with `` Uncle '' and Ilagin toward the hare . 
`` A full-grown one ? '' 
asked Ilagin as he approached the whip who had sighted the hare -- and not without agitation he looked round and whistled to Erza . 
`` And you , Michael Nikanorovich ? '' 
he said , addressing `` Uncle . '' 
The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face . 
`` How can I join in ? 
Why , you 've given a village for each of your borzois ! 
That 's it , come on ! 
Yours are worth thousands . 
Try yours against one another , you two , and I 'll look on ! '' 
`` Rugay , hey , hey ! '' 
he shouted . 
`` Rugayushka ! '' 
he added , involuntarily by this diminutive expressing his affection and the hopes he placed on this red borzoi . 
Natasha saw and felt the agitation the two elderly men and her brother were trying to conceal , and was herself excited by it . 
The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll holding up his whip and the gentlefolk rode up to him at a footpace ; the hounds that were far off on the horizon turned away from the hare , and the whips , but not the gentlefolk , also moved away . 
All were moving slowly and sedately . 
`` How is it pointing ? '' 
asked Nicholas , riding a hundred paces toward the whip who had sighted the hare . 
But before the whip could reply , the hare , scenting the frost coming next morning , was unable to rest and leaped up . 
The pack on leash rushed downhill in full cry after the hare , and from all sides the borzois that were not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare . 
All the hunt , who had been moving slowly , shouted , `` Stop ! '' 
calling in the hounds , while the borzoi whips , with a cry of `` A-tu ! '' 
galloped across the field setting the borzois on the hare . 
The tranquil Ilagin , Nicholas , Natasha , and `` Uncle '' flew , reckless of where and how they went , seeing only the borzois and the hare and fearing only to lose sight even for an instant of the chase . 
The hare they had started was a strong and swift one . 
When he jumped up he did not run at once , but pricked his ears listening to the shouting and trampling that resounded from all sides at once . 
He took a dozen bounds , not very quickly , letting the borzois gain on him , and , finally having chosen his direction and realized his danger , laid back his ears and rushed off headlong . 
He had been lying in the stubble , but in front of him was the autumn sowing where the ground was soft . 
The two borzois of the huntsman who had sighted him , having been the nearest , were the first to see and pursue him , but they had not gone far before Ilagin 's red-spotted Erza passed them , got within a length , flew at the hare with terrible swiftness aiming at his scut , and , thinking she had seized him , rolled over like a ball . 
The hare arched his back and bounded off yet more swiftly . 
From behind Erza rushed the broad-haunched , black-spotted Milka and began rapidly gaining on the hare . 
`` Milashka , dear ! '' 
rose Nicholas ' triumphant cry . 
It looked as if Milka would immediately pounce on the hare , but she overtook him and flew past . 
The hare had squatted . 
Again the beautiful Erza reached him , but when close to the hare 's scut paused as if measuring the distance , so as not to make a mistake this time but seize his hind leg . 
`` Erza , darling ! '' 
Ilagin wailed in a voice unlike his own . 
Erza did not hearken to his appeal . 
At the very moment when she would have seized her prey , the hare moved and darted along the balk between the winter rye and the stubble . 
Again Erza and Milka were abreast , running like a pair of carriage horses , and began to overtake the hare , but it was easier for the hare to run on the balk and the borzois did not overtake him so quickly . 
`` Rugay , Rugayushka ! 
That 's it , come on ! '' 
came a third voice just then , and `` Uncle 's '' red borzoi , straining and curving its back , caught up with the two foremost borzois , pushed ahead of them regardless of the terrible strain , put on speed close to the hare , knocked it off the balk onto the ryefield , again put on speed still more viciously , sinking to his knees in the muddy field , and all one could see was how , muddying his back , he rolled over with the hare . 
A ring of borzois surrounded him . 
A moment later everyone had drawn up round the crowd of dogs . 
Only the delighted `` Uncle '' dismounted , and cut off a pad , shaking the hare for the blood to drip off , and anxiously glancing round with restless eyes while his arms and legs twitched . 
He spoke without himself knowing whom to or what about . 
`` That 's it , come on ! 
That 's a dog ! 
... There , it has beaten them all , the thousand-ruble as well as the one-ruble borzois . 
That 's it , come on ! '' 
said he , panting and looking wrathfully around as if he were abusing someone , as if they were all his enemies and had insulted him , and only now had he at last succeeded in justifying himself . 
`` There are your thousand-ruble ones ... . 
That 's it , come on ! 
... '' `` Rugay , here 's a pad for you ! '' 
he said , throwing down the hare 's muddy pad . 
`` You 've deserved it , that 's it , come on ! '' 
`` She 'd tired herself out , she 'd run it down three times by herself , '' said Nicholas , also not listening to anyone and regardless of whether he were heard or not . 
`` But what is there in running across it like that ? '' 
said Ilagin 's groom . 
`` Once she had missed it and turned it away , any mongrel could take it , '' Ilagin was saying at the same time , breathless from his gallop and his excitement . 
At the same moment Natasha , without drawing breath , screamed joyously , ecstatically , and so piercingly that it set everyone 's ear tingling . 
By that shriek she expressed what the others expressed by all talking at once , and it was so strange that she must herself have been ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have been amazed at it at any other time . 
`` Uncle '' himself twisted up the hare , threw it neatly and smartly across his horse 's back as if by that gesture he meant to rebuke everybody , and , with an air of not wishing to speak to anyone , mounted his bay and rode off . 
The others all followed , dispirited and shamefaced , and only much later were they able to regain their former affectation of indifference . 
For a long time they continued to look at red Rugay who , his arched back spattered with mud and clanking the ring of his leash , walked along just behind `` Uncle 's '' horse with the serene air of a conqueror . 
`` Well , I am like any other dog as long as it 's not a question of coursing . 
But when it is , then look out ! '' 
his appearance seemed to Nicholas to be saying . 
When , much later , `` Uncle '' rode up to Nicholas and began talking to him , he felt flattered that , after what had happened , `` Uncle '' deigned to speak to him . 
Toward evening Ilagin took leave of Nicholas , who found that they were so far from home that he accepted `` Uncle 's '' offer that the hunting party should spend the night in his little village of Mikhaylovna . 
`` And if you put up at my house that will be better still . 
That 's it , come on ! '' 
said `` Uncle . '' 
`` You see it 's damp weather , and you could rest , and the little countess could be driven home in a trap . '' 
`` Uncle 's '' offer was accepted . 
A huntsman was sent to Otradnoe for a trap , while Nicholas rode with Natasha and Petya to `` Uncle 's '' house . 
Some five male domestic serfs , big and little , rushed out to the front porch to meet their master . 
A score of women serfs , old and young , as well as children , popped out from the back entrance to have a look at the hunters who were arriving . 
The presence of Natasha - a woman , a lady , and on horseback -- raised the curiosity of the serfs to such a degree that many of them came up to her , stared her in the face , and unabashed by her presence made remarks about her as though she were some prodigy on show and not a human being able to hear or understand what was said about her . 
`` Arinka ! 
Look , she sits sideways ! 
There she sits and her skirt dangles ... . 
See , she 's got a little hunting horn ! '' 
`` Goodness gracious ! 
See her knife ? 
... '' `` Is n't she a Tartar ! '' 
`` How is it you did n't go head over heels ? '' 
asked the boldest of all , addressing Natasha directly . 
`` Uncle '' dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which stood in the midst of an overgrown garden and , after a glance at his retainers , shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should take themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made to receive the guests and the visitors . 
The serfs all dispersed . 
`` Uncle '' lifted Natasha off her horse and taking her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch . 
The house , with its bare , unplastered log walls , was not overclean -- it did not seem that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless -- but neither was it noticeably neglected . 
In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples , and wolf and fox skins hung about . 
`` Uncle '' led the visitors through the anteroom into a small hall with a folding table and red chairs , then into the drawing room with a round birchwood table and a sofa , and finally into his private room where there was a tattered sofa , a worn carpet , and portraits of Suvorov , of the host 's father and mother , and of himself in military uniform . 
The study smelt strongly of tobacco and dogs . 
`` Uncle '' asked his visitors to sit down and make themselves at home , and then went out of the room . 
Rugay , his back still muddy , came into the room and lay down on the sofa , cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth . 
Leading from the study was a passage in which a partition with ragged curtains could be seen . 
From behind this came women 's laughter and whispers . 
Natasha , Nicholas , and Petya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa . 
Petya , leaning on his elbow , fell asleep at once . 
Natasha and Nicholas were silent . 
Their faces glowed , they were hungry and very cheerful . 
They looked at one another -LRB- now that the hunt was over and they were in the house , Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to show his manly superiority over his sister -RRB- , Natasha gave him a wink , and neither refrained long from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had a pretext ready to account for it . 
After a while `` Uncle '' came in , in a Cossack coat , blue trousers , and small top boots . 
And Natasha felt that this costume , the very one she had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe , was just the right thing and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat . 
`` Uncle '' too was in high spirits and far from being offended by the brother 's and sister 's laughter -LRB- it could never enter his head that they might be laughing at his way of life -RRB- he himself joined in the merriment . 
`` That 's right , young countess , that 's it , come on ! 
I never saw anyone like her ! '' 
said he , offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stem and , with a practiced motion of three fingers , taking down another that had been cut short . 
`` She 's ridden all day like a man , and is as fresh as ever ! '' 
Soon after `` Uncle 's '' reappearance the door was opened , evidently from the sound by a barefooted girl , and a stout , rosy , good-looking woman of about forty , with a double chin and full red lips , entered carrying a large loaded tray . 
With hospitable dignity and cordiality in her glance and in every motion , she looked at the visitors and , with a pleasant smile , bowed respectfully . 
In spite of her exceptional stoutness , which caused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw back her head , this woman -LRB- who was `` Uncle 's '' housekeeper -RRB- trod very lightly . 
She went to the table , set down the tray , and with her plump white hands deftly took from it the bottles and various hors d'oeuvres and dishes and arranged them on the table . 
When she had finished , she stepped aside and stopped at the door with a smile on her face . 
`` Here I am . 
I am she ! 
Now do you understand ` Uncle ' ? '' 
her expression said to Rostov . 
How could one help understanding ? 
Not only Nicholas , but even Natasha understood the meaning of his puckered brow and the happy complacent smile that slightly puckered his lips when Anisya Fedorovna entered . 
On the tray was a bottle of herb wine , different kinds of vodka , pickled mushrooms , rye cakes made with buttermilk , honey in the comb , still mead and sparkling mead , apples , nuts -LRB- raw and roasted -RRB- , and nut-and-honey sweets . 
Afterwards she brought a freshly roasted chicken , ham , preserves made with honey , and preserves made with sugar . 
All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna 's housekeeping , gathered and prepared by her . 
The smell and taste of it all had a smack of Anisya Fedorovna herself : a savor of juiciness , cleanliness , whiteness , and pleasant smiles . 
`` Take this , little Lady-Countess ! '' 
she kept saying , as she offered Natasha first one thing and then another . 
Natasha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten such buttermilk cakes , such aromatic jam , such honey-and-nut sweets , or such a chicken anywhere . 
Anisya Fedorovna left the room . 
After supper , over their cherry brandy , Rostov and `` Uncle '' talked of past and future hunts , of Rugay and Ilagin 's dogs , while Natasha sat upright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes . 
She tried several times to wake Petya that he might eat something , but he only muttered incoherent words without waking up . 
Natasha felt so lighthearted and happy in these novel surroundings that she only feared the trap would come for her too soon . 
After a casual pause , such as often occurs when receiving friends for the first time in one 's own house , `` Uncle , '' answering a thought that was in his visitors ' mind , said : `` This , you see , is how I am finishing my days ... Death will come . 
That 's it , come on ! 
Nothing will remain . 
Then why harm anyone ? '' 
`` Uncle 's '' face was very significant and even handsome as he said this . 
Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good he had heard about him from his father and the neighbors . 
Throughout the whole province `` Uncle '' had the reputation of being the most honorable and disinterested of cranks . 
They called him in to decide family disputes , chose him as executor , confided secrets to him , elected him to be a justice and to other posts ; but he always persistently refused public appointments , passing the autumn and spring in the fields on his bay gelding , sitting at home in winter , and lying in his overgrown garden in summer . 
`` Why do n't you enter the service , Uncle ? '' 
`` I did once , but gave it up . 
I am not fit for it . 
That 's it , come on ! 
I ca n't make head or tail of it . 
That 's for you -- I have n't brains enough . 
Now , hunting is another matter -- that 's it , come on ! 
Open the door , there ! '' 
he shouted . 
`` Why have you shut it ? '' 
The door at the end of the passage led to the huntsmen 's room , as they called the room for the hunt servants . 
There was a rapid patter of bare feet , and an unseen hand opened the door into the huntsmen 's room , from which came the clear sounds of a balalayka on which someone , who was evidently a master of the art , was playing . 
Natasha had been listening to those strains for some time and now went out into the passage to hear better . 
`` That 's Mitka , my coachman ... . 
I have got him a good balalayka . 
I 'm fond of it , '' said `` Uncle . '' 
It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in the huntsmen 's room when `` Uncle '' returned from the chase . 
`` Uncle '' was fond of such music . 
`` How good ! 
Really very good ! '' 
said Nicholas with some unintentional superciliousness , as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased him very much . 
`` Very good ? '' 
said Natasha reproachfully , noticing her brother 's tone . 
`` Not ` very good ' it 's simply delicious ! '' 
Just as `` Uncle 's '' pickled mushrooms , honey , and cherry brandy had seemed to her the best in the world , so also that song , at that moment , seemed to her the acme of musical delight . 
`` More , please , more ! '' 
cried Natasha at the door as soon as the balalayka ceased . 
Mitka tuned up afresh , and recommenced thrumming the balalayka to the air of My Lady , with trills and variations . 
`` Uncle '' sat listening , slightly smiling , with his head on one side . 
The air was repeated a hundred times . 
The balalayka was retuned several times and the same notes were thrummed again , but the listeners did not grow weary of it and wished to hear it again and again . 
Anisya Fedorovna came in and leaned her portly person against the doorpost . 
`` You like listening ? '' 
she said to Natasha , with a smile extremely like `` Uncle 's . '' 
`` That 's a good player of ours , '' she added . 
`` He does n't play that part right ! '' 
said `` Uncle '' suddenly , with an energetic gesture . 
`` Here he ought to burst out -- that 's it , come on ! 
- ought to burst out . '' 
`` Do you play then ? '' 
asked Natasha . 
`` Uncle '' did not answer , but smiled . 
`` Anisya , go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right . 
I have n't touched it for a long time . 
That 's it -- come on ! 
I 've given it up . '' 
Anisya Fedorovna , with her light step , willingly went to fulfill her errand and brought back the guitar . 
Without looking at anyone , `` Uncle '' blew the dust off it and , tapping the case with his bony fingers , tuned the guitar and settled himself in his armchair . 
He took the guitar a little above the fingerboard , arching his left elbow with a somewhat theatrical gesture , and , with a wink at Anisya Fedorovna , struck a single chord , pure and sonorous , and then quietly , smoothly , and confidently began playing in very slow time , not My Lady , but the well-known song : Came a maiden down the street . 
The tune , played with precision and in exact time , began to thrill in the hearts of Nicholas and Natasha , arousing in them the same kind of sober mirth as radiated from Anisya Fedorovna 's whole being . 
Anisya Fedorovna flushed , and drawing her kerchief over her face went laughing out of the room . 
`` Uncle '' continued to play correctly , carefully , with energetic firmness , looking with a changed and inspired expression at the spot where Anisya Fedorovna had just stood . 
Something seemed to be laughing a little on one side of his face under his gray mustaches , especially as the song grew brisker and the time quicker and when , here and there , as he ran his fingers over the strings , something seemed to snap . 
`` Lovely , lovely ! 
Go on , Uncle , go on ! '' 
shouted Natasha as soon as he had finished . 
She jumped up and hugged and kissed him . 
`` Nicholas , Nicholas ! '' 
she said , turning to her brother , as if asking him : `` What is it moves me so ? '' 
Nicholas too was greatly pleased by `` Uncle 's '' playing , and `` Uncle '' played the piece over again . 
Anisya Fedorovna 's smiling face reappeared in the doorway and behind hers other faces ... Fetching water clear and sweet , Stop , dear maiden , I entreat - played `` Uncle '' once more , running his fingers skillfully over the strings , and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders . 
`` Go on , Uncle dear , '' Natasha wailed in an imploring tone as if her life depended on it . 
`` Uncle '' rose , and it was as if there were two men in him : one of them smiled seriously at the merry fellow , while the merry fellow struck a naive and precise attitude preparatory to a folk dance . 
`` Now then , niece ! '' 
he exclaimed , waving to Natasha the hand that had just struck a chord . 
Natasha threw off the shawl from her shoulders , ran forward to face `` Uncle , '' and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion with her shoulders and struck an attitude . 
Where , how , and when had this young countess , educated by an emigree French governess , imbibed from the Russian air she breathed that spirit and obtained that manner which the pas de chale * would , one would have supposed , long ago have effaced ? 
But the spirit and the movements were those inimitable and unteachable Russian ones that `` Uncle '' had expected of her . 
As soon as she had struck her pose , and smiled triumphantly , proudly , and with sly merriment , the fear that had at first seized Nicholas and the others that she might not do the right thing was at an end , and they were already admiring her . 
* The French shawl dance . 
She did the right thing with such precision , such complete precision , that Anisya Fedorovna , who had at once handed her the handkerchief she needed for the dance , had tears in her eyes , though she laughed as she watched this slim , graceful countess , reared in silks and velvets and so different from herself , who yet was able to understand all that was in Anisya and in Anisya 's father and mother and aunt , and in every Russian man and woman . 
`` Well , little countess ; that 's it -- come on ! '' 
cried `` Uncle , '' with a joyous laugh , having finished the dance . 
`` Well done , niece ! 
Now a fine young fellow must be found as husband for you . 
That 's it -- come on ! '' 
`` He 's chosen already , '' said Nicholas smiling . 
`` Oh ? '' 
said `` Uncle '' in surprise , looking inquiringly at Natasha , who nodded her head with a happy smile . 
`` And such a one ! '' 
she said . 
But as soon as she had said it a new train of thoughts and feelings arose in her . 
`` What did Nicholas ' smile mean when he said ` chosen already ' ? 
Is he glad of it or not ? 
It is as if he thought my Bolkonski would not approve of or understand our gaiety . 
But he would understand it all . 
Where is he now ? '' 
she thought , and her face suddenly became serious . 
But this lasted only a second . 
`` Do n't dare to think about it , '' she said to herself , and sat down again smilingly beside `` Uncle , '' begging him to play something more . 
`` Uncle '' played another song and a valse ; then after a pause he cleared his throat and sang his favorite hunting song : As 't was growing dark last night Fell the snow so soft and light ... `` Uncle '' sang as peasants sing , with full and naive conviction that the whole meaning of a song lies in the words and that the tune comes of itself , and that apart from the words there is no tune , which exists only to give measure to the words . 
As a result of this the unconsidered tune , like the song of a bird , was extraordinarily good . 
Natasha was in ecstasies over `` Uncle 's '' singing . 
She resolved to give up learning the harp and to play only the guitar . 
She asked `` Uncle '' for his guitar and at once found the chords of the song . 
After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men , who had been sent to look for them , arrived to fetch Natasha and Petya . 
The count and countess did not know where they were and were very anxious , said one of the men . 
Petya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the two traps . 
Natasha and Nicholas got into the other . 
`` Uncle '' wrapped Natasha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness . 
He accompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not be crossed , so that they had to go round by the ford , and he sent huntsmen to ride in front with lanterns . 
`` Good-by , dear niece , '' his voice called out of the darkness -- not the voice Natasha had known previously , but the one that had sung As 't was growing dark last night . 
In the village through which they passed there were red lights and a cheerful smell of smoke . 
`` What a darling Uncle is ! '' 
said Natasha , when they had come out onto the highroad . 
`` Yes , '' returned Nicholas . 
`` You 're not cold ? '' 
`` No . 
I 'm quite , quite all right . 
I feel so comfortable ! '' 
answered Natasha , almost perplexed by her feelings . 
They remained silent a long while . 
The night was dark and damp . 
They could not see the horses , but only heard them splashing through the unseen mud . 
What was passing in that receptive childlike soul that so eagerly caught and assimilated all the diverse impressions of life ? 
How did they all find place in her ? 
But she was very happy . 
As they were nearing home she suddenly struck up the air of As 't was growing dark last night -- the tune of which she had all the way been trying to get and had at last caught . 
`` Got it ? '' 
said Nicholas . 
`` What were you thinking about just now , Nicholas ? '' 
inquired Natasha . 
They were fond of asking one another that question . 
`` I ? '' 
said Nicholas , trying to remember . 
`` Well , you see , first I thought that Rugay , the red hound , was like Uncle , and that if he were a man he would always keep Uncle near him , if not for his riding , then for his manner . 
What a good fellow Uncle is ! 
Do n't you think so ? 
... Well , and you ? '' 
`` I ? 
Wait a bit , wait ... . 
Yes , first I thought that we are driving along and imagining that we are going home , but that heaven knows where we are really going in the darkness , and that we shall arrive and suddenly find that we are not in Otradnoe , but in Fairyland . 
And then I thought ... No , nothing else . '' 
`` I know , I expect you thought of him , '' said Nicholas , smiling as Natasha knew by the sound of his voice . 
`` No , '' said Natasha , though she had in reality been thinking about Prince Andrew at the same time as of the rest , and of how he would have liked `` Uncle . '' 
`` And then I was saying to myself all the way , ` How well Anisya carried herself , how well ! ' '' 
And Nicholas heard her spontaneous , happy , ringing laughter . 
`` And do you know , '' she suddenly said , `` I know that I shall never again be as happy and tranquil as I am now . '' 
`` Rubbish , nonsense , humbug ! '' 
exclaimed Nicholas , and he thought : `` How charming this Natasha of mine is ! 
I have no other friend like her and never shall have . 
Why should she marry ? 
We might always drive about together ! '' 
`` What a darling this Nicholas of mine is ! '' 
thought Natasha . 
`` Ah , there are still lights in the drawingroom ! '' 
she said , pointing to the windows of the house that gleamed invitingly in the moist velvety darkness of the night . 
Count Ilya Rostov had resigned the position of Marshal of the Nobility because it involved him in too much expense , but still his affairs did not improve . 
Natasha and Nicholas often noticed their parents conferring together anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of selling the fine ancestral Rostov house and estate near Moscow . 
It was not necessary to entertain so freely as when the count had been Marshal , and life at Otradnoe was quieter than in former years , but still the enormous house and its lodges were full of people and more than twenty sat down to table every day . 
These were all their own people who had settled down in the house almost as members of the family , or persons who were , it seemed , obliged to live in the count 's house . 
Such were Dimmler the musician and his wife , Vogel the dancing master and his family , Belova , an old maiden lady , an inmate of the house , and many others such as Petya 's tutors , the girls ' former governess , and other people who simply found it preferable and more advantageous to live in the count 's house than at home . 
They had not as many visitors as before , but the old habits of life without which the count and countess could not conceive of existence remained unchanged . 
There was still the hunting establishment which Nicholas had even enlarged , the same fifty horses and fifteen grooms in the stables , the same expensive presents and dinner parties to the whole district on name days ; there were still the count 's games of whist and boston , at which - spreading out his cards so that everybody could see them -- he let himself be plundered of hundreds of rubles every day by his neighbors , who looked upon an opportunity to play a rubber with Count Rostov as a most profitable source of income . 
The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net , trying not to believe that he was entangled but becoming more and more so at every step , and feeling too feeble to break the meshes or to set to work carefully and patiently to disentangle them . 
The countess , with her loving heart , felt that her children were being ruined , that it was not the count 's fault for he could not help being what he was -- that -LRB- though he tried to hide it -RRB- he himself suffered from the consciousness of his own and his children 's ruin , and she tried to find means of remedying the position . 
From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution , namely , for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress . 
She felt this to be their last hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found for him , she would have to abandon the hope of ever getting matters right . 
This match was with Julie Karagina , the daughter of excellent and virtuous parents , a girl the Rostovs had known from childhood , and who had now become a wealthy heiress through the death of the last of her brothers . 
The countess had written direct to Julie 's mother in Moscow suggesting a marriage between their children and had received a favorable answer from her . 
Karagina had replied that for her part she was agreeable , and everything depend on her daughter 's inclination . 
She invited Nicholas to come to Moscow . 
Several times the countess , with tears in her eyes , told her son that now both her daughters were settled , her only wish was to see him married . 
She said she could lie down in her grave peacefully if that were accomplished . 
Then she told him that she knew of a splendid girl and tried to discover what he thought about marriage . 
At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to Moscow during the holidays to amuse himself . 
Nicholas guessed what his mother 's remarks were leading to and during one of these conversations induced her to speak quite frankly . 
She told him that her only hope of getting their affairs disentangled now lay in his marrying Julie Karagina . 
`` But , Mamma , suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune , would you expect me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of money ? '' 
he asked his mother , not realizing the cruelty of his question and only wishing to show his noble-mindedness . 
`` No , you have not understood me , '' said his mother , not knowing how to justify herself . 
`` You have not understood me , Nikolenka . 
It is your happiness I wish for , '' she added , feeling that she was telling an untruth and was becoming entangled . 
She began to cry . 
`` Mamma , do n't cry ! 
Only tell me that you wish it , and you know I will give my life , anything , to put you at ease , '' said Nicholas . 
`` I would sacrifice anything for you -- even my feelings . '' 
But the countess did not want the question put like that : she did not want a sacrifice from her son , she herself wished to make a sacrifice for him . 
`` No , you have not understood me , do n't let us talk about it , '' she replied , wiping away her tears . 
`` Maybe I do love a poor girl , '' said Nicholas to himself . 
`` Am I to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for money ? 
I wonder how Mamma could speak so to me . 
Because Sonya is poor I must not love her , '' he thought , `` must not respond to her faithful , devoted love ? 
Yet I should certainly be happier with her than with some doll-like Julie . 
I can always sacrifice my feelings for my family 's welfare , '' he said to himself , `` but I ca n't coerce my feelings . 
If I love Sonya , that feeling is for me stronger and higher than all else . '' 
Nicholas did not go to Moscow , and the countess did not renew the conversation with him about marriage . 
She saw with sorrow , and sometimes with exasperation , symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and the portionless Sonya . 
Though she blamed herself for it , she could not refrain from grumbling at and worrying Sonya , often pulling her up without reason , addressing her stiffly as `` my dear , '' and using the formal `` you '' instead of the intimate `` thou '' in speaking to her . 
The kindhearted countess was the more vexed with Sonya because that poor , dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek , so kind , so devotedly grateful to her benefactors , and so faithfully , unchangingly , and unselfishly in love with Nicholas , that there were no grounds for finding fault with her . 
Nicholas was spending the last of his leave at home . 
A fourth letter had come from Prince Andrew , from Rome , in which he wrote that he would have been on his way back to Russia long ago had not his wound unexpectedly reopened in the warm climate , which obliged him to defer his return till the beginning of the new year . 
Natasha was still as much in love with her betrothed , found the same comfort in that love , and was still as ready to throw herself into all the pleasures of life as before ; but at the end of the fourth month of their separation she began to have fits of depression which she could not master . 
She felt sorry for herself : sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to anyone -- while she felt herself so capable of loving and being loved . 
Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs ' home . 
Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass , the solemn and wearisome Christmas congratulations from neighbors and servants , and the new dresses everyone put on , there were no special festivities , though the calm frost of twenty degrees Reaumur , the dazzling sunshine by day , and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for some special celebration of the season . 
On the third day of Christmas week , after the midday dinner , all the inmates of the house dispersed to various rooms . 
It was the dullest time of the day . 
Nicholas , who had been visiting some neighbors that morning , was asleep on the sitting-room sofa . 
The old count was resting in his study . 
Sonya sat in the drawing room at the round table , copying a design for embroidery . 
The countess was playing patience . 
Nastasya Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old ladies . 
Natasha came into the room , went up to Sonya , glanced at what she was doing , and then went up to her mother and stood without speaking . 
`` Why are you wandering about like an outcast ? '' 
asked her mother . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
`` Him ... I want him ... now , this minute ! 
I want him ! '' 
said Natasha , with glittering eyes and no sign of a smile . 
The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter . 
`` Do n't look at me , Mamma ! 
Do n't look ; I shall cry directly . '' 
`` Sit down with me a little , '' said the countess . 
`` Mamma , I want him . 
Why should I be wasted like this , Mamma ? '' 
Her voice broke , tears gushed from her eyes , and she turned quickly to hide them and left the room . 
She passed into the sitting room , stood there thinking awhile , and then went into the maids ' room . 
There an old maidservant was grumbling at a young girl who stood panting , having just run in through the cold from the serfs ' quarters . 
`` Stop playing -- there 's a time for everything , '' said the old woman . 
`` Let her alone , Kondratevna , '' said Natasha . 
`` Go , Mavrushka , go . '' 
Having released Mavrushka , Natasha crossed the dancing hall and went to the vestibule . 
There an old footman and two young ones were playing cards . 
They broke off and rose as she entered . 
`` What can I do with them ? '' 
thought Natasha . 
`` Oh , Nikita , please go ... where can I send him ? 
... Yes , go to the yard and fetch a fowl , please , a cock , and you , Misha , bring me some oats . '' 
`` Just a few oats ? '' 
said Misha , cheerfully and readily . 
`` Go , go quickly , '' the old man urged him . 
`` And you , Theodore , get me a piece of chalk . '' 
On her way past the butler 's pantry she told them to set a samovar , though it was not at all the time for tea . 
Foka , the butler , was the most ill-tempered person in the house . 
Natasha liked to test her power over him . 
He distrusted the order and asked whether the samovar was really wanted . 
`` Oh dear , what a young lady ! '' 
said Foka , pretending to frown at Natasha . 
No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble as Natasha did . 
She could not see people unconcernedly , but had to send them on some errand . 
She seemed to be trying whether any of them would get angry or sulky with her ; but the serfs fulfilled no one 's orders so readily as they did hers . 
`` What can I do , where can I go ? '' 
