`` None but fools trust to luck in play , '' Dolokhov had then said . 
`` Or are you afraid to play with me ? '' 
Dolokhov now asked as if guessing Rostov 's thought . 
Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the mood he had shown at the Club dinner and at other times , when as if tired of everyday life he had felt a need to escape from it by some strange , and usually cruel , action . 
Rostov felt ill at ease . 
He tried , but failed , to find some joke with which to reply to Dolokhov 's words . 
But before he had thought of anything , Dolokhov , looking straight in his face , said slowly and deliberately so that everyone could hear : `` Do you remember we had a talk about cards ... ` He 's a fool who trusts to luck , one should make certain , ' and I want to try . '' 
`` To try his luck or the certainty ? '' 
Rostov asked himself . 
`` Well , you 'd better not play , '' Dolokhov added , and springing a new pack of cards said : `` Bank , gentlemen ! '' 
Moving the money forward he prepared to deal . 
Rostov sat down by his side and at first did not play . 
Dolokhov kept glancing at him . 
`` Why do n't you play ? '' 
he asked . 
And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up a card , putting a small stake on it , and beginning to play . 
`` I have no money with me , '' he said . 
`` I 'll trust you . '' 
Rostov staked five rubles on a card and lost , staked again , and again lost . 
Dolokhov `` killed , '' that is , beat , ten cards of Rostov 's running . 
`` Gentlemen , '' said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time . 
`` Please place your money on the cards or I may get muddled in the reckoning . '' 
One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted . 
`` Yes , you might , but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed . 
So I ask you to put the money on your cards , '' replied Dolokhov . 
`` Do n't stint yourself , we 'll settle afterwards , '' he added , turning to Rostov . 
The game continued ; a waiter kept handing round champagne . 
All Rostov 's cards were beaten and he had eight hundred rubles scored up against him . 
He wrote `` 800 rubles '' on a card , but while the waiter filled his glass he changed his mind and altered it to his usual stake of twenty rubles . 
`` Leave it , '' said Dolokhov , though he did not seem to be even looking at Rostov , `` you 'll win it back all the sooner . 
I lose to the others but win from you . 
Or are you afraid of me ? '' 
he asked again . 
Rostov submitted . 
He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a seven of hearts with a torn corner , which he had picked up from the floor . 
He well remembered that seven afterwards . 
He laid down the seven of hearts , on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written `` 800 rubles '' in clear upright figures ; he emptied the glass of warm champagne that was handed him , smiled at Dolokhov 's words , and with a sinking heart , waiting for a seven to turn up , gazed at Dolokhov 's hands which held the pack . 
Much depended on Rostov 's winning or losing on that seven of hearts . 
On the previous Sunday the old count had given his son two thousand rubles , and though he always disliked speaking of money difficulties had told Nicholas that this was all he could let him have till May , and asked him to be more economical this time . 
Nicholas had replied that it would be more than enough for him and that he gave his word of honor not to take anything more till the spring . 
Now only twelve hundred rubles was left of that money , so that this seven of hearts meant for him not only the loss of sixteen hundred rubles , but the necessity of going back on his word . 
With a sinking heart he watched Dolokhov 's hands and thought , `` Now then , make haste and let me have this card and I 'll take my cap and drive home to supper with Denisov , Natasha , and Sonya , and will certainly never touch a card again . '' 
At that moment his home life , jokes with Petya , talks with Sonya , duets with Natasha , piquet with his father , and even his comfortable bed in the house on the Povarskaya rose before him with such vividness , clearness , and charm that it seemed as if it were all a lost and unappreciated bliss , long past . 
He could not conceive that a stupid chance , letting the seven be dealt to the right rather than to the left , might deprive him of all this happiness , newly appreciated and newly illumined , and plunge him into the depths of unknown and undefined misery . 
That could not be , yet he awaited with a sinking heart the movement of Dolokhov 's hands . 
Those broad , reddish hands , with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs , laid down the pack and took up a glass and a pipe that were handed him . 
`` So you are not afraid to play with me ? '' 
repeated Dolokhov , and as if about to tell a good story he put down the cards , leaned back in his chair , and began deliberately with a smile : `` Yes , gentlemen , I 've been told there 's a rumor going about Moscow that I 'm a sharper , so I advise you to be careful . '' 
`` Come now , deal ! '' 
exclaimed Rostov . 
`` Oh , those Moscow gossips ! '' 
said Dolokhov , and he took up the cards with a smile . 
`` Aah ! '' 
Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head . 
The seven he needed was lying uppermost , the first card in the pack . 
He had lost more than he could pay . 
`` Still , do n't ruin yourself ! '' 
said Dolokhov with a side glance at Rostov as he continued to deal . 
An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested in their own play . 
The whole interest was concentrated on Rostov . 
Instead of sixteen hundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him , which he had reckoned up to ten thousand , but that now , as he vaguely supposed , must have risen to fifteen thousand . 
In reality it already exceeded twenty thousand rubles . 
Dolokhov was no longer listening to stories or telling them , but followed every movement of Rostov 's hands and occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him . 
He had decided to play until that score reached forty-three thousand . 
He had fixed on that number because forty-three was the sum of his and Sonya 's joint ages . 
Rostov , leaning his head on both hands , sat at the table which was scrawled over with figures , wet with spilled wine , and littered with cards . 
One tormenting impression did not leave him : that those broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt sleeves , those hands which he loved and hated , held him in their power . 
`` Six hundred rubles , ace , a corner , a nine ... winning it back 's impossible ... Oh , how pleasant it was at home ! 
... The knave , double or quits ... it ca n't be ! 
... And why is he doing this to me ? '' 
Rostov pondered . 
Sometimes he staked a large sum , but Dolokhov refused to accept it and fixed the stake himself . 
Nicholas submitted to him , and at one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridge over the Enns , and then guessed that the card that came first to hand from the crumpled heap under the table would save him , now counted the cords on his coat and took a card with that number and tried staking the total of his losses on it , then he looked round for aid from the other players , or peered at the now cold face of Dolokhov and tried to read what was passing in his mind . 
`` He knows of course what this loss means to me . 
He ca n't want my ruin . 
Was n't he my friend ? 
Was n't I fond of him ? 
But it 's not his fault . 
What 's he to do if he has such luck ? 
... And it 's not my fault either , '' he thought to himself , `` I have done nothing wrong . 
Have I killed anyone , or insulted or wished harm to anyone ? 
Why such a terrible misfortune ? 
And when did it begin ? 
Such a little while ago I came to this table with the thought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mamma 's name day and then going home . 
I was so happy , so free , so lighthearted ! 
And I did not realize how happy I was ! 
When did that end and when did this new , terrible state of things begin ? 
What marked the change ? 
I sat all the time in this same place at this table , chose and placed cards , and watched those broad-boned agile hands in the same way . 
When did it happen and what has happened ? 
I am well and strong and still the same and in the same place . 
No , it ca n't be ! 
Surely it will all end in nothing ! '' 
He was flushed and bathed in perspiration , though the room was not hot . 
His face was terrible and piteous to see , especially from its helpless efforts to seem calm . 
The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand . 
Rostov had just prepared a card , by bending the corner of which he meant to double the three thousand just put down to his score , when Dolokhov , slamming down the pack of cards , put it aside and began rapidly adding up the total of Rostov 's debt , breaking the chalk as he marked the figures in his clear , bold hand . 
`` Supper , it 's time for supper ! 
And here are the gypsies ! '' 
Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outside and saying something in their gypsy accents . 
Nicholas understood that it was all over ; but he said in an indifferent tone : `` Well , wo n't you go on ? 
I had a splendid card all ready , '' as if it were the fun of the game which interested him most . 
`` It 's all up ! 
I 'm lost ! '' 
thought he . 
`` Now a bullet through my brain - that 's all that 's left me ! '' 
And at the same time he said in a cheerful voice : `` Come now , just this one more little card ! '' 
`` All right ! '' 
said Dolokhov , having finished the addition . 
`` All right ! 
Twenty-one rubles , '' he said , pointing to the figure twenty-one by which the total exceeded the round sum of forty-three thousand ; and taking up a pack he prepared to deal . 
Rostov submissively unbent the corner of his card and , instead of the six thousand he had intended , carefully wrote twenty-one . 
`` It 's all the same to me , '' he said . 
`` I only want to see whether you will let me win this ten , or beat it . '' 
Dolokhov began to deal seriously . 
Oh , how Rostov detested at that moment those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists , which held him in their power ... . 
The ten fell to him . 
`` You owe forty-three thousand , Count , '' said Dolokhov , and stretching himself he rose from the table . 
`` One does get tired sitting so long , '' he added . 
`` Yes , I 'm tired too , '' said Rostov . 
Dolokhov cut him short , as if to remind him that it was not for him to jest . 
`` When am I to receive the money , Count ? '' 
Rostov , flushing , drew Dolokhov into the next room . 
`` I can not pay it all immediately . 
Will you take an I.O.U. ? '' 
he said . 
`` I say , Rostov , '' said Dolokhov clearly , smiling and looking Nicholas straight in the eyes , `` you know the saying , ` Lucky in love , unlucky at cards . ' 
Your cousin is in love with you , I know . '' 
`` Oh , it 's terrible to feel oneself so in this man 's power , '' thought Rostov . 
He knew what a shock he would inflict on his father and mother by the news of this loss , he knew what a relief it would be to escape it all , and felt that Dolokhov knew that he could save him from all this shame and sorrow , but wanted now to play with him as a cat does with a mouse . 
`` Your cousin ... '' Dolokhov started to say , but Nicholas interrupted him . 
`` My cousin has nothing to do with this and it 's not necessary to mention her ! '' 
he exclaimed fiercely . 
`` Then when am I to have it ? '' 
`` Tomorrow , '' replied Rostov and left the room . 
To say `` tomorrow '' and keep up a dignified tone was not difficult , but to go home alone , see his sisters , brother , mother , and father , confess and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word of honor , was terrible . 
At home , they had not yet gone to bed . 
The young people , after returning from the theater , had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord . 
As soon as Nicholas entered , he was enfolded in that poetic atmosphere of love which pervaded the Rostov household that winter and , now after Dolokhov 's proposal and Iogel 's ball , seemed to have grown thicker round Sonya and Natasha as the air does before a thunderstorm . 
Sonya and Natasha , in the light-blue dresses they had worn at the theater , looking pretty and conscious of it , were standing by the clavichord , happy and smiling . 
Vera was playing chess with Shinshin in the drawing room . 
The old countess , waiting for the return of her husband and son , sat playing patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house . 
Denisov , with sparkling eyes and ruffled hair , sat at the clavichord striking chords with his short fingers , his legs thrown back and his eyes rolling as he sang , with his small , husky , but true voice , some verses called `` Enchantress , '' which he had composed , and to which he was trying to fit music : Enchantress , say , to my forsaken lyre What magic power is this recalls me still ? 
What spark has set my inmost soul on fire , What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill ? 
He was singing in passionate tones , gazing with his sparkling black-agate eyes at the frightened and happy Natasha . 
`` Splendid ! 
Excellent ! '' 
exclaimed Natasha . 
`` Another verse , '' she said , without noticing Nicholas . 
`` Everything 's still the same with them , '' thought Nicholas , glancing into the drawing room , where he saw Vera and his mother with the old lady . 
`` Ah , and here 's Nicholas ! '' 
cried Natasha , running up to him . 
`` Is Papa at home ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I am so glad you 've come ! '' 
said Natasha , without answering him . 
`` We are enjoying ourselves ! 
Vasili Dmitrich is staying a day longer for my sake ! 
Did you know ? '' 
`` No , Papa is not back yet , '' said Sonya . 
`` Nicholas , have you come ? 
Come here , dear ! '' 
called the old countess from the drawing room . 
Nicholas went to her , kissed her hand , and sitting down silently at her table began to watch her hands arranging the cards . 
From the dancing room , they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to persuade Natasha to sing . 
`` All wight ! 
All wight ! '' 
shouted Denisov . 
`` It 's no good making excuses now ! 
It 's your turn to sing the ba ` cawolla -- I entweat you ! '' 
The countess glanced at her silent son . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Oh , nothing , '' said he , as if weary of being continually asked the same question . 
`` Will Papa be back soon ? '' 
`` I expect so . '' 
`` Everything 's the same with them . 
They know nothing about it ! 
Where am I to go ? '' 
thought Nicholas , and went again into the dancing room where the clavichord stood . 
Sonya was sitting at the clavichord , playing the prelude to Denisov 's favorite barcarolle . 
Natasha was preparing to sing . 
Denisov was looking at her with enraptured eyes . 
Nicholas began pacing up and down the room . 
`` Why do they want to make her sing ? 
How can she sing ? 
There 's nothing to be happy about ! '' 
thought he . 
Sonya struck the first chord of the prelude . 
`` My God , I 'm a ruined and dishonored man ! 
A bullet through my brain is the only thing left me -- not singing ! '' 
his thoughts ran on . 
`` Go away ? 
But where to ? 
It 's one -- let them sing ! '' 
He continued to pace the room , looking gloomily at Denisov and the girls and avoiding their eyes . 
`` Nikolenka , what is the matter ? '' 
Sonya 's eyes fixed on him seemed to ask . 
She noticed at once that something had happened to him . 
Nicholas turned away from her . 
Natasha too , with her quick instinct , had instantly noticed her brother 's condition . 
But , though she noticed it , she was herself in such high spirits at that moment , so far from sorrow , sadness , or self-reproach , that she purposely deceived herself as young people often do . 
`` No , I am too happy now to spoil my enjoyment by sympathy with anyone 's sorrow , '' she felt , and she said to herself : `` No , I must be mistaken , he must be feeling happy , just as I am . '' 
`` Now , Sonya ! '' 
she said , going to the very middle of the room , where she considered the resonance was best . 
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly , as ballet dancers do , Natasha , rising energetically from her heels to her toes , stepped to the middle of the room and stood still . 
`` Yes , that 's me ! '' 
she seemed to say , answering the rapt gaze with which Denisov followed her . 
`` And what is she so pleased about ? '' 
thought Nicholas , looking at his sister . 
`` Why is n't she dull and ashamed ? '' 
Natasha took the first note , her throat swelled , her chest rose , her eyes became serious . 
At that moment she was oblivious of her surroundings , and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone may produce at the same intervals hold for the same time , but which leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill you and make you weep . 
Natasha , that winter , had for the first time begun to sing seriously , mainly because Denisov so delighted in her singing . 
She no longer sang as a child , there was no longer in her singing that comical , childish , painstaking effect that had been in it before ; but she did not yet sing well , as all the connoisseurs who heard her said : `` It is not trained , but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained . '' 
Only they generally said this some time after she had finished singing . 
While that untrained voice , with its incorrect breathing and labored transitions , was sounding , even the connoisseurs said nothing , but only delighted in it and wished to hear it again . 
In her voice there was a virginal freshness , an unconsciousness of her own powers , and an as yet untrained velvety softness , which so mingled with her lack of art in singing that it seemed as if nothing in that voice could be altered without spoiling it . 
`` What is this ? '' 
thought Nicholas , listening to her with widely opened eyes . 
`` What has happened to her ? 
How she is singing today ! '' 
And suddenly the whole world centered for him on anticipation of the next note , the next phrase , and everything in the world was divided into three beats : `` Oh mio crudele affetto . '' 
... One , two , three ... one , two , three ... One ... `` Oh mio crudele affetto . '' 
... One , two , three ... One . 
`` Oh , this senseless life of ours ! '' 
thought Nicholas . 
`` All this misery , and money , and Dolokhov , and anger , and honor -- it 's all nonsense ... but this is real ... . 
Now then , Natasha , now then , dearest ! 
Now then , darling ! 
How will she take that si ? 
She 's taken it ! 
Thank God ! '' 
And without noticing that he was singing , to strengthen the si he sung a second , a third below the high note . 
`` Ah , God ! 
How fine ! 
Did I really take it ? 
How fortunate ! '' 
he thought . 
Oh , how that chord vibrated , and how moved was something that was finest in Rostov 's soul ! 
And this something was apart from everything else in the world and above everything in the world . 
`` What were losses , and Dolokhov , and words of honor ? 
... All nonsense ! 
One might kill and rob and yet be happy ... '' It was long since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as he did that day . 
But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than reality again presented itself . 
He got up without saying a word and went downstairs to his own room . 
A quarter of an hour later the old count came in from his Club , cheerful and contented . 
Nicholas , hearing him drive up , went to meet him . 
`` Well -- had a good time ? '' 
said the old count , smiling gaily and proudly at his son . 
Nicholas tried to say `` Yes , '' but could not : and he nearly burst into sobs . 
The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his son 's condition . 
`` Ah , it ca n't be avoided ! '' 
thought Nicholas , for the first and last time . 
And suddenly , in the most casual tone , which made him feel ashamed feel of himself , he said , as if merely asking his father to let him have the carriage to drive to town : `` Papa , I have come on a matter of business . 
I was nearly forgetting . 
I need some money . '' 
`` Dear me ! '' 
said his father , who was in a specially good humor . 
`` I told you it would not be enough . 
How much ? '' 
`` Very much , '' said Nicholas flushing , and with a stupid careless smile , for which he was long unable to forgive himself , `` I have lost a little , I mean a good deal , a great deal -- forty three thousand . '' 
`` What ! 
To whom ? 
... Nonsense ! '' 
cried the count , suddenly reddening with an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do . 
`` I promised to pay tomorrow , '' said Nicholas . 
`` Well ! 
... '' said the old count , spreading out his arms and sinking helplessly on the sofa . 
`` It ca n't be helped It happens to everyone ! '' 
said the son , with a bold , free , and easy tone , while in his soul he regarded himself as a worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime . 
He longed to kiss his father 's hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness , but said , in a careless and even rude voice , that it happens to everyone ! 
The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son 's words and began bustlingly searching for something . 
`` Yes , yes , '' he muttered , `` it will be difficult , I fear , difficult to raise ... happens to everybody ! 
Yes , who has not done it ? '' 
And with a furtive glance at his son 's face , the count went out of the room ... . 
Nicholas had been prepared for resistance , but had not at all expected this . 
`` Papa ! 
Pa-pa ! '' 
he called after him , sobbing , `` forgive me ! '' 
And seizing his father 's hand , he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears . 
While father and son were having their explanation , the mother and daughter were having one not less important . 
Natasha came running to her mother , quite excited . 
`` Mamma ! 
... Mamma ! 
... He has made me ... '' `` Made what ? '' 
`` Made , made me an offer , Mamma ! 
Mamma ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
The countess did not believe her ears . 
Denisov had proposed . 
To whom ? 
To this chit of a girl , Natasha , who not so long ago was playing with dolls and who was still having lessons . 
`` Do n't , Natasha ! 
What nonsense ! '' 
she said , hoping it was a joke . 
`` Nonsense , indeed ! 
I am telling you the fact , '' said Natasha indignantly . 
`` I come to ask you what to do , and you call it ` nonsense ! ' '' 
The countess shrugged her shoulders . 
`` If it true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal , tell him he is a fool , that 's all ! '' 
`` No , he 's not a fool ! '' 
replied Natasha indignantly and seriously . 
`` Well then , what do you want ? 
You 're all in love nowadays . 
Well , if you are in love , marry him ! '' 
said the countess , with a laugh of annoyance . 
`` Good luck to you ! '' 
`` No , Mamma , I 'm not in love with him , I suppose I 'm not in love with him . '' 
`` Well then , tell him so . '' 
`` Mamma , are you cross ? 
Do n't be cross , dear ! 
Is it my fault ? '' 
`` No , but what is it , my dear ? 
Do you want me to go and tell him ? '' 
said the countess smiling . 
`` No , I will do it myself , only tell me what to say . 
It 's all very well for you , '' said Natasha , with a responsive smile . 
`` You should have seen how he said it ! 
I know he did not mean to say it , but it came out accidently . '' 
`` Well , all the same , you must refuse him . '' 
`` No , I must n't . 
I am so sorry for him ! 
He 's so nice . '' 
`` Well then , accept his offer . 
It 's high time for you to be married , '' answered the countess sharply and sarcastically . 
`` No , Mamma , but I 'm so sorry for him . 
I do n't know how I 'm to say it . '' 
`` And there 's nothing for you to say . 
I shall speak to him myself , '' said the countess , indignant that they should have dared to treat this little Natasha as grown up . 
`` No , not on any account ! 
I will tell him myself , and you 'll listen at the door , '' and Natasha ran across the drawing room to the dancing hall , where Denisov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord with his face in his hands . 
He jumped up at the sound of her light step . 
`` Nataly , '' he said , moving with rapid steps toward her , `` decide my fate . 
It is in your hands . '' 
`` Vasili Dmitrich , I 'm so sorry for you ! 
... No , but you are so nice ... but it wo n't do ... not that ... but as a friend , I shall always love you . '' 
Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not understand . 
She kissed his rough curly black head . 
At this instant , they heard the quick rustle of the countess ' dress . 
She came up to them . 
`` Vasili Dmitrich , I thank you for the honor , '' she said , with an embarrassed voice , though it sounded severe to Denisov -- `` but my daughter is so young , and I thought that , as my son 's friend , you would have addressed yourself first to me . 
In that case you would not have obliged me to give this refusal . '' 
`` Countess ... '' said Denisov , with downcast eyes and a guilty face . 
He tried to say more , but faltered . 
Natasha could not remain calm , seeing him in such a plight . 
She began to sob aloud . 
`` Countess , I have done w ` ong , '' Denisov went on in an unsteady voice , `` but believe me , I so adore your daughter and all your family that I would give my life twice over ... '' He looked at the countess , and seeing her severe face said : `` Well , good-by , Countess , '' and kissing her hand , he left the room with quick resolute strides , without looking at Natasha . 
Next day Rostov saw Denisov off . 
He not wish to stay another day in Moscow . 
All Denisov 's Moscow friends gave him a farewell entertainment at the gypsies ' , with the result that he had no recollection of how he was put in the sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey . 
After Denisov 's departure , Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow , without going out of the house , waiting for the money his father could not at once raise , and he spent most of his time in the girls ' room . 
Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever . 
It was as if she wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her love him all the more , but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of her . 
He filled the girls ' albums with verses and music , and having at last sent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his receipt , he left at the end of November , without taking leave of any of his acquaintances , to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland . 
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg . 
At the Torzhok post station , either there were no horses or the postmaster would not supply them . 
Pierre was obliged to wait . 
Without undressing , he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table , put his big feet in their overboots on the table , and began to reflect . 
`` Will you have the portmanteaus brought in ? 
And a bed got ready , and tea ? '' 
asked his valet . 
Pierre gave no answer , for he neither heard nor saw anything . 
He had begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same question -- one so important that he took no notice of what went on around him . 
Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to Petersburg earlier or later , or whether he secured accommodation at this station , but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it was a matter of indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for the rest of his life . 
The postmaster , his wife , the valet , and a peasant woman selling Torzhok embroidery came into the room offering their services . 
Without changing his careless attitude , Pierre looked at them over his spectacles unable to understand what they wanted or how they could go on living without having solved the problems that so absorbed him . 
He had been engrossed by the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from Sokolniki after the duel and had spent that first agonizing , sleepless night . 
But now , in the solitude of the journey , they seized him with special force . 
No matter what he thought about , he always returned to these same questions which he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself . 
It was as if the thread of the chief screw which held his life together were stripped , so that the screw could not get in or out , but went on turning uselessly in the same place . 
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to wait only two hours , when , come what might , he would let his excellency have the courier horses . 
It was plain that he was lying and only wanted to get more money from the traveler . 
`` Is this good or bad ? '' 
Pierre asked himself . 
`` It is good for me , bad for another traveler , and for himself it 's unavoidable , because he needs money for food ; the man said an officer had once given him a thrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horses . 
But the officer thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible . 
And I , '' continued Pierre , `` shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured , and Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal , and a year later they executed those who executed him -- also for some reason . 
What is bad ? 
What is good ? 
What should one love and what hate ? 
What does one live for ? 
And what am I ? 
What is life , and what is death ? 
What power governs all ? '' 
There was no answer to any of these questions , except one , and that not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them . 
The answer was : `` You 'll die and all will end . 
You 'll die and know all , or cease asking . '' 
But dying was also dreadful . 
The Torzhok peddler woman , in a whining voice , went on offering her wares , especially a pair of goatskin slippers . 
`` I have hundreds of rubles I do n't know what to do with , and she stands in her tattered cloak looking timidly at me , '' he thought . 
`` And what does she want the money for ? 
As if that money could add a hair 's breadth to happiness or peace of mind . 
Can anything in the world make her or me less a prey to evil and death ? 
-- death which ends all and must come today or tomorrow -- at any rate , in an instant as compared with eternity . '' 
And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread , and again it turned uselessly in the same place . 
His servant handed him a half-cut novel , in the form of letters , by Madame de Souza . 
He began reading about the sufferings and virtuous struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld . 
`` And why did she resist her seducer when she loved him ? '' 
he thought . 
`` God could not have put into her heart an impulse that was against His will . 
My wife -- as she once was -- did not struggle , and perhaps she was right . 
Nothing has been found out , nothing discovered , '' Pierre again said to himself . 
`` All we can know is that we know nothing . 
And that 's the height of human wisdom . '' 
Everything within and around him seemed confused , senseless , and repellent . 
Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction . 
`` I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this gentleman , '' said the postmaster , entering the room followed by another traveler , also detained for lack of horses . 
The newcomer was a short , large-boned , yellow-faced , wrinkled old man , with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite grayish color . 
Pierre took his feet off the table , stood up , and lay down on a bed that had been got ready for him , glancing now and then at the newcomer , who , with a gloomy and tired face , was wearily taking off his wraps with the aid of his servant , and not looking at Pierre . 
With a pair of felt boots on his thin bony legs , and keeping on a worn , nankeen-covered , sheepskin coat , the traveler sat down on the sofa , leaned back his big head with its broad temples and close-cropped hair , and looked at Bezukhov . 
The stern , shrewd , and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre . 
He felt a wish to speak to the stranger , but by the time he had made up his mind to ask him a question about the roads , the traveler had closed his eyes . 
His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a death 's head . 
The stranger sat without stirring , either resting or , as it seemed to Pierre , sunk in profound and calm meditation . 
His servant was also a yellow , wrinkled old man , without beard or mustache , evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown . 
This active old servant was unpacking the traveler 's canteen and preparing tea . 
He brought in a boiling samovar . 
When everything was ready , the stranger opened his eyes , moved to the table , filled a tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom he passed it . 
Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness , and the need , even the inevitability , of entering into conversation with this stranger . 
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down , * with an unfinished bit of nibbled sugar , and asked if anything more would be wanted . 
* To indicate he did not want more tea . 
`` No . 
Give me the book , '' said the stranger . 
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work , and the traveler became absorbed in it . 
Pierre looked at him . 
All at once the stranger closed the book , putting in a marker , and again , leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa , sat in his former position with his eyes shut . 
Pierre looked at him and had not time to turn away when the old man , opening his eyes , fixed his steady and severe gaze straight on Pierre 's face . 
Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look , but the bright old eyes attracted him irresistibly . 
`` I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bezukhov , if I am not mistaken , '' said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice . 
Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles . 
`` I have heard of you , my dear sir , '' continued the stranger , `` and of your misfortune . '' 
He seemed to emphasize the last word , as if to say -- `` Yes , misfortune ! 
Call it what you please , I know that what happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune . '' 
-- `` I regret it very much , my dear sir . '' 
Pierre flushed and , hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed , bent forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile . 
`` I have not referred to this out of curiosity , my dear sir , but for greater reasons . '' 
He paused , his gaze still on Pierre , and moved aside on the sofa by way of inviting the other to take a seat beside him . 
Pierre felt reluctant to enter into conversation with this old man , but , submitting to him involuntarily , came up and sat down beside him . 
`` You are unhappy , my dear sir , '' the stranger continued . 
`` You are young and I am old . 
I should like to help you as far as lies in my power . '' 
`` Oh , yes ! '' 
said Pierre , with a forced smile . 
`` I am very grateful to you . 
Where are you traveling from ? '' 
The stranger 's face was not genial , it was even cold and severe , but in spite of this , both the face and words of his new acquaintance were irresistibly attractive to Pierre . 
`` But if for reason you do n't feel inclined to talk to me , '' said the old man , `` say so , my dear sir . '' 
And he suddenly smiled , in an unexpected and tenderly paternal way . 
`` Oh no , not at all ! 
On the contrary , I am very glad to make your acquaintance , '' said Pierre . 
And again , glancing at the stranger 's hands , he looked more closely at the ring , with its skull -- a Masonic sign . 
`` Allow me to ask , '' he said , `` are you a Mason ? '' 
`` Yes , I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons , '' said the stranger , looking deeper and deeper into Pierre 's eyes . 
`` And in their name and my own I hold out a brotherly hand to you . '' 
`` I am afraid , '' said Pierre , smiling , and wavering between the confidence the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own habit of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs -- `` I am afraid I am very far from understanding -- how am I to put it ? 
-- I am afraid my way of looking at the world is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one another . '' 
`` I know your outlook , '' said the Mason , `` and the view of life you mention , and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts , is the one held by the majority of people , and is the invariable fruit of pride , indolence , and ignorance . 
Forgive me , my dear sir , but if I had not known it I should not have addressed you . 
Your view of life is a regrettable delusion . '' 
`` Just as I may suppose you to be deluded , '' said Pierre , with a faint smile . 
`` I should never dare to say that I know the truth , '' said the Mason , whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness . 
`` No one can attain to truth by himself . 
Only by laying stone on stone with the cooperation of all , by the millions of generations from our forefather Adam to our own times , is that temple reared which is to be a worthy dwelling place of the Great God , '' he added , and closed his eyes . 
`` I ought to tell you that I do not believe ... do not believe in God , '' said Pierre , regretfully and with an effort , feeling it essential to speak the whole truth . 
The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he , poor man , had not the five rubles that would make him happy . 
`` Yes , you do not know Him , my dear sir , '' said the Mason . 
`` You can not know Him . 
You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy . '' 
`` Yes , yes , I am unhappy , '' assented Pierre . 
`` But what am I to do ? '' 
`` You know Him not , my dear sir , and so you are very unhappy . 
You do not know Him , but He is here , He is in me , He is in my words , He is in thee , and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered ! '' 
pronounced the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice . 
He paused and sighed , evidently trying to calm himself . 
`` If He were not , '' he said quietly , `` you and I would not be speaking of Him , my dear sir . 
Of what , of whom , are we speaking ? 
Whom hast thou denied ? '' 
he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and authority in his voice . 
`` Who invented Him , if He did not exist ? 
Whence came thy conception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being ? 
didst thou , and why did the whole world , conceive the idea of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being , a Being all-powerful , eternal , and infinite in all His attributes ? 
... '' He stopped and remained silent for a long time . 
Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence . 
`` He exists , but to understand Him is hard , '' the Mason began again , looking not at Pierre but straight before him , and turning the leaves of his book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keep still . 
`` If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I could bring him to thee , could take him by the hand and show him to thee . 
But how can I , an insignificant mortal , show His omnipotence , His infinity , and all His mercy to one who is blind , or who shuts his eyes that he may not see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness and sinfulness ? '' 
He paused again . 
`` Who art thou ? 
Thou dreamest that thou art wise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words , '' he went on , with a somber and scornful smile . 
`` And thou art more foolish and unreasonable than a little child , who , playing with the parts of a skillfully made watch , dares to say that , as he does not understand its use , he does not believe in the master who made it . 
To know Him is hard ... . 
For ages , from our forefather Adam to our own day , we labor to attain that knowledge and are still infinitely far from our aim ; but in our lack of understanding we see only our weakness and His greatness ... '' Pierre listened with swelling heart , gazing into the Mason 's face with shining eyes , not interrupting or questioning him , but believing with his whole soul what the stranger said . 
Whether he accepted the wise reasoning contained in the Mason 's words , or believed as a child believes , in the speaker 's tone of conviction and earnestness , or the tremor of the speaker 's voice -- which sometimes almost broke -- or those brilliant aged eyes grown old in this conviction , or the calm firmness and certainty of his vocation , which radiated from his whole being -LRB- and which struck Pierre especially by contrast with his own dejection and hopelessness -RRB- -- at any rate , Pierre longed with his whole soul to believe and he did believe , and felt a joyful sense of comfort , regeneration , and return to life . 
`` He is not to be apprehended by reason , but by life , '' said the Mason . 
`` I do not understand , '' said Pierre , feeling with dismay doubts reawakening . 
He was afraid of any want of clearness , any weakness , in the Mason 's arguments ; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him . 
`` I do n't understand , '' he said , `` how it is that the mind of man can not attain the knowledge of which you speak . '' 
The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile . 
`` The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish to imbibe , '' he said . 
