Now , do me a service ... . 
What horses have you come with ? 
Eh ? '' 
`` As your messenger ordered , your special beasts , '' replied Balaga . 
`` Well , listen , Balaga ! 
Drive all three to death but get me there in three hours . 
Eh ? '' 
`` When they are dead , what shall I drive ? '' 
said Balaga with a wink . 
`` Mind , I 'll smash your face in ! 
Do n't make jokes ! '' 
cried Anatole , suddenly rolling his eyes . 
`` Why joke ? '' 
said the driver , laughing . 
`` As if I 'd grudge my gentlemen anything ! 
As fast as ever the horses can gallop , so fast we 'll go ! '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Anatole . 
`` Well , sit down . '' 
`` Yes , sit down ! '' 
said Dolokhov . 
`` I 'll stand , Theodore Ivanych . '' 
`` Sit down ; nonsense ! 
Have a drink ! '' 
said Anatole , and filled a large glass of Madeira for him . 
The driver 's eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine . 
After refusing it for manners ' sake , he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk handkerchief he took out of his cap . 
`` And when are we to start , your excellency ? '' 
`` Well ... '' Anatole looked at his watch . 
`` We 'll start at once . 
Mind , Balaga ! 
You 'll get there in time ? 
Eh ? '' 
`` That depends on our luck in starting , else why should n't we be there in time ? '' 
replied Balaga . 
`` Did n't we get you to Tver in seven hours ? 
I think you remember that , your excellency ? '' 
`` Do you know , one Christmas I drove from Tver , '' said Anatole , smilingly at the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazed rapturously at him with wide-open eyes . 
`` Will you believe it , Makarka , it took one 's breath away , the rate we flew . 
We came across a train of loaded sleighs and drove right over two of them . 
Eh ? '' 
`` Those were horses ! '' 
Balaga continued the tale . 
`` That time I 'd harnessed two young side horses with the bay in the shafts , '' he went on , turning to Dolokhov . 
`` Will you believe it , Theodore Ivanych , those animals flew forty miles ? 
I could n't hold them in , my hands grew numb in the sharp frost so that I threw down the reins -- ` Catch hold yourself , your excellency ! ' 
says I , and I just tumbled on the bottom of the sleigh and sprawled there . 
It was n't a case of urging them on , there was no holding them in till we reached the place . 
The devils took us there in three hours ! 
Only the near one died of it . '' 
Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearing a fur coat girt with a silver belt , and a sable cap jauntily set on one side and very becoming to his handsome face . 
Having looked in a mirror , and standing before Dolokhov in the same pose he had assumed before it , he lifted a glass of wine . 
`` Well , good-by , Theodore . 
Thank you for everything and farewell ! '' 
said Anatole . 
`` Well , comrades and friends ... '' he considered for a moment '' ... of my youth , farewell ! '' 
he said , turning to Makarin and the others . 
Though they were all going with him , Anatole evidently wished to make something touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades . 
He spoke slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chest slightly swayed one leg . 
`` All take glasses ; you too , Balaga . 
Well , comrades and friends of my youth , we 've had our fling and lived and reveled . 
Eh ? 
And now , when shall we meet again ? 
I am going abroad . 
We have had a good time -- now farewell , lads ! 
To our health ! 
Hurrah ! 
... '' he cried , and emptying his glass flung it on the floor . 
`` To your health ! '' 
said Balaga who also emptied his glass , and wiped his mouth with his handkerchief . 
Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes . 
`` Ah , Prince , how sorry I am to part from you ! 
`` Let 's go . 
Let 's go ! '' 
cried Anatole . 
Balaga was about to leave the room . 
`` No , stop ! '' 
said Anatole . 
`` Shut the door ; we have first to sit down . 
That 's the way . '' 
They shut the door and all sat down . 
`` Now , quick march , lads ! '' 
said Anatole , rising . 
Joseph , his valet , handed him his sabretache and saber , and they all went out into the vestibule . 
`` And where 's the fur cloak ? '' 
asked Dolokhov . 
`` Hey , Ignatka ! 
Go to Matrena Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak . 
I have heard what elopements are like , '' continued Dolokhov with a wink . 
`` Why , she 'll rush out more dead than alive just in the things she is wearing ; if you delay at all there 'll be tears and ` Papa ' and ` Mamma , ' and she 's frozen in a minute and must go back -- but you wrap the fur cloak round her first thing and carry her to the sleigh . '' 
The valet brought a woman 's fox-lined cloak . 
`` Fool , I told you the sable one ! 
Hey , Matrena , the sable ! '' 
he shouted so that his voice rang far through the rooms . 
A handsome , slim , and pale-faced gypsy girl with glittering black eyes and curly blue-black hair , wearing a red shawl , ran out with a sable mantle on her arm . 
`` Here , I do n't grudge it -- take it ! '' 
she said , evidently afraid of her master and yet regretful of her cloak . 
Dolokhov , without answering , took the cloak , threw it over Matrena , and wrapped her up in it . 
`` That 's the way , '' said Dolokhov , `` and then so ! '' 
and he turned the collar up round her head , leaving only a little of the face uncovered . 
`` And then so , do you see ? '' 
and he pushed Anatole 's head forward to meet the gap left by the collar , through which Matrena 's brilliant smile was seen . 
`` Well , good-by , Matrena , '' said Anatole , kissing her . 
`` Ah , my revels here are over . 
Remember me to Steshka . 
There , good-by ! 
Good-by , Matrena , wish me luck ! '' 
`` Well , Prince , may God give you great luck ! '' 
said Matrena in her gypsy accent . 
Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers were holding the horses . 
Balaga took his seat in the front one and holding his elbows high arranged the reins deliberately . 
Anatole and Dolokhov got in with him . 
Makarin , Khvostikov , and a valet seated themselves in the other sleigh . 
`` Well , are you ready ? '' 
asked Balaga . 
`` Go ! '' 
he cried , twisting the reins round his hands , and the troyka tore down the Nikitski Boulevard . 
`` Tproo ! 
Get out of the way ! 
Hi ! 
... Tproo ! 
... '' The shouting of Balaga and of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could be heard . 
On the Arbat Square the troyka caught against a carriage ; something cracked , shouts were heard , and the troyka flew along the Arbat Street . 
After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard , Balaga began to rein in , and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Konyusheny Street . 
The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole and Dolokhov went along the pavement . 
When they reached the gate Dolokhov whistled . 
The whistle was answered , and a maidservant ran out . 
`` Come into the courtyard or you 'll be seen ; she 'll come out directly , '' said she . 
Dolokhov stayed by the gate . 
Anatole followed the maid into the courtyard , turned the corner , and ran up into the porch . 
He was met by Gabriel , Marya Dmitrievna 's gigantic footman . 
`` Come to the mistress , please , '' said the footman in his deep bass , intercepting any retreat . 
`` To what Mistress ? 
Who are you ? '' 
asked Anatole in a breathless whisper . 
`` Kindly step in , my orders are to bring you in . '' 
`` Kuragin ! 
Come back ! '' 
shouted Dolokhov . 
`` Betrayed ! 
Back ! '' 
Dolokhov , after Anatole entered , had remained at the wicket gate and was struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it . 
With a last desperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside , and when Anatole ran back seized him by the arm , pulled him through the wicket , and ran back with him to the troyka . 
Marya Dmitrievna , having found Sonya weeping in the corridor , made her confess everything , and intercepting the note to Natasha she read it and went into Natasha 's room with it in her hand . 
`` You shameless good-for-nothing ! '' 
said she . 
`` I wo n't hear a word . '' 
Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but tearless eyes , she locked her in ; and having given orders to the yard porter to admit the persons who would be coming that evening , but not to let them out again , and having told the footman to bring them up to her , she seated herself in the drawing room to await the abductors . 
When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run away again , she rose frowning , and clasping her hands behind her paced through the rooms a long time considering what she should do . 
Toward midnight she went to Natasha 's room fingering the key in her pocket . 
Sonya was sitting sobbing in the corridor . 
`` Marya Dmitrievna , for God 's sake let me in to her ! '' 
she pleaded , but Marya Dmitrievna unlocked the door and went in without giving her an answer ... `` Disgusting , abominable ... In my house ... horrid girl , hussy ! 
I 'm only sorry for her father ! '' 
thought she , trying to restrain her wrath . 
`` Hard as it may be , I 'll tell them all to hold their tongues and will hide it from the count . '' 
She entered the room with resolute steps . 
Natasha lying on the sofa , her head hidden in her hands , and she did not stir . 
She was in just the same position in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her . 
`` A nice girl ! 
Very nice ! '' 
said Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` Arranging meetings with lovers in my house ! 
It 's no use pretending : you listen when I speak to you ! '' 
And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm . 
`` Listen when when I speak ! 
You 've disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies . 
I 'd treat you differently , but I 'm sorry for your father , so I will conceal it . '' 
Natasha did not change her position , but her whole body heaved with noiseless , convulsive sobs which choked her . 
Marya Dmitrievna glanced round at Sonya and seated herself on the sofa beside Natasha . 
`` It 's lucky for him that he escaped me ; but I 'll find him ! '' 
she said in her rough voice . 
`` Do you hear what I am saying or not ? '' 
she added . 
She put her large hand under Natasha 's face and turned it toward her . 
Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw how Natasha looked . 
Her eyes were dry and glistening , her lips compressed , her cheeks sunken . 
`` Let me be ! 
... What is it to me ? 
... I shall die ! '' 
she muttered , wrenching herself from Marya Dmitrievna 's hands with a vicious effort and sinking down again into her former position . 
`` Natalie ! '' 
said Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` I wish for your good . 
Lie still , stay like that then , I wo n't touch you . 
But listen . 
I wo n't tell you how guilty you are . 
You know that yourself . 
But when your father comes back tomorrow what am I to tell him ? 
Eh ? '' 
Again Natasha 's body shook with sobs . 
`` Suppose he finds out , and your brother , and your betrothed ? '' 
`` I have no betrothed : I have refused him ! '' 
cried Natasha . 
`` That 's all the same , '' continued Dmitrievna . 
`` If they hear of this , will they let it pass ? 
He , your father , I know him ... if he challenges him to a duel will that be all right ? 
Eh ? '' 
`` Oh , let me be ! 
Why have you interfered at all ? 
Why ? 
Why ? 
Who asked you to ? '' 
shouted Natasha , raising herself on the sofa and looking malignantly at Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` But what did you want ? '' 
cried Marya Dmitrievna , growing angry again . 
`` Were you kept under lock and key ? 
Who hindered his coming to the house ? 
Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl ? 
... Well , if he had carried you off ... do you think they would n't have found him ? 
Your father , or brother , or your betrothed ? 
And he 's a scoundrel , a wretch -- that 's a fact ! '' 
`` He is better than any of you ! '' 
exclaimed Natasha getting up . 
`` If you had n't interfered ... Oh , my God ! 
What is it all ? 
What is it ? 
Sonya , why ? 
... Go away ! '' 
And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which people bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned . 
Marya Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out : `` Go away ! 
Go away ! 
You all hate and despise me ! '' 
and she threw herself back on the sofa . 
Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time , enjoining on her that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobody would know anything about it if only Natasha herself would undertake to forget it all and not let anyone see that something had happened . 
Natasha did not reply , nor did she sob any longer , but she grew cold and had a shivering fit . 
Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head , covered her with two quilts , and herself brought her some lime-flower water , but Natasha did not respond to her . 
`` Well , let her sleep , '' said Marya Dmitrievna as she went of the room supposing Natasha to be asleep . 
But Natasha was not asleep ; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes she looked straight before her . 
All that night she did not sleep or weep and did not speak to Sonya who got up and went to her several times . 
Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for lunch as he had promised . 
He was in very good spirits ; the affair with the purchaser was going on satisfactorily , and there was nothing to keep him any longer in Moscow , away from the countess whom he missed . 
Marya Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the day before and that they had sent for the doctor , but that she was better now . 
Natasha had not left her room that morning . 
With compressed and parched lips and dry fixed eyes , she sat at the window , uneasily watching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round at anyone who entered the room . 
She was evidently expecting news of him and that he would come or would write to her . 
When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound of a man 's footstep , and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent expression . 
She did not even get up to greet him . 
`` What is the matter with you , my angel ? 
Are you ill ? '' 
asked the count . 
After a moment 's silence Natasha answered : `` Yes , ill . '' 
In reply to the count 's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejected and whether anything had happened to her betrothed , she assured him that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry . 
Marya Dmitrievna confirmed Natasha 's assurances that nothing had happened . 
From the pretense of illness , from his daughter 's distress , and by the embarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya Dmitrievna , the count saw clearly that something had gone wrong during his absence , but it was so terrible for him to think that anything disgraceful had happened to his beloved daughter , and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity , that he avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing particularly had happened ; and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition delayed their return to the country . 
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go away somewhere , so as not to be near her . 
Soon after the Rostovs came to Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out his intention . 
He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich 's widow , who had long since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased husband 's . 
When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya Dmitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of great importance relating to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed . 
Pierre had been avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him that his feeling for her was stronger than a married man 's should be for his friend 's fiancee . 
Yet some fate constantly threw them together . 
`` What can have happened ? 
And what can they want with me ? '' 
thought he as he dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna 's . 
`` If only Prince Andrew would hurry up and come and marry her ! '' 
thought he on his way to the house . 
On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him . 
`` Pierre ! 
Been back long ? '' 
someone shouted . 
Pierre raised his head . 
In a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering the dashboard with snow , Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashed past . 
Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of military dandies , the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his head slightly bent . 
His face was fresh and rosy , his white-plumed hat , tilted to one side , disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkled with powdery snow . 
`` Yes , indeed , that 's a true sage , '' thought Pierre . 
`` He sees nothing beyond the pleasure of the moment , nothing troubles him and so he is always cheerful , satisfied , and serene . 
What would n't I give to be like him ! '' 
he thought enviously . 
In Marya Dmitrievna 's anteroom the footman who helped him off with his fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom . 
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at the window , with a thin , pale , and spiteful face . 
She glanced round at him , frowned , and left the room with an expression of cold dignity . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
asked Pierre , entering Marya Dmitrievna 's room . 
`` Fine doings ! '' 
answered Dmitrievna . 
`` For fifty-eight years have I lived in this world and never known anything so disgraceful ! '' 
And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him , Marya Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrew without her parents ' knowledge and that the cause of this was Anatole Kuragin into whose society Pierre 's wife had thrown her and with whom Natasha had tried to elope during her father 's absence , in order to be married secretly . 
Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was told him , scarcely able to believe his own ears . 
That Prince Andrew 's deeply loved affianced wife -- the same Natasha Rostova who used to be so charming -- should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already secretly married -LRB- as Pierre knew -RRB- , and should be so in love with him as to agree to run away with him , was something Pierre could not conceive and could not imagine . 
He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha , whom he had known from a child , with this new conception of her baseness , folly , and cruelty . 
He thought of his wife . 
`` They are all alike ! '' 
he said to himself , reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunate enough to be tied to a bad woman . 
But still he pitied Prince Andrew to the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride , and the more he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with disgust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom with such a look of cold dignity . 
He did not know that Natasha 's soul was overflowing with despair , shame , and humiliation , and that it was not her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignity and severity . 
`` But how get married ? '' 
said Pierre , in answer to Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` He could not marry -- he is married ! '' 
`` Things get worse from hour to hour ! '' 
ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` A nice youth ! 
What a scoundrel ! 
And she 's expecting him -- expecting him since yesterday . 
She must be told ! 
Then at least she wo n't go on expecting him . '' 
After hearing the details of Anatole 's marriage from Pierre , and giving vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse , Marya Dmitrievna told Pierre why she had sent for him . 
She was afraid that the count or Bolkonski , who might arrive at any moment , if they knew of this affair -LRB- which she hoped to hide from them -RRB- might challenge Anatole to a duel , and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to leave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again . 
Pierre -- only now realizing the danger to the old count , Nicholas , and Prince Andrew -- promised to do as she wished . 
Having briefly and exactly explained her wishes to him , she let him go to the drawing room . 
`` Mind , the count knows nothing . 
Behave as if you know nothing either , '' she said . 
`` And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him ! 
And stay to dinner if you care to ! '' 
she called after Pierre . 
Pierre met the old count , who seemed nervous and upset . 
That morning Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski . 
`` Troubles , troubles , my dear fellow ! '' 
he said to Pierre . 
`` What troubles one has with these girls without their mother ! 
I do so regret having come here ... . 
I will be frank with you . 
Have you heard she has broken off her engagement without consulting anybody ? 
It 's true this engagement never was much to my liking . 
Of course he is an excellent man , but still , with his father 's disapproval they would n't have been happy , and Natasha wo n't lack suitors . 
Still , it has been going on so long , and to take such a step without father 's or mother 's consent ! 
And now she 's ill , and God knows what ! 
It 's hard , Count , hard to manage daughters in their mother 's absence ... '' Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the subject , but the count returned to his troubles . 
Sonya entered the room with an agitated face . 
`` Natasha is not quite well ; she 's in her room and would like to see you . 
Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come . '' 
`` Yes , you are a great friend of Bolkonski 's , no doubt she wants to send him a message , '' said the count . 
`` Oh dear ! 
Oh dear ! 
How happy it all was ! '' 
And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the room . 
When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married , Natasha did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre himself . 
Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor to Natasha 's room . 
Natasha , pale and stern , was sitting beside Marya Dmitrievna , and her eyes , glittering feverishly , met Pierre with a questioning look the moment he entered . 
She did not smile or nod , but only gazed fixedly at him , and her look asked only one thing : was he a friend , or like the others an enemy in regard to Anatole ? 
As for Pierre , he evidently did not exist for her . 
`` He knows all about it , '' said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre and addressing Natasha . 
`` Let him tell you whether I have told the truth . '' 
Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen . 
`` Natalya Ilynichna , '' Pierre began , dropping his eyes with a feeling of pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do , `` whether it is true or not should make no difference to you , because ... '' `` Then it is not true that he 's married ! '' 
`` Yes , it is true . '' 
`` Has he been married long ? '' 
she asked . 
`` On your honor ? 
... '' Pierre gave his word of honor . 
`` Is he still here ? '' 
she asked , quickly . 
`` Yes , I have just seen him . '' 
She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands that they should leave her alone . 
Pierre did not stay for dinner , but left the room and went away at once . 
He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin , at the thought of whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in breathing . 
He was not at the ice hills , nor at the gypsies ' , nor at Komoneno 's . 
Pierre drove to the Club . 
In the Club all was going on as usual . 
The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about in groups ; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news . 
The footman having greeted him , knowing his habits and his acquaintances , told him there was a place left for him in the small dining room and that Prince Michael Zakharych was in the library , but Paul Timofeevich had not yet arrived . 
One of Pierre 's acquaintances , while they were talking about the weather , asked if he had heard of Kuragin 's abduction of Rostova which was talked of in the town , and was it true ? 
Pierre laughed and said it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs ' . 
He asked everyone about Anatole . 
One man told him he had not come yet , and another that he was coming to dinner . 
Pierre felt it strange to see this calm , indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in his soul . 
He paced through the ballroom , waited till everyone had come , and as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home . 
Anatole , for whom Pierre was looking , dined that day with Dolokhov , consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair . 
It seemed to him essential to see Natasha . 
In the evening he drove to his sister 's to discuss with her how to arrange a meeting . 
When Pierre returned home after vainly hunting all over Moscow , his valet informed him that Prince Anatole was with the countess . 
The countess ' drawing room was full of guests . 
Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his return -- at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever - entered the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him . 
`` Ah , Pierre , '' said the countess going up to her husband . 
`` You do n't know what a plight our Anatole ... '' She stopped , seeing in the forward thrust of her husband 's head , in his glowing eyes and his resolute gait , the terrible indications of that rage and strength which she knew and had herself experienced after his duel with Dolokhov . 
`` Where you are , there is vice and evil ! '' 
said Pierre to his wife . 
`` Anatole , come with me ! 
I must speak to you , '' he added in French . 
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively , ready to follow Pierre . 
Pierre , taking him by the arm , pulled him toward himself and was leading him from the room . 
`` If you allow yourself in my drawing room ... '' whispered Helene , but Pierre did not reply and went out of the room . 
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed anxiety . 
Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole without looking at him . 
`` You promised Countess Rostova to marry her and were about to elope with her , is that so ? '' 
`` Mon cher , '' answered Anatole -LRB- their whole conversation was in French -RRB- , `` I do n't consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in that tone . '' 
Pierre 's face , already pale , became distorted by fury . 
He seized Anatole by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook him from side to side till Anatole 's face showed a sufficient degree of terror . 
`` When I tell you that I must talk to you ! 
... '' repeated Pierre . 
`` Come now , this is stupid . 
What ? '' 
said Anatole , fingering a button of his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth . 
`` You 're a scoundrel and a blackguard , and I do n't know what deprives me from the pleasure of smashing your head with this ! '' 
said Pierre , expressing himself so artificially because he was talking French . 
He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly , but at once put it back in its place . 
`` Did you promise to marry her ? '' 
`` I. . . 
I did n't think of it . 
I never promised , because ... '' Pierre interrupted him . 
`` Have you any letters of hers ? 
Any letters ? '' 
he said , moving toward Anatole . 
Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket and drew out his pocketbook . 
Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and , pushing aside a table that stood in his way , threw himself on the sofa . 
`` I sha n't be violent , do n't be afraid ! '' 
said Pierre in answer to a frightened gesture of Anatole 's . 
`` First , the letters , '' said he , as if repeating a lesson to himself . 
`` Secondly , '' he continued after a short pause , again rising and again pacing the room , `` tomorrow you must get out of Moscow . '' 
`` But how can I ? 
... '' `` Thirdly , '' Pierre continued without listening to him , `` you must never breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova . 
I know I ca n't prevent your doing so , but if you have a spark of conscience ... '' Pierre paced the room several times in silence . 
Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips . 
`` After all , you must understand that besides your pleasure there is such a thing as other people 's happiness and peace , and that you are ruining a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself ! 
Amuse yourself with women like my wife -- with them you are within your rights , for they know what you want of them . 
They are armed against you by the same experience of debauchery ; but to promise a maid to marry her ... to deceive , to kidnap ... . 
Do n't you understand that it is as mean as beating an old man or a child ? 
... '' Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with a questioning look . 
`` I do n't know about that , eh ? '' 
said Anatole , growing more confident as Pierre mastered his wrath . 
`` I do n't know that and do n't want to , '' he said , not looking at Pierre and with a slight tremor of his lower jaw , `` but you have used such words to me -- ` mean ' and so on -- which as a man of honor I ca n't allow anyone to use . '' 
Pierre glanced at him with amazement , unable to understand what he wanted . 
`` Though it was tete-a-tete , '' Anatole continued , `` still I ca n't ... '' `` Is it satisfaction you want ? '' 
said Pierre ironically . 
`` You could at least take back your words . 
What ? 
If you want me to do as you wish , eh ? '' 
`` I take them back , I take them back ! '' 
said Pierre , `` and I ask you to forgive me . '' 
Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button . 
`` And if you require money for your journey ... '' Anatole smiled . 
The expression of that base and cringing smile , which Pierre knew so well in his wife , revolted him . 
`` Oh , vile and heartless brood ! '' 
he exclaimed , and left the room . 
Next day Anatole left for Petersburg . 
Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna 's to tell her of the fulfillment of her wish that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow . 
The whole house was in a state of alarm and commotion . 
Natasha was very ill , having , as Marya Dmitrievna told him in secret , poisoned herself the night after she had been told that Anatole was married , with some arsenic she had stealthily procured . 
After swallowing a little she had been so frightened that she woke Sonya and told her what she had done . 
The necessary antidotes had been administered in time and she was now out of danger , though still so weak that it was out of the question to move her to the country , and so the countess had been sent for . 
Pierre saw the distracted count , and Sonya , who had a tear-stained face , but he could not see Natasha . 
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about the attempted abduction of Rostova . 
He resolutely denied these rumors , assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that his brother-in-law had proposed to her and been refused . 
It seemed to Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and re-establish Natasha 's reputation . 
He was awaiting Prince Andrew 's return with dread and went every day to the old prince 's for news of him . 
Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town from Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which Natasha had broken off her engagement . 
He seemed in better spirits than usual and awaited his son with great impatience . 
Some days after Anatole 's departure Pierre received a note from Prince Andrew , informing him of his arrival and asking him to come to see him . 
As soon as he reached Moscow , Prince Andrew had received from his father Natasha 's note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagement -LRB- Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and given it to the old prince -RRB- , and he heard from him the story of Natasha 's elopement , with additions . 
Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next morning . 
Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state as Natasha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing room to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some intrigue going on in Petersburg . 
The old prince 's voice and another now and then interrupted him . 
Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre . 
She sighed , looking toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was , evidently intending to express her sympathy with his sorrow , but Pierre saw by her face that she was glad both at what had happened and at the way her brother had taken the news of Natasha 's faithlessness . 
`` He says he expected it , '' she remarked . 
`` I know his pride will not let him express his feelings , but still he has taken it better , far better , than I expected . 
Evidently it had to be ... '' `` But is it possible that all is really ended ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment . 
She did not understand how he could ask such a question . 
Pierre went into the study . 
Prince Andrew , greatly changed and plainly in better health , but with a fresh horizontal wrinkle between his brows , stood in civilian dress facing his father and Prince Meshcherski , warmly disputing and vigorously gesticulating . 
The conversation was about Speranski -- the news of whose sudden exile and alleged treachery had just reached Moscow . 
`` Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him a month ago , '' Prince Andrew was saying , `` and by those who were unable to understand his aims . 
To judge a man who is in disfavor and to throw on him all the blame of other men 's mistakes is very easy , but I maintain that if anything good has been accomplished in this reign it was done by him , by him alone . '' 
He paused at the sight of Pierre . 
His face quivered and immediately assumed a vindictive expression . 
`` Posterity will do him justice , '' he concluded , and at once turned to Pierre . 
`` Well , how are you ? 
Still getting stouter ? '' 
he said with animation , but the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened . 
`` Yes , I am well , '' he said in answer to Pierre 's question , and smiled . 
To Pierre that smile said plainly : `` I am well , but my health is now of no use to anyone . '' 
After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polish frontier , about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre , and about M. Dessalles , whom he had brought from abroad to be his son 's tutor , Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about Speranski which was still going on between the two old men . 
`` If there were treason , or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon , they would have been made public , '' he said with warmth and haste . 
`` I do not , and never did , like Speranski personally , but I like justice ! '' 
Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only too familiar , to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous matters in order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate . 
When Prince Meshcherski had left , Prince Andrew took Pierre 's arm and asked him into the room that had been assigned him . 
A bed had been made up there , and some open portmanteaus and trunks stood about . 
Prince Andrew went to one and took out a small casket , from which he drew a packet wrapped in paper . 
He did it all silently and very quickly . 
He stood up and coughed . 
His face was gloomy and his lips compressed . 
`` Forgive me for troubling you ... '' Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha , and his broad face expressed pity and sympathy . 
This expression irritated Prince Andrew , and in a determined , ringing , and unpleasant tone he continued : `` I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reports of your brother-in-law having sought her hand , or something of that kind . 
Is that true ? '' 
`` Both true and untrue , '' Pierre began ; but Prince Andrew interrupted him . 
`` Here are her letters and her portrait , '' said he . 
He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre . 
`` Give this to the countess ... if you see her . '' 
`` She is very ill , '' said Pierre . 
`` Then she is here still ? '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` And Prince Kuragin ? '' 
he added quickly . 
`` He left long ago . 
She has been at death 's door . '' 
`` I much regret her illness , '' said Prince Andrew ; and he smiled like his father , coldly , maliciously , and unpleasantly . 
`` So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored Countess Rostova with his hand ? '' 
said Prince Andrew , and he snorted several times . 
`` He could not marry , for he was married already , '' said Pierre . 
Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably , again reminding one of his father . 
`` And where is your brother-in-law now , if I may ask ? '' 
he said . 
`` He has gone to Peters ... But I do n't know , '' said Pierre . 
`` Well , it does n't matter , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Tell Countess Rostova that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is good . '' 
Pierre took the packet . 
Prince Andrew , as if trying to remember whether he had something more to say , or waiting to see if Pierre would say anything , looked fixedly at him . 
`` I say , do you remember our discussion in Petersburg ? '' 
asked Pierre , `` about ... '' `` Yes , '' returned Prince Andrew hastily . 
