`` Yes he will LAST , too . 
You do n't reckon it 's going to take thirty-seven years to dig out through a DIRT foundation , do you ? '' 
`` How long will it take , Tom ? '' 
`` Well , we ca n't resk being as long as we ought to , because it may n't take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Orleans . 
He 'll hear Jim ai n't from there . 
Then his next move will be to advertise Jim , or something like that . 
So we ca n't resk being as long digging him out as we ought to . 
By rights I reckon we ought to be a couple of years ; but we ca n't . 
Things being so uncertain , what I recommend is this : that we really dig right in , as quick as we can ; and after that , we can LET ON , to ourselves , that we was at it thirty-seven years . 
Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the first time there 's an alarm . 
Yes , I reckon that 'll be the best way . '' 
`` Now , there 's SENSE in that , '' I says . 
`` Letting on do n't cost nothing ; letting on ai n't no trouble ; and if it 's any object , I do n't mind letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year . 
It would n't strain me none , after I got my hand in . 
So I 'll mosey along now , and smouch a couple of case-knives . '' 
`` Smouch three , '' he says ; `` we want one to make a saw out of . '' 
`` Tom , if it ai n't unregular and irreligious to sejest it , '' I says , `` there 's an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under the weather - boarding behind the smoke-house . '' 
He looked kind of weary and discouraged-like , and says : `` It ai n't no use to try to learn you nothing , Huck . 
Run along and smouch the knives -- three of them . '' 
So I done it . 
AS soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the lightning-rod , and shut ourselves up in the lean-to , and got out our pile of fox-fire , and went to work . 
We cleared everything out of the way , about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log . 
Tom said we was right behind Jim 's bed now , and we 'd dig in under it , and when we got through there could n't nobody in the cabin ever know there was any hole there , because Jim 's counter-pin hung down most to the ground , and you 'd have to raise it up and look under to see the hole . 
So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight ; and then we was dog-tired , and our hands was blistered , and yet you could n't see we 'd done anything hardly . 
At last I says : `` This ai n't no thirty-seven year job ; this is a thirty-eight year job , Tom Sawyer . '' 
He never said nothing . 
But he sighed , and pretty soon he stopped digging , and then for a good little while I knowed that he was thinking . 
Then he says : `` It ai n't no use , Huck , it ai n't a-going to work . 
If we was prisoners it would , because then we 'd have as many years as we wanted , and no hurry ; and we would n't get but a few minutes to dig , every day , while they was changing watches , and so our hands would n't get blistered , and we could keep it up right along , year in and year out , and do it right , and the way it ought to be done . 
But WE ca n't fool along ; we got to rush ; we ai n't got no time to spare . 
If we was to put in another night this way we 'd have to knock off for a week to let our hands get well -- could n't touch a case-knife with them sooner . '' 
`` Well , then , what we going to do , Tom ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you . 
It ai n't right , and it ai n't moral , and I would n't like it to get out ; but there ai n't only just the one way : we got to dig him out with the picks , and LET ON it 's case-knives . '' 
`` NOW you 're TALKING ! '' 
I says ; `` your head gets leveler and leveler all the time , Tom Sawyer , '' I says . 
`` Picks is the thing , moral or no moral ; and as for me , I do n't care shucks for the morality of it , nohow . 
When I start in to steal a nigger , or a watermelon , or a Sunday-school book , I ai n't no ways particular how it 's done so it 's done . 
What I want is my nigger ; or what I want is my watermelon ; or what I want is my Sunday - school book ; and if a pick 's the handiest thing , that 's the thing I 'm a - going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that Sunday-school book out with ; and I do n't give a dead rat what the authorities thinks about it nuther . '' 
`` Well , '' he says , `` there 's excuse for picks and letting-on in a case like this ; if it war n't so , I would n't approve of it , nor I would n't stand by and see the rules broke -- because right is right , and wrong is wrong , and a body ai n't got no business doing wrong when he ai n't ignorant and knows better . 
It might answer for YOU to dig Jim out with a pick , WITHOUT any letting on , because you do n't know no better ; but it would n't for me , because I do know better . 
Gim me a case-knife . '' 
He had his own by him , but I handed him mine . 
He flung it down , and says : `` Gim me a CASE-KNIFE . '' 
I did n't know just what to do -- but then I thought . 
I scratched around amongst the old tools , and got a pickaxe and give it to him , and he took it and went to work , and never said a word . 
He was always just that particular . 
Full of principle . 
So then I got a shovel , and then we picked and shoveled , turn about , and made the fur fly . 
We stuck to it about a half an hour , which was as long as we could stand up ; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for it . 
When I got up stairs I looked out at the window and see Tom doing his level best with the lightning-rod , but he could n't come it , his hands was so sore . 
At last he says : `` It ai n't no use , it ca n't be done . 
What you reckon I better do ? 
Ca n't you think of no way ? '' 
`` Yes , '' I says , `` but I reckon it ai n't regular . 
Come up the stairs , and let on it 's a lightning-rod . '' 
So he done it . 
Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house , for to make some pens for Jim out of , and six tallow candles ; and I hung around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance , and stole three tin plates . 
Tom says it was n't enough ; but I said nobody would n't ever see the plates that Jim throwed out , because they 'd fall in the dog-fennel and jimpson weeds under the window-hole -- then we could tote them back and he could use them over again . 
So Tom was satisfied . 
Then he says : `` Now , the thing to study out is , how to get the things to Jim . '' 
`` Take them in through the hole , '' I says , `` when we get it done . '' 
He only just looked scornful , and said something about nobody ever heard of such an idiotic idea , and then he went to studying . 
By and by he said he had ciphered out two or three ways , but there war n't no need to decide on any of them yet . 
Said we 'd got to post Jim first . 
That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten , and took one of the candles along , and listened under the window-hole , and heard Jim snoring ; so we pitched it in , and it did n't wake him . 
Then we whirled in with the pick and shovel , and in about two hours and a half the job was done . 
We crept in under Jim 's bed and into the cabin , and pawed around and found the candle and lit it , and stood over Jim awhile , and found him looking hearty and healthy , and then we woke him up gentle and gradual . 
He was so glad to see us he most cried ; and called us honey , and all the pet names he could think of ; and was for having us hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away , and clearing out without losing any time . 
But Tom he showed him how unregular it would be , and set down and told him all about our plans , and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm ; and not to be the least afraid , because we would see he got away , SURE . 
So Jim he said it was all right , and we set there and talked over old times awhile , and then Tom asked a lot of questions , and when Jim told him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him , and Aunt Sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat , and both of them was kind as they could be , Tom says : `` NOW I know how to fix it . 
We 'll send you some things by them . '' 
I said , `` Do n't do nothing of the kind ; it 's one of the most jackass ideas I ever struck ; '' but he never paid no attention to me ; went right on . 
It was his way when he 'd got his plans set . 
So he told Jim how we 'd have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and other large things by Nat , the nigger that fed him , and he must be on the lookout , and not be surprised , and not let Nat see him open them ; and we would put small things in uncle 's coat-pockets and he must steal them out ; and we would tie things to aunt 's apron-strings or put them in her apron-pocket , if we got a chance ; and told him what they would be and what they was for . 
And told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with his blood , and all that . 
He told him everything . 
Jim he could n't see no sense in the most of it , but he allowed we was white folks and knowed better than him ; so he was satisfied , and said he would do it all just as Tom said . 
Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco ; so we had a right down good sociable time ; then we crawled out through the hole , and so home to bed , with hands that looked like they 'd been chawed . 
Tom was in high spirits . 
He said it was the best fun he ever had in his life , and the most intellectural ; and said if he only could see his way to it we would keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our children to get out ; for he believed Jim would come to like it better and better the more he got used to it . 
He said that in that way it could be strung out to as much as eighty year , and would be the best time on record . 
And he said it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it . 
In the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass candlestick into handy sizes , and Tom put them and the pewter spoon in his pocket . 
Then we went to the nigger cabins , and while I got Nat 's notice off , Tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a corn - pone that was in Jim 's pan , and we went along with Nat to see how it would work , and it just worked noble ; when Jim bit into it it most mashed all his teeth out ; and there war n't ever anything could a worked better . 
Tom said so himself . 
Jim he never let on but what it was only just a piece of rock or something like that that 's always getting into bread , you know ; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first . 
And whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light , here comes a couple of the hounds bulging in from under Jim 's bed ; and they kept on piling in till there was eleven of them , and there war n't hardly room in there to get your breath . 
By jings , we forgot to fasten that lean-to door ! 
The nigger Nat he only just hollered `` Witches '' once , and keeled over on to the floor amongst the dogs , and begun to groan like he was dying . 
Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim 's meat , and the dogs went for it , and in two seconds he was out himself and back again and shut the door , and I knowed he 'd fixed the other door too . 
Then he went to work on the nigger , coaxing him and petting him , and asking him if he 'd been imagining he saw something again . 
He raised up , and blinked his eyes around , and says : `` Mars Sid , you 'll say I 's a fool , but if I did n't b ` lieve I see most a million dogs , er devils , er some ` n , I wisht I may die right heah in dese tracks . 
I did , mos ' sholy . 
Mars Sid , I FELT um -- I FELT um , sah ; dey was all over me . 
Dad fetch it , I jis ' wisht I could git my han 's on one er dem witches jis ' wunst -- on ' y jis ' wunst -- it 's all I 'd ast . 
But mos ` ly I wisht dey 'd lem me ` lone , I does . '' 
Tom says : `` Well , I tell you what I think . 
What makes them come here just at this runaway nigger 's breakfast-time ? 
It 's because they 're hungry ; that 's the reason . 
You make them a witch pie ; that 's the thing for YOU to do . '' 
`` But my lan ' , Mars Sid , how 's I gwyne to make 'm a witch pie ? 
I doan ' know how to make it . 
I hai n't ever hearn er sich a thing b ` fo ' . '' 
`` Well , then , I 'll have to make it myself . '' 
`` Will you do it , honey ? 
-- will you ? 
I 'll wusshup de groun ' und ' yo ' foot , I will ! '' 
`` All right , I 'll do it , seeing it 's you , and you 've been good to us and showed us the runaway nigger . 
But you got to be mighty careful . 
When we come around , you turn your back ; and then whatever we 've put in the pan , do n't you let on you see it at all . 
And do n't you look when Jim unloads the pan -- something might happen , I do n't know what . 
And above all , do n't you HANDLE the witch-things . '' 
`` HANNEL 'm , Mars Sid ? 
What IS you a-talkin ' ` bout ? 
I wouldn ' lay de weight er my finger on um , not f ' r ten hund 'd thous 'n billion dollars , I would n't . '' 
THAT was all fixed . 
So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile in the back yard , where they keep the old boots , and rags , and pieces of bottles , and wore-out tin things , and all such truck , and scratched around and found an old tin washpan , and stopped up the holes as well as we could , to bake the pie in , and took it down cellar and stole it full of flour and started for breakfast , and found a couple of shingle-nails that Tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and sorrows on the dungeon walls with , and dropped one of them in Aunt Sally 's apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair , and t ` other we stuck in the band of Uncle Silas 's hat , which was on the bureau , because we heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger 's house this morning , and then went to breakfast , and Tom dropped the pewter spoon in Uncle Silas 's coat-pocket , and Aunt Sally was n't come yet , so we had to wait a little while . 
And when she come she was hot and red and cross , and could n't hardly wait for the blessing ; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with one hand and cracking the handiest child 's head with her thimble with the other , and says : `` I 've hunted high and I 've hunted low , and it does beat all what HAS become of your other shirt . '' 
My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things , and a hard piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the road with a cough , and was shot across the table , and took one of the children in the eye and curled him up like a fishing-worm , and let a cry out of him the size of a warwhoop , and Tom he turned kinder blue around the gills , and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for about a quarter of a minute or as much as that , and I would a sold out for half price if there was a bidder . 
But after that we was all right again -- it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of cold . 
Uncle Silas he says : `` It 's most uncommon curious , I ca n't understand it . 
I know perfectly well I took it OFF , because -- '' `` Because you hai n't got but one ON . 
Just LISTEN at the man ! 
I know you took it off , and know it by a better way than your wool-gethering memory , too , because it was on the clo 's - line yesterday -- I see it there myself . 
But it 's gone , that 's the long and the short of it , and you 'll just have to change to a red flann ' l one till I can get time to make a new one . 
And it 'll be the third I 've made in two years . 
It just keeps a body on the jump to keep you in shirts ; and whatever you do manage to DO with 'm all is more 'n I can make out . 
A body 'd think you WOULD learn to take some sort of care of 'em at your time of life . '' 
`` I know it , Sally , and I do try all I can . 
But it ought n't to be altogether my fault , because , you know , I do n't see them nor have nothing to do with them except when they 're on me ; and I do n't believe I 've ever lost one of them OFF of me . '' 
`` Well , it ai n't YOUR fault if you have n't , Silas ; you 'd a done it if you could , I reckon . 
And the shirt ai n't all that 's gone , nuther . 
Ther 's a spoon gone ; and THAT ai n't all . 
There was ten , and now ther 's only nine . 
The calf got the shirt , I reckon , but the calf never took the spoon , THAT 'S certain . '' 
`` Why , what else is gone , Sally ? '' 
`` Ther 's six CANDLES gone -- that 's what . 
The rats could a got the candles , and I reckon they did ; I wonder they do n't walk off with the whole place , the way you 're always going to stop their holes and do n't do it ; and if they war n't fools they 'd sleep in your hair , Silas -- YOU 'D never find it out ; but you ca n't lay the SPOON on the rats , and that I know . '' 
`` Well , Sally , I 'm in fault , and I acknowledge it ; I 've been remiss ; but I wo n't let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes . '' 
`` Oh , I would n't hurry ; next year 'll do . 
Matilda Angelina Araminta PHELPS ! '' 
Whack comes the thimble , and the child snatches her claws out of the sugar-bowl without fooling around any . 
Just then the nigger woman steps on to the passage , and says : `` Missus , dey 's a sheet gone . '' 
`` A SHEET gone ! 
Well , for the land 's sake ! '' 
`` I 'll stop up them holes to-day , '' says Uncle Silas , looking sorrowful . 
`` Oh , DO shet up ! 
-- s ` pose the rats took the SHEET ? 
WHERE 'S it gone , Lize ? '' 
`` Clah to goodness I hai n't no notion , Miss ' Sally . 
She wuz on de clo ` sline yistiddy , but she done gone : she ain ' dah no mo ' now . '' 
`` I reckon the world IS coming to an end . 
I NEVER see the beat of it in all my born days . 
A shirt , and a sheet , and a spoon , and six can -- '' `` Missus , '' comes a young yaller wench , `` dey 's a brass cannelstick miss ` n. '' `` Cler out from here , you hussy , er I 'll take a skillet to ye ! '' 
Well , she was just a-biling . 
I begun to lay for a chance ; I reckoned I would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather moderated . 
She kept a-raging right along , running her insurrection all by herself , and everybody else mighty meek and quiet ; and at last Uncle Silas , looking kind of foolish , fishes up that spoon out of his pocket . 
She stopped , with her mouth open and her hands up ; and as for me , I wished I was in Jeruslem or somewheres . 
But not long , because she says : `` It 's JUST as I expected . 
So you had it in your pocket all the time ; and like as not you 've got the other things there , too . 
How 'd it get there ? '' 
`` I reely do n't know , Sally , '' he says , kind of apologizing , `` or you know I would tell . 
I was a-studying over my text in Acts Seventeen before breakfast , and I reckon I put it in there , not noticing , meaning to put my Testament in , and it must be so , because my Testament ai n't in ; but I 'll go and see ; and if the Testament is where I had it , I 'll know I did n't put it in , and that will show that I laid the Testament down and took up the spoon , and -- '' `` Oh , for the land 's sake ! 
Give a body a rest ! 
Go ` long now , the whole kit and biling of ye ; and do n't come nigh me again till I 've got back my peace of mind . '' 
I 'd a heard her if she 'd a said it to herself , let alone speaking it out ; and I 'd a got up and obeyed her if I 'd a been dead . 
As we was passing through the setting-room the old man he took up his hat , and the shingle - nail fell out on the floor , and he just merely picked it up and laid it on the mantel-shelf , and never said nothing , and went out . 
Tom see him do it , and remembered about the spoon , and says : `` Well , it ai n't no use to send things by HIM no more , he ai n't reliable . '' 
Then he says : `` But he done us a good turn with the spoon , anyway , without knowing it , and so we 'll go and do him one without HIM knowing it -- stop up his rat-holes . '' 
There was a noble good lot of them down cellar , and it took us a whole hour , but we done the job tight and good and shipshape . 
Then we heard steps on the stairs , and blowed out our light and hid ; and here comes the old man , with a candle in one hand and a bundle of stuff in t ` other , looking as absent-minded as year before last . 
He went a mooning around , first to one rat-hole and then another , till he 'd been to them all . 
Then he stood about five minutes , picking tallow-drip off of his candle and thinking . 
Then he turns off slow and dreamy towards the stairs , saying : `` Well , for the life of me I ca n't remember when I done it . 
I could show her now that I war n't to blame on account of the rats . 
But never mind -- let it go . 
I reckon it would n't do no good . '' 
And so he went on a-mumbling up stairs , and then we left . 
He was a mighty nice old man . 
And always is . 
Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon , but he said we 'd got to have it ; so he took a think . 
When he had ciphered it out he told me how we was to do ; then we went and waited around the spoon-basket till we see Aunt Sally coming , and then Tom went to counting the spoons and laying them out to one side , and I slid one of them up my sleeve , and Tom says : `` Why , Aunt Sally , there ai n't but nine spoons YET . '' 
She says : `` Go ` long to your play , and do n't bother me . 
I know better , I counted 'm myself . '' 
`` Well , I 've counted them twice , Aunty , and I ca n't make but nine . '' 
She looked out of all patience , but of course she come to count -- anybody would . 
`` I declare to gracious ther ' AI N'T but nine ! '' 
she says . 
`` Why , what in the world -- plague TAKE the things , I 'll count 'm again . '' 
So I slipped back the one I had , and when she got done counting , she says : `` Hang the troublesome rubbage , ther 's TEN now ! '' 
and she looked huffy and bothered both . 
But Tom says : `` Why , Aunty , I do n't think there 's ten . '' 
`` You numskull , did n't you see me COUNT 'm ? '' 
`` I know , but -- '' `` Well , I 'll count 'm AGAIN . '' 
So I smouched one , and they come out nine , same as the other time . 
Well , she WAS in a tearing way -- just a-trembling all over , she was so mad . 
But she counted and counted till she got that addled she 'd start to count in the basket for a spoon sometimes ; and so , three times they come out right , and three times they come out wrong . 
Then she grabbed up the basket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat galley-west ; and she said cle ' r out and let her have some peace , and if we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she 'd skin us . 
So we had the odd spoon , and dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst she was a - giving us our sailing orders , and Jim got it all right , along with her shingle nail , before noon . 
We was very well satisfied with this business , and Tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took , because he said NOW she could n't ever count them spoons twice alike again to save her life ; and would n't believe she 'd counted them right if she DID ; and said that after she 'd about counted her head off for the next three days he judged she 'd give it up and offer to kill anybody that wanted her to ever count them any more . 
So we put the sheet back on the line that night , and stole one out of her closet ; and kept on putting it back and stealing it again for a couple of days till she did n't know how many sheets she had any more , and she did n't CARE , and war n't a-going to bullyrag the rest of her soul out about it , and would n't count them again not to save her life ; she druther die first . 
So we was all right now , as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon and the candles , by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up counting ; and as to the candlestick , it war n't no consequence , it would blow over by and by . 
But that pie was a job ; we had no end of trouble with that pie . 
We fixed it up away down in the woods , and cooked it there ; and we got it done at last , and very satisfactory , too ; but not all in one day ; and we had to use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through , and we got burnt pretty much all over , in places , and eyes put out with the smoke ; because , you see , we did n't want nothing but a crust , and we could n't prop it up right , and she would always cave in . 
But of course we thought of the right way at last -- which was to cook the ladder , too , in the pie . 
So then we laid in with Jim the second night , and tore up the sheet all in little strings and twisted them together , and long before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person with . 
We let on it took nine months to make it . 
And in the forenoon we took it down to the woods , but it would n't go into the pie . 
Being made of a whole sheet , that way , there was rope enough for forty pies if we 'd a wanted them , and plenty left over for soup , or sausage , or anything you choose . 
We could a had a whole dinner . 
But we did n't need it . 
All we needed was just enough for the pie , and so we throwed the rest away . 
We did n't cook none of the pies in the wash - pan -- afraid the solder would melt ; but Uncle Silas he had a noble brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of , because it belonged to one of his ancesters with a long wooden handle that come over from England with William the Conqueror in the Mayflower or one of them early ships and was hid away up garret with a lot of other old pots and things that was valuable , not on account of being any account , because they war n't , but on account of them being relicts , you know , and we snaked her out , private , and took her down there , but she failed on the first pies , because we did n't know how , but she come up smiling on the last one . 
We took and lined her with dough , and set her in the coals , and loaded her up with rag rope , and put on a dough roof , and shut down the lid , and put hot embers on top , and stood off five foot , with the long handle , cool and comfortable , and in fifteen minutes she turned out a pie that was a satisfaction to look at . 
But the person that et it would want to fetch a couple of kags of toothpicks along , for if that rope ladder would n't cramp him down to business I do n't know nothing what I 'm talking about , and lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him till next time , too . 
Nat did n't look when we put the witch pie in Jim 's pan ; and we put the three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under the vittles ; and so Jim got everything all right , and as soon as he was by himself he busted into the pie and hid the rope ladder inside of his straw tick , and scratched some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the window-hole . 
MAKING them pens was a distressid tough job , and so was the saw ; and Jim allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all . 
That 's the one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall . 
But he had to have it ; Tom said he 'd GOT to ; there war n't no case of a state prisoner not scrabbling his inscription to leave behind , and his coat of arms . 
`` Look at Lady Jane Grey , '' he says ; `` look at Gilford Dudley ; look at old Northumberland ! 
Why , Huck , s ` pose it IS considerble trouble ? 
-- what you going to do ? 
-- how you going to get around it ? 
Jim 's GOT to do his inscription and coat of arms . 
They all do . '' 
Jim says : `` Why , Mars Tom , I hai n't got no coat o ' arm ; I hai n't got nuffn but dish yer ole shirt , en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat . '' 
`` Oh , you do n't understand , Jim ; a coat of arms is very different . '' 
`` Well , '' I says , `` Jim 's right , anyway , when he says he ai n't got no coat of arms , because he hai n't . '' 
`` I reckon I knowed that , '' Tom says , `` but you bet he 'll have one before he goes out of this -- because he 's going out RIGHT , and there ai n't going to be no flaws in his record . '' 
So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece , Jim a - making his 'n out of the brass and I making mine out of the spoon , Tom set to work to think out the coat of arms . 
By and by he said he 'd struck so many good ones he did n't hardly know which to take , but there was one which he reckoned he 'd decide on . 
He says : `` On the scutcheon we 'll have a bend OR in the dexter base , a saltire MURREY in the fess , with a dog , couchant , for common charge , and under his foot a chain embattled , for slavery , with a chevron VERT in a chief engrailed , and three invected lines on a field AZURE , with the nombril points rampant on a dancette indented ; crest , a runaway nigger , SABLE , with his bundle over his shoulder on a bar sinister ; and a couple of gules for supporters , which is you and me ; motto , MAGGIORE FRETTA , MINORE OTTO . 
Got it out of a book -- means the more haste the less speed . '' 
`` Geewhillikins , '' I says , `` but what does the rest of it mean ? '' 
`` We ai n't got no time to bother over that , '' he says ; `` we got to dig in like all git-out . '' 
`` Well , anyway , '' I says , `` what 's SOME of it ? 
What 's a fess ? '' 
`` A fess -- a fess is -- YOU do n't need to know what a fess is . 
I 'll show him how to make it when he gets to it . '' 
`` Shucks , Tom , '' I says , `` I think you might tell a person . 
What 's a bar sinister ? '' 
`` Oh , I do n't know . 
But he 's got to have it . 
All the nobility does . '' 
That was just his way . 
If it did n't suit him to explain a thing to you , he would n't do it . 
You might pump at him a week , it would n't make no difference . 
He 'd got all that coat of arms business fixed , so now he started in to finish up the rest of that part of the work , which was to plan out a mournful inscription -- said Jim got to have one , like they all done . 
He made up a lot , and wrote them out on a paper , and read them off , so : 1 . 
Here a captive heart busted . 
2 . 
Here a poor prisoner , forsook by the world and friends , fretted his sorrowful life . 
3 . 
Here a lonely heart broke , and a worn spirit went to its rest , after thirty-seven years of solitary captivity . 
4 . 
Here , homeless and friendless , after thirty-seven years of bitter captivity , perished a noble stranger , natural son of Louis XIV . 
Tom 's voice trembled whilst he was reading them , and he most broke down . 
When he got done he could n't no way make up his mind which one for Jim to scrabble on to the wall , they was all so good ; but at last he allowed he would let him scrabble them all on . 
Jim said it would take him a year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail , and he did n't know how to make letters , besides ; but Tom said he would block them out for him , and then he would n't have nothing to do but just follow the lines . 
Then pretty soon he says : `` Come to think , the logs ai n't a-going to do ; they do n't have log walls in a dungeon : we got to dig the inscriptions into a rock . 
We 'll fetch a rock . '' 
Jim said the rock was worse than the logs ; he said it would take him such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he would n't ever get out . 
But Tom said he would let me help him do it . 
Then he took a look to see how me and Jim was getting along with the pens . 
It was most pesky tedious hard work and slow , and did n't give my hands no show to get well of the sores , and we did n't seem to make no headway , hardly ; so Tom says : `` I know how to fix it . 
We got to have a rock for the coat of arms and mournful inscriptions , and we can kill two birds with that same rock . 
There 's a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill , and we 'll smouch it , and carve the things on it , and file out the pens and the saw on it , too . '' 
It war n't no slouch of an idea ; and it war n't no slouch of a grindstone nuther ; but we allowed we 'd tackle it . 
It war n't quite midnight yet , so we cleared out for the mill , leaving Jim at work . 
We smouched the grindstone , and set out to roll her home , but it was a most nation tough job . 
Sometimes , do what we could , we could n't keep her from falling over , and she come mighty near mashing us every time . 
Tom said she was going to get one of us , sure , before we got through . 
We got her half way ; and then we was plumb played out , and most drownded with sweat . 
We see it war n't no use ; we got to go and fetch Jim So he raised up his bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg , and wrapt it round and round his neck , and we crawled out through our hole and down there , and Jim and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing ; and Tom superintended . 
He could out-superintend any boy I ever see . 
He knowed how to do everything . 
Our hole was pretty big , but it war n't big enough to get the grindstone through ; but Jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough . 
Then Tom marked out them things on it with the nail , and set Jim to work on them , with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the lean - to for a hammer , and told him to work till the rest of his candle quit on him , and then he could go to bed , and hide the grindstone under his straw tick and sleep on it . 
Then we helped him fix his chain back on the bed - leg , and was ready for bed ourselves . 
But Tom thought of something , and says : `` You got any spiders in here , Jim ? '' 
`` No , sah , thanks to goodness I hai n't , Mars Tom . '' 
`` All right , we 'll get you some . '' 
`` But bless you , honey , I doan ' WANT none . 
I 's afeard un um . 
I jis ' 's soon have rattlesnakes aroun ' . '' 
Tom thought a minute or two , and says : `` It 's a good idea . 
And I reckon it 's been done . 
It MUST a been done ; it stands to reason . 
Yes , it 's a prime good idea . 
Where could you keep it ? '' 
`` Keep what , Mars Tom ? '' 
`` Why , a rattlesnake . '' 
`` De goodness gracious alive , Mars Tom ! 
Why , if dey was a rattlesnake to come in heah I 'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall , I would , wid my head . '' 
Why , Jim , you would n't be afraid of it after a little . 
You could tame it . '' 
`` TAME it ! '' 
`` Yes -- easy enough . 
Every animal is grateful for kindness and petting , and they would n't THINK of hurting a person that pets them . 
Any book will tell you that . 
You try -- that 's all I ask ; just try for two or three days . 
Why , you can get him so in a little while that he 'll love you ; and sleep with you ; and wo n't stay away from you a minute ; and will let you wrap him round your neck and put his head in your mouth . '' 
`` PLEASE , Mars Tom -- DOAN ' talk so ! 
I ca n't STAN ' it ! 
He 'd LET me shove his head in my mouf -- fer a favor , hai n't it ? 
I lay he 'd wait a pow ` ful long time ` fo ' I AST him . 
En mo ' en dat , I doan ' WANT him to sleep wid me . '' 
`` Jim , do n't act so foolish . 
A prisoner 's GOT to have some kind of a dumb pet , and if a rattlesnake hai n't ever been tried , why , there 's more glory to be gained in your being the first to ever try it than any other way you could ever think of to save your life . '' 
`` Why , Mars Tom , I doan ' WANT no sich glory . 
Snake take 'n bite Jim 's chin off , den WHAH is de glory ? 
No , sah , I doan ' want no sich doin 's . '' 
`` Blame it , ca n't you TRY ? 
I only WANT you to try -- you need n't keep it up if it do n't work . '' 
`` But de trouble all DONE ef de snake bite me while I 's a tryin ' him . 
Mars Tom , I 's willin ' to tackle mos ' anything ` at ai n't onreasonable , but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame , I 's gwyne to LEAVE , dat 's SHORE . '' 
`` Well , then , let it go , let it go , if you 're so bull-headed about it . 
We can get you some garter-snakes , and you can tie some buttons on their tails , and let on they 're rattlesnakes , and I reckon that 'll have to do . '' 
`` I k 'n stan ' DEM , Mars Tom , but blame ' ' f I couldn ' get along widout um , I tell you dat . 
I never knowed b ` fo ' ' t was so much bother and trouble to be a prisoner . '' 
`` Well , it ALWAYS is when it 's done right . 
You got any rats around here ? '' 
`` No , sah , I hai n't seed none . '' 
`` Well , we 'll get you some rats . '' 
`` Why , Mars Tom , I doan ' WANT no rats . 
Dey 's de dadblamedest creturs to ` sturb a body , en rustle roun ' over ` im , en bite his feet , when he 's tryin ' to sleep , I ever see . 
No , sah , gim me g ` yarter-snakes , ' f I 's got to have 'm , but doan ' gim me no rats ; I hain ' got no use f ' r um , skasely . '' 
`` But , Jim , you GOT to have 'em -- they all do . 
So do n't make no more fuss about it . 
Prisoners ai n't ever without rats . 
There ai n't no instance of it . 
And they train them , and pet them , and learn them tricks , and they get to be as sociable as flies . 
But you got to play music to them . 
You got anything to play music on ? '' 
`` I ain ' got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o ' paper , en a juice-harp ; but I reck 'n dey wouldn ' take no stock in a juice-harp . '' 
`` Yes they would . 
THEY do n't care what kind of music 't is . 
A jews-harp 's plenty good enough for a rat . 
All animals like music -- in a prison they dote on it . 
Specially , painful music ; and you ca n't get no other kind out of a jews-harp . 
It always interests them ; they come out to see what 's the matter with you . 
Yes , you 're all right ; you 're fixed very well . 
You want to set on your bed nights before you go to sleep , and early in the mornings , and play your jews-harp ; play ` The Last Link is Broken ' -- that 's the thing that 'll scoop a rat quicker 'n anything else ; and when you 've played about two minutes you 'll see all the rats , and the snakes , and spiders , and things begin to feel worried about you , and come . 
And they 'll just fairly swarm over you , and have a noble good time . '' 
`` Yes , DEY will , I reck ` n , Mars Tom , but what kine er time is JIM havin ' ? 
Blest if I kin see de pint . 
But I 'll do it ef I got to . 
I reck 'n I better keep de animals satisfied , en not have no trouble in de house . '' 
Tom waited to think it over , and see if there was n't nothing else ; and pretty soon he says : `` Oh , there 's one thing I forgot . 
Could you raise a flower here , do you reckon ? '' 
`` I doan know but maybe I could , Mars Tom ; but it 's tolable dark in heah , en I ain ' got no use f ' r no flower , nohow , en she 'd be a pow ` ful sight o ' trouble . '' 
`` Well , you try it , anyway . 
Some other prisoners has done it . '' 
`` One er dem big cat-tail-lookin ' mullen-stalks would grow in heah , Mars Tom , I reck ` n , but she would n't be wuth half de trouble she 'd coss . '' 
`` Do n't you believe it . 
We 'll fetch you a little one and you plant it in the corner over there , and raise it . 
And do n't call it mullen , call it Pitchiola -- that 's its right name when it 's in a prison . 
And you want to water it with your tears . '' 
`` Why , I got plenty spring water , Mars Tom . '' 
`` You do n't WANT spring water ; you want to water it with your tears . 
It 's the way they always do . '' 
`` Why , Mars Tom , I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen-stalks twyste wid spring water whiles another man 's a START 'N one wid tears . '' 
`` That ai n't the idea . 
You GOT to do it with tears . '' 
`` She 'll die on my han 's , Mars Tom , she sholy will ; kase I doan ' skasely ever cry . '' 
So Tom was stumped . 
But he studied it over , and then said Jim would have to worry along the best he could with an onion . 
He promised he would go to the nigger cabins and drop one , private , in Jim 's coffee-pot , in the morning . 
Jim said he would `` jis ' 's soon have tobacker in his coffee ; '' and found so much fault with it , and with the work and bother of raising the mullen , and jews-harping the rats , and petting and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things , on top of all the other work he had to do on pens , and inscriptions , and journals , and things , which made it more trouble and worry and responsibility to be a prisoner than anything he ever undertook , that Tom most lost all patience with him ; and said he was just loadened down with more gaudier chances than a prisoner ever had in the world to make a name for himself , and yet he did n't know enough to appreciate them , and they was just about wasted on him . 
So Jim he was sorry , and said he would n't behave so no more , and then me and Tom shoved for bed . 
IN the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and fetched it down , and unstopped the best rat-hole , and in about an hour we had fifteen of the bulliest kind of ones ; and then we took it and put it in a safe place under Aunt Sally 's bed . 
But while we was gone for spiders little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Elexander Phelps found it there , and opened the door of it to see if the rats would come out , and they did ; and Aunt Sally she come in , and when we got back she was a - standing on top of the bed raising Cain , and the rats was doing what they could to keep off the dull times for her . 
So she took and dusted us both with the hickry , and we was as much as two hours catching another fifteen or sixteen , drat that meddlesome cub , and they war n't the likeliest , nuther , because the first haul was the pick of the flock . 
I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was . 
We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders , and bugs , and frogs , and caterpillars , and one thing or another ; and we like to got a hornet 's nest , but we did n't . 
The family was at home . 
We did n't give it right up , but stayed with them as long as we could ; because we allowed we 'd tire them out or they 'd got to tire us out , and they done it . 
Then we got allycumpain and rubbed on the places , and was pretty near all right again , but could n't set down convenient . 
And so we went for the snakes , and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes , and put them in a bag , and put it in our room , and by that time it was supper-time , and a rattling good honest day 's work : and hungry ? 
-- oh , no , I reckon not ! 
And there war n't a blessed snake up there when we went back -- we did n't half tie the sack , and they worked out somehow , and left . 
But it did n't matter much , because they was still on the premises somewheres . 
So we judged we could get some of them again . 
No , there war n't no real scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell . 
You 'd see them dripping from the rafters and places every now and then ; and they generly landed in your plate , or down the back of your neck , and most of the time where you did n't want them . 
Well , they was handsome and striped , and there war n't no harm in a million of them ; but that never made no difference to Aunt Sally ; she despised snakes , be the breed what they might , and she could n't stand them no way you could fix it ; and every time one of them flopped down on her , it did n't make no difference what she was doing , she would just lay that work down and light out . 
I never see such a woman . 
And you could hear her whoop to Jericho . 
You could n't get her to take a-holt of one of them with the tongs . 
And if she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble out and lift a howl that you would think the house was afire . 
She disturbed the old man so that he said he could most wish there had n't ever been no snakes created . 
Why , after every last snake had been gone clear out of the house for as much as a week Aunt Sally war n't over it yet ; she war n't near over it ; when she was setting thinking about something you could touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and she would jump right out of her stockings . 
It was very curious . 
But Tom said all women was just so . 
He said they was made that way for some reason or other . 
We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her way , and she allowed these lickings war n't nothing to what she would do if we ever loaded up the place again with them . 
I did n't mind the lickings , because they did n't amount to nothing ; but I minded the trouble we had to lay in another lot . 
But we got them laid in , and all the other things ; and you never see a cabin as blithesome as Jim 's was when they 'd all swarm out for music and go for him . 
Jim did n't like the spiders , and the spiders did n't like Jim ; and so they 'd lay for him , and make it mighty warm for him . 
And he said that between the rats and the snakes and the grindstone there war n't no room in bed for him , skasely ; and when there was , a body could n't sleep , it was so lively , and it was always lively , he said , because THEY never all slept at one time , but took turn about , so when the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck , and when the rats turned in the snakes come on watch , so he always had one gang under him , in his way , and t ` other gang having a circus over him , and if he got up to hunt a new place the spiders would take a chance at him as he crossed over . 
He said if he ever got out this time he would n't ever be a prisoner again , not for a salary . 
Well , by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape . 
The shirt was sent in early , in a pie , and every time a rat bit Jim he would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh ; the pens was made , the inscriptions and so on was all carved on the grindstone ; the bed-leg was sawed in two , and we had et up the sawdust , and it give us a most amazing stomach-ache . 
We reckoned we was all going to die , but did n't . 
It was the most undigestible sawdust I ever see ; and Tom said the same . 
But as I was saying , we 'd got all the work done now , at last ; and we was all pretty much fagged out , too , but mainly Jim . 
The old man had wrote a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come and get their runaway nigger , but had n't got no answer , because there war n't no such plantation ; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in the St. Louis and New Orleans papers ; and when he mentioned the St. Louis ones it give me the cold shivers , and I see we had n't no time to lose . 
So Tom said , now for the nonnamous letters . 
`` What 's them ? '' 
I says . 
`` Warnings to the people that something is up . 
Sometimes it 's done one way , sometimes another . 
But there 's always somebody spying around that gives notice to the governor of the castle . 
When Louis XVI . 
was going to light out of the Tooleries a servant-girl done it . 
It 's a very good way , and so is the nonnamous letters . 
We 'll use them both . 
And it 's usual for the prisoner 's mother to change clothes with him , and she stays in , and he slides out in her clothes . 
We 'll do that , too . '' 
`` But looky here , Tom , what do we want to WARN anybody for that something 's up ? 
Let them find it out for themselves -- it 's their lookout . '' 
`` Yes , I know ; but you ca n't depend on them . 
It 's the way they 've acted from the very start -- left us to do EVERYTHING . 
They 're so confiding and mullet-headed they do n't take notice of nothing at all . 
So if we do n't GIVE them notice there wo n't be nobody nor nothing to interfere with us , and so after all our hard work and trouble this escape 'll go off perfectly flat ; wo n't amount to nothing -- wo n't be nothing TO it . '' 
`` Well , as for me , Tom , that 's the way I 'd like . '' 
`` Shucks ! '' 
he says , and looked disgusted . 
So I says : `` But I ai n't going to make no complaint . 
Any way that suits you suits me . 
What you going to do about the servant-girl ? '' 
`` You 'll be her . 
You slide in , in the middle of the night , and hook that yaller girl 's frock . '' 
`` Why , Tom , that 'll make trouble next morning ; because , of course , she prob ` bly hai n't got any but that one . '' 
`` I know ; but you do n't want it but fifteen minutes , to carry the nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door . '' 
`` All right , then , I 'll do it ; but I could carry it just as handy in my own togs . '' 
`` You would n't look like a servant-girl THEN , would you ? '' 
`` No , but there wo n't be nobody to see what I look like , ANYWAY . '' 
`` That ai n't got nothing to do with it . 
The thing for us to do is just to do our DUTY , and not worry about whether anybody SEES us do it or not . 
Hai n't you got no principle at all ? '' 
`` All right , I ai n't saying nothing ; I 'm the servant-girl . 
Who 's Jim 's mother ? '' 
`` I 'm his mother . 
I 'll hook a gown from Aunt Sally . '' 
`` Well , then , you 'll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves . '' 
`` Not much . 
I 'll stuff Jim 's clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed to represent his mother in disguise , and Jim 'll take the nigger woman 's gown off of me and wear it , and we 'll all evade together . 
When a prisoner of style escapes it 's called an evasion . 
It 's always called so when a king escapes , f ` rinstance . 
And the same with a king 's son ; it do n't make no difference whether he 's a natural one or an unnatural one . '' 
So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter , and I smouched the yaller wench 's frock that night , and put it on , and shoved it under the front door , the way Tom told me to . 
It said : Beware . 
Trouble is brewing . 
Keep a sharp lookout . 
UNKNOWN FRIEND . 
Next night we stuck a picture , which Tom drawed in blood , of a skull and crossbones on the front door ; and next night another one of a coffin on the back door . 
I never see a family in such a sweat . 
They could n't a been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts laying for them behind everything and under the beds and shivering through the air . 
If a door banged , Aunt Sally she jumped and said `` ouch ! '' 
if anything fell , she jumped and said `` ouch ! '' 
if you happened to touch her , when she war n't noticing , she done the same ; she could n't face noway and be satisfied , because she allowed there was something behind her every time -- so she was always a-whirling around sudden , and saying `` ouch , '' and before she 'd got two-thirds around she 'd whirl back again , and say it again ; and she was afraid to go to bed , but she das n't set up . 
So the thing was working very well , Tom said ; he said he never see a thing work more satisfactory . 
He said it showed it was done right . 
So he said , now for the grand bulge ! 
So the very next morning at the streak of dawn we got another letter ready , and was wondering what we better do with it , because we heard them say at supper they was going to have a nigger on watch at both doors all night . 
Tom he went down the lightning-rod to spy around ; and the nigger at the back door was asleep , and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back . 
This letter said : Do n't betray me , I wish to be your friend . 
There is a desprate gang of cut-throats from over in the Indian Territory going to steal your runaway nigger to-night , and they have been trying to scare you so as you will stay in the house and not bother them . 
I am one of the gang , but have got religgion and wish to quit it and lead an honest life again , and will betray the helish design . 
They will sneak down from northards , along the fence , at midnight exact , with a false key , and go in the nigger 's cabin to get him . 
I am to be off a piece and blow a tin horn if I see any danger ; but stead of that I will BA like a sheep soon as they get in and not blow at all ; then whilst they are getting his chains loose , you slip there and lock them in , and can kill them at your leasure . 
Do n't do anything but just the way I am telling you ; if you do they will suspicion something and raise whoop-jamboreehoo . 
I do not wish any reward but to know I have done the right thing . 
UNKNOWN FRIEND . 
WE was feeling pretty good after breakfast , and took my canoe and went over the river a-fishing , with a lunch , and had a good time , and took a look at the raft and found her all right , and got home late to supper , and found them in such a sweat and worry they did n't know which end they was standing on , and made us go right off to bed the minute we was done supper , and would n't tell us what the trouble was , and never let on a word about the new letter , but did n't need to , because we knowed as much about it as anybody did , and as soon as we was half up stairs and her back was turned we slid for the cellar cubboard and loaded up a good lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed , and got up about half - past eleven , and Tom put on Aunt Sally 's dress that he stole and was going to start with the lunch , but says : `` Where 's the butter ? '' 
`` I laid out a hunk of it , '' I says , `` on a piece of a corn-pone . '' 
`` Well , you LEFT it laid out , then -- it ai n't here . '' 
`` We can get along without it , '' I says . 
`` We can get along WITH it , too , '' he says ; `` just you slide down cellar and fetch it . 
And then mosey right down the lightning-rod and come along . 
I 'll go and stuff the straw into Jim 's clothes to represent his mother in disguise , and be ready to BA like a sheep and shove soon as you get there . '' 
So out he went , and down cellar went I . 
The hunk of butter , big as a person 's fist , was where I had left it , so I took up the slab of corn - pone with it on , and blowed out my light , and started up stairs very stealthy , and got up to the main floor all right , but here comes Aunt Sally with a candle , and I clapped the truck in my hat , and clapped my hat on my head , and the next second she see me ; and she says : `` You been down cellar ? '' 
`` Yes 'm . '' 
`` What you been doing down there ? '' 
`` Noth ` n. '' `` NOTH ` N ! '' 
`` No 'm . '' 
`` Well , then , what possessed you to go down there this time of night ? '' 
`` I do n't know 'm . '' 
`` You do n't KNOW ? 
Do n't answer me that way . 
Tom , I want to know what you been DOING down there . '' 
`` I hai n't been doing a single thing , Aunt Sally , I hope to gracious if I have . '' 
I reckoned she 'd let me go now , and as a generl thing she would ; but I s ` pose there was so many strange things going on she was just in a sweat about every little thing that war n't yard-stick straight ; so she says , very decided : `` You just march into that setting-room and stay there till I come . 
You been up to something you no business to , and I lay I 'll find out what it is before I 'M done with you . '' 
So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the setting-room . 
My , but there was a crowd there ! 
Fifteen farmers , and every one of them had a gun . 
