Oh , cruel ! 
what hast thou done with her ? 
There lies my puzzle ; but thine is greater . 
Thou knowest not how came ye , hence callest thyself unbegotten ; certainly knowest not thy beginning , hence callest thyself unbegun . 
I know that of me , which thou knowest not of thyself , oh , thou omnipotent . 
There is some unsuffusing thing beyond thee , thou clear spirit , to whom all thy eternity is but time , all thy creativeness mechanical . 
Through thee , thy flaming self , my scorched eyes do dimly see it . 
Oh , thou foundling fire , thou hermit immemorial , thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle , thy unparticipated grief . 
Here again with haughty agony , I read my sire . 
Leap ! 
leap up , and lick the sky ! 
I leap with thee ; I burn with thee ; would fain be welded with thee ; defyingly I worship thee ! '' 
`` The boat ! 
the boat ! '' 
cried Starbuck , `` look at thy boat , old man ! '' 
Ahab 's harpoon , the one forged at Perth 's fire , remained firmly lashed in its conspicuous crotch , so that it projected beyond his whale-boat 's bow ; but the sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off ; and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale , forked fire . 
As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent 's tongue , Starbuck grasped Ahab by the arm -- `` God , God is against thee , old man ; forbear ! ' 
t is an ill voyage ! 
ill begun , ill continued ; let me square the yards , while we may , old man , and make a fair wind of it homewards , to go on a better voyage than this . '' 
Overhearing Starbuck , the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the braces -- though not a sail was left aloft . 
For the moment all the aghast mate 's thoughts seemed theirs ; they raised a half mutinous cry . 
But dashing the rattling lightning links to the deck , and snatching the burning harpoon , Ahab waved it like a torch among them ; swearing to transfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a rope 's end . 
Petrified by his aspect , and still more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held , the men fell back in dismay , and Ahab again spoke : -- `` All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine ; and heart , soul , and body , lungs and life , old Ahab is bound . 
And that ye may know to what tune this heart beats : look ye here ; thus I blow out the last fear ! '' 
And with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame . 
As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain , men fly the neighborhood of some lone , gigantic elm , whose very height and strength but render it so much the more unsafe , because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts ; so at those last words of Ahab 's many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of dismay . 
The Deck Toward the End of the First Night Watch Ahab standing by the helm . 
Starbuck approaching him . 
We must send down the main-top-sail yard , sir . 
The band is working loose and the lee lift is half-stranded . 
Shall I strike it , sir ? '' 
`` Strike nothing ; lash it . 
If I had sky-sail poles , I 'd sway them up now . '' 
`` Sir ! 
-- in God 's name ! 
-- sir ? '' 
`` Well . '' 
`` The anchors are working , sir . 
Shall I get them inboard ? '' 
`` Strike nothing , and stir nothing but lash everything . 
The wind rises , but it has not got up to my table-lands yet . 
Quick , and see to it . 
-- By masts and keels ! 
he takes me for the hunchbacked skipper of some coasting smack . 
Send down my main-top-sail yard ! 
Ho , gluepots ! 
Loftiest trucks were made for wildest winds , and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud . 
Shall I strike that ? 
Oh , none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in tempest time . 
What a hooroosh aloft there ! 
I would e ` en take it for sublime , did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady . 
Oh , take medicine , take medicine ! '' 
Midnight - The Forecastle Bulwarks Stubb and Flask mounted on them , and passing additional lashings over the anchors there hanging . 
No , Stubb ; you may pound that knot there as much as you please , but you will never pound into me what you were just now saying . 
And how long ago is it since you said the very contrary ? 
Did n't you once say that whatever ship Ahab sails in , that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy , just as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers forward ? 
Stop , now ; did n't you say so ? '' 
`` Well , suppose I did ? 
What then ! 
I 've part changed my flesh since that time , why not my mind ? 
Besides , supposing we are loaded with powder barrels aft and lucifers forward ; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this drenching spray here ? 
Why , my little man , you have pretty red hair , but you could n't get afire now . 
Shake yourself ; you 're Aquarius , or the water-bearer , Flask ; might fill pitchers at your coat collar . 
Do n't you see , then , that for these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees ? 
Here are hydrants , Flask . 
But hark , again , and I 'll answer ye the other thing . 
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here , though , so I can pass the rope ; now listen . 
What 's the mighty difference between holding a mast 's lightning-rod in the storm , and standing close by a mast that has n't got any lightning-rod at all in a storm ? 
Do n't you see , you timber-head , that no harm can come to the holder of the rod , unless the mast is first struck ? 
What are you talking about , then ? 
Not one ship in a hundred carries rods , and Ahab , -- aye , man , and all of us , -- were in no more danger then , in my poor opinion , than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas . 
Why , you King-Post , you , I suppose you would have every man in the world go about with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat , like a militia officer 's skewered feather , and trailing behind like his sash . 
Why do n't ye be sensible , Flask ? 
it 's easy to be sensible ; why do n't ye , then ? 
any man with half an eye can be sensible . '' 
`` I do n't know that , Stubb . 
You sometimes find it rather hard . '' 
`` Yes , when a fellow 's soaked through , it 's hard to be sensible , that 's a fact . 
And I am about drenched with this spray . 
Never mind ; catch the turn there , and pass it . 
Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were never going to be used again . 
Tying these two anchors here , Flask , seems like tying a man 's hands behind him . 
And what big generous hands they are , to be sure . 
These are your iron fists , hey ? 
What a hold they have , too ! 
I wonder , Flask , whether the world is anchored anywhere ; if she is , she swings with an uncommon long cable , though . 
There , hammer that knot down , and we 've done . 
So ; next to touching land , lighting on deck is the most satisfactory . 
I say , just wring out my jacket skirts , will ye ? 
Thank ye . 
They laugh at long-togs so , Flask ; but seems to me , a long-tailed coat ought always to be worn in all storms afloat . 
The tails tapering down that way , serve to carry off the water , d'ye see . 
Same with cocked hats ; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs , Flask . 
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me ; I must mount a swallow-tail , and drive down a beaver ; so . 
Halloa ! 
whew ! 
there goes my tarpaulin overboard ; Lord , Lord , that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly ! 
This is a nasty night , lad . '' 
Midnight Aloft . 
-- Thunder and Lightning The Main-top-sail yard - Tashtego passing new lashings around it . 
`` Um , um , um . 
Stop that thunder ! 
Plenty too much thunder up here . 
What 's the use of thunder ? 
Um , um , um . 
We do n't want thunder ; we want rum ; give us a glass of rum . 
Um , um , um ! '' 
The Musket During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon , the man at the Pequod 's jaw-bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its spasmodic motions even though preventer tackles had been attached to it -- for they were slack -- because some play to the tiller was indispensable . 
In a severe gale like this , while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the blast , it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses , at intervals , go round and round . 
It was thus with the Pequod 's ; at almost every shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which they revolved upon the cards ; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold without some sort of unwonted emotion . 
Some hours after midnight , the Typhoon abated so much , that through the strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb -- one engaged forward and the other aft -- the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut adrift from the spars , and went eddying away to leeward , like the feathers of an albatross , which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed bird is on the wing . 
The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed , and a storm-trysail was set further aft ; so that the ship soon went through the water with some precision again ; and the course -- for the present , East-south-east -- which he was to steer , if practicable , was once more given to the helmsman . 
For during the violence of the gale , he had only steered according to its vicissitudes . 
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible , watching the compass meanwhile , lo ! 
a good sign ! 
the wind seemed coming round astern ; aye , the foul breeze became fair ! 
Instantly the yards were squared , to the lively song of `` Ho ! 
the fair wind ! 
oh-ye-ho cheerly , men ! '' 
the crew singing for joy , that so promising an event should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it . 
In compliance with the standing order of his commander -- to report immediately , and at any one of the twenty-four hours , any decided change in the affairs of the deck , -- Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze -- however reluctantly and gloomily , -- than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain Ahab of the circumstance . 
Ere knocking at his state-room , he involuntarily paused before it a moment . 
The cabin lamp -- taking long swings this way and that -- was burning fitfully , and casting fitful shadows upon the old man 's bolted door , -- a thin one , with fixed blinds inserted , in place of upper panels . 
The isolated subterraneousness of the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there , though it was hooped round by all the roar of the elements . 
The loaded muskets in the rack were shiningly revealed , as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead . 
Starbuck was an honest , upright man ; but out of Starbuck 's heart , at that instant when he saw the muskets , there strangely evolved an evil thought ; but so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he hardly knew it for itself . 
`` He would have shot me once , '' he murmured , `` yes , there 's the very musket that he pointed at me ; -- that one with the studded stock ; let me touch it -- lift it . 
Strange , that I , who have handled so many deadly lances , strange , that I should shake so now . 
Loaded ? 
I must see . 
Aye , aye ; and powder in the pan ; -- that 's not good . 
Best spill it ? 
-- wait . 
I 'll cure myself of this . 
I 'll hold the musket boldly while I think . 
-- I come to report a fair wind to him . 
But how fair ? 
Fair for death and doom , -- that 's fair for Moby Dick . 
It 's a fair wind that 's only fair for that accursed fish . 
-- The very tube he pointed at me ! 
-- the very one ; this one -- I hold it here ; he would have killed me with the very thing I handle now . 
-- Aye and he would fain kill all his crew . 
Does he not say he will not strike his spars to any gale ? 
Has he not dashed his heavenly quadrant ? 
and in these same perilous seas , gropes he not his way by mere dead reckoning of the error-abounding log ? 
and in this very Typhoon , did he not swear that he would have no lightning-rods ? 
But shall this crazed old man be tamely suffered to drag a whole ship 's company down to doom with him ? 
-- Yes , it would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more , if this ship come to any deadly harm ; and come to deadly harm , my soul swears this ship will , if Ahab have his way . 
If , then , he were this instant -- put aside , that crime would not be his . 
Ha ! 
is he muttering in his sleep ? 
Yes , just there , -- in there , he 's sleeping . 
Sleeping ? 
aye , but still alive , and soon awake again . 
I ca n't withstand thee , then , old man . 
Not reasoning ; not remonstrance ; not entreaty wilt thou hearken to ; all this thou scornest . 
Flat obedience to thy own flat commands , this is all thou breathest . 
Aye , and say ` st the men have vow 'd thy vow ; say ` st all of us are Ahabs . 
Great God forbid ! 
-- But is there no other way ? 
no lawful way ? 
-- Make him a prisoner to be taken home ? 
What ! 
hope to wrest this old man 's living power from his own living hands ? 
Only a fool would try it . 
Say he were pinioned even ; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers ; chained down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor ; he would be more hideous than a caged tiger , then . 
I could not endure the sight ; could not possibly fly his howlings ; all comfort , sleep itself , inestimable reason would leave me on the long intolerable voyage . 
What , then , remains ? 
The land is hundreds of leagues away , and locked Japan the nearest . 
I stand alone here upon an open sea , with two oceans and a whole continent between me and law . 
-- Aye , aye , 't is so . 
-- Is heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed , tindering sheets and skin together ? 
-- And would I be a murderer , then , if '' -- and slowly , stealthily , and half sideways looking , he placed the loaded musket 's end against the door . 
`` On this level , Ahab 's hammock swings within ; his head this way . 
A touch , and Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again . 
-- Oh Mary ! 
Mary ! 
-- boy ! 
boy ! 
boy ! 
-- But if I wake thee not to death , old man , who can tell to what unsounded deeps Starbuck 's body this day week may sink , with all the crew ! 
Great God , where art Thou ? 
Shall I ? 
shall I ? 
-- The wind has gone down and shifted , sir ; the fore and main topsails are reefed and set ! 
she heads her course . '' 
`` Stern all ! 
Oh Moby Dick , I clutch thy heart at last ! '' 
Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man 's tormented sleep , as if Starbuck 's voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak . 
The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard 's arm against the panel ; Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel , but turning from the door , he placed the death-tube in its rack , and left the place . 
`` He 's too sound asleep , Mr. Stubb ; go thou down , and wake him , and tell him . 
I must see to the deck here . 
Thou know ` st what to say . '' 
The Needle Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty bulk , and striving in the Pequod 's gurgling track , pushed her on like giants ' palms outspread . 
The strong unstaggering breeze abounded so , that sky and air seemed vast outbellying sails ; the whole world boomed before the wind . 
Muffled in the full morning light , the invisible sun was only known by the spread intensity of his place ; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks . 
Emblazonings , as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens , reigned over everything . 
The sea was as a crucible of molten gold , that bubblingly leaps with light and heat . 
Long maintaining an enchanted silence , Ahab stood apart ; and every time the teetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit , he turned to eye the bright sun 's rays produced ahead ; and when she profoundly settled by the stern , he turned behind , and saw the sun 's rearward place , and how the same yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake . 
`` Ha , ha , my ship ! 
thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the sun . 
Ho , ho ! 
all ye nations before my prow , I bring the sun to ye ! 
Yoke on the further billows ; hallo ! 
a tandem , I drive the sea ! '' 
But suddenly reined back by some counter thought , he hurried towards the helm , huskily demanding how the ship was heading . 
`` East-sou-east , sir , '' said the frightened steersman . 
`` Thou liest ! '' 
smiting him with his clenched fist . 
`` Heading East at this hour in the morning , and the sun astern ? '' 
Upon this every soul was confounded ; for the phenomenon just then observed by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else ; but its very blinding palpableness must have been the cause . 
Thrusting his head half-way into the binnacle , Ahab caught one glimpse of the compasses ; his uplifted arm slowly fell ; for a moment he almost seemed to stagger . 
Standing behind him Starbuck looked , and lo ! 
the two compasses pointed East , and the Pequod was as infallibly going West . 
But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew , the old man with a rigid laugh exclaimed , `` I have it ! 
It has happened before . 
Mr. Starbuck , last night 's thunder turned our compasses -- that 's all . 
Thou hast before now heard of such a thing , I take it . '' 
`` Aye ; but never before has it happened to me , sir , '' said the pale mate , gloomily . 
Here , it must needs be said , that accidents like this have in more than one case occurred to ships in violent storms . 
The magnetic energy , as developed in the mariner 's needle , is , as all know , essentially one with the electricity beheld in heaven ; hence it is not to be much marvelled at , that such things should be . 
In instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel , so as to smite down some of the spars and rigging , the effect upon the needle has at times been still more fatal ; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated , so that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife 's knitting needle . 
But in either case , the needle never again , of itself , recovers the original virtue thus marred or lost ; and if the binnacle compasses be affected , the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship ; even were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson . 
Deliberately standing before the binnacle , and eyeing the transpointed compasses , the old man , with the sharp of his extended hand , now took the precise bearing of the sun , and satisfied that the needles were exactly inverted , shouted out his orders for the ship 's course to be changed accordingly . 
The yards were hard up ; and once more the Pequod thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind , for the supposed fair one had only been juggling her . 
Meanwhile , whatever were his own secret thoughts , Starbuck said nothing , but quietly he issued all requisite orders ; while Stubb and Flask -- who in some small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings -- likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced . 
As for the men , though some of them lowly rumbled , their fear of Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate . 
But as ever before , the pagan harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed ; or if impressed , it was only with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible Ahab 's . 
For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries . 
But chancing to slip with his ivory heel , he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck . 
`` Thou poor , proud heaven-gazer and sun 's pilot ! 
yesterday I wrecked thee , and to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me . 
So , so . 
But Ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet . 
Mr. Starbuck -- a lance without the pole ; a top-maul , and the smallest of the sail-maker 's needles . 
Quick ! '' 
Accessory , perhaps , to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do , were certain prudential motives , whose object might have been to revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill , in a matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses . 
Besides , the old man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles , though clumsily practicable , was not a thing to be passed over by superstitious sailors , without some shudderings and evil portents . 
`` Men , '' said he , steadily turning upon the crew , as the mate handed him the things he had demanded , `` my men , the thunder turned old Ahab 's needles ; but out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own , that will point as true as any . '' 
Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors , as this was said ; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow . 
But Starbuck looked away . 
With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance , and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining , bade him hold it upright , without its touching the deck . 
Then , with the maul , after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod , he placed the blunted needle endwise on the top of it , and less strongly hammered that , several times , the mate still holding the rod as before . 
Then going through some small strange motions with it -- whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel , or merely intended to augment the awe of the crew , is uncertain -- he called for linen thread ; and moving to the binnacle , slipped out the two reversed needles there , and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle , over one of the compass cards . 
At first , the steel went round and round , quivering and vibrating at either end ; but at last it settled to its place , when Ahab , who had been intently watching for this result , stepped frankly back from the binnacle , and pointing his stretched arm towards it , exclaimed , -- `` Look ye , for yourselves , if Ahab be not the lord of the level loadstone ! 
The sun is East , and that compass swears it ! '' 
One after another they peered in , for nothing but their own eyes could persuade such ignorance as theirs , and one after another they slunk away . 
In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph , you then saw Ahab in all his fatal pride . 
The Log and Line While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage , the log and line had but very seldom been in use . 
Owing to a confident reliance upon other means of determining the vessel 's place , some merchantmen , and many whalemen , especially when cruising , wholly neglect to heave the log ; though at the same time , and frequently more for form 's sake than anything else , regularly putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship , as well as the presumed average rate of progression every hour . 
It had been thus with the Pequod . 
The wooden reel and angular log attached hung , long untouched , just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks . 
Rains and spray had damped it ; the sun and wind had warped it ; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that hung so idly . 
But heedless of all this , his mood seized Ahab , as he happened to glance upon the reel , not many hours after the magnet scene , and he remembered how his quadrant was no more , and recalled his frantic oath about the level log and line . 
The ship was sailing plungingly ; astern the billows rolled in riots . 
`` Forward , there ! 
Heave the log ! '' 
Two seamen came . 
The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman . 
`` Take the reel , one of ye , I 'll heave . '' 
They went towards the extreme stern , on the ship 's lee side , where the deck , with the oblique energy of the wind , was now almost dipping into the creamy , sidelong-rushing sea . 
The Manxman took the reel , and holding it high up , by the projecting handle-ends of the spindle , round which the spool of line revolved , so stood with the angular log hanging downwards , till Ahab advanced to him . 
Ahab stood before him , and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard , when the old Manxman , who was intently eyeing both him and the line , made bold to speak . 
`` Sir , I mistrust it ; this line looks far gone , long heat and wet have spoiled it . '' '' 
` Twill hold , old gentleman . 
Long heat and wet , have they spoiled thee ? 
Thou seem ` st to hold . 
Or , truer perhaps , life holds thee ; not thou it . '' 
`` I hold the spool , sir . 
But just as my captain says . 
With these grey hairs of mine 't is not worth while disputing , ` specially with a superior , who 'll ne'er confess . '' 
`` What 's that ? 
There now 's a patched professor in Queen Nature 's granite-founded College ; but methinks he 's too subservient . 
Where wert thou born ? '' 
`` In the little rocky Isle of Man , sir . '' 
`` Excellent ! 
Thou ` st hit the world by that . '' 
`` I know not , sir , but I was born there . '' 
`` In the Isle of Man , hey ? 
Well , the other way , it 's good . 
Here 's a man from Man ; a man born in once independent Man , and now unmanned of Man ; which is sucked in -- by what ? 
Up with the reel ! 
The dead , blind wall butts all inquiring heads at last . 
Up with it ! 
So . '' 
The log was heaved . 
The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long dragging line astern , and then , instantly , the reel began to whirl . 
In turn , jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows , the towing resistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely . 
`` Hold hard ! '' 
Snap ! 
the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon ; the tugging log was gone . 
`` I crush the quadrant , the thunder turns the needles , and now the mad sea parts the log-line . 
But Ahab can mend all . 
Haul in here , Tahitian ; reel up , Manxman . 
And look ye , let the carpenter make another log , and mend thou the line . 
See to it . '' 
`` There he goes now ; to him nothing 's happened ; but to me , the skewer seems loosening out of the middle of the world . 
Haul in , haul in , Tahitian ! 
These lines run whole , and whirling out : come in broken , and dragging slow . 
Ha , Pip ? 
come to help ; eh , Pip ? '' 
`` Pip ? 
whom call ye Pip ? 
Pip jumped from the whaleboat . 
Pip 's missing . 
Let 's see now if ye have n't fished him up here , fisherman . 
It drags hard ; I guess he 's holding on . 
Jerk him , Tahiti ! 
Jerk him off we haul in no cowards here . 
Ho ! 
there 's his arm just breaking water . 
A hatchet ! 
a hatchet ! 
cut it off -- we haul in no cowards here . 
Captain Ahab ! 
sir , sir ! 
here 's Pip , trying to get on board again . '' 
`` Peace , thou crazy loon , '' cried the Manxman , seizing him by the arm . 
`` Away from the quarter-deck ! '' 
`` The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser , '' muttered Ahab , advancing . 
`` Hands off from that holiness ! 
Where sayest thou Pip was , boy ? 
`` Astern there , sir , astern ! 
Lo ! 
lo ! '' 
`` And who art thou , boy ? 
I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy eyes . 
Oh God ! 
that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through ! 
Who art thou , boy ? '' 
`` Bell-boy , sir ; ship 's - crier ; ding , dong , ding ! 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
One hundred pounds of clay reward for Pip ; five feet high -- looks cowardly -- quickest known by that ! 
Ding , dong , ding ! 
Who 's seen Pip the coward ? '' 
`` There can be no hearts above the snow-line . 
Oh , ye frozen heavens ! 
look down here . 
Ye did beget this luckless child , and have abandoned him , ye creative libertines . 
Here , boy ; Ahab 's cabin shall be Pip 's home henceforth , while Ahab lives . 
Thou touchest my inmost centre , boy ; thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings . 
Come , let 's down . '' 
`` What 's this ? 
here 's velvet shark-skin , '' intently gazing at Ahab 's hand , and feeling it . 
`` Ah , now , had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this , perhaps he had ne'er been lost ! 
This seems to me , sir , as a man-rope ; something that weak souls may hold by . 
Oh , sir , let old Perth now come and rivet these two hands together ; the black one with the white , for I will not let this go . '' 
`` Oh , boy , nor will I thee , unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors than are here . 
Come , then , to my cabin . 
Lo ! 
ye believers in gods all goodness , and in man all ill , lo you ! 
see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering man ; and man , though idiotic , and knowing not what he does , yet full of the sweet things of love and gratitude . 
Come ! 
I feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand , than though I grasped an Emperor 's ! '' 
`` There go two daft ones now , '' muttered the old Manxman . 
`` One daft with strength , the other daft with weakness . 
But here 's the end of the rotten line -- all dripping , too . 
Mend it , eh ? 
I think we had best have a new line altogether . 
I 'll see Mr. Stubb about it . '' 
The Life-Buoy Steering now south-eastward by Ahab 's levelled steel , and her progress solely determined by Ahab 's level log and line ; the Pequod held on her path towards the Equator . 
Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters , descrying no ships , and ere long , sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds , over waves monotonously mild ; all these seemed the strange calm things preluding some riotous and desperate scene . 
At last , when the ship drew near to the outskirts , as it were , of the Equatorial fishing-ground , and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn , was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets ; the watch -- then headed by Flask -- was startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly -- like half-articulated wailings of the ghosts of all Herod 's murdered Innocents -- that one and all , they started from their reveries , and for the space of some moments stood , or sat , or leaned all transfixed by listening , like the carved Roman slave , while that wild cry remained within hearing . 
The Christian or civilized part of the crew said it was mermaids , and shuddered ; but the pagan harpooneers remained unappalled . 
Yet the grey Manxman -- the oldest mariner of all -- declared that the wild thrilling sounds that were heard , were the voices of newly drowned men in the sea . 
Below in his hammock , Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn , when he came to the deck ; it was then recounted to him by Flask , not unaccompanied with hinted dark meanings . 
He hollowly laughed , and thus explained the wonder . 
Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of seals , and some young seals that had lost their dams , or some dams that had lost their cubs , must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her , crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail . 
But this only the more affected some of them , because most mariners cherish a very superstitious feeling about seals , arising not only from their peculiar tones when in distress , but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-intelligent faces , seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside . 
In the sea , under certain circumstances , seals have more than once been mistaken for men . 
But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning . 
At sun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore ; and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep -LRB- for sailors sometimes go aloft in a transition state -RRB- , whether it was thus with the man , there is now no telling ; but , be that as it may , he had not been long at his perch , when a cry was heard -- a cry and a rushing -- and looking up , they saw a falling phantom in the air ; and looking down , a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue of the sea . 
The life-buoy -- a long slender cask -- was dropped from the stern , where it always hung obedient to a cunning spring ; but no hand rose to seize it , and the sun having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken , so that it slowly filled , and the parched wood also filled at its every pore ; and the studded iron-bound cask followed the sailor to the bottom , as if to yield him his pillow , though in sooth but a hard one . 
And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the White Whale , on the White Whale 's own peculiar ground ; that man was swallowed up in the deep . 
But few , perhaps , thought of that at the time . 
Indeed , in some sort , they were not grieved at this event , at least as a portent ; for they regarded it , not as a fore-shadowing of evil in the future , but as the fulfilment of an evil already presaged . 
They declared that now they knew the reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before . 
But again the old Manxman said nay . 
The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced ; Starbuck was directed to see to it ; but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found , and as in the feverish eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage , all hands were impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end , whatever that might prove to be ; therefore , they were going to leave the ship 's stern unprovided with a buoy , when by certain strange signs and inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin . 
`` A life-buoy of a coffin ! '' 
cried Starbuck , starting . 
`` Rather queer , that , I should say , '' said Stubb . 
`` It will make a good enough one , '' said Flask , `` the carpenter here can arrange it easily . '' 
`` Bring it up ; there 's nothing else for it , '' said Starbuck , after a melancholy pause . 
`` Rig it , carpenter ; do not look at me so -- the coffin , I mean . 
Dost thou hear me ? 
Rig it . '' 
`` And shall I nail down the lid , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a hammer . 
`` Aye . '' 
`` And shall I caulk the seams , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a caulking-iron . 
`` Aye . '' 
`` And shall I then pay over the same with pitch , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a pitch-pot . 
Away ! 
What possesses thee to this ? 
Make a life-buoy of the coffin , and no more . 
-- Mr. Stubb , Mr. Flask , come forward with me . '' 
`` He goes off in a huff . 
The whole he can endure ; at the parts he baulks . 
Now I do n't like this . 
I make a leg for Captain Ahab , and he wears it like a gentleman ; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg , and he wo n't put his head into it . 
Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin ? 
And now I 'm ordered to make a life-buoy of it . 
It 's like turning an old coat ; going to bring the flesh on the other side now . 
I do n't like this cobbling sort of business -- I do n't like it at all ; it 's undignified ; it 's not my place . 
Let tinkers ' brats do tinkerings ; we are their betters . 
I like to take in hand none but clean , virgin , fair-and-square mathematical jobs , something that regularly begins at the beginning , and is at the middle when midway , and comes to an end at the conclusion ; not a cobbler 's job , that 's at an end in the middle , and at the beginning at the end . 
It 's the old woman 's tricks to be giving cobbling jobs . 
Lord ! 
what an affection all old women have for tinkers . 
I know an old woman of sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once . 
And that 's the reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore when I kept my job-shop in the Vineyard ; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads to run off with me . 
But heigh-ho ! 
there are no caps at sea but snow-caps . 
Let me see . 
Nail down the lid ; caulk the seams ; pay over the same with pitch ; batten them down tight , and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship 's stern . 
Were ever such things done before with a coffin ? 
Some superstitious old carpenters , now , would be tied up in the rigging , ere they would do the job . 
But I 'm made of knotty Aroostook hemlock ; I do n't budge . 
Cruppered with a coffin ! 
Sailing about with a grave-yard tray ! 
But never mind . 
We workers in woods make bridal bedsteads and card-tables , as well as coffins and hearses . 
We work by the month , or by the job , or by the profit ; not for us to ask the why and wherefore of our work , unless it be too confounded cobbling , and then we stash it if we can . 
Hem ! 
I 'll do the job , now , tenderly . 
I 'll have me -- let 's see -- how many in the ship 's company , all told ? 
But I 've forgotten . 
Any way , I 'll have me thirty separate , Turk 's - headed life-lines , each three feet long hanging all round to the coffin . 
Then , if the hull go down , there 'll be thirty lively fellows all fighting for one coffin , a sight not seen very often beneath the sun ! 
Come hammer , caulking-iron , pitch-pot , and marling-spike ! 
Let 's to it . '' 
The Deck The coffin laid upon two line-tubs , between the vice-bench and the open hatchway ; the Carpenter caulking its seams ; the string of twisted oakum slowly unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock . 
-- Ahab comes slowly from the cabin-gangway , and hears Pip following him . 
Back lad ; I will be with ye again presently . 
He goes ! 
Not this hand complies with my humor more genially than that boy . 
-- Middle aisle of a church ! 
What 's here ? '' 
`` Life-buoy , sir . 
Mr. Starbuck 's orders . 
Oh , look , sir ! 
Beware the hatchway ! '' 
`` Thank ye , man . 
Thy coffin lies handy to the vault . '' 
`` Sir ? 
The hatchway ? 
oh ! 
So it does , sir , so it does . '' 
`` Art not thou the leg-maker ? 
Look , did not this stump come from thy shop ? '' 
`` I believe it did , sir ; does the ferrule stand , sir ? '' 
`` Well enough . 
But art thou not also the undertaker ? '' 
`` Aye , sir ; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg ; but they 've set me now to turning it into something else . '' 
`` Then tell me ; art thou not an arrant , all-grasping , intermeddling , monopolizing , heathenish old scamp , to be one day making legs , and the next day coffins to clap them in , and yet again life-buoys out of those same coffins ? 
Thou art as unprincipled as the gods , and as much of a jack-of-all-trades . '' 
`` But I do not mean anything , sir . 
I do as I do . '' 
`` The gods again . 
Hark ye , dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin ? 
The Titans , they say , hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes ; and the grave-digger in the play sings , spade in hand . 
Dost thou never ? '' 
`` Sing , sir ? 
Do I sing ? 
Oh , I 'm indifferent enough , sir , for that ; but the reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none in his spade , sir . 
But the caulking mallet is full of it . 
Hark to it . '' 
`` Aye , and that 's because the lid there 's a sounding-board ; and what in all things makes the sounding-board is this -- there 's naught beneath . 
And yet , a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same , Carpenter . 
Hast thou ever helped carry a bier , and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate , going in ? 
`` Faith , sir , I 've - '' `` Faith ? 
What 's that ? '' 
`` Why , faith , sir , it 's only a sort of exclamation-like -- that 's all , sir . '' 
`` Um , um ; go on . '' 
`` I was about to say , sir , that - '' `` Art thou a silk-worm ? 
Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself ? 
Look at thy bosom ! 
Despatch ! 
and get these traps out of sight . '' 
`` He goes aft . 
That was sudden , now ; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes . 
I 've heard that the Isle of Albermarle , one of the Gallipagos , is cut by the Equator right in the middle . 
Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old man , too , right in his middle . 
He 's always under the Line -- fiery hot , I tell ye ! 
He 's looking this way -- come , oakum ; quick . 
Here we go again . 
This wooden mallet is the cork , and I 'm the professor of musical glasses -- tap , tap ! '' 
-LRB- Ahab to himself -RRB- `` There 's a sight ! 
There 's a sound ! 
The greyheaded wood-pecker tapping the hollow tree ! 
Blind and dumb might well be envied now . 
See ! 
that thing rests on two line-tubs , full of tow-lines . 
A most malicious wag , that fellow . 
Rat-tat ! 
