I 'll not have the Burtons hoisted . '' 
`` What will the owners say , sir ? '' 
`` Let the owners stand on Nantucket beach and outyell the Typhoons . 
What cares Ahab ? 
Owners , owners ? 
Thou art always prating to me , Starbuck , about those miserly owners , as if the owners were my conscience . 
But look ye , the only real owner of anything is its commander ; and hark ye , my conscience is in this ship 's keel . 
-- On deck ! '' 
`` Captain Ahab , '' said the reddening mate , moving further into the cabin , with a daring so strangely respectful and cautious that it almost seemed not only every way seeking to avoid the slightest outward manifestation of itself , but within also seemed more than half distrustful of itself ; `` A better man than I might well pass over in thee what he would quickly enough resent in a younger man ; aye , and in a happier , Captain Ahab . '' 
`` Devils ! 
Dost thou then so much as dare to critically think of me ? 
-- On deck ! '' 
`` Nay , sir , not yet ; I do entreat . 
And I do dare , sir -- to be forbearing ! 
Shall we not understand each other better than hitherto , Captain Ahab ? '' 
Ahab seized a loaded musket from the rack -LRB- forming part of most South-Sea-men 's cabin furniture -RRB- , and pointing it towards Starbuck , exclaimed : `` There is one God that is Lord over the earth , and one Captain that is lord over the Pequod . 
-- On deck ! '' 
For an instant in the flashing eyes of the mate , and his fiery cheeks , you would have almost thought that he had really received the blaze of the levelled tube . 
But , mastering his emotion , he half calmly rose , and as he quitted the cabin , paused for an instant and said : `` Thou hast outraged , not insulted me , Sir ; but for that I ask thee not to beware of Starbuck ; thou wouldst but laugh ; but let Ahab beware of Ahab ; beware of thyself , old man . '' 
`` He waxes brave , but nevertheless obeys ; most careful bravery that ! '' 
murmured Ahab , as Starbuck disappeared . 
`` What 's that he said -- Ahab beware of Ahab -- there 's something there ! '' 
Then unconsciously using the musket for a staff , with an iron brow he paced to and fro in the little cabin ; but presently the thick plaits of his forehead relaxed , and returning the gun to the rack , he went to the deck . 
`` Thou art but too good a fellow , Starbuck , '' he said lowly to the mate ; then raising his voice to the crew : `` Furl the t ` gallant-sails , and close-reef the top-sails , fore and aft ; back the main-yard ; up Burtons , and break out in the main-hold . '' 
It were perhaps vain to surmise exactly why it was , that as respecting Starbuck , Ahab thus acted . 
It may have been a flash of honesty in him ; or mere prudential policy which , under the circumstance , imperiously forbade the slightest symptom of open disaffection , however transient , in the important chief officer of his ship . 
However it was , his orders were executed ; and the Burtons were hoisted . 
Queequeg in His Coffin Upon searching , it was found that the casks last struck into the hold were perfectly sound , and that the leak must be further off . 
So , it being calm weather , they broke out deeper and deeper , disturbing the slumbers of the huge ground-tier butts ; and from that black midnight sending those gigantic moles into the daylight above . 
So deep did they go ; and so ancient , and corroded , and weedy the aspect of the lowermost puncheons , that you almost looked next for some mouldy corner-stone cask containing coins of Captain Noah , with copies of the posted placards , vainly warning the infatuated old world from the flood . 
Tierce after tierce , too , of water , and bread , and beef , and shooks of staves , and iron bundles of hoops , were hoisted out , till at last the piled decks were hard to get about ; and the hollow hull echoed under foot , as if you were treading over empty catacombs , and reeled and rolled in the sea like an air-freighted demijohn . 
Top-heavy was the ship as a dinnerless student with all Aristotle in his head . 
Well was it that the Typhoons did not visit them then . 
Now , at this time it was that my poor pagan companion , and fast bosom-friend , Queequeg , was seized with a fever , which brought him nigh to his endless end . 
Be it said , that in this vocation of whaling , sinecures are unknown ; dignity and danger go hand in hand ; till you get to be Captain , the higher you rise the harder you toil . 
So with poor Queequeg , who , as harpooneer , must not only face all the rage of the living whale , but -- as we have elsewhere seen -- mount his dead back in a rolling sea ; and finally descend into the gloom of the hold , and bitterly sweating all day in that subterraneous confinement , resolutely manhandle the clumsiest casks and see to their stowage . 
To be short , among whalemen , the harpooneers are the holders , so called . 
Poor Queequeg ! 
when the ship was about half disembowelled , you should have stooped over the hatchway , and peered down upon him there ; where , stripped to his woollen drawers , the tattooed savage was crawling about amid that dampness and slime , like a green spotted lizard at the bottom of a well . 
And a well , or an ice-house , it somehow proved to him , poor pagan ; where , strange to say , for all the heat of his sweatings , he caught a terrible chill which lapsed into a fever ; and at last , after some days ' suffering , laid him in his hammock , close to the very sill of the door of death . 
How he wasted and wasted away in those few long-lingering days , till there seemed but little left of him but his frame and tattooing . 
But as all else in him thinned , and his cheek-bones grew sharper , his eyes , nevertheless , seemed growing fuller and fuller ; they became of a strange softness of lustre ; and mildly but deeply looked out at you there from his sickness , a wondrous testimony to that immortal health in him which could not die , or be weakened . 
And like circles on the water , which , as they grow fainter , expand ; so his eyes seemed rounding and rounding , like the rings of Eternity . 
An awe that can not be named would steal over you as you sat by the side of this waning savage , and saw as strange things in his face , as any beheld who were bystanders when Zoroaster died . 
For whatever is truly wondrous and fearful in man , never yet was put into words or books . 
And the drawing near of Death , which alike levels all , alike impresses all with a last revelation , which only an author from the dead could adequately tell . 
So that -- let us say it again -- no dying Chaldee or Greek had higher and holier thoughts than those , whose mysterious shades you saw creeping over the face of poor Queequeg , as he quietly lay in his swaying hammock , and the rolling sea seemed gently rocking him to his final rest , and the ocean 's invisible flood-tide lifted him higher and higher towards his destined heaven . 
Not a man of the crew but gave him up ; and , as for Queequeg himself , what he thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious favor he asked . 
He called one to him in the grey morning watch , when the day was just breaking , and taking his hand , said that while in Nantucket he had chanced to see certain little canoes of dark wood , like the rich war-wood of his native isle ; and upon inquiry , he had learned that all whalemen who died in Nantucket , were laid in those same dark canoes , and that the fancy of being so laid had much pleased him ; for it was not unlike the custom of his own race , who , after embalming a dead warrior , stretched him out in his canoe , and so left him to be floated away to the starry archipelagoes ; for not only do they believe that the stars are isles , but that far beyond all visible horizons , their own mild , uncontinented seas , interflow with the blue heavens ; and so form the white breakers of the milky way . 
He added , that he shuddered at the thought of being buried in his hammock , according to the usual sea-custom , tossed like something vile to the death-devouring sharks . 
No : he desired a canoe like those of Nantucket , all the more congenial to him , being a whaleman , that like a whale-boat these coffin-canoes were without a keel ; though that involved but uncertain steering , and much lee-way adown the dim ages . 
Now , when this strange circumstance was made known aft , the carpenter was at once commanded to do Queequeg 's bidding , whatever it might include . 
There was some heathenish , coffin-colored old lumber aboard , which , upon a long previous voyage , had been cut from the aboriginal groves of the Lackaday islands , and from these dark planks the coffin was recommended to be made . 
No sooner was the carpenter apprised of the order , than taking his rule , he forthwith with all the indifferent promptitude of his character , proceeded into the forecastle and took Queequeg 's measure with great accuracy , regularly chalking Queequeg 's person as he shifted the rule . 
`` Ah ! 
poor fellow ! 
he 'll have to die now , '' ejaculated the Long Island sailor . 
Going to his vice-bench , the carpenter for convenience sake and general reference , now transferringly measured on it the exact length the coffin was to be , and then made the transfer permanent by cutting two notches at its extremities . 
This done , he marshalled the planks and his tools , and to work . 
When the last nail was driven , and the lid duly planed and fitted , he lightly shouldered the coffin and went forward with it , inquiring whether they were ready for it yet in that direction . 
Overhearing the indignant but half-humorous cries with which the people on deck began to drive the coffin away , Queequeg , to every one 's consternation , commanded that the thing should be instantly brought to him , nor was there any denying him ; seeing that , of all mortals , some dying men are the most tyrannical ; and certainly , since they will shortly trouble us so little for evermore , the poor fellows ought to be indulged . 
Leaning over in his hammock , Queequeg long regarded the coffin with an attentive eye . 
He then called for his harpoon , had the wooden stock drawn from it , and then had the iron part placed in the coffin along with one of the paddles of his boat . 
All by his own request , also , biscuits were then ranged round the sides within ; a flask of fresh water was placed at the head , and a small bag of woody earth scraped up in the hold at the foot ; and a piece of sail-cloth being rolled up for a pillow , Queequeg now entreated to be lifted into his final bed , that he might make trial of its comforts , if any it had . 
He lay without moving a few minutes , then told one to go to his bag and bring out his little god , Yojo . 
Then crossing his arms on his breast with Yojo between , he called for the coffin lid -LRB- hatch he called it -RRB- to be placed over him . 
The head part turned over with a leather hinge , and there lay Queequeg in his coffin with little but his composed countenance in view . 
`` Rarmai '' -LRB- it will do ; it is easy -RRB- , he murmured at last , and signed to be replaced in his hammock . 
But ere this was done , Pip , who had been slily hovering near by all the while , drew nigh to him where he lay , and with soft sobbings , took him by the hand ; in the other , holding his tambourine . 
`` Poor rover ! 
will ye never have done with all this weary roving ? 
Where go ye now ? 
But if the currents carry ye to those sweet Antilles where the beaches are only beat with water-lilies , will ye do one little errand for me ? 
Seek out one Pip , who 's now been missing long : I think he 's in those far Antilles . 
If ye find him , then comfort him ; for he must be very sad ; for look ! 
he 's left his tambourine behind ; -- I found it . 
Rig-a-dig , dig , dig ! 
Now , Queequeg , die ; and I 'll beat ye your dying march . '' 
`` I have heard , '' murmured Starbuck , gazing down the scuttle , `` that in violent fevers , men , all ignorance , have talked in ancient tongues ; and that when the mystery is probed , it turns out always that in their wholly forgotten childhood those ancient tongues had been really spoken in their hearing by some lofty scholars . 
So , to my fond faith , poor Pip , in this strange sweetness of his lunacy , brings heavenly vouchers of all our heavenly homes . 
Where learned he that , but there ? 
-- Hark ! 
he speaks again ; but more wildly now . '' 
`` Form two and two ! 
Let 's make a General of him ! 
Ho , where 's his harpoon ? 
Lay it across here . 
-- Rig-a-dig , dig , dig ! 
huzza ! 
Oh for a game cock now to sit upon his head and crow ! 
Queequeg dies game ! 
-- mind ye that ; Queequeg dies game ! 
-- take ye good heed of that ; Queequeg dies game ! 
I say ; game , game , game ! 
but base little Pip , he died a coward ; died all a ` shiver ; -- out upon Pip ! 
Hark ye ; if ye find Pip , tell all the Antilles he 's a runaway ; a coward , a coward , a coward ! 
Tell them he jumped from a whale-boat ! 
I 'd never beat my tambourine over base Pip , and hail him General , if he were once more dying here . 
No , no ! 
shame upon all cowards -- shame upon them ! 
Let 'em go drown like Pip , that jumped from a whale-boat . 
Shame ! 
shame ! '' 
During all this , Queequeg lay with closed eyes , as if in a dream . 
Pip was led away , and the sick man was replaced in his hammock . 
But now that he had apparently made every preparation for death ; now that his coffin was proved a good fit , Queequeg suddenly rallied ; soon there seemed no need of the carpenter 's box ; and thereupon , when some expressed their delighted surprise , he , in substance , said , that the cause of his sudden convalescence was this ; -- at a critical moment , he had just recalled a little duty ashore , which he was leaving undone ; and therefore had changed his mind about dying : he could not die yet , he averred . 
They asked him , then , whether to live or die was a matter of his own sovereign will and pleasure . 
He answered , certainly . 
In a word , it was Queequeg 's conceit , that if a man made up his mind to live , mere sickness could not kill him : nothing but a whale , or a gale , or some violent , ungovernable , unintelligent destroyer of that sort . 
Now , there is this noteworthy difference between savage and civilized ; that while a sick , civilized man may be six months convalescing , generally speaking , a sick savage is almost half-well again in a day . 
So , in good time my Queequeg gained strength ; and at length after sitting on the windlass for a few indolent days -LRB- but eating with a vigorous appetite -RRB- he suddenly leaped to his feet , threw out his arms and legs , gave himself a good stretching , yawned a little bit , and then springing into the head of his hoisted boat , and poising a harpoon , pronounced himself fit for a fight . 
With a wild whimsiness , he now used his coffin for a sea-chest ; and emptying into it his canvas bag of clothes , set them in order there . 
Many spare hours he spent , in carving the lid with all manner of grotesque figures and drawings ; and it seemed that hereby he was striving , in his rude way , to copy parts of the twisted tattooing on his body . 
And this tattooing had been the work of a departed prophet and seer of his island , who , by those hieroglyphic marks , had written out on his body a complete theory of the heavens and the earth , and a mystical treatise on the art of attaining truth ; so that Queequeg in his own proper person was a riddle to unfold ; a wondrous work in one volume ; but whose mysteries not even himself could read , though his own live heart beat against them ; and these mysteries were therefore destined in the end to moulder away with the living parchment whereon they were inscribed , and so be unsolved to the last . 
And this thought it must have been which suggested to Ahab that wild exclamation of his , when one morning turning away from surveying poor Queequeg -- `` Oh , devilish tantalization of the gods ! '' 
The Pacific When gliding by the Bashee isles we emerged at last upon the great South Sea ; were it not for other things I could have greeted my dear Pacific with uncounted thanks , for now the long supplication of my youth was answered ; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me a thousand leagues of blue . 
There is , one knows not what sweet mystery about this sea , whose gently awful stirrings seems to speak of some hidden soul beneath ; like those fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buried Evangelist St. John . 
And meet it is , that over these sea-pastures , wide-rolling watery prairies and Potters ' Fields of all four continents , the waves should rise and fall , and ebb and flow unceasingly ; for here , millions of mixed shades and shadows , drowned dreams , somnambulisms , reveries ; all that we call lives and souls , lie dreaming , dreaming , still ; tossing like slumberers in their beds ; the ever-rolling waves but made so by their restlessness . 
To any meditative Magian rover , this serene Pacific , once beheld , must ever after be the sea of his adoption . 
It rolls the midmost waters of the world , the Indian ocean and Atlantic being but its arms . 
The same waves wash the moles of the new-built California towns , but yesterday planted by the recentest race of men and lave the faded but still gorgeous skirts of Asiatic lands , older than Abraham ; while all between float milky-ways of coral isles , and low-lying , endless , unknown Archipelagoes , and impenetrable Japans . 
Thus this mysterious , divine Pacific zones the world 's whole bulk about ; makes all coasts one bay to it ; seems the tide-beating heart of earth . 
Lifted by those eternal swells , you needs must own the seductive god , bowing your head to Pan . 
But few thoughts of Pan stirred Ahab 's brain , as standing , like an iron statue at his accustomed place beside the mizen rigging , with one nostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the Bashee isles -LRB- in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking -RRB- , and with the other consciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea ; that sea in which the hated White Whale must even then be swimming . 
Launched at length upon these almost final waters , and gliding towards the Japanese cruising-ground , the old man 's purpose intensified itself . 
His firm lips met like the lips of a vice ; the Delta of his forehead 's veins swelled like overladen brooks ; in his very sleep , his ringing cry ran through the vaulted hull , `` Stern all ! 
the White Whale spouts thick blood ! '' 
The Blacksmith Availing himself of the mild , summer-cool weather that now reigned in these latitudes , and in preparation for the peculiarly active pursuits shortly to be anticipated , Perth , the begrimed , blistered old blacksmith , had not removed his portable forge to the hold again , after concluding his contributory work for Ahab 's leg , but still retained it on deck , fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast ; being now almost incessantly invoked by the headsmen , and harpooneers , and bowsmen to do some little job for them ; altering , or repairing , or new shaping their various weapons and boat furniture . 
Often he would be surrounded by an eager circle , all waiting to be served ; holding boat-spades , pikeheads , harpoons , and lances , and jealously watching his every sooty movement , as he toiled . 
Nevertheless , this old man 's was a patient hammer wielded by a patient arm . 
No murmur , no impatience , no petulance did come from him . 
Silent , slow , and solemn ; bowing over still further his chronically broken back , he toiled away , as if toil were life itself , and the heavy beating of his hammer the heavy beating of his heart . 
And so it was . 
-- Most miserable ! 
A peculiar walk in this old man , a certain slight but painful appearing yawing in his gait , had at an early period of the voyage excited the curiosity of the mariners . 
And to the importunity of their persisted questionings he had finally given in ; and so it came to pass that every one now knew the shameful story of his wretched fate . 
Belated , and not innocently , one bitter winter 's midnight , on the road running between two country towns , the blacksmith half-stupidly felt the deadly numbness stealing over him , and sought refuge in a leaning , dilapidated barn . 
The issue was , the loss of the extremities of both feet . 
Out of this revelation , part by part , at last came out the four acts of the gladness , and the one long , and as yet uncatastrophied fifth act of the grief of his life 's drama . 
He was an old man , who , at the age of nearly sixty , had postponedly encountered that thing in sorrow 's technicals called ruin . 
He had been an artisan of famed excellence , and with plenty to do ; owned a house and garden ; embraced a youthful , daughter-like , loving wife , and three blithe , ruddy children ; every Sunday went to a cheerful-looking church , planted in a grove . 
But one night , under cover of darkness , and further concealed in a most cunning disguisement , a desperate burglar slid into his happy home , and robbed them all of everything . 
And darker yet to tell , the blacksmith himself did ignorantly conduct this burglar into his family 's heart . 
It was the Bottle Conjuror ! 
Upon the opening of that fatal cork , forth flew the fiend , and shrivelled up his home . 
Now , for prudent , most wise , and economic reasons , the blacksmith 's shop was in the basement of his dwelling , but with a separate entrance to it ; so that always had the young and loving healthy wife listened with no unhappy nervousness , but with vigorous pleasure , to the stout ringing of her young-armed old husband 's hammer ; whose reverberations , muffled by passing through the floors and walls , came up to her , not unsweetly , in her nursery ; and so , to stout Labor 's iron lullaby , the blacksmith 's infants were rocked to slumber . 
Oh , woe on woe ! 
Oh , Death , why canst thou not sometimes be timely ? 
Hadst thou taken this old blacksmith to thyself ere his full ruin came upon him , then had the young widow had a delicious grief , and her orphans a truly venerable , legendary sire to dream of in their after years ; and all of them a care-killing competency . 
But Death plucked down some virtuous elder brother , on whose whistling daily toil solely hung the responsibilities of some other family , and left the worse than useless old man standing , till the hideous rot of life should make him easier to harvest . 
Why tell the whole ? 
The blows of the basement hammer every day grew more and more between ; and each blow every day grew fainter than the last ; the wife sat frozen at the window , with tearless eyes , glitteringly gazing into the weeping faces of her children ; the bellows fell ; the forge choked up with cinders ; the house was sold ; the mother dived down into the long church-yard grass ; her children twice followed her thither ; and the houseless , familyless old man staggered off a vagabond in crape ; his every woe unreverenced ; his grey head a scorn to flaxen curls ! 
Death seems the only desirable sequel for a career like this ; but Death is only a launching into the region of the strange Untried ; it is but the first salutation to the possibilities of the immense Remote , the Wild , the Watery , the Unshored ; therefore , to the death-longing eyes of such men , who still have left in them some interior compunctions against suicide , does the all-contributed and all-receptive ocean alluringly spread forth his whole plain of unimaginable , taking terrors , and wonderful , new-life adventures ; and from the hearts of infinite Pacifics , the thousand mermaids sing to them -- `` Come hither , broken-hearted ; here is another life without the guilt of intermediate death ; here are wonders supernatural , without dying for them . 
Come hither ! 
bury thyself in a life which , to your now equally abhorred and abhorring , landed world , is more oblivious than death . 
Come hither ! 
put up thy grave-stone , too , within the churchyard , and come hither , till we marry thee ! '' 
Hearkening to these voices , East and West , by early sunrise , and by fall of eve , the blacksmith 's soul responded , Aye , I come ! 
And so Perth went a-whaling . 
The Forge With matted beard , and swathed in a bristling shark-skin apron , about mid-day , Perth was standing between his forge and anvil , the latter placed upon an iron-wood log , with one hand holding a pike-head in the coals , and with the other at his forge 's lungs , when Captain Ahab came along , carrying in his hand a small rusty-looking leathern bag . 
While yet a little distance from the forge , moody Ahab paused ; till at last , Perth , withdrawing his iron from the fire , began hammering it upon the anvil -- the red mass sending off the sparks in thick hovering flights , some of which flew close to Ahab . 
`` Are these thy Mother Carey 's chickens , Perth ? 
they are always flying in thy wake ; birds of good omen , too , but not to all ; -- look here , they burn ; but thou -- thou liv ` st among them without a scorch . '' 
`` Because I am scorched all over , Captain Ahab , '' answered Perth , resting for a moment on his hammer ; `` I am past scorching - , not easily can ` st thou scorch a scar . '' 
`` Well , well ; no more . 
Thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly , sanely woeful to me . 
In no Paradise myself , I am impatient of all misery in others that is not mad . 
Thou should ` st go mad , blacksmith ; say , why dost thou not go mad ? 
How can ` st thou endure without being mad ? 
Do the heavens yet hate thee , that thou can ` st not go mad ? 
-- What wert thou making there ? '' 
`` Welding an old pike-head , sir ; there were seams and dents in it . '' 
`` And can ` st thou make it all smooth again , blacksmith , after such hard usage as it had ? '' 
`` I think so , sir . '' 
`` And I suppose thou can ` st smoothe almost any seams and dents ; never mind how hard the metal , blacksmith ? '' 
`` Aye , sir , I think I can ; all seams and dents but one . '' 
`` Look ye here then , '' cried Ahab , passionately advancing , and leaning with both hands on Perth 's shoulders ; `` look ye here -- here -- can ye smoothe out a seam like this , blacksmith , '' sweeping one hand across his ribbed brow ; `` if thou could ` st , blacksmith , glad enough would I lay my head upon thy anvil , and feel thy heaviest hammer between my eyes . 
Answer ! 
Can ` st thou smoothe this seam ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
that is the one , sir ! 
Said I not all seams and dents but one ? '' 
`` Aye , blacksmith , it is the one ; aye , man , it is unsmoothable ; for though thou only see ` st it here in my flesh , it has worked down into the bone of my skull -- that is all wrinkles ! 
But , away with child 's play ; no more gaffs and pikes to-day . 
Look ye here ! '' 
jingling the leathern bag , as if it were full of gold coins . 
`` I , too , want a harpoon made ; one that a thousand yoke of fiends could not part , Perth ; something that will stick in a whale like his own fin-bone . 
There 's the stuff , '' flinging the pouch upon the anvil . 
`` Look ye , blacksmith , these are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel shoes of racing horses . '' 
`` Horse-shoe stubbs , sir ? 
Why , Captain Ahab , thou hast here , then , the best and stubbornest stuff we blacksmiths ever work . '' 
`` I know it , old man ; these stubbs will weld together like glue from the melted bones of murderers . 
Quick ! 
forge me the harpoon . 
And forge me first , twelve rods for its shank ; then wind , and twist , and hammer these twelve together like the yarns and strands of a tow-line . 
Quick ! 
I 'll blow the fire . '' 
When at last the twelve rods were made , Ahab tried them , one by one , by spiralling them , with his own hand , round a long , heavy iron bolt . 
`` A flaw ! '' 
rejecting the last one . 
`` Work that over again , Perth . '' 
This done , Perth was about to begin welding the twelve into one , when Ahab stayed his hand , and said he would weld his own iron . 
As , then , with regular , gasping hems , he hammered on the anvil , Perth passing to him the glowing rods , one after the other , and the hard pressed forge shooting up its intense straight flame , the Parsee passed silently , and bowing over his head towards the fire , seemed invoking some curse or some blessing on the toil . 
But , as Ahab looked up , he slid aside . 
`` What 's that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for ? '' 
muttered Stubb , looking on from the forecastle . 
`` That Parsee smells fire like a fusee ; and smells of it himself , like a hot musket 's powder-pan . '' 
At last the shank , in one complete rod , received its final heat ; and as Perth , to temper it , plunged it all hissing into the cask of water near by , the scalding steam shot up into Ahab 's bent face . 
`` Would ` st thou brand me , Perth ? '' 
wincing for a moment with the pain ; `` have I been but forging my own branding-iron , then ? '' 
`` Pray God , not that ; yet I fear something , Captain Ahab . 
Is not this harpoon for the White Whale ? '' 
`` For the white fiend ! 
But now for the barbs ; thou must make them thyself , man . 
Here are my razors -- the best of steel ; here , and make the barbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the Icy Sea . '' 
For a moment , the old blacksmith eyed the razors as though he would fain not use them . 
`` Take them , man , I have no need for them ; for I now neither shave , sup , nor pray till -- but here -- to work ! '' 
Fashioned at last into an arrowy shape , and welded by Perth to the shank , the steel soon pointed the end of the iron ; and as the blacksmith was about giving the barbs their final heat , prior to tempering them , he cried to Ahab to place the water-cask near . 
`` No , no -- no water for that ; I want it of the true death-temper . 
Ahoy , there ! 
Tashtego , Queequeg , Daggoo ! 
What say ye , pagans ! 
Will ye give me as much blood as will cover this barb ? '' 
holding it high up . 
A cluster of dark nods replied , Yes . 
Three punctures were made in the heathen flesh , and the White Whale 's barbs were then tempered . 
`` Ego non baptizo te in nomine patris , sed in nomine diaboli ! '' 
deliriously howled Ahab , as the malignant iron scorchingly devoured the baptismal blood . 
Now , mustering the spare poles from below , and selecting one of hickory , with the bark still investing it , Ahab fitted the end to the socket of the iron . 
A coil of new tow-line was then unwound , and some fathoms of it taken to the windlass , and stretched to a great tension . 
Pressing his foot upon it , till the rope hummed like a harp-string , then eagerly bending over it , and seeing no strandings , Ahab exclaimed , `` Good ! 
and now for the seizings . '' 
At one extremity the rope was unstranded , and the separate spread yarns were all braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon ; the pole was then driven hard up into the socket ; from the lower end the rope was traced halfway along the pole 's length , and firmly secured so , with inter-twistings of twine . 
This done , pole , iron , and rope -- like the Three Fates -- remained inseparable , and Ahab moodily stalked away with the weapon ; the sound of his ivory leg , and the sound of the hickory pole , both hollowly ringing along every plank . 
But ere he entered his cabin , a light , unnatural , half-bantering , yet most piteous sound was heard . 
Oh ! 
Pip , thy wretched laugh , thy idle but unresting eye ; all thy strange mummeries not unmeaningly blended with the black tragedy of the melancholy ship , and mocked it ! 
The Gilder Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising ground the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery . 
Often , in mild , pleasant weather , for twelve , fifteen , eighteen , and twenty hours on the stretch , they were engaged in the boats , steadily pulling , or sailing , or paddling after the whales , or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their uprising ; though with but small success for their pains . 
At such times , under an abated sun ; afloat all day upon smooth , slow heaving swells ; seated in his boat , light as a birch canoe ; and so sociably mixing with the soft waves themselves , that like hearth-stone cats they purr against the gunwale ; these are the times of dreamy quietude , when beholding the tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean 's skin , one forgets the tiger heart that pants beneath it ; and would not willingly remember , that this velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang . 
These are the times , when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain filial , confident , land-like feeling towards the sea ; that he regards it as so much flowery earth ; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts , seems struggling forward , not through high rolling waves , but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie : as when the western emigrants ' horses only show their erected ears , while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing verdure . 
The long-drawn virgin vales ; the mild blue hill-sides ; as over these there steals the hush , the hum ; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie sleeping in these solitudes , in some glad May-time , when the flowers of the woods are plucked . 
And all this mixes with your most mystic mood ; so that fact and fancy , half-way meeting , interpenetrate , and form one seamless whole . 
Nor did such soothing scenes , however temporary , fail of at least as temporary an effect on Ahab . 
But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his own secret golden treasuries , yet did his breath upon them prove but tarnishing . 
Oh , grassy glades ! 
oh ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul ; in ye , -- though long parched by the dead drought of the earthly life , -- in ye , men yet may roll , like young horses in new morning clover ; and for some few fleeting moments , feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them . 
Would to God these blessed calms would last . 
But the mingled , mingling threads of life are woven by warp and woof : calms crossed by storms , a storm for every calm . 
There is no steady unretracing progress in this life ; we do not advance through fixed gradations , and at the last one pause : -- through infancy 's unconscious spell , boyhood 's thoughtless faith , adolescence ' doubt -LRB- the common doom -RRB- , then scepticism , then disbelief , resting at last in manhood 's pondering repose of If . 
But once gone through , we trace the round again ; and are infants , boys , and men , and Ifs eternally . 
Where lies the final harbor , whence we unmoor no more ? 
In what rapt ether sails the world , of which the weariest will never weary ? 
Where is the foundling 's father hidden ? 
Our souls are like those orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them : the secret of our paternity lies in their grave , and we must there to learn it . 
And that same day , too , gazing far down from his boat 's side into that same golden sea , Starbuck lowly murmured : -- `` Loveliness unfathomable , as ever lover saw in his young bride 's eyes ! 
-- Tell me not of thy teeth-tiered sharks , and thy kidnapping cannibal ways . 
Let faith oust fact ; let fancy oust memory ; I look deep down and do believe . '' 
And Stubb , fish-like , with sparkling scales , leaped up in that same golden light : -- `` I am Stubb , and Stubb has his history ; but here Stubb takes oaths that he has always been jolly ! '' 
The Pequod Meets The Bachelor And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down before the wind , some few weeks after Ahab 's harpoon had been welded . 
It was a Nantucket ship , the Bachelor , which had just wedged in her last cask of oil , and bolted down her bursting hatches ; and now , in glad holiday apparel , was joyously , though somewhat vain-gloriously , sailing round among the widely-separated ships on the ground , previous to pointing her prow for home . 
The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red bunting at their hats ; from the stern , a whale-boat was suspended , bottom down ; and hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long lower jaw of the last whale they had slain . 
Signals , ensigns , and jacks of all colors were flying from her rigging , on every side . 
Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed tops were two barrels of sperm ; above which , in her top-mast cross-trees , you saw slender breakers of the same precious fluid ; and nailed to her main truck was a brazen lamp . 
As was afterwards learned , the Bachelor had met with the most surprising success ; all the more wonderful , for that while cruising in the same seas numerous other vessels had gone entire months without securing a single fish . 
Not only had barrels of beef and bread been given away to make room for the far more valuable sperm , but additional supplemental casks had been bartered for , from the ships she had met ; and these were stowed along the deck , and in the captain 's and officers ' state-rooms . 
Even the cabin table itself had been knocked into kindling-wood ; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an oil-butt , lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece . 
In the forecastle , the sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests , and filled them ; it was humorously added , that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler , and filled it ; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it ; that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled them ; that indeed everything was filled with sperm , except the captain 's pantaloons pockets , and those he reserved to thrust his hands into , in self-complacent testimony of his entire satisfaction . 
As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod , the barbarian sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle ; and drawing still nearer , a crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge try-pots , which , covered with the parchment-like poke or stomach skin of the black fish , gave forth a loud roar to every stroke of the clenched hands of the crew . 
On the quarter-deck , the mates and harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had eloped with them from the Polynesian Isles ; while suspended in an ornamented boat , firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast , three Long Island negroes , with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory , were presiding over the hilarious jig . 
Meanwhile , others of the ship 's company were tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works , from which the huge pots had been removed . 
You would have almost thought they were pulling down the cursed Bastille , such wild cries they raised , as the now useless brick and mortar were being hurled into the sea . 
Lord and master over all this scene , the captain stood erect on the ship 's elevated quarter-deck , so that the whole rejoicing drama was full before him , and seemed merely contrived for his own individual diversion . 
And Ahab , he too was standing on his quarter-deck , shaggy and black , with a stubborn gloom ; and as the two ships crossed each other 's wakes -- one all jubilations for things passed , the other all forebodings as to things to come -- their two captains in themselves impersonated the whole striking contrast of the scene . 
`` Come aboard , come aboard ! '' 
cried the gay Bachelor 's commander , lifting a glass and a bottle in the air . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
gritted Ahab in reply . 
`` No ; only heard of him ; but do n't believe in him at all , '' said the other good-humoredly . 
`` Come aboard ! '' 
`` Thou art too damned jolly . 
Sail on . 
Hast lost any men ? '' 
`` Not enough to speak of -- two islanders , that 's all ; -- but come aboard , old hearty , come along . 
I 'll soon take that black from your brow . 
Come along , will ye -LRB- merry 's the play -RRB- ; a full ship and homeward-bound . '' 
`` How wondrous familiar is a fool ! '' 
muttered Ahab ; then aloud , `` Thou art a full ship and homeward bound , thou sayest ; well , then , call me an empty ship , and outward-bound . 
So go thy ways , and I will mine . 
Forward there ! 
Set all sail , and keep her to the wind ! '' 
And thus , while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze , the other stubbornly fought against it ; and so the two vessels parted ; the crew of the Pequod looking with grave , lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor ; but the Bachelor 's men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they were in . 
And as Ahab , leaning over the taffrail , eyed the homewardbound craft , he took from his pocket a small vial of sand , and then looking from the ship to the vial , seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together , for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings . 
The Dying Whale Not seldom in this life , when , on the right side , fortune 's favorites sail close by us , we , though all adroop before , catch somewhat of the rushing breeze , and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out . 
So seemed it with the Pequod . 
For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor , whales were seen and four were slain ; and one of them by Ahab . 
It was far down the afternoon ; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight were done ; and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky , sun and whale both stilly died together ; then , such a sweetness and such plaintiveness , such inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air , that it almost seemed as if far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles , the Spanish land-breeze , wantonly turned sailor , had gone to sea , freighted with these vesper hymns . 
Soothed again , but only soothed to deeper gloom , Ahab , who had sterned off from the whale , sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil boat . 
For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying -- the turning sunwards of the head , and so expiring -- that strange spectacle , beheld of such a placid evening , somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown before . 
`` He turns and turns him to it , -- how slowly , but how steadfastly , his homage-rendering and invoking brow , with his last dying motions . 
He too worships fire ; most faithful , broad , baronial vassal of the sun ! 
-- Oh that these too-favoring eyes should see these too-favoring sights . 
Look ! 
here , far water-locked ; beyond all hum of human weal or woe ; in these most candid and impartial seas ; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets ; where for long Chinese ages , the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to , as stars that shine upon the Niger 's unknown source ; here , too , life dies sunwards full of faith , but see ! 
no sooner dead , than death whirls round the corpse , and it heads some other way . 
`` Oh , thou dark Hindoo half of nature , who of drowned bones hast builded thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas ; thou art an infidel , thou queen , and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering Typhoon , and the hushed burial of its after calm . 
Nor has this thy whale sunwards turned his dying head , and then gone round again , without a lesson to me . 
`` Oh , trebly hooped and welded hip of power ! 
Oh , high aspiring , rainbowed jet ! 
-- that one strivest , this one jettest all in vain ! 
In vain , oh whale , dost thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun , that only calls forth life , but gives it not again . 
Yet dost thou darker half , rock me with a prouder , if a darker faith . 
All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me here ; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things , exhaled as air , but water now . 
`` Then hail , for ever hail , O sea , in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl finds his only rest . 
Born of earth , yet suckled by the sea ; though hill and valley mothered me , ye billows are my foster-brothers ! '' 
The Whale Watch The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart ; one , far to windward ; one less distant , to leeward ; one ahead ; one astern . 
These last three were brought alongside ere nightfall ; but the windward one could not be reached till morning ; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night ; and that boat was Ahab 's . 
The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale 's spout-hole ; and the lantern hanging from its top , cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black , glossy back , and far out upon the midnight waves , which gently chafed the whale 's broad flank , like soft surf upon a beach . 
Ahab and all his boat 's crew seemed asleep but the Parsee ; who crouching in the bow , sat watching the sharks , that spectrally played round the whale , and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails . 
A sound like the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah , ran shuddering through the air . 
Started from his slumbers , Ahab , face to face , saw the Parsee ; and hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world . 
`` I have dreamed it again , '' said he . 
`` Of the hearses ? 
Have I not said , old man , that neither hearse nor coffin can be thine ? '' 
`` And who are hearsed that die on the sea ? '' 
`` But I said , old man , that ere thou couldst die on this voyage , two hearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea ; the first not made by mortal hands ; and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America . '' 
`` Aye , aye ! 
a strange sight that , Parsee ! 
-- a hearse and its plumes floating over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers . 
Ha ! 
Such a sight we shall not soon see . '' 
`` Believe it or not , thou canst not die till it be seen , old man . '' 
`` And what was that saying about thyself ? '' 
`` Though it come to the last , I shall still go before thee thy pilot . '' 
`` And when thou art so gone before -- if that ever befall -- then ere I can follow , thou must still appear to me , to pilot me still ? 
-- Was it not so ? 
Well , then , did I believe all ye say , oh my pilot ! 
I have here two pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it . '' 
`` Take another pledge , old man , '' said the Parsee , as his eyes lighted up like fire-flies in the gloom -- `` Hemp only can kill thee . '' 
`` The gallows , ye mean . 
-- I am immortal then , on land and on sea , '' cried Ahab , with a laugh of derision ; -- `` Immortal on land and on sea ! '' 
Both were silent again , as one man . 
The grey dawn came on , and the slumbering crew arose from the boat 's bottom , and ere noon the dead whale was brought to the ship . 
The Quadrant The season for the Line at length drew near ; and every day when Ahab , coming from his cabin cast his eyes aloft , the vigilant helmsman would ostentatiously handle his spokes , and the eager mariners quickly run to the braces , and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the nailed doubloon ; impatient for the order to point the ship 's prow for the equator . 
In good time the order came . 
It was hard upon high noon ; and Ahab , seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat , was about taking his wonted daily observation of the sun to determine his latitude . 
Now , in that Japanese sea , the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences . 
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy ocean 's immeasurable burning-glass . 
The sky looks lacquered ; clouds there are none ; the horizon floats ; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the insufferable splendors of God 's throne . 
Well that Ahab 's quadrant was furnished with colored glasses , through which to take sight of that solar fire . 
So , swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship , and with his astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye , he remained in that posture for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its precise meridian . 
Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed , the Parsee was kneeling beneath him on the ship 's deck , and with face thrown up like Ahab 's , was eyeing the same sun with him ; only the lids of his eyes half hooded their orbs , and his wild face was subdued to an earthly passionlessness . 
At length the desired observation was taken ; and with his pencil upon his ivory leg , Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at that precise instant . 
Then falling into a moment 's revery , he again looked up towards the sun and murmured to himself : `` Thou seamark ! 
thou high and mighty Pilot ! 
thou tellest me truly where I am -- but canst thou cast the least hint where I shall be ? 
Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is this moment living ? 
Where is Moby Dick ? 
This instant thou must be eyeing him . 
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him ; aye , and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the unknown , thither side of thee , thou sun ! '' 
Then gazing at his quadrant , and handling , one after the other , its numerous cabalistical contrivances , he pondered again , and muttered : `` Foolish toy ! 
babies ' plaything of haughty Admirals , and Commodores , and Captains ; the world brags of thee , of thy cunning and might ; but what after all canst thou do , but tell the poor , pitiful point , where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide planet , and the hand that holds thee : no ! 
not one jot more ! 
Thou canst not tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon ; and yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun ! 
Science ! 
Curse thee , thou vain toy ; and cursed be all the things that cast man 's eyes aloft to that heaven , whose live vividness but scorches him , as these old eyes are even now scorched with thy light , O sun ! 
Level by nature to this earth 's horizon are the glances of man 's eyes ; not shot from the crown of his head , as if God had meant him to gaze on his firmament . 
Curse thee , thou quadrant ! '' 
dashing it to the deck , `` no longer will I guide my earthly way by thee ; the level ship 's compass , and the level deadreckoning , by log and by line ; these shall conduct me , and show me my place on the sea . 
Aye , '' lighting from the boat to the deck , `` thus I trample on thee , thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high ; thus I split and destroy thee ! '' 
As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead feet , a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab , and a fatalistic despair that seemed meant for himself -- these passed over the mute , motionless Parsee 's face . 
Unobserved he rose and glided away ; while , awestruck by the aspect of their commander , the seamen clustered together on the forecastle , till Ahab , troubledly pacing the deck , shouted out -- `` To the braces ! 
Up helm ! 
-- square in ! '' 
In an instant the yards swung round ; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her heel , her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long , ribbed hull , seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed . 
Standing between the knight-heads , Starbuck watched the Pequod 's tumultuous way , and Ahab 's also , as he went lurching along the deck . 
`` I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow , full of its tormented flaming life ; and I have seen it wane at last , down , down , to dumbest dust . 
Old man of oceans ! 
of all this fiery life of thine , what will at length remain but one little heap of ashes ! '' 
`` Aye , '' cried Stubb , `` but sea-coal ashes -- mind ye that , Mr. Starbuck -- sea-coal , not your common charcoal . 
Well , well ! 
I heard Ahab mutter , ` Here some one thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine ; swears that I must play them , and no others . ' 
And damn me , Ahab , but thou actest right ; live in the game , and die in it ! '' 
The Candles Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs : the tiger of Bengal crouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure . 
Skies the most effulgent but basket the deadliest thunders : gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame northern lands . 
So , too , it is , that in these resplendent Japanese seas the mariner encounters the direst of all storms , the Typhoon . 
It will sometimes burst from out that cloudless sky , like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town . 
Towards evening of that day , the Pequod was torn of her canvas , and bare-poled was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead . 
When darkness came on , sky and sea roared and split with the thunder , and blazed with the lightning , that showed the disabled mast fluttering here and there with the rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport . 
Holding by a shroud , Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck ; at every flash of the lightning glancing aloft , to see what additional disaster might have befallen the intricate hamper there ; while Stubb and Flask were directing the men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats . 
But all their pains seemed naught . 
Though lifted to the very top of the cranes , the windward quarter boat -LRB- Ahab 's -RRB- did not escape . 
A great rolling sea , dashing high up against the reeling ship 's high teetering side , stove in the boat 's bottom at the stern , and left it again , all dripping through like a sieve . 
`` Bad work , bad work ! 
Mr. Starbuck , '' said Stubb , regarding the wreck , `` but the sea will have its way . 
Stubb , for one , ca n't fight it . 
You see , Mr. Starbuck , a wave has such a great long start before it leaps , all round the world it runs , and then comes the spring ! 
But as for me , all the start I have to meet it , is just across the deck here . 
But never mind ; it 's all in fun : so the old song says ; '' -- -LRB- sings . -RRB- 
Oh ! 
jolly is the gale , And a joker is the whale , A ' flourishin ' his tail , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
The scud all a flyin ' , That 's his flip only foamin ' ; When he stirs in the spicin ' , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
Thunder splits the ships , But he only smacks his lips , A tastin ' of this flip , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
`` Avast Stubb , '' cried Starbuck , `` let the Typhoon sing , and strike his harp here in our rigging ; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace . '' 
`` But I am not a brave man ; never said I was a brave man ; I am a coward ; and I sing to keep up my spirits . 
And I tell you what it is , Mr. Starbuck , there 's no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat . 
And when that 's done , ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up . '' 
`` Madman ! 
look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own . '' 
`` What ! 
how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else , never mind how foolish ? '' 
`` Here ! '' 
cried Starbuck , seizing Stubb by the shoulder , and pointing his hand towards the weather bow , `` markest thou not that the gale comes from the eastward , the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick ? 
the very course he swung to this day noon ? 
now mark his boat there ; where is that stove ? 
In the stern-sheets , man ; where he is wont to stand -- his stand-point is stove , man ! 
Now jump overboard , and sing away , if thou must ! 
`` I do n't half understand ye : what 's in the wind ? '' 
`` Yes , yes , round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket , '' soliloquized Starbuck suddenly , heedless of Stubb 's question . 
`` The gale that now hammers at us to stave us , we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive us towards home . 
Yonder , to windward , all is blackness of doom ; but to leeward , homeward -- I see it lightens up there ; but not with the lightning . '' 
At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness , following the flashes , a voice was heard at his side ; and almost at the same instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
`` Old Thunder ! '' 
said Ahab , groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-hole ; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of fire . 
Now , as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the perilous fluid into the soil ; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry to each mast , is intended to conduct it into the water . 
But as this conductor must descend to considerable depth , that its end may avoid all contact with the hull ; and as moreover , if kept constantly towing there , it would be liable to many mishaps , besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging , and more or less impeding the vessel 's way in the water ; because of all this , the lower parts of a ship 's lightning-rods are not always overboard ; but are generally made in long slender links , so as to be the more readily hauled up into the chains outside , or thrown down into the sea , as occasion may require . 
`` The rods ! 
the rods ! '' 
cried Starbuck to the crew , suddenly admonished to vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux , to light Ahab to his post . 
`` Are they overboard ? 
drop them over , fore and aft . 
Quick ! '' 
`` Avast ! '' 
cried Ahab ; `` let 's have fair play here , though we be the weaker side . 
Yet I 'll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes , that all the world may be secured ; but out on privileges ! 
Let them be , sir . '' 
`` Look aloft ! '' 
cried Starbuck . 
`` The corpusants ! 
the corpusants ! 
All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire ; and touched at each tri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames , each of the three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air , like three gigantic wax tapers before an altar . 
`` Blast the boat ! 
let it go ! '' 
cried Stubb at this instant , as a swashing sea heaved up under his own little craft so that its gunwale violently jammed his hand , as he was passing a lashing . 
`` Blast it ! '' 
-- but slipping backward on the deck , his uplifted eyes caught the flames ; and immediately shifting his tone he cried -- `` The corpusants have mercy on us all ! '' 
To sailors , oaths are household words ; they will swear in the trance of the calm , and in the teeth of the tempest ; they will imprecate curses from the topsail-yard-arms , when most they teeter over to a seething sea ; but in all my voyagings , seldom have I heard a common oath when God 's burning finger has been laid on the ship ; when His `` Mene , Mene , Tekel Upharsin '' has been woven into the shrouds and the cordage . 
While this pallidness was burning aloft , few words were heard from the enchanted crew ; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle , all their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence , like a faraway constellation of stars . 
Relieved against the ghostly light , the gigantic jet negro , Daggoo , loomed up to thrice his real stature , and seemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come . 
The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth , which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants ; while lit up by the preternatural light , Queequeg 's tattooing burned like Satanic blue flames on his body . 
The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft ; and once more the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall . 
A moment or two passed , when Starbuck , going forward , pushed against some one . 
It was Stubb . 
`` What thinkest thou now , man ; I heard thy cry ; it was not the same in the song . '' 
`` No , no , it was n't ; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all ; and I hope they will , still . 
But do they only have mercy on long faces ? 
-- have they no bowels for a laugh ? 
And look ye , Mr. Starbuck -- but it 's too dark to look . 
Hear me , then ; I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck ; for those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a ' block with sperm-oil , d'ye see ; and so , all that sperm will work up into the masts , like sap in a tree . 
Yes , our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti candles -- that 's the good promise we saw . '' 
At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb 's face slowly beginning to glimmer into sight . 
Glancing upwards , he cried : `` See ! 
see ! '' 
and once more the high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness in their pallor . 
`` The corpusants have mercy on us all , '' cried Stubb , again . 
At the base of the main-mast , full beneath the doubloon and the flame , the Parsee was kneeling in Ahab 's front , but with his head bowed away from him ; while near by , from the arched and overhanging rigging , where they had just been engaged securing a spar , a number of the seamen , arrested by the glare , now cohered together , and hung pendulous , like a knot of numbed wasps from a drooping , orchard twig . 
In various enchanted attitudes like the standing , or stepping , or running skeletons in Herculaneum , others remained rooted to the deck ; but all their eyes upcast . 
`` Aye , aye , men ! '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Look up at it ; mark it well ; the white flame but lights the way to the White Whale ! 
Hand me those mainmast links there ; I would fain feel this pulse , and let mine beat against it ; blood against fire ! 
So . '' 
Then turning -- the last link held fast in his left hand , he put his foot upon the Parsee ; and with fixed upward eye , and high-flung right arm , he stood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames . 
`` Oh ! 
thou clear spirit of clear fire , whom on these seas I as Persian once did worship , till in the sacramental act so burned by thee , that to this hour I bear the scar ; I now know thee , thou clear spirit , and I now know that thy right worship is defiance . 
To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind ; and e ` en for hate thou canst but kill ; and all are killed . 
No fearless fool now fronts thee . 
I own thy speechless , placeless power ; but to the last gasp of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional , unintegral mastery in me . 
In the midst of the personified impersonal , a personality stands here . 
Though but a point at best ; whenceso'er I came ; whereso'er I go ; yet while I earthly live , the queenly personality lives in me , and feels her royal rights . 
But war is pain , and hate is woe . 
Come in thy lowest form of love , and I will kneel and kiss thee ; but at thy highest , come as mere supernal power ; and though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds , there 's that in here that still remains indifferent . 
Oh , thou clear spirit , of thy fire thou madest me , and like a true child of fire , I breathe it back to thee . '' 
-LSB- Sudden , repeated flashes of lightning ; the nine flames leap lengthwise to thrice their previous height ; Ahab , with the rest , closes his eyes , his right hand pressed hard upon them . -RSB- 
`` I own thy speechless , placeless power ; said I not so ? 
Nor was it wrung from me ; nor do I now drop these links . 
Thou canst blind ; but I can then grope . 
Thou canst consume ; but I can then be ashes . 
Take the homage of these poor eyes , and shutter-hands . 
I would not take it . 
The lightning flashes through my skull ; mine eyeballs ache and ache ; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded , and rolling on some stunning ground . 
Oh , oh ! 
Yet blindfold , yet will I talk to thee . 
Light though thou be , thou leapest out of darkness ; but I am darkness leaping out of light , leaping out of thee ! 
The javelins cease ; open eyes ; see , or not ? 
There burn the flames ! 
Oh , thou magnanimous ! 
now do I do glory in my genealogy . 
But thou art but my fiery father ; my sweet mother , I know not . 
