He 's all a magnet ! 
How long since thou saw ` st him last ? 
Which way heading ? '' 
`` Bless my soul , and curse the foul fiend 's , '' cried Bunger , stoopingly walking round Ahab , and like a dog , strangely snuffing ; `` this man 's blood -- bring the thermometer ! 
-- it 's at the boiling point ! 
-- his pulse makes these planks beat ! 
-- sir ! '' 
-- taking a lancet from his pocket , and drawing near to Ahab 's arm . 
`` Avast ! '' 
roared Ahab , dashing him against the bulwarks -- `` Man the boat ! 
Which way heading ? '' 
`` Good God ! '' 
cried the English Captain , to whom the question was put . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
He was heading east , I think . 
-- Is your Captain crazy ? '' 
whispering Fedallah . 
But Fedallah , putting a finger on his lip , slid over the bulwarks to take the boat 's steering oar , and Ahab , swinging the cutting-tackle towards him commanded the ship 's sailors to stand by to lower . 
In a moment he was standing in the boat 's stern , and the Manilla men were springing to their oars . 
In vain the English Captain hailed him . 
With back to the stranger ship , and face set like a flint to his own , Ahab stood upright till alongside of the Pequod . 
The Decanter Ere the English ship fades from sight be it set down here , that she hailed from London , and was named after the late Samuel Enderby , merchant of that city , the original of the famous whaling house of enderby and sons ; a house which in my poor whaleman 's opinion , comes not far behind the united royal houses of the Tudors and Bourbons , in point of real historical interest . 
How long , prior to the year of our Lord 1775 , this great whaling house was in existence , my numerous fish-documents do not make plain ; but in that year -LRB- 1775 -RRB- it fitted out the first English ships that ever regularly hunted the Sperm Whale ; though for some score of years previous -LRB- ever since 1726 -RRB- our valiant Coffins and Maceys of Nantucket and the Vineyard had in large fleets pursued the Leviathan , but only in the North and South Atlantic : not elsewhere . 
Be it distinctly recorded here , that the Nantucketers were the first among mankind to harpoon with civilized steel the great Sperm Whale ; and that for half a century they were the only people of the whole globe who so harpooned him . 
In 1778 , a fine ship , the Amelia , fitted out for the express purpose , and at the sole charge of the vigorous Enderbys , boldly rounded Cape Horn , and was the first among the nations to lower a whale-boat of any sort in the great South Sea . 
The voyage was a skilful and lucky one ; and returning to her berth with her hold full of the precious sperm , the Amelia 's example was soon followed by other ships , English and American , and thus the vast Sperm Whale grounds of the Pacific were thrown open . 
But not content with this good deed , the indefatigable house again bestirred itself : Samuel and all his Sons -- how many , their mother only knows -- and under their immediate auspices , and partly , I think , at their expense , the British government was induced to send the sloop-of-war Rattler on a whaling voyage of discovery into the South Sea . 
Commanded by a naval Post-Captain , the Rattler made a rattling voyage of it , and did some service ; how much does not appear . 
But this is not all . 
In 1819 , the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship of their own , to go on a tasting cruise to the remote waters of Japan . 
That ship -- well called the `` Syren '' -- made a noble experimental cruise ; and it was thus that the great Japanese Whaling Ground first became generally known . 
The Syren in this famous voyage was commanded by a Captain Coffin , a Nantucketer . 
All honor to the Enderbies , therefore , whose house , I think , exists to the present day ; though doubtless the original Samuel must long ago have slipped his cable for the great South Sea of the other world . 
The ship named after him was worthy of the honor , being a very fast sailer and a noble craft every way . 
I boarded her once at midnight somewhere off the Patagonian coast , and drank good flip down in the forecastle . 
It was a fine gam we had , and they were all trumps -- every soul on board . 
A short life to them , and a jolly death . 
And that fine gam I had -- long , very long after old Ahab touched her planks with his ivory heel -- it minds me of the noble , solid , Saxon hospitality of that ship ; and may my parson forget me , and the devil remember me , if I ever lose sight of it . 
Flip ? 
Did I say we had flip ? 
Yes , and we flipped it at the rate of ten gallons the hour ; and when the squall came -LRB- for it 's squally off there by Patagonia -RRB- , and all hands -- visitors and all -- were called to reef topsails , we were so top-heavy that we had to swing each other aloft in bowlines ; and we ignorantly furled the skirts of our jackets into the sails , so that we hung there , reefed fast in the howling gale , a warning example to all drunken tars . 
However , the masts did not go overboard ; and by and by we scrambled down , so sober , that we had to pass the flip again , though the savage salt spray bursting down the forecastle scuttle , rather too much diluted and pickled it for my taste . 
The beef was fine -- tough , but with body in it . 
They said it was bullbeef ; others , that it was dromedary beef ; but I do not know , for certain , how that was . 
They had dumplings too ; small , but substantial , symmetrically globular , and indestructible dumplings . 
I fancied that you could feel them , and roll them about in you after they were swallowed . 
If you stooped over too far forward , you risked their pitching out of you like billiard-balls . 
The bread -- but that could n't be helped ; besides , it was an anti-scorbutic , in short , the bread contained the only fresh fare they had . 
But the forecastle was not very light , and it was very easy to step over into a dark corner when you ate it . 
But all in all , taking her from truck to helm , considering the dimensions of the cook 's boilers , including his own live parchment boilers ; fore and aft , I say , the Samuel Enderby was a jolly ship ; of good fare and plenty ; fine flip and strong ; crack fellows all , and capital from boot heels to hat-band . 
But why was it , think ye , that the Samuel Enderby , and some other English whalers I know of -- not all though -- were such famous , hospitable ships ; that passed round the beef , and the bread , and the can , and the joke ; and were not soon weary of eating , and drinking , and laughing ? 
I will tell you . 
The abounding good cheer of these English whalers is matter for historical research . 
Nor have I been at all sparing of historical whale research , when it has seemed needed . 
The English were preceded in the whale fishery by the Hollanders , Zealanders , and Danes ; from whom they derived many terms still extant in the fishery ; and what is yet more , their fat old fashions , touching plenty to eat and drink . 
For , as a general thing , the English merchant-ship scrimps her crew ; but not so the English whaler . 
Hence , in the English , this thing of whaling good cheer is not normal and natural , but incidental and particular ; and , therefore , must have some special origin , which is here pointed out , and will be still further elucidated . 
During my researches in the Leviathanic histories , I stumbled upon an ancient Dutch volume , which , by the musty whaling smell of it , I knew must be about whalers . 
The title was , `` Dan Coopman , '' wherefore I concluded that this must be the invaluable memoirs of some Amsterdam cooper in the fishery , as every whale ship must carry its cooper . 
I was reinforced in this opinion by seeing that it was the production of one `` Fitz Swackhammer . '' 
But my friend Dr. Snodhead , a very learned man , professor of Low Dutch and High German in the college of Santa Claus and St. Potts , to whom I handed the work for translation , giving him a box of sperm candles for his trouble -- this same Dr. Snodhead , so soon as he spied the book , assured me that `` Dan Coopman '' did not mean `` The Cooper , '' but `` The Merchant . '' 
In short , this ancient and learned Low Dutch book treated of the commerce of Holland ; and , among other subjects , contained a very interesting account of its whale fishery . 
And in this chapter it was , headed , `` Smeer , '' or `` Fat , '' that I found a long detailed list of the outfits for the larders and cellars of 180 sail of Dutch whalemen ; from which list , as translated by Dr. Snodhead , I transcribe the following : 0084400,000 lbs . 
of beef . 
60,000 lbs . 
Friesland pork . 
150,000 lbs . 
of stock fish . 
550,000 lbs . 
of biscuit . 
72,000 lbs . 
of soft bread . 
2,800 firkins of butter . 
20,000 lbs . 
of Texel and Leyden cheese . 
144,000 lbs . 
cheese -LRB- probably an inferior article -RRB- . 
550 ankers of Geneva . 
10,800 barrels of beer . 
Most statistical tables are parchingly dry in the reading ; not so in the present case , however , where the reader is flooded with whole pipes , barrels , quarts , and gills of good gin and good cheer . 
At the time , I devoted three days to the studious digesting of all this beer , beef , and bread , during which many profound thoughts were incidentally suggested to me , capable of a transcendental and Platonic application ; and , furthermore , I compiled supplementary tables of my own , touching the probable quantity of stock-fish , & c. , consumed by every Low Dutch harpooneer in that ancient Greenland and Spitzbergen whale fishery . 
In the first place , the amount of butter , and Texel and Leyden cheese consumed , seems amazing . 
I impute it , though , to their naturally unctuous natures , being rendered still more unctuous by the nature of their vocation , and especially by their pursuing their game in those frigid Polar Seas , on the very coasts of that Esquimaux country where the convivial natives pledge each other in bumpers of train oil . 
The quantity of the beer , too , is very large , 10,800 barrels . 
Now , as those polar fisheries could only be prosecuted in the short summer of that climate , so that the whole cruise of one of these Dutch whalemen , including the short voyage to and from the Spitzbergen sea , did not much exceed three months , say , and reckoning 30 men to each of their fleet of 180 sail , we have 5,400 Low Dutch seamen in all ; therefore , I say , we have precisely two barrels of beer per man , for a twelve weeks ' allowance , exclusive of his fair proportion of that 550 ankers of gin . 
Now , whether these gin and beer harpooneers , so fuddled as one might fancy them to have been , were the right sort of men to stand up in a boat 's head , and take good aim at flying whales ; this would seem somewhat improbable . 
Yet they did aim at them , and hit them too . 
But this was very far North , be it remembered , where beer agrees well with the constitution ; upon the Equator , in our southern fishery , beer would be apt to make the harpooneer sleepy at the mast-head and boozy in his boat ; and grievous loss might ensue to Nantucket and New Bedford . 
But no more ; enough has been said to show that the old Dutch whalers of two or three centuries ago were high livers ; and that the English whalers have not neglected so excellent an example . 
For , say they , when cruising in an empty ship , if you can get nothing better out of the world , get a good dinner out of it , at least . 
And this empties the decanter . 
A Bower in the Arsacides Hitherto , in descriptively treating of the Sperm Whale , I have chiefly dwelt upon the marvels of his outer aspect ; or separately and in detail upon some few interior structural features . 
But to a large and thorough sweeping comprehension of him , it behoves me now to unbutton him still further , and untagging the points of his hose , unbuckling his garters , and casting loose the hooks and the eyes of the joints of his innermost bones , set him before you in his ultimatum ; that is to say , in his unconditional skeleton . 
But how now , Ishmael ? 
How is it , that you , a mere oarsman in the fishery , pretend to know aught about the subterranean parts of the whale ? 
Did erudite Stubb , mounted upon your capstan , deliver lectures on the anatomy of the Cetacea ; and by help of the windlass , hold up a specimen rib for exhibition ? 
Explain thyself , Ishmael . 
Can you land a full-grown whale on your deck for examination , as a cook dishes a roast-pig ? 
Surely not . 
A veritable witness have you hitherto been , Ishmael ; but have a care how you seize the privilege of Jonah alone ; the privilege of discoursing upon the joists and beams ; the rafters , ridge-pole , sleepers , and under-pinnings , making up the frame-work of leviathan ; and belike of the tallow-vats , dairy-rooms , butteries , and cheeseries in his bowels . 
I confess , that since Jonah , few whalemen have penetrated very far beneath the skin of the adult whale ; nevertheless , I have been blessed with an opportunity to dissect him in miniature . 
In a ship I belonged to , a small cub Sperm Whale was once bodily hoisted to the deck for his poke or bag , to make sheaths for the barbs of the harpoons , and for the heads of the lances . 
Think you I let that chance go , without using my boat-hatchet and jack-knife , and breaking the seal and reading all the contents of that young cub ? 
And as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan in their gigantic , full grown development , for that rare knowledge I am indebted to my late royal friend Tranquo , king of Tranque , one of the Arsacides . 
For being at Tranque , years ago , when attached to the trading-ship Dey of Algiers , I was invited to spend part of the Arsacidean holidays with the lord of Tranque , at his retired palm villa at Pupella ; a sea-side glen not very far distant from what our sailors called Bamboo-Town , his capital . 
Among many other fine qualities , my royal friend Tranquo , being gifted with a devout love for all matters of barbaric vertu , had brought together in Pupella whatever rare things the more ingenious of his people could invent ; chiefly carved woods of wonderful devices , chiselled shells , inlaid spears , costly paddles , aromatic canoes ; and all these distributed among whatever natural wonders , the wonder-freighted , tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores . 
Chief among these latter was a great Sperm Whale , which , after an unusually long raging gale , had been found dead and stranded , with his head against a cocoa-nut tree , whose plumage-like , tufted droopings seemed his verdant jet . 
When the vast body had at last been stripped of its fathomdeep enfoldings , and the bones become dust dry in the sun , then the skeleton was carefully transported up the Pupella glen , where a grand temple of lordly palms now sheltered it . 
The ribs were hung with trophies ; the vertebrae were carved with Arsacidean annals , in strange hieroglyphics ; in the skull , the priests kept up an unextinguished aromatic flame , so that the mystic head again sent forth its vapory spout ; while , suspended from a bough , the terrific lower jaw vibrated over all the devotees , like the hair-hung sword that so affrighted Damocles . 
It was a wondrous sight . 
The wood was green as mosses of the Icy Glen ; the trees stood high and haughty , feeling their living sap ; the industrious earth beneath was as a weaver 's loom , with a gorgeous carpet on it , whereof the ground-vine tendrils formed the warp and woof , and the living flowers the figures . 
All the trees , with all their laden branches ; all the shrubs , and ferns , and grasses ; the message-carrying air ; all these unceasingly were active . 
Through the lacings of the leaves , the great sun seemed a flying shuttle weaving the unwearied verdure . 
Oh , busy weaver ! 
unseen weaver ! 
-- pause ! 
-- one word ! 
-- whither flows the fabric ? 
what palace may it deck ? 
wherefore all these ceaseless toilings ? 
Speak , weaver ! 
-- stay thy hand ! 
-- but one single word with thee ! 
Nay -- the shuttle flies -- the figures float from forth the loom ; the fresher-rushing carpet for ever slides away . 
The weaver-god , he weaves ; and by that weaving is he deafened , that he hears no mortal voice ; and by that humming , we , too , who look on the loom are deafened ; and only when we escape it shall we hear the thousand voices that speak through it . 
For even so it is in all material factories . 
The spoken words that are inaudible among the flying spindles ; those same words are plainly heard without the walls , bursting from the opened casements . 
Thereby have villainies been detected . 
Ah , mortal ! 
then , be heedful ; for so , in all this din of the great world 's loom , thy subtlest thinkings may be overheard afar . 
Now , amid the green , life-restless loom of that Arsacidean wood , the great , white , worshipped skeleton lay lounging -- a gigantic idler ! 
Yet , as the ever-woven verdant warp and woof intermixed and hummed around him , the mighty idler seemed the cunning weaver ; himself all woven over with the vines ; every month assuming greener , fresher verdure ; but himself a skeleton . 
Life folded Death ; Death trellised Life ; the grim god wived with youthful Life , and begat him curly-headed glories . 
Now , when with royal Tranquo I visited this wondrous whale , and saw the skull an altar , and the artificial smoke ascending from where the real jet had issued , I marvelled that the king should regard a chapel as an object of vertu . 
He laughed . 
But more I marvelled that the priests should swear that smoky jet of his was genuine . 
To and fro I paced before this skeleton -- brushed the vines aside -- broke through the ribs -- and with a ball of Arsacidean twine , wandered , eddied long amid its many winding , shaded colonnades and arbors . 
But soon my line was out ; and following it back , I emerged from the opening where I entered . 
I saw no living thing within ; naught was there but bones . 
Cutting me a green measuring-rod , I once more dived within the skeleton . 
From their arrow-slit in the skull , the priests perceived me taking the altitude of the final rib , `` How now ! '' 
they shouted ; `` Dar ` st thou measure this our god ! 
That 's for us . '' 
`` Aye , priests -- well , how long do ye make him , then ? '' 
But hereupon a fierce contest rose among them , concerning feet and inches ; they cracked each other 's sconces with their yard-sticks -- the great skull echoed -- and seizing that lucky chance , I quickly concluded my own admeasurements . 
These admeasurements I now propose to set before you . 
But first , be it recorded , that , in this matter , I am not free to utter any fancied measurements I please . 
Because there are skeleton authorities you can refer to , to test my accuracy . 
There is a Leviathanic Museum , they tell me , in Hull , England , one of the whaling ports of that country , where they have some fine specimens of fin-backs and other whales . 
Likewise , I have heard that in the museum of Manchester , in New Hampshire , they have what the proprietors call `` the only perfect specimen of a Greenland or River Whale in the United States . '' 
Moreover , at a place in Yorkshire , England , Burton Constable by name , a certain Sir Clifford Constable has in his possession the skeleton of a Sperm Whale , but of moderate size , by no means of the full-grown magnitude of my friend King Tranquo 's . 
In both cases , the stranded whales to which these two skeletons belonged , were originally claimed by their proprietors upon similar grounds . 
King Tranquo seizing his because he wanted it ; and Sir Clifford , because he was lord of the seignories of those parts . 
Sir Clifford 's whale has been articulated throughout ; so that , like a great chest of drawers , you can open and shut him , in all his bony cavities -- spread out his ribs like a gigantic fan -- and swing all day upon his lower jaw . 
Locks are to be put upon some of his trap-doors and shutters ; and a footman will show round future visitors with a bunch of keys at his side . 
Sir Clifford thinks of charging twopence for a peep at the whispering gallery in the spinal column ; threepence to hear the echo in the hollow of his cerebellum ; and sixpence for the unrivalled view from his forehead . 
The skeleton dimensions I shall now proceed to set down are copied verbatim from my right arm , where I had them tattooed ; as in my wild wanderings at that period , there was no other secure way of preserving such valuable statistics . 
But as I was crowded for space , and wished the other parts of my body to remain a blank page for a poem I was then composing -- at least , what untattooed parts might remain -- I did not trouble myself with the odd inches ; nor , indeed , should inches at all enter into a congenial admeasurement of the whale . 
Measurement of The Whale 's Skeleton In the first place , I wish to lay before you a particular , plain statement , touching the living bulk of this leviathan , whose skeleton we are briefly to exhibit . 
Such a statement may prove useful here . 
According to a careful calculation I have made , and which I partly base upon Captain Scoresby 's estimate , of seventy tons for the largest sized Greenland whale of sixty feet in length ; according to my careful calculation , I say , a Sperm Whale of the largest magnitude , between eighty-five and ninety feet in length , and something less than forty feet in its fullest circumference , such a whale will weigh at least ninety tons ; so that , reckoning thirteen men to a ton , he would considerably outweigh the combined population of a whole village of one thousand one hundred inhabitants . 
Think you not then that brains , like yoked cattle , should be put to this leviathan , to make him at all budge to any landsman 's imagination ? 
Having already in various ways put before you his skull , spout-hole , jaw , teeth , tail , forehead , fins , and divers other parts , I shall now simply point out what is most interesting in the general bulk of his unobstructed bones . 
But as the colossal skull embraces so very large a proportion of the entire extent of the skeleton ; as it is by far the most complicated part ; and as nothing is to be repeated concerning it in this chapter , you must not fail to carry it in your mind , or under your arm , as we proceed , otherwise you will not gain a complete notion of the general structure we are about to view . 
In length , the Sperm Whale 's skeleton at Tranque measured seventy-two feet : so that when fully invested and extended in life , he must have been ninety feet long ; for in the whale , the skeleton loses about one fifth in length compared with the living body . 
Of this seventy-two feet , his skull and jaw comprised some twenty feet , leaving some fifty feet of plain backbone . 
Attached to this back-bone , for something less than a third of its length , was the mighty circular basket of ribs which once enclosed his vitals . 
To me this vast ivory-ribbed chest , with the long , unrelieved spine , extending far away from it in a straight line , not a little resembled the hull of a great ship new-laid upon the stocks , when only some twenty of her naked bow-ribs are inserted , and the keel is otherwise , for the time , but a long , disconnected timber . 
The ribs were ten on a side . 
The first , to begin from the neck , was nearly six feet long ; the second , third , and fourth were each successively longer , till you came to the climax of the fifth , or one of the middle ribs , which measured eight feet and some inches . 
From that part , the remaining ribs diminished , till the tenth and last only spanned five feet and some inches . 
In general thickness , they all bore a seemly correspondence to their length . 
The middle ribs were the most arched . 
In some of the Arsacides they are used for beams whereon to lay footpath bridges over small streams . 
In considering these ribs , I could not but be struck anew with the circumstance , so variously repeated in this book , that the skeleton of the whale is by no means the mould of his invested form . 
The largest of the Tranque ribs , one of the middle ones , occupied that part of the fish which , in life , is greatest in depth . 
Now , the greatest depth of the invested body of this particular whale must have been at least sixteen feet ; whereas , the corresponding rib measured but little more than eight feet . 
So that this rib only conveyed half of the true notion of the living magnitude of that part . 
Besides , for some way , where I now saw but a naked spine , all that had been once wrapped round with tons of added bulk in flesh , muscle , blood , and bowels . 
Still more , for the ample fins , I here saw but a few disordered joints ; and in place of the weighty and majestic , but boneless flukes , an utter blank ! 
How vain and foolish , then , thought I , for timid untravelled man to try to comprehend aright this wondrous whale , by merely poring over his dead attenuated skeleton , stretched in this peaceful wood . 
No . 
Only in the heart of quickest perils ; only when within the eddyings of his angry flukes ; only on the profound unbounded sea , can the fully invested whale be truly and livingly found out . 
But the spine . 
For that , the best way we can consider it is , with a crane , to pile its bones high up on end . 
No speedy enterprise . 
But now it 's done , it looks much like Pompey 's Pillar . 
There are forty and odd vertebrae in all , which in the skeleton are not locked together . 
They mostly lie like the great knobbed blocks on a Gothic spire , forming solid courses of heavy masonry . 
The largest , a middle one , is in width something less than three feet , and in depth more than four . 
The smallest , where the spine tapers away into the tail , is only two inches in width , and looks something like a white billiard-ball . 
I was told that there were still smaller ones , but they had been lost by some little cannibal urchins , the priest 's children , who had stolen them to play marbles with . 
Thus we see how that the spine of even the hugest of living things tapers off at last into simple child 's play . 
The Fossil Whale From his mighty bulk the whale affords a most congenial theme whereon to enlarge , amplify , and generally expatiate . 
Would you , you could not compress him . 
By good rights he should only be treated of in imperial folio . 
Not to tell over again his furlongs from spiracle to tail , and the yards he measures about the waist ; only think of the gigantic involutions of his intestines , where they lie in him like great cables and hawsers coiled away in the subterranean orlop-deck of a line-of-battle-ship . 
Since I have undertaken to manhandle this Leviathan , it behoves me to approve myself omnisciently exhaustive in the enterprise ; not overlooking the minutest seminal germs of his blood , and spinning him out to the uttermost coil of his bowels . 
Having already described him in most of his present habitatory and anatomical peculiarities , it now remains to magnify him in an archaeological , fossiliferous , and antediluvian point of view . 
Applied to any other creature than the Leviathan -- to an ant or a flea -- such portly terms might justly be deemed unwarrantably grandiloquent . 
But when Leviathan is the text , the case is altered . 
Fain am I to stagger to this enterprise under the weightiest words of the dictionary . 
And here be it said , that whenever it has been convenient to consult one in the course of these dissertations , I have invariably used a huge quarto edition of Johnson , expressly purchased for that purpose ; because that famous lexicographer 's uncommon personal bulk more fitted him to compile a lexicon to be used by a whale author like me . 
One often hears of writers that rise and swell with their subject , though it may seem but an ordinary one . 
How , then , with me , writing of this Leviathan ? 
Unconsciously my chirography expands into placard capitals . 
Give me a condor 's quill ! 
Give me Vesuvius ' crater for an inkstand ! 
Friends , hold my arms ! 
For in the mere act of penning my thoughts of this Leviathan , they weary me , and make me faint with their outreaching comprehensiveness of sweep , as if to include the whole circle of the sciences , and all the generations of whales , and men , and mastodons , past , present , and to come , with all the revolving panoramas of empire on earth , and throughout the whole universe , not excluding its suburbs . 
Such , and so magnifying , is the virtue of a large and liberal theme ! 
We expand to its bulk . 
To produce a mighty book , you must choose a mighty theme . 
No great and enduring volume can ever be written on the flea , though many there be who have tried it . 
Ere entering upon the subject of Fossil Whales , I present my credentials as a geologist , by stating that in my miscellaneous time I have been a stone-mason , and also a great digger of ditches , canals and wells , wine-vaults , cellars , and cisterns of all sorts . 
Likewise , by way of preliminary , I desire to remind the reader , that while in the earlier geological strata there are found the fossils of monsters now almost completely extinct ; the subsequent relics discovered in what are called the Tertiary formations seem the connecting , or at any rate intercepted links , between the antichronical creatures , and those whose remote posterity are said to have entered the Ark ; all the Fossil Whales hitherto discovered belong to the Tertiary period , which is the last preceding the superficial formations . 
And though none of them precisely answer to any known species of the present time , they are yet sufficiently akin to them in general respects , to justify their taking ranks as Cetacean fossils . 
Detached broken fossils of pre-adamite whales , fragments of their bones and skeletons , have within thirty years past , at various intervals , been found at the base of the Alps , in Lombardy , in France , in England , in Scotland , and in the States of Louisiana , Mississippi , and Alabama . 
Among the more curious of such remains is part of a skull , which in the year 1779 was disinterred in the Rue Dauphine in Paris , a short street opening almost directly upon the palace of the Tuileries ; and bones disinterred in excavating the great docks of Antwerp , in Napoleon 's time . 
Cuvier pronounced these fragments to have belonged to some utterly unknown Leviathanic species . 
But by far the most wonderful of all Cetacean relics was the almost complete vast skeleton of an extinct monster , found in the year 1842 , on the plantation of Judge Creagh , in Alabama . 
The awe-stricken credulous slaves in the vicinity took it for the bones of one of the fallen angels . 
The Alabama doctors declared it a huge reptile , and bestowed upon it the name of Basilosaurus . 
But some specimen bones of it being taken across the sea to Owen , the English Anatomist , it turned out that this alleged reptile was a whale , though of a departed species . 
A significant illustration of the fact , again and again repeated in this book , that the skeleton of the whale furnishes but little clue to the shape of his fully invested body . 
So Owen rechristened the monster Zeuglodon ; and in his paper read before the London Geological Society , pronounced it , in substance , one of the most extraordinary creatures which the mutations of the globe have blotted out of existence . 
When I stand among these mighty Leviathan skeletons , skulls , tusks , jaws , ribs , and vertebrae , all characterized by partial resemblances to the existing breeds of sea-monsters ; but at the same time bearing on the other hand similar affinities to the annihilated antichronical Leviathans , their incalculable seniors ; I am , by a flood , borne back to that wondrous period , ere time itself can be said to have begun ; for time began with man . 
Here Saturn 's grey chaos rolls over me , and I obtain dim , shuddering glimpses into those Polar eternities ; when wedged bastions of ice pressed hard upon what are now the Tropics ; and in all the 25,000 miles of this world 's circumference , not an inhabitable hand 's breadth of land was visible . 
Then the whole world was the whale 's ; and , king of creation , he left his wake along the present lines of the Andes and the Himmalehs . 
Who can show a pedigree like Leviathan ? 
Ahab 's harpoon had shed older blood than the Pharaoh 's . 
Methuselah seems a schoolboy . 
I look round to shake hands with Shem . 
I am horror-struck at this antemosaic , unsourced existence of the unspeakable terrors of the whale , which , having been before all time , must needs exist after all humane ages are over . 
But not alone has this Leviathan left his pre-adamite traces in the stereotype plates of nature , and in limestone and marl bequeathed his ancient bust ; but upon Egyptian tablets , whose antiquity seems to claim for them an almost fossiliferous character , we find the unmistakable print of his fin . 
In an apartment of the great temple of Denderah , some fifty years ago , there was discovered upon the granite ceiling a sculptured and painted planisphere , abounding in centaurs , griffins , and dolphins , similar to the grotesque figures on the celestial globe of the moderns . 
Gliding among them , old Leviathan swam as of yore ; was there swimming in that planisphere , centuries before Solomon was cradled . 
Nor must there be omitted another strange attestation of the antiquity of the whale , in his own osseous postdiluvian reality , as set down by the venerable John Leo , the old Barbary traveller . 
`` Not far from the Sea-side , they have a Temple , the Rafters and Beams of which are made of Whale-Bones ; for Whales of a monstrous size are oftentimes cast up dead upon that shore . 
The Common People imagine , that by a secret Power bestowed by God upon the Temple , no Whale can pass it without immediate death . 
But the truth of the Matter is , that on either side of the Temple , there are Rocks that shoot two Miles into the Sea , and wound the Whales when they light upon 'em . 
They keep a Whale 's Rib of an incredible length for a Miracle , which lying upon the Ground with its convex part uppermost , makes an Arch , the Head of which can not be reached by a Man upon a Camel 's Back . 
This Rib -LRB- says John Leo -RRB- is said to have layn there a hundred Years before I saw it . 
Their Historians affirm , that a Prophet who prophesy 'd of Mahomet , came from this Temple , and some do not stand to assert , that the Prophet Jonas was cast forth by the Whale at the Base of the Temple . '' 
In this Afric Temple of the Whale I leave you , reader , and if you be a Nantucketer , and a whaleman , you will silently worship there . 
Does the Whale 's Magnitude Diminish ? 
- Will He Perish ? 
Inasmuch , then , as this Leviathan comes floundering down upon us from the head-waters of the Eternities , it may be fitly inquired , whether , in the long course of his generations , he has not degenerated from the original bulk of his sires . 
But upon investigation we find , that not only are the whales of the present day superior in magnitude to those whose fossil remains are found in the Tertiary system -LRB- embracing a distinct geological period prior to man -RRB- , but of the whales found in that Tertiary system , those belonging to its latter formations exceed in size those of its earlier ones . 
Of all the pre-adamite whales yet exhumed , by far the largest is the Alabama one mentioned in the last chapter , and that was less than seventy feet in length in the skeleton . 
Whereas , we have already seen , that the tape-measure gives seventy-two feet for the skeleton of a large sized modern whale . 
And I have heard , on whalemen 's authority , that Sperm Whales have been captured near a hundred feet long at the time of capture . 
But may it not be , that while the whales of the present hour are an advance in magnitude upon those of all previous geological periods ; may it not be , that since Adam 's time they have degenerated ? 
Assuredly , we must conclude so , if we are to credit the accounts of such gentlemen as Pliny , and the ancient naturalists generally . 
For Pliny tells us of Whales that embraced acres of living bulk , and Aldrovandus of others which measured eight hundred feet in length -- Rope Walks and Thames Tunnels of Whales ! 
And even in the days of Banks and Solander , Cooke 's naturalists , we find a Danish member of the Academy of Sciences setting down certain Iceland Whales -LRB- reydan-siskur , or Wrinkled Bellies -RRB- at one hundred and twenty yards ; that is , three hundred and sixty feet . 
And Lacepede , the French naturalist , in his elaborate history of whales , in the very beginning of his work -LRB- page 3 -RRB- , sets down the Right Whale at one hundred metres , three hundred and twenty-eight feet . 
And this work was published so late as A.D. 1825 . 
But will any whaleman believe these stories ? 
No . 
The whale of to-day is as big as his ancestors in Pliny 's time . 
And if ever I go where Pliny is , I , a whaleman -LRB- more than he was -RRB- , will make bold to tell him so . 
Because I can not understand how it is , that while the Egyptian mummies that were buried thousands of years before even Pliny was born , do not measure so much in their coffins as a modern Kentuckian in his socks ; and while the cattle and other animals sculptured on the oldest Egyptian and Nineveh tablets , by the relative proportions in which they are drawn , just as plainly prove that the high-bred , stall-fed , prize cattle of Smithfield , not only equal , but far exceed in magnitude the fattest of Pharaoh 's fat kine ; in the face of all this , I will not admit that of all animals the whale alone should have degenerated . 
But still another inquiry remains ; one often agitated by the more recondite Nantucketers . 
Whether owing to the almost omniscient look-outs at the mast-heads of the whaleships , now penetrating even through Behring 's straits , and into the remotest secret drawers and lockers of the world ; and the thousand harpoons and lances darted along all continental coasts ; the moot point is , whether Leviathan can long endure so wide a chase , and so remorseless a havoc ; whether he must not at last be exterminated from the waters , and the last whale , like the last man , smoke his last pipe , and then himself evaporate in the final puff . 
Comparing the humped herds of whales with the humped herds of buffalo , which , not forty years ago , overspread by tens of thousands the prairies of Illinois and Missouri , and shook their iron manes and scowled with their thunder-clotted brows upon the sites of populous river-capitals , where now the polite broker sells you land at a dollar an inch ; in such a comparison an irresistible argument would seem furnished , to show that the hunted whale can not now escape speedy extinction . 
But you must look at this matter in every light . 
Though so short a period ago -- not a good lifetime -- the census of the buffalo in Illinois exceeded the census of men now in London , and though at the present day not one horn or hoof of them remains in all that region ; and though the cause of this wondrous extermination was the spear of man ; yet the far different nature of the whale-hunt peremptorily forbids so inglorious an end to the Leviathan . 
Forty men in one ship hunting the Sperm Whales for forty-eight months think they have done extremely well , and thank God , if at last they carry home the oil of forty fish . 
Whereas , in the days of the old Canadian and Indian hunters and trappers of the West , when the far west -LRB- in whose sunset suns still rise -RRB- was a wilderness and a virgin , the same number of moccasined men , for the same number of months , mounted on horse instead of sailing in ships , would have slain not forty , but forty thousand and more buffaloes ; a fact that , if need were , could be statistically stated . 
Nor , considered aright , does it seem any argument in favor of the gradual extinction of the Sperm Whale , for example , that in former years -LRB- the latter part of the last century , say -RRB- these Leviathans , in small pods , were encountered much oftener than at present , and , in consequence , the voyages were not so prolonged , and were also much more remunerative . 
Because , as has been elsewhere noticed , those whales , influenced by some views to safety , now swim the seas in immense caravans , so that to a large degree the scattered solitaries , yokes , and pods , and schools of other days are now aggregated into vast but widely separated , unfrequent armies . 
That is all . 
And equally fallacious seems the conceit , that because the so-called whale-bone whales no longer haunt many grounds in former years abounding with them , hence that species also is declining . 
For they are only being driven from promontory to cape ; and if one coast is no longer enlivened with their jets , then , be sure , some other and remoter strand has been very recently startled by the unfamiliar spectacle . 
Furthermore : concerning these last mentioned Leviathans , they have two firm fortresses , which , in all human probability , will for ever remain impregnable . 
And as upon the invasion of their valleys , the frosty Swiss have retreated to their mountains ; so , hunted from the savannas and glades of the middle seas , the whale-bone whales can at last resort to their Polar citadels , and diving under the ultimate glassy barriers and walls there , come up among icy fields and floes ! 
and in a charmed circle of everlasting December , bid defiance to all pursuit from man . 
But as perhaps fifty of these whale-bone whales are harpooned for one cachalot , some philosophers of the forecastle have concluded that this positive havoc has already very seriously diminished their battalions . 
But though for some time past a number of these whales , not less than 13,000 , have been annually slain on the nor ` west coast by the Americans alone ; yet there are considerations which render even this circumstance of little or no account as an opposing argument in this matter . 
Natural as it is to be somewhat incredulous concerning the populousness of the more enormous creatures of the globe , yet what shall we say to Harto , the historian of Goa , when he tells us that at one hunting the King of Siam took 4,000 elephants ; that in those regions elephants are numerous as droves of cattle in the temperate climes . 
And there seems no reason to doubt that if these elephants , which have now been hunted for thousands of years , by Semiramis , by Porus , by Hannibal , and by all the successive monarchs of the East -- if they still survive there in great numbers , much more may the great whale outlast all hunting , since he has a pasture to expatiate in , which is precisely twice as large as all Asia , both Americas , Europe and Africa , New Holland , and all the Isles of the sea combined . 
Moreover : we are to consider , that from the presumed great longevity of whales , their probably attaining the age of a century and more , therefore at any one period of time , several distinct adult generations must be contemporary . 
And what this is , we may soon gain some idea of , by imagining all the grave-yards , cemeteries , and family vaults of creation yielding up the live bodies of all the men , women , and children who were alive seventy-five years ago ; and adding this countless host to the present human population of the globe . 
Wherefore , for all these things , we account the whale immortal in his species , however perishable in his individuality . 
He swam the seas before the continents broke water ; he once swam over the site of the Tuileries , and Windsor Castle , and the Kremlin . 
In Noah 's flood he despised Noah 's Ark ; and if ever the world is to be again flooded , like the Netherlands , to kill off its rats , then the eternal whale will still survive , and rearing upon the topmost crest of the equatorial flood , spout his frothed defiance to the skies . 
Ahab 's Leg The precipitating manner in which Captain Ahab had quitted the Samuel Enderby of London , had not been unattended with some small violence to his own person . 
He had lighted with such energy upon a thwart of his boat that his ivory leg had received a half-splintering shock . 
And when after gaining his own deck , and his own pivot-hole there , he so vehemently wheeled round with an urgent command to the steersman -LRB- it was , as ever , something about his not steering inflexibly enough -RRB- ; then , the already shaken ivory received such an additional twist and wrench , that though it still remained entire , and to all appearances lusty , yet Ahab did not deem it entirely trustworthy . 
And , indeed , it seemed small matter for wonder , that for all his pervading , mad recklessness , Ahab , did at times give careful heed to the condition of that dead bone upon which he partly stood . 
For it had not been very long prior to the Pequod 's sailing from Nantucket , that he had been found one night lying prone upon the ground , and insensible ; by some unknown , and seemingly inexplicable , unimaginable casualty , his ivory limb having been so violently displaced , that it had stake-wise smitten , and all but pierced his groin ; nor was it without extreme difficulty that the agonizing wound was entirely cured . 
Nor , at the time , had it failed to enter his monomaniac mind , that all the anguish of that then present suffering was but the direct issue of a former woe ; and he too plainly seemed to see , that as the most poisonous reptile of the marsh perpetuates his kind as inevitably as the sweetest songster of the grove ; so , equally with every felicity , all miserable events do naturally beget their like . 
Yea , more than equally , thought Ahab ; since both the ancestry and posterity of Grief go further than the ancestry and posterity of Joy . 
For , not to hint of this : that it is an inference from certain canonic teachings , that while some natural enjoyments here shall have no children born to them for the other world , but , on the contrary , shall be followed by the joy-childlessness of all hell 's despair ; whereas , some guilty mortal miseries shall still fertilely beget to themselves an eternally progressive progeny of griefs beyond the grave ; not at all to hint of this , there still seems an inequality in the deeper analysis of the thing . 
For , thought Ahab , while even the highest earthly felicities ever have a certain unsignifying pettiness lurking in them , but , at bottom , all heartwoes , a mystic significance , and , in some men , an archangelic grandeur ; so do their diligent tracings-out not belie the obvious deduction . 
To trail the genealogies of these high mortal miseries , carries us at last among the sourceless primogenitures of the gods ; so that , in the face of all the glad , hay-making suns , and softcymballing , round harvest-moons , we must needs give in to this : that the gods themselves are not for ever glad . 
The ineffaceable , sad birth-mark in the brow of man , is but the stamp of sorrow in the signers . 
Unwittingly here a secret has been divulged , which perhaps might more properly , in set way , have been disclosed before . 
With many other particulars concerning Ahab , always had it remained a mystery to some , why it was , that for a certain period , both before and after the sailing of the Pequod , he had hidden himself away with such Grand-Lama-like exclusiveness ; and , for that one interval , sought speechless refuge , as it were , among the marble senate of the dead . 
Captain Peleg 's bruited reason for this thing appeared by no means adequate ; though , indeed , as touching all Ahab 's deeper part , every revelation partook more of significant darkness than of explanatory light . 
But , in the end , it all came out ; this one matter did , at least . 
That direful mishap was at the bottom of his temporary recluseness . 
And not only this , but to that ever-contracting , dropping circle ashore , who for any reason , possessed the privilege of a less banned approach to him ; to that timid circle the above hinted casualty -- remaining , as it did , moodily unaccounted for by Ahab -- invested itself with terrors , not entirely underived from the land of spirits and of wails . 
So that , through their zeal for him , they had all conspired , so far as in them lay , to muffle up the knowledge of this thing from others ; and hence it was , that not till a considerable interval had elapsed , did it transpire upon the Pequod 's decks . 
But be all this as it may ; let the unseen , ambiguous synod in the air , or the vindictive princes and potentates of fire , have to do or not with earthly Ahab , yet , in this present matter of his leg , he took plain practical procedures ; -- he called the carpenter . 
And when that functionary appeared before him , he bade him without delay set about making a new leg , and directed the mates to see him supplied with all the studs and joists of jaw-ivory -LRB- Sperm Whale -RRB- which had thus far been accumulated on the voyage , in order that a careful selection of the stoutest , clearest-grained stuff might be secured . 
This done , the carpenter received orders to have the leg completed that night ; and to provide all the fittings for it , independent of those pertaining to the distrusted one in use . 
Moreover , the ship 's forge was ordered to be hoisted out of its temporary idleness in the hold ; and , to accelerate the affair , the blacksmith was commanded to proceed at once to the forging of whatever iron contrivances might be needed . 
The Carpenter Seat thyself sultanically among the moons of Saturn , and take high abstracted man alone ; and he seems a wonder , a grandeur , and a woe . 
But from the same point , take mankind in mass , and for the most part , they seem a mob of unnecessary duplicates , both contemporary and hereditary . 
But most humble though he was , and far from furnishing an example of the high , humane abstraction ; the Pequod 's carpenter was no duplicate ; hence , he now comes in person on this stage . 
Like all sea-going ship carpenters , and more especially those belonging to whaling vessels , he was , to a certain off-hand , practical extent , alike experienced in numerous trades and callings collateral to his own ; the carpenter 's pursuit being the ancient and outbranching trunk of all those numerous handicrafts which more or less have to do with wood as an auxiliary material . 
But , besides the application to him of the generic remark above , this carpenter of the Pequod was singularly efficient in those thousand nameless mechanical emergencies continually recurring in a large ship , upon a three or four years ' voyage , in uncivilized and far-distant seas . 
For not to speak of his readiness in ordinary duties : -- repairing stove boats , sprung spars , reforming the shape of clumsy-bladed oars , inserting bull 's eyes in the deck , or new tree-nails in the side planks , and other miscellaneous matters more directly pertaining to his special business ; he was moreover unhesitatingly expert in all manner of conflicting aptitudes , both useful and capricious . 
The one grand stage where he enacted all his various parts so manifold , was his vice-bench ; a long rude ponderous table furnished with several vices , of different sizes , and both of iron and of wood . 
At all times except when whales were alongside , this bench was securely lashed athwartships against the rear of the Try-works . 
A belaying pin is found too large to be easily inserted into its hole : the carpenter claps it into one of his ever ready vices , and straightway files it smaller . 
A lost landbird of strange plumage strays on board , and is made a captive : out of clean shaved rods of right-whale bone , and cross-beams of sperm whale ivory , the carpenter makes a pagoda-looking cage for it . 
An oarsman sprains his wrist : the carpenter concocts a soothing lotion . 
Stubb longed for vermillion stars to be painted upon the blade of his every oar ; screwing each oar in his big vice of wood , the carpenter symmetrically supplies the constellation . 
A sailor takes a fancy to wear shark-bone ear-rings : the carpenter drills his ears . 
Another has the toothache : the carpenter out pincers , and clapping one hand upon his bench bids him be seated there ; but the poor fellow unmanageably winces under the unconcluded operation ; whirling round the handle of his wooden vice , the carpenter signs him to clap his jaw in that , if he would have him draw the tooth . 
Thus , this carpenter was prepared at all points , and alike indifferent and without respect in all . 
Teeth he accounted bits of ivory ; heads he deemed but top-blocks ; men themselves he lightly held for capstans . 
But while now upon so wide a field thus variously accomplished and with such liveliness of expertness in him , too ; all this would seem to argue some uncommon vivacity of intelligence . 
But not precisely so . 
For nothing was this man more remarkable , than for a certain impersonal stolidity as it were ; impersonal , I say ; for it so shaded off into the surrounding infinite of things , that it seemed one with the general stolidity discernible in the whole visible world ; which while pauselessly active in uncounted modes , still eternally holds its peace , and ignores you , though you dig foundations for cathedrals . 
Yet was this half-horrible stolidity in him , involving , too , as it appeared , an all-ramifying heartlessness ; -- yet was it oddly dashed at times , with an old , crutch-like , antediluvian , wheezing humorousness , not unstreaked now and then with a certain grizzled wittiness ; such as might have served to pass the time during the midnight watch on the bearded forecastle of Noah 's ark . 
Was it that this old carpenter had been a life-long wanderer , whose much rolling , to and fro , not only had gathered no moss ; but what is more , had rubbed off whatever small outward clingings might have originally pertained to him ? 
He was a stript abstract ; an unfractioned integral ; uncompromised as a new-born babe ; living without premeditated reference to this world or the next . 
You might almost say , that this strange uncompromisedness in him involved a sort of unintelligence ; for in his numerous trades , he did not seem to work so much by reason or by instinct , or simply because he had been tutored to it , or by any intermixture of all these , even or uneven ; but merely by a kind of deaf and dumb , spontaneous literal process . 
He was a pure manipulator ; his brain , if he had ever had one , must have early oozed along into the muscles of his fingers . 
He was like one of those unreasoning but still highly useful , multum in parvo , Sheffield contrivances , assuming the exterior -- though a little swelled -- of a common pocket knife ; but containing , not only blades of various sizes , but also screw-drivers , cork-screws , tweezers , awls , pens , rulers , nail-filers , countersinkers . 
So , if his superiors wanted to use the carpenter for a screw-driver , all they had to do was to open that part of him , and the screw was fast : or if for tweezers , take him up by the legs , and there they were . 
Yet , as previously hinted , this omnitooled , open-and-shut carpenter , was , after all , no mere machine of an automaton . 
If he did not have a common soul in him , he had a subtle something that somehow anomalously did its duty . 
What that was , whether essence of quicksilver , or a few drops of hartshorn , there is no telling . 
But there it was ; and there it had abided for now some sixty years or more . 
And this it was , this same unaccountable , cunning life-principle in him ; this it was , that kept him a great part of the time soliloquizing ; but only like an unreasoning wheel , which also hummingly soliloquizes ; or rather , his body was a sentry-box and this soliloquizer on guard there , and talking all the time to keep himself awake . 
Ahab and the Carpenter The Deck - First Night Watch -LRB- Carpenter standing before his vice-bench , and by the light of two lanterns busily filing the ivory joist for the leg , which joist is firmly fixed in the vice . 
Slabs of ivory , leather straps , pads , screws , and various tools of all sorts lying about the bench . 
Forward , the red flame of the forge is seen , where the blacksmith is at work . -RRB- 
Drat the file , and drat the bone ! 
That is hard which should be soft , and that is soft which should be hard . 
So we go , who file old jaws and shin bones . 
Let 's try another . 
Aye , now , this works better -LRB- sneezes -RRB- . 
Halloa , this bone dust is -LRB- sneezes -RRB- -- why it 's -LRB- sneezes -RRB- -- yes it 's -LRB- sneezes -RRB- -- bless my soul , it wo n't let me speak ! 
This is what an old fellow gets now for working in dead lumber . 
Saw a live tree , and you do n't get this dust ; amputate a live bone , and you do n't get it -LRB- sneezes -RRB- . 
Come , come , you old Smut , there , bear a hand , and let 's have that ferrule and buckle-screw ; I 'll be ready for them presently . 
Lucky now -LRB- sneezes -RRB- there 's no knee-joint to make ; that might puzzle a little ; but a mere shin-bone -- why it 's easy as making hop-poles ; only I should like to put a good finish on . 
Time , time ; if I but only had the time , I could turn him out as neat a leg now as ever -LRB- sneezes -RRB- scraped to a lady in a parlor . 
Those buckskin legs and calves of legs I 've seen in shop windows would n't compare at all . 
They soak water , they do ; and of course get rheumatic , and have to be doctored -LRB- sneezes -RRB- with washes and lotions , just like live legs . 
There ; before I saw it off , now , I must call his old Mogulship , and see whether the length will be all right ; too short , if anything , I guess . 
Ha ! 
that 's the heel ; we are in luck ; here he comes , or it 's somebody else , that 's certain . 
AHAB -LRB- advancing -RRB- -LRB- During the ensuing scene , the carpenter continues sneezing at times -RRB- . 
Well , manmaker ! 
Just in time , sir . 
If the captain pleases , I will now mark the length . 
Let me measure , sir . 
Measured for a leg ! 
good . 
Well , it 's not the first time . 
About it ! 
There ; keep thy finger on it . 
This is a cogent vice thou hast here , carpenter ; let me feel its grip once . 
So , so ; it does pinch some . 
Oh , sir , it will break bones -- beware , beware ! 
No fear ; I like a good grip ; I like to feel something in this slippery world that can hold , man . 
What 's Prometheus about there ? 
-- the blacksmith , I mean -- what 's he about ? 
He must be forging the buckle-screw , sir , now . 
Right . 
It 's a partnership ; he supplies the muscle part . 
He makes a fierce red flame there ! 
Aye , sir ; he must have the white heat for this kind of fine work . 
Um-m . 
So he must . 
I do deem it now a most meaning thing , that that old Greek , Prometheus , who made men , they say , should have been a blacksmith , and animated them with fire ; for what 's made in fire must properly belong to fire ; and so hell 's probable . 
How the soot flies ! 
This must be the remainder the Greek made the Africans of . 
Carpenter , when he 's through with that buckle , tell him to forge a pair of steel shoulder-blades ; there 's a pedlar aboard with a crushing pack . 
Sir ? 
Hold ; while Prometheus is about it , I 'll order a complete man after a desirable pattern . 
Imprimis , fifty feet high in his socks ; then , chest modelled after the Thames Tunnel then , legs with roots to 'em , to stay in one place ; then , arms three feet through the wrist ; no heart at all , brass forehead , and about a quarter of an acre of fine brains ; and let me see -- shall I order eyes to see outwards ? 
No , but put a sky-light on top of his head to illuminate inwards . 
There , take the order , and away . 
Now , what 's he speaking about , and who 's he speaking to , I should like to know ? 
Shall I keep standing here ? 
-LRB- aside . -RRB- 
'T is but indifferent architecture to make a blind dome ; here 's one . 
No , no , no ; I must have a lantern . 
Ho , ho ! 
That 's it , hey ? 
Here are two , sir ; one will serve my turn . 
What art thou thrusting that thief-catcher into my face for , man ? 
Thrusted light is worse than presented pistols . 
I thought , sir , that you spoke to carpenter . 
Carpenter ? 
why that 's -- but no ; -- a very tidy , and , I may say , an extremely gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here , carpenter ; -- or would ` st thou rather work in clay ? 
Sir ? 
-- Clay ? 
clay , sir ? 
That 's mud ; we leave clay to ditchers , sir . 
The fellow 's impious ! 
What art thou sneezing about ? 
Bone is rather dusty , sir . 
Take the hint , then ; and when thou art dead , never bury thyself under living people 's noses . 
Sir ? 
-- oh ! 
ah ! 
-- I guess so ; so ; -- yes , yes -- oh dear ! 
Look ye , carpenter , I dare say thou callest thyself a right good workmanlike workman , eh ? 
Well , then , will it speak thoroughly well for thy work , if , when I come to mount this leg thou makest , I shall nevertheless feel another leg in the same identical place with it ; that is , carpenter , my old lost leg ; the flesh and blood one , I mean . 
Canst thou not drive that old Adam away ? 
Truly , sir , I begin to understand somewhat now . 
Yes , I have heard something curious on that score , sir ; how that a dismasted man never entirely loses the feeling of his old spar , but it will be still pricking him at times . 
May I humbly ask if it be really so , sir ? 
It is , man . 
Look , put thy live leg here in the place where mine once was ; so , now , here is only one distinct leg to the eye , yet two to the soul . 
Where thou feelest tingling life ; there , exactly there , there to a hair , do I. Is ' t a riddle ? 
I should humbly call it a poser , sir . 
Hist , then . 
How dost thou know that some entire , living , thinking thing may not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standing precisely where thou now standest ; aye , and standing there in thy spite ? 
In thy most solitary hours , then , dost thou not fear eavesdroppers ? 
Hold , do n't speak ! 
And if I still feel the smart of my crushed leg , though it be now so long dissolved ; then , why mayest not thou , carpenter , feel the fiery pains of hell for ever , and without a body ? 
Hah ! 
Good Lord ! 
Truly , sir , if it comes to that , I must calculate over again ; I think I did n't carry a small figure , sir . 
Look ye , pudding-heads should never grant premises . 
-- How long before this leg is done ? 
Perhaps an hour , sir . 
Bungle away at it then , and bring it to me -LRB- turns to go -RRB- . 
Oh , Life . 
Here I am , proud as Greek god , and yet standing debtor to this blockhead for a bone to stand on ! 
Cursed be that mortal inter-indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers . 
I would be free as air ; and I 'm down in the whole world 's books . 
I am so rich , I could have given bid for bid with the wealthiest Praetorians at the auction of the Roman empire -LRB- which was the world 's -RRB- ; and yet I owe for the flesh in the tongue I brag with . 
By heavens ! 
I 'll get a crucible , and into it , and dissolve myself down to one small , compendious vertebra . 
So . 
Carpenter -LRB- resuming his work -RRB- . 
Well , well , well ! 
Stubb knows him best of all , and Stubb always says he 's queer ; says nothing but that one sufficient little word queer ; he 's queer , says Stubb ; he 's queer -- queer , queer ; and keeps dinning it into Mr. Starbuck all the time -- queer -- sir -- queer , queer , very queer . 
And here 's his leg . 
Yes , now that I think of it , here 's his bed-fellow ! 
has a stick of whale 's jaw-bone for a wife ! 
And this is his leg ; he 'll stand on this . 
What was that now about one leg standing in three places , and all three places standing in one hell -- how was that ? 
Oh ! 
I do n't wonder he looked so scornful at me ! 
I 'm a sort of strange-thoughted sometimes , they say ; but that 's only haphazard-like . 
Then , a short , little old body like me , should never undertake to wade out into deep waters with tall , heron-built captains ; the water chucks you under the chin pretty quick , and there 's a great cry for life-boats . 
And here 's the heron 's leg ! 
long and slim , sure enough ! 
Now , for most folks one pair of legs lasts a lifetime , and that must be because they use them mercifully , as a tender-hearted old lady uses her roly-poly old coach-horses . 
But Ahab ; oh he 's a hard driver . 
Look , driven one leg to death , and spavined the other for life , and now wears out bone legs by the cord . 
Halloa , there , you Smut ! 
bear a hand there with those screws , and let 's finish it before the resurrection fellow comes a-calling with his horn for all legs , true or false , as brewery men go round collecting old beer barrels , to fill 'em up again . 
What a leg this is ! 
It looks like a real live leg , filed down to nothing but the core ; he 'll be standing on this to-morrow ; he 'll be taking altitudes on it . 
Halloa ! 
I almost forgot the little oval slate , smoothed ivory , where he figures up the latitude . 
So , so ; chisel , file , and sand-paper , now ! 
Ahab and Starbuck in the Cabin According to usage they were pumping the ship next morning ; and lo ! 
no inconsiderable oil came up with the water ; the casks below must have sprung a bad leak . 
Much concern was shown ; and Starbuck went down into the cabin to report this unfavorable affair . 
* * In Sperm-whalemen with any considerable quantity of oil on board , it is a regular semiweekly duty to conduct a hose into the hold , and drench the casks with sea-water ; which afterwards , at varying intervals , is removed by the ship 's pumps . 
Hereby the casks are sought to be kept damply tight ; while by the changed character of the withdrawn water , the mariners readily detect any serious leakage in the precious cargo . 
Now , from the South and West the Pequod was drawing nigh to Formosa and the Bashee Isles , between which lies one of the tropical outlets from the China waters into the Pacific . 
And so Starbuck found Ahab with a general chart of the oriental archipelagoes spread before him ; and another separate one representing the long eastern coasts of the Japanese islands -- Niphon , Matsmai , and Sikoke . 
With his snow-white new ivory leg braced against the screwed leg of his table , and with a long pruning-hook of a jack-knife in his hand , the wondrous old man , with his back to the gangway door , was wrinkling his brow , and tracing his old courses again . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
hearing the footstep at the door , but not turning round to it . 
`` On deck ! 
Begone ! '' 
`` Captain Ahab mistakes ; it is I . 
The oil in the hold is leaking , sir . 
We must up Burtons and break out . '' 
`` Up Burtons and break out ? 
Now that we are nearing Japan ; heave-to here for a week to tinker a parcel of old hoops ? '' 
`` Either do that , sir , or waste in one day more oil than we may make good in a year . 
What we come twenty thousand miles to get is worth saving , sir . '' 
`` So it is , so it is ; if we get it . '' 
`` I was speaking of the oil in the hold , sir . '' 
`` And I was not speaking or thinking of that at all . 
Begone ! 
Let it leak ! 
I 'm all aleak myself . 
Aye ! 
leaks in leaks ! 
not only full of leaky casks , but those leaky casks are in a leaky ship ; and that 's a far worse plight than the Pequod 's , man . 
Yet I do n't stop to plug my leak ; for who can find it in the deep-loaded hull ; or how hope to plug it , even if found , in this life 's howling gale ? 
Starbuck ! 
