So man 's seconds tick ! 
Oh ! 
how immaterial are all materials ! 
What things real are there , but imponderable thoughts ? 
Here now 's the very dreaded symbol of grim death , by a mere hap , made the expressive sign of the help and hope of most endangered life . 
A life-buoy of a coffin ! 
Does it go further ? 
Can it be that in some spiritual sense the coffin is , after all , but an immortality-preserver ! 
I 'll think of that . 
But no . 
So far gone am I in the dark side of earth , that its other side , the theoretic bright one , seems but uncertain twilight to me . 
Will ye never have done , Carpenter , with that accursed sound ? 
I go below ; let me not see that thing here when I return again . 
Now , then , Pip , we 'll talk this over ; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee ! 
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee ! '' 
The Pequod Meets The Rachel Next day , a large ship , the Rachel , was descried , bearing directly down upon the Pequod , all her spars thickly clustering with men . 
At the time the Pequod was making good speed through the water ; but as the broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her , the boastful sails all fell together as blank bladders that are burst , and all life fled from the smitten hull . 
`` Bad news ; she brings bad news , '' muttered the old Manxman . 
But ere her commander , who , with trumpet to mouth , stood up in his boat ; ere he could hopefully hail , Ahab 's voice was heard . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
`` Aye , yesterday . 
Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift ? '' 
Throttling his joy , Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question ; and would then have fain boarded the stranger , when the stranger captain himself , having stopped his vessel 's way , was seen descending her side . 
A few keen pulls , and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod 's main-chains , and he sprang to the deck . 
Immediately he was recognized by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew . 
But no formal salutation was exchanged . 
`` Where was he ? 
-- not killed ! 
-- not killed ! '' 
cried Ahab , closely advancing . 
`` How was it ? '' 
It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous , while three of the stranger 's boats were engaged with a shoal of whales , which had led them some four or five miles from the ship ; and while they were yet in swift chase to windward , the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the blue water , not very far to leeward ; whereupon , the fourth rigged boat -- a reserved one -- had been instantly lowered in chase . 
After a keen sail before the wind , this fourth boat -- the swiftest keeled of all -- seemed to have succeeded in fastening -- at least , as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything about it . 
In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat ; and then a swift gleam of bubbling white water ; and after that nothing more ; whence it was concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his pursuers , as often happens . 
There was some apprehension , but no positive alarm , as yet . 
The recall signals were placed in the rigging ; darkness came on ; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats -- ere going in quest of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction -- the ship had not only been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight , but , for the time , to increase her distance from it . 
But the rest of her crew being at last safe aboard , she crowded all sail -- stunsail on stunsail -- after the missing boat ; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon ; and every other man aloft on the look-out . 
But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen ; though she then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her ; and not finding anything , had again dashed on ; again paused , and lowered her boats ; and though she had thus continued doing till daylight ; yet not the least glimpse of the missing keel had been seen . 
The story told , the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object in boarding the Pequod . 
He desired that ship to unite with his own in the search ; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart , on parallel lines , and so sweeping a double horizon , as it were . 
`` I will wager something now , '' whispered Stubb to Flask , `` that some one in that missing boat wore off that Captain 's best coat ; mayhap , his watch -- he 's so cursed anxious to get it back . 
Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season ? 
See , Flask , only see how pale he looks -- pale in the very buttons of his eyes -- look -- it was n't the coat -- it must have been the - '' `` My boy , my own boy is among them . 
For God 's sake -- I beg , I conjure '' -- here exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab , who thus far had but icily received his petition . 
`` For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship -- I will gladly pay for it , and roundly pay for it -- if there be no other way -- for eight-and-forty hours only -- only that -- you must , oh , you must , and you shall do this thing . '' 
`` His son ! '' 
cried Stubb , `` oh , it 's his son he 's lost ! 
I take back the coat and watch -- what says Ahab ? 
We must save that boy . '' 
`` He 's drowned with the rest on 'em , last night , '' said the old Manx sailor standing behind them ; `` I heard ; all of ye heard their spirits . '' 
Now , as it shortly turned out , what made this incident of the Rachel 's the more melancholy , was the circumstance , that not only was one of the Captain 's sons among the number of the missing boat 's crew ; but among the number of the other boats ' crews , at the same time , but on the other hand , separated from the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase , there had been still another son ; as that for a time , the wretched father was plunged to the bottom of the cruellest perplexity ; which was only solved for him by his chief mate 's instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whaleship in such emergencies , that is , when placed between jeopardized but divided boats , always to pick up the majority first . 
But the captain , for some unknown constitutional reason , had refrained from mentioning all this , and not till forced to it by Ahab 's iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy ; a little lad , but twelve years old , whose father with the earnest but unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer 's paternal love , had thus early sought to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially the destiny of all his race . 
Nor does it unfrequently occur , that Nantucket captains will send a son of such tender age away from them , for a protracted three or four years ' voyage in some other ship than their own ; so that their first knowledge of a whaleman 's career shall be unenervated by any chance display of a father 's natural but untimely partiality , or undue apprehensiveness and concern . 
Meantime , now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab ; and Ahab still stood like an anvil , receiving every shock , but without the least quivering of his own . 
`` I will not go , '' said the stranger , `` till you say aye to me . 
Do to me as you would have me do to you in the like case . 
For you too have a boy , Captain Ahab -- though but a child , and nestling safely at home now -- a child of your old age too -- Yes , yes , you relent ; I see it -- run , run , men , now , and stand by to square in the yards . '' 
`` Avast , '' cried Ahab -- `` touch not a rope-yarn '' ; then in a voice that prolongingly moulded every word -- `` Captain Gardiner , I will not do it . 
Even now I lose time , Good-bye , good-bye . 
God bless ye , man , and may I forgive myself , but I must go . 
Mr. Starbuck , look at the binnacle watch , and in three minutes from this present instant warn off all strangers ; then brace forward again , and let the ship sail as before . '' 
Hurriedly turning , with averted face , he descended into his cabin , leaving the strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so earnest suit . 
But starting from his enchantment , Gardiner silently hurried to the side ; more fell than stepped into his boat , and returned to his ship . 
Soon the two ships diverged their wakes ; and long as the strange vessel was in view , she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot , however small , on the sea . 
This way and that her yards were swung around ; starboard and larboard , she continued to tack ; now she beat against a head sea ; and again it pushed her before it ; while all the while , her masts and yards were thickly clustered with men , as three tall cherry trees , when the boys are cherrying among the boughs . 
But by her still halting course and winding , woeful way , you plainly saw that this ship that so wept with spray , still remained without comfort . 
She was Rachel , weeping for her children , because they were not . 
The Cabin -LRB- Ahab moving to go on deck ; Pip catches him by the hand to follow . -RRB- 
Lad , lad , I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now . 
The hour is coming when Ahab would not scare thee from him , yet would not have thee by him . 
There is that in thee , poor lad , which I feel too curing to my malady . 
Like cures like ; and for this hunt , my malady becomes my most desired health . 
Do thou abide below here , where they shall serve thee , as if thou wert the captain . 
Aye , lad , thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair ; another screw to it , thou must be . '' 
`` No , no , no ! 
ye have not a whole body , sir ; do ye but use poor me for your one lost leg ; only tread upon me , sir ; I ask no more , so I remain a part of ye . '' 
`` Oh ! 
spite of million villains , this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity of man ! 
-- and a black ! 
and crazy ! 
-- but methinks like-cures-like applies to him too ; he grows so sane again . '' 
`` They tell me , sir , that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip , whose drowned bones now show white , for all the blackness of his living skin . 
But I will never desert ye , sir , as Stubb did him . 
Sir , I must go with ye . '' 
`` If thou speakest thus to me much more , Ahab 's purpose keels up in him . 
I tell thee no ; it can not be . '' 
`` Oh good master , master , master ! 
`` Weep so , and I will murder thee ! 
have a care , for Ahab too is mad . 
Listen , and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck , and still know that I am there . 
And now I quit thee . 
Thy hand ! 
-- Met ! 
True art thou , lad , as the circumference to its centre . 
So : God for ever bless thee ; and if it come to that , -- God for ever save thee , let what will befall . '' 
-LRB- Ahab goes ; Pip steps one step forward . -RRB- 
`` Here he this instant stood , I stand in his air , -- but I 'm alone . 
Now were even poor Pip here I could endure it , but he 's missing . 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
Ding , dong , ding ! 
Who 's seen Pip ? 
He must be up here ; let 's try the door . 
What ? 
neither lock , nor bolt , nor bar ; and yet there 's no opening it . 
It must be the spell ; he told me to stay here : Aye , and told me this screwed chair was mine . 
Here , then , I 'll seat me , against the transom , in the ship 's full middle , all her keel and her three masts before me . 
Here , our old sailors say , in their black seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table , and lord it over rows of captains and lieutenants . 
Ha ! 
what 's this ? 
epaulets ! 
epaulets ! 
the epaulets all come crowding . 
Pass round the decanters ; glad to see ye ; fill up , monsieurs ! 
What an odd feeling , now , when a black boy 's host to white men with gold lace upon their coats ! 
-- Monsieurs , have ye seen one Pip ? 
-- a little negro lad , five feet high , hang-dog look , and cowardly ! 
Jumped from a whale-boat once ; -- seen him ? 
No ! 
Well then , fill up again , captains , and let 's drink shame upon all cowards ! 
I name no names . 
Shame upon them ! 
Put one foot upon the table . 
Shame upon all cowards . 
-- Hist ! 
above there , I hear ivory -- Oh , master ! 
master ! 
I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me . 
But here I 'll stay , though this stern strikes rocks ; and they bulge through ; and oysters come to join me . '' 
The Hat And now that at the proper time and place , after so long and wide a preliminary cruise , Ahab , -- all other whaling waters swept -- seemed to have chased his foe into an oceanfold , to slay him the more securely there ; now , that he found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting wound had been inflicted ; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick ; -- and now that all his successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters , whether sinning or sinned against ; now it was that there lurked a something in the old man 's eyes , which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see . 
As the unsetting polar star , which through the livelong , arctic , six months ' night sustains its piercing , steady , central gaze ; so Ahab 's purpose now fixedly gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew . 
It domineered above them so , that all their bodings , doubts , misgivings , fears , were fain to hide beneath their souls , and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf . 
In this foreshadowing interval , too , all humor , forced or natural , vanished . 
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile ; Starbuck no more strove to check one . 
Alike , joy and sorrow , hope and fear , seemed ground to finest dust , and powdered , for the time , in the clamped mortar of Ahab 's iron soul . 
Like machines , they dumbly moved about the deck , ever conscious that the old man 's despot eye was on them . 
But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours when he thought no glance but one was on him ; then you would have seen that even as Ahab 's eyes so awed the crew 's , the inscrutable Parsee 's glance awed his ; or somehow , at least , in some wild way , at times affected it . 
Such an added , gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now ; such ceaseless shudderings shook him ; that the men looked dubious at him ; half uncertain , as it seemed , whether indeed he were a mortal substance , or else a tremulous shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being 's body . 
And that shadow was always hovering there . 
For not by night , even , had Fedallah ever certainly been known to slumber , or go below . 
He would stand still for hours : but never sat or leaned ; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say -- We two watchmen never rest . 
Nor , at any time , by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck , unless Ahab was before them ; either standing in his pivot-hole , or exactly pacing the planks between two undeviating limits , -- the main-mast and the mizen ; or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle , -- his living foot advanced upon the deck , as if to step ; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes ; so that however motionless he stood , however the days and nights were added on , that he had not swung in his hammock ; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat , they could never tell unerringly whether , for all this , his eyes were really closed at times ; or whether he was still intently scanning them ; no matter , though he stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch , and the unheeded night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat . 
The clothes that the night had wet , the next day 's sunshine dried upon him ; and so , day after day , and night after night ; he went no more beneath the planks ; whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for . 
He ate in the same open air ; that is , his two only meals , -- breakfast and dinner : supper he never touched ; nor reaped his beard ; which darkly grew all gnarled , as unearthed roots of trees blown over , which still grow idly on at naked base , though perished in the upper verdure . 
But though his whole life was now become one watch on deck ; and though the Parsee 's mystic watch was without intermission as his own ; yet these two never seemed to speak -- one man to the other -- unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it necessary . 
Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain ; openly , and to the awe-struck crew , they seemed pole-like asunder . 
If by day they chanced to speak one word ; by night , dumb men were both , so far as concerned the slightest verbal interchange . 
At times , for longest hours , without a single hail , they stood far parted in the starlight ; Ahab in his scuttle , the Parsee by the main-mast ; but still fixedly gazing upon each other ; as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow , in Ahab the Parsee his abandoned substance . 
And yet , somehow , did Ahab -- in his own proper self , as daily , hourly , and every instant , commandingly revealed to his subordinates , -- Ahab seemed an independent lord ; the Parsee but his slave . 
Still again both seemed yoked together , and an unseen tyrant driving them ; the lean shade siding the solid rib . 
For be this Parsee what he may , all rib and keel was solid Ahab . 
At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn , his iron voice was heard from aft , -- `` Man the mast-heads ! '' 
-- and all through the day , till after sunset and after twilight , the same voice every hour , at the striking of the helmsman 's bell , was heard -- `` What d'ye see ? 
-- sharp ! 
sharp ! 
sharp ! '' 
But when three or four days had slided by , after meeting the children-seeking Rachel ; and no spout had yet been seen ; the monomaniac old man seemed distrustful of his crew 's fidelity ; at least , of nearly all except the Pagan harpooneers ; he seemed to doubt , even , whether Stubb and Flask might not willingly overlook the sight he sought . 
But if these suspicions were really his , he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them , however his actions might seem to hint them . 
`` I will have the first sight of the whale myself , '' -- he said . 
`` Aye ! 
Ahab must have the doubloon ! 
and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed bowlines ; and sending a hand aloft , with a single sheaved block , to secure to the mainmast head , he received the two ends of the downwardreeved rope ; and attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end , in order to fasten it at the rail . 
This done , with that end yet in his hand and standing beside the pin , he looked round upon his crew , sweeping from one to the other ; pausing his glance long upon Daggoo , Queequeg , Tashtego ; but shunning Fedallah ; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate , said , -- `` Take the rope , sir -- I give it into thy hands , Starbuck . '' 
Then arranging his person in the basket , he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch , Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last ; and afterwards stood near it . 
And thus , with one hand clinging round the royal mast , Ahab gazed abroad upon the sea for miles and miles , -- ahead astern , this side , and that , -- within the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height . 
When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the rigging , which chances to afford no foothold , the sailor at sea is hoisted up to that spot , and sustained there by the rope ; under these circumstances , its fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has the special watch of it . 
Because in such a wilderness of running rigging , whose various different relations aloft can not always be infallibly discerned by what is seen of them at the deck ; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings , it would be but a natural fatality , if , unprovided with a constant watchman , the hoisted sailor should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping to the sea . 
So Ahab 's proceedings in this matter were not unusual ; the only strange thing about them seemed to be , that Starbuck , almost the one only man who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree approaching to decision -- one of those too , whose faithfulness on the look-out he had seemed to doubt somewhat ; it was strange , that this was the very man he should select for his watchman ; freely giving his whole life into such an otherwise distrusted person 's hands . 
Now , the first time Ahab was perched aloft ; ere he had been there ten minutes ; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes ; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably swift circlings . 
Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air ; then spiralized downwards , and went eddying again round his head . 
But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon , Ahab seemed not to mark this wild bird ; nor , indeed , would any one else have marked it much , it being no uncommon circumstance ; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight . 
`` Your hat , your hat , sir ! '' 
suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman , who being posted at the mizen-mast-head , stood directly behind Ahab , though somewhat lower than his level , and with a deep gulf of air dividing them . 
But already the sable wing was before the old man 's eyes ; the long hooked bill at his head : with a scream , the black hawk darted away with his prize . 
An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin 's head , removing his cap to replace it , and thereupon Tanaquil , his wife , declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome . 
But only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good . 
Ahab 's hat was never restored ; the wild hawk flew on and on with it ; far in advance of the prow : and at last disappeared ; while from the point of that disappearance , a minute black spot was dimly discerned , falling from that vast height into the sea . 
The Pequod Meets The Delight The intense Pequod sailed on ; the rolling waves and days went by ; the life-buoy-coffin still lightly swung ; and another ship , most miserably misnamed the Delight , was descried . 
As she drew nigh , all eyes were fixed upon her broad beams , called shears , which , in some whaling-ships , cross the quarter-deck at the height of eight or nine feet ; serving to carry the spare , unrigged , or disabled boats . 
Upon the stranger 's shears were beheld the shattered , white ribs , and some few splintered planks , of what had once been a whale-boat ; but you now saw through this wreck , as plainly as you see through the peeled , half-unhinged , and bleaching skeleton of a horse . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
`` Look ! '' 
replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail ; and with his trumpet he pointed to the wreck . 
`` Hast killed him ? '' 
`` The harpoon is not yet forged that will ever will do that , '' answered the other , sadly glancing upon a rounded hammock on the deck , whose gathered sides some noiseless sailors were busy in sewing together . 
`` Not forged ! '' 
and snatching Perth 's levelled iron from the crotch , Ahab held it out , exclaiming -- `` Look ye , Nantucketer ; here in this hand I hold his death ! 
Tempered in blood , and tempered by lightning are these barbs ; and I swear to temper them triply in that hot place behind the fin , where the White Whale most feels his accursed life ! '' 
`` Then God keep thee , old man -- see ` st thou that '' -- pointing to the hammock -- `` I bury but one of five stout men , who were alive only yesterday ; but were dead ere night . 
Only that one I bury ; the rest were buried before they died ; you sail upon their tomb . '' 
Then turning to his crew -- `` Are ye ready there ? 
place the plank then on the rail , and lift the body ; so , then -- Oh ! 
God '' -- advancing towards the hammock with uplifted hands -- `` may the resurrection and the life - '' `` Brace forward ! 
Up helm ! '' 
cried Ahab like lightning to his men . 
But the suddenly started Pequod was not quick enough to escape the sound of the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea ; not so quick , indeed , but that some of the flying bubbles might have sprinkled her hull with their ghostly baptism . 
As Ahab now glided from the dejected Delight , the strange life-buoy hanging at the Pequod 's stern came into conspicuous relief . 
`` Ha ! 
yonder ! 
look yonder , men ! '' 
cried a foreboding voice in her wake . 
`` In vain , oh , ye strangers , ye fly our sad burial ; ye but turn us your taffrail to show us your coffin ! '' 
The Symphony It was a clear steel-blue day . 
The firmaments of air and sea were hardly separable in that all-pervading azure ; only , the pensive air was transparently pure and soft , with a woman 's look , and the robust and man-like sea heaved with long , strong , lingering swells , as Samson 's chest in his sleep . 
Hither , and thither , on high , glided the snow-white wings of small , unspeckled birds ; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air ; but to and fro in the deeps , far down in the bottomless blue , rushed mighty leviathans , sword-fish , and sharks ; and these were the strong , troubled , murderous thinkings of the masculine sea . 
But though thus contrasting within , the contrast was only in shades and shadows without ; those two seemed one ; it was only the sex , as it were , that distinguished them . 
Aloft , like a royal czar and king , the sun seemed giving this gentle air to this bold and rolling sea ; even as bride to groom . 
And at the girdling line of the horizon , a soft and tremulous motion -- most seen here at the Equator -- denoted the fond , throbbing trust , the loving alarms , with which the poor bride gave her bosom away . 
Tied up and twisted ; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles ; haggardly firm and unyielding ; his eyes glowing like coals , that still glow in the ashes of ruin ; untottering Ahab stood forth in the clearness of the morn ; lifting his splintered helmet of a brow to the fair girl 's forehead of heaven . 
Oh , immortal infancy , and innocency of the azure ! 
Invisible winged creatures that frolic all round us ! 
Sweet childhood of air and sky ! 
how oblivious were ye of old Ahab 's close-coiled woe ! 
But so have I seen little Miriam and Martha , laughing-eyed elves , heedlessly gambol around their old sire ; sporting with the circle of singed locks which grew on the marge of that burnt-out crater of his brain . 
Slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle , Ahab leaned over the side and watched how his shadow in the water sank and sank to his gaze , the more and the more that he strove to pierce the profundity . 
But the lovely aromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to dispel , for a moment , the cankerous thing in his soul . 
That glad , happy air , that winsome sky , did at last stroke and caress him ; the step-mother world , so long cruel -- forbidding -- now threw affectionate arms round his stubborn neck , and did seem to joyously sob over him , as if over one , that however wilful and erring , she could yet find it in her heart to save and to bless . 
From beneath his slouched hat Ahab dropped a tear into the sea ; nor did all the Pacific contain such wealth as that one wee drop . 
Starbuck saw the old man ; saw him , how he heavily leaned over the side ; and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measureless sobbing that stole out of the centre of the serenity around . 
Careful not to touch him , or be noticed by him , he yet drew near to him , and stood there . 
Ahab turned . 
`` Starbuck ! '' 
`` Sir . '' 
`` Oh , Starbuck ! 
it is a mild , mild wind , and a mild looking sky . 
On such a day -- very much such a sweetness as this -- I struck my first whale -- a boy-harpooneer of eighteen ! 
Forty -- forty -- forty years ago ! 
-- ago ! 
Forty years of continual whaling ! 
forty years of privation , and peril , and storm-time ! 
forty years on the pitiless sea ! 
for forty years has Ahab forsaken the peaceful land , for forty years to make war on the horrors of the deep ! 
Aye and yes , Starbuck , out of those forty years I have not spent three ashore . 
When I think of this life I have led ; the desolation of solitude it has been ; the masoned , walled-town of a Captain 's exclusiveness , which admits but small entrance to any sympathy from the green country without -- oh , weariness ! 
heaviness ! 
Guinea-coast slavery of solitary command ! 
-- when I think of all this ; only half-suspected , not so keenly known to me before -- and how for forty years I have fed upon dry salted fare -- fit emblem of the dry nourishment of my soul ! 
-- when the poorest landsman has had fresh fruit to his daily hand , and broken the world 's fresh bread to my mouldy crusts -- away , whole oceans away , from that young girl-wife I wedded past fifty , and sailed for Cape Horn the next day , leaving but one dent in my marriage pillow -- wife ? 
wife ? 
-- rather a widow with her husband alive ? 
Aye , I widowed that poor girl when I married her , Starbuck ; and then , the madness , the frenzy , the boiling blood and the smoking brow , with which , for a thousand lowerings old Ahab has furiously , foamingly chased his prey -- more a demon than a man ! 
-- aye , aye ! 
what a forty years ' fool -- fool -- old fool , has old Ahab been ! 
Why this strife of the chase ? 
why weary , and palsy the arm at the oar , and the iron , and the lance ? 
how the richer or better is Ahab now ? 
Behold . 
Oh , Starbuck ! 
is it not hard , that with this weary load I bear , one poor leg should have been snatched from under me ? 
Here , brush this old hair aside ; it blinds me , that I seem to weep . 
Locks so grey did never grow but from out some ashes ! 
But do I look very old , so very , very old , Starbuck ? 
I feel deadly faint , bowed , and humped , as though I were Adam , staggering beneath the piled centuries since Paradise . 
God ! 
God ! 
God ! 
-- crack my heart ! 
-- stave my brain ! 
-- mockery ! 
mockery ! 
bitter , biting mockery of grey hairs , have I lived enough joy to wear ye ; and seem and feel thus intolerably old ? 
Close ! 
stand close to me , Starbuck ; let me look into a human eye ; it is better than to gaze into sea or sky ; better than to gaze upon God . 
By the green land ; by the bright hearthstone ! 
this is the magic glass , man ; I see my wife and my child in thine eye . 
No , no ; stay on board , on board ! 
-- lower not when I do ; when branded Ahab gives chase to Moby Dick . 
That hazard shall not be thine . 
No , no ! 
not with the far away home I see in that eye ! '' 
`` Oh , my Captain ! 
my Captain ! 
noble soul ! 
grand old heart , after all ! 
why should any one give chase to that hated fish ! 
Away with me ! 
let us fly these deadly waters ! 
let us home ! 
Wife and child , too , are Starbuck 's -- wife and child of his brotherly , sisterly , play-fellow youth ; even as thine , sir , are the wife and child of thy loving , longing , paternal old age ! 
Away ! 
let us away ! 
-- this instant let me alter the course ! 
How cheerily , how hilariously , O my Captain , would we bowl on our way to see old Nantucket again ! 
I think , sir , they have some such mild blue days , even as this , in Nantucket . '' 
`` They have , they have . 
I have seen them -- some summer days in the morning . 
About this time -- yes , it is his noon nap now -- the boy vivaciously wakes ; sits up in bed ; and his mother tells him of me , of cannibal old me ; how I am abroad upon the deep , but will yet come back to dance him again . '' '' 
'T is my Mary , my Mary herself ! 
She promised that my boy , every morning , should be carried to the hill to catch the first glimpse of his father 's sail ! 
Yes , yes ! 
no more ! 
it is done ! 
we head for Nantucket ! 
Come , my Captain , study out the course , and let us away ! 
See , see ! 
the boy 's face from the window ! 
the boy 's hand on the hill ! '' 
But Ahab 's glance was averted ; like a blighted fruit tree he shook , and cast his last , cindered apple to the soil . 
`` What is it , what nameless , inscrutable , unearthly thing is it ; what cozening , hidden lord and master , and cruel , remorseless emperor commands me ; that against all natural lovings and longings , I so keep pushing , and crowding , and jamming myself on all the time ; recklessly making me ready to do what in my own proper , natural heart , I durst not so much as dare ? 
Is Ahab , Ahab ? 
Is it I , God , or who , that lifts this arm ? 
But if the great sun move not of himself ; but is as an errand-boy in heaven ; nor one single star can revolve , but by some invisible power ; how then can this one small heart beat ; this one small brain think thoughts ; unless God does that beating , does that thinking , does that living , and not I. By heaven , man , we are turned round and round in this world , like yonder windlass , and Fate is the handspike . 
And all the time , lo ! 
that smiling sky , and this unsounded sea ! 
Look ! 
see yon Albicore ! 
who put it into him to chase and fang that flying-fish ? 
Where do murderers go , man ! 
Who 's to doom , when the judge himself is dragged to the bar ? 
But it is a mild , mild wind , and a mild looking sky ; and the airs smells now , as if it blew from a far-away meadow ; they have been making hay somewhere under the slopes of the Andes , Starbuck , and the mowers are sleeping among the new-mown hay . 
Sleeping ? 
Aye , toil we how we may , we all sleep at last on the field . 
Sleep ? 
Aye , and rust amid greenness ; as last year 's scythes flung down , and left in the half-cut swarths -- Starbuck ! '' 
But blanched to a corpse 's hue with despair , the Mate had stolen away . 
Ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side ; but started at two reflected , fixed eyes in the water there , Fedallah was motionlessly leaning over the same rail . 
The Chase - First Day That night , in the mid-watch when the old man -- as his wont at intervals -- stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned , and went to his pivot-hole , he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely , snuffing up the sea air as a sagacious ship 's dog will , in drawing nigh to some barbarous isle . 
He declared that a whale must be near . 
Soon that peculiar odor , sometimes to a great distance given forth by the living sperm whale , was palpable to all the watch ; nor was any mariner surprised when , after inspecting the compass , and then the dog-vane , and then ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor as nearly as possible , Ahab rapidly ordered the ship 's course to be slightly altered , and the sail to be shortened . 
The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently vindicated at daybreak , by the sight of a long sleek on the sea directly and lengthwise ahead , smooth as oil , and resembling in the pleated watery wrinkles bordering it , the polished metallic-like marks of some swift tide-rip , at the mouth of a deep , rapid stream . 
`` Man the mast-heads ! 
Call all hands ! '' 
Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on the forecastle deck , Daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment claps that they seemed to exhale from the scuttle , so instantaneously did they appear with their clothes in their hands . 
`` What d'ye see ? '' 
cried Ahab , flattening his face to the sky . 
`` Nothing , nothing sir ! '' 
was the sound hailing down in reply . 
`` T'gallant sails ! 
-- stunsails ! 
alow and aloft , and on both sides ! '' 
All sail being set , he now cast loose the life-line , reserved for swaying him to the main royal-mast head ; and in a few moments they were hoisting him thither , when , while but two thirds of the way aloft , and while peering ahead through the horizontal vacancy between the main-top-sail and top-gallant-sail , he raised a gull-like cry in the air . 
`` There she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
A hump like a snow-hill ! 
It is Moby Dick ! '' 
Fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the three look-outs , the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famous whale they had so long been pursuing . 
Ahab had now gained his final perch , some feet above the other look-outs , Tashtego standing just beneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast , so that the Indian 's head was almost on a level with Ahab 's heel . 
From this height the whale was now seen some mile or so ahead , at every roll of the sea revealing his high sparkling hump , and regularly jetting his silent spout into the air . 
To the credulous mariners it seemed the same silent spout they had so long ago beheld in the moonlit Atlantic and Indian Oceans . 
`` And did none of ye see it before ? '' 
cried Ahab , hailing the perched men all around him . 
`` I saw him almost that same instant , sir , that Captain Ahab did , and I cried out , '' said Tashtego . 
`` Not the same instant ; not the same -- no , the doubloon is mine , Fate reserved the doubloon for me . 
I only ; none of ye could have raised the White Whale first . 
There she blows ! 
there she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
There again ! 
-- there again ! '' 
he cried , in long-drawn , lingering , methodic tones , attuned to the gradual prolongings of the whale 's visible jets . 
`` He 's going to sound ! 
In stunsails ! 
Down top-gallant-sails ! 
Stand by three boats . 
Mr. Starbuck , remember , stay on board , and keep the ship . 
Helm there ! 
Luff , luff a point ! 
So ; steady , man , steady ! 
There go flukes ! 
No , no ; only black water ! 
All ready the boats there ? 
Stand by , stand by ! 
Lower me , Mr. Starbuck ; lower , lower , -- quick , quicker ! '' 
and he slid through the air to the deck . 
`` He is heading straight to leeward , sir , '' cried Stubb , `` right away from us ; can not have seen the ship yet . '' 
`` Be dumb , man ! 
Stand by the braces ! 
Hard down the helm ! 
-- brace up ! 
Shiver her ! 
-- shiver her ! 
-- So ; well that ! 
Boats , boats ! '' 
Soon all the boats but Starbuck 's were dropped ; all the boat-sails set -- all the paddles plying ; with rippling swiftness , shooting to leeward ; and Ahab heading the onset . 
A pale , death-glimmer lit up Fedallah 's sunken eyes ; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth . 
Like noiseless nautilus shells , their light prows sped through the sea ; but only slowly they neared the foe . 
As they neared him , the ocean grew still more smooth ; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves ; seemed a noon-meadow , so serenely it spread . 
At length the breathless hunter came so nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey , that his entire dazzling hump was distinctly visible , sliding along the sea as if an isolated thing , and continually set in a revolving ring of finest , fleecy , greenish foam . 
He saw the vast , involved wrinkles of the slightly projecting head beyond . 
Before it , far out on the soft Turkish-rugged waters , went the glistening white shadow from his broad , milky forehead , a musical rippling playfully accompanying the shade ; and behind , the blue waters interchangeably flowed over into the moving valley of his steady wake ; and on either hand bright bubbles arose and danced by his side . 
But these were broken again by the light toes of hundreds of gay fowls softly feathering the sea , alternate with their fitful flight ; and like to some flag-staff rising from the painted hull of an argosy , the tall but shattered pole of a recent lance projected from the white whale 's back ; and at intervals one of the cloud of soft-toed fowls hovering , and to and fro skimming like a canopy over the fish , silently perched and rocked on this pole , the long tail feathers streaming like pennons . 
A gentle joyousness -- a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness , invested the gliding whale . 
Not the white bull Jupiter swimming away with ravished Europa clinging to his graceful horns ; his lovely , leering eyes sideways intent upon the maid ; with smooth bewitching fleetness , rippling straight for the nuptial bower in Crete ; not Jove , not that great majesty Supreme ! 
did surpass the glorified White Whale as he so divinely swam . 
On each soft side -- coincident with the parted swell , that but once leaving him then flowed so wide away -- on each bright side , the whale shed off enticings . 
No wonder there had been some among the hunters who namelessly transported and allured by all this serenity , had ventured to assail it ; but had fatally found that quietude but the vesture of tornadoes . 
Yet calm , enticing calm , oh , whale ! 
thou glidest on , to all who for the first time eye thee , no matter how many in that same way thou mayst have bejuggled and destroyed before . 
And thus , through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea , among waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture , Moby Dick moved on , still withholding from sight the full terrors of his submerged trunk , entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his jaw . 
But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water ; for an instant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch , like Virginia 's Natural Bridge , and warningly waving his bannered flukes in the air , the grand god revealed himself , sounded and went out of sight . 
Hoveringly halting , and dipping on the wing , the white sea-fowls longingly lingered over the agitated pool that he left . 
With oars apeak , and paddles down , the sheets of their sails adrift , the three boats now stilly floated , awaiting Moby Dick 's reappearance . 
`` An hour , '' said Ahab , standing rooted in his boat 's stern ; and he gazed beyond the whale 's place , towards the dim blue spaces and wide wooing vacancies to leeward . 
It was only an instant ; for again his eyes seemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle . 
The breeze now freshened ; the sea began to swell . 
`` The birds ! 
-- the birds ! '' 
cried Tashtego . 
In long Indian file , as when herons take wing , the white birds were now all flying towards Ahab 's boat ; and when within a few yards began fluttering over the water there , wheeling round and round , with joyous , expectant cries . 
Their vision was keener than man 's ; Ahab could discover no sign in the sea . 
But suddenly as he peered down and down into its depths , he profoundly saw a white living spot no bigger than a white weasel , with wonderful celerity uprising , and magnifying as it rose , till it turned , and then there were plainly revealed two long crooked rows of white , glistening teeth , floating up from the undiscoverable bottom . 
It was Moby Dick 's open mouth and scrolled jaw ; his vast , shadowed bulk still half blending with the blue of the sea . 
The glittering mouth yawned beneath the boat like an open-doored marble tomb ; and giving one sidelong sweep with his steering oar , Ahab whirled the craft aside from this tremendous apparition . 
Then , calling upon Fedallah to change places with him , went forward to the bows , and seizing Perth 's harpoon , commanded his crew to grasp their oars and stand by to stern . 
Now , by reason of this timely spinning round the boat upon its axis , its bow , by anticipation , was made to face the whale 's head while yet under water . 
But as if perceiving this stratagem , Moby Dick , with that malicious intelligence ascribed to him , sidelingly transplanted himself , as it were , in an instant , shooting his pleated head lengthwise beneath the boat . 
Through and through ; through every plank and each rib , it thrilled for an instant , the whale obliquely lying on his back , in the manner of a biting shark slowly and feelingly taking its bows full within his mouth , so that the long , narrow , scrolled lower jaw curled high up into the open air , and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock . 
The bluish pearl-white of the inside of the jaw was within six inches of Ahab 's head , and reached higher than that . 
In this attitude the White Whale now shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat her mouse . 
With unastonished eyes Fedallah gazed , and crossed his arms ; but the tiger-yellow crew were tumbling over each other 's heads to gain the uttermost stern . 
And now , while both elastic gunwales were springing in and out , as the whale dallied with the doomed craft in this devilish way ; and from his body being submerged beneath the boat , he could not be darted at from the bows , for the bows were almost inside of him , as it were ; and while the other boats involuntarily paused , as before a quick crisis impossible to withstand , then it was that monomaniac Ahab , furious with this tantalizing vicinity of his foe , which placed him all alive and helpless in the very jaws he hated ; frenzied with all this , he seized the long bone with his naked hands , and wildly strove to wrench it from its gripe . 
As now he thus vainly strove , the jaw slipped from him ; the frail gunwales bent in , collapsed , and snapped , as both jaws , like an enormous shears , sliding further aft , bit the craft completely in twain , and locked themselves fast again in the sea , midway between the two floating wrecks . 
These floated aside , the broken ends drooping , the crew at the stern-wreck clinging to the gunwales , and striving to hold fast to the oars to lash them across . 
At that preluding moment , ere the boat was yet snapped , Ahab , the first to perceive the whale 's intent , by the crafty upraising of his head , a movement that loosed his hold for the time ; at that moment his hand had made one final effort to push the boat out of the bite . 
But only slipping further into the whale 's mouth , and tilting over sideways as it slipped , the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw ; spilled him out of it , as he leaned to the push ; and so he fell flat-faced upon the sea . 
Ripplingly withdrawing from his prey , Moby Dick now lay at a little distance , vertically thrusting his oblong white head up and down in the billows ; and at the same time slowly revolving his whole spindled body ; so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose -- some twenty or more feet out of the water -- the now rising swells , with all their confluent waves , dazzlingly broke against it ; vindictively tossing their shivered spray still higher into the air . 
* So , in a gale , the but half baffled Channel billows only recoil from the base of the Eddystone , triumphantly to overleap its summit with their scud . 
* This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale . 
It receives its designation -LRB- pitchpoling -RRB- from its being likened to that preliminary up-and-down poise of the whale-lance , in the exercise called pitchpoling , previously described . 
By this motion the whale must best and most comprehensively view whatever objects may be encircling him . 
But soon resuming his horizontal attitude , Moby Dick swam swiftly round and round the wrecked crew ; sideways churning the water in his vengeful wake , as if lashing himself up to still another and more deadly assault . 
The sight of the splintered boat seemed to madden him , as the blood of grapes and mulberries cast before Antiochus 's elephants in the book of Maccabees . 
Meanwhile Ahab half smothered in the foam of the whale 's insolent tail , and too much of a cripple to swim , -- though he could still keep afloat , even in the heart of such a whirlpool as that ; helpless Ahab 's head was seen , like a tossed bubble which the least chance shock might burst . 
From the boat 's fragmentary stern , Fedallah incuriously and mildly eyed him ; the clinging crew , at the other drifting end , could not succor him ; more than enough was it for them to look to themselves . 
For so revolvingly appalling was the White Whale 's aspect , and so planetarily swift the ever-contracting circles he made , that he seemed horizontally swooping upon them . 
And though the other boats , unharmed , still hovered hard by ; still they dared not pull into the eddy to strike , lest that should be the signal for the instant destruction of the jeopardized castaways , Ahab and all ; nor in that case could they themselves hope to escape . 
With straining eyes , then , they remained on the outer edge of the direful zone , whose centre had now become the old man 's head . 
Meantime , from the beginning all this had been descried from the ship 's mast heads ; and squaring her yards , she had borne down upon the scene ; and was now so nigh , that Ahab in the water hailed her ! 
-- `` Sail on the '' -- but that moment a breaking sea dashed on him from Moby Dick , and whelmed him for the time . 
But struggling out of it again , and chancing to rise on a towering crest , he shouted , -- `` Sail on the whale ! 
-- Drive him off ! '' 
The Pequod 's prows were pointed - , and breaking up the charmed circle , she effectually parted the white whale from his victim . 
As he sullenly swam off , the boats flew to the rescue . 
Dragged into Stubb 's boat with blood-shot , blinded eyes , the white brine caking in his wrinkles ; the long tension of Ahab 's bodily strength did crack , and helplessly he yielded to his body 's doom for a time , lying all crushed in the bottom of Stubb 's boat , like one trodden under foot of herds of elephants . 
Far inland , nameless wails came from him , as desolate sounds from out ravines . 
But this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much the more abbreviate it . 
In an instant 's compass , great hearts sometimes condense to one deep pang , the sum total of those shallow pains kindly diffused through feebler men 's whole lives . 
And so , such hearts , though summary in each one suffering ; still , if the gods decree it , in their life-time aggregate a whole age of woe , wholly made up of instantaneous intensities ; for even in their pointless centres , those noble natures contain the entire circumferences of inferior souls . 
`` The harpoon , '' said Ahab , half way rising , and draggingly leaning on one bended arm -- `` is it safe ? '' 
`` Aye , sir , for it was not darted ; this is it , '' said Stubb , showing it . 
`` Lay it before me ; -- any missing men ? '' 
`` One , two , three , four , five ; -- there were five oars , sir , and here are five men . '' 
`` That 's good . 
-- Help me , man ; I wish to stand . 
So , so , I see him ! 
there ! 
there ! 
going to leeward still ; what a leaping spout ! 
-- Hands off from me ! 
The eternal sap runs up in Ahab 's bones again ! 
Set the sail ; out oars ; the helm ! '' 
It is often the case that when a boat is stove , its crew , being picked up by another boat , help to work that second boat ; and the chase is thus continued with what is called double-banked oars . 
It was thus now . 
But the added power of the boat did not equal the added power of the whale , for he seemed to have treble-banked his every fin ; swimming with a velocity which plainly showed , that if now , under these circumstances , pushed on , the chase would prove an indefinitely prolonged , if not a hopeless one ; nor could any crew endure for so long a period , such an unintermitted , intense straining at the oar ; a thing barely tolerable only in some one brief vicissitude . 
The ship itself , then , as it sometimes happens , offered the most promising intermediate means of overtaking the chase . 
Accordingly , the boats now made for her , and were soon swayed up to their cranes -- the two parts of the wrecked boat having been previously secured by her -- and then hoisting everything to her side , and stacking her canvas high up , and sideways outstretching it with stunsails , like the double-jointed wings of an albatross ; the Pequod bore down in the leeward wake of Moby Dick . 
At the well known , methodic intervals , the whale 's glittering spout was regularly announced from the manned mast-heads ; and when he would be reported as just gone down , Ahab would take the time , and then pacing the deck , binnacle-watch in hand , so soon as the last second of the allotted hour expired , his voice was heard . 
-- `` Whose is the doubloon now ? 
D'ye see him ? '' 
and if the reply was No , sir ! 
straightway he commanded them to lift him to his perch . 
In this way the day wore on ; Ahab , now aloft and motionless ; anon , unrestingly pacing the planks . 
As he was thus walking , uttering no sound , except to hail the men aloft , or to bid them hoist a sail still higher , or to spread one to a still greater breadth -- thus to and fro pacing , beneath his slouched hat , at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat , which had been dropped upon the quarter-deck , and lay there reversed ; broken bow to shattered stern . 
At last he paused before it ; and as in an already over-clouded sky fresh troops of clouds will sometimes sail across , so over the old man 's face there now stole some such added gloom as this . 
Stubb saw him pause ; and perhaps intending , not vainly , though , to evince his own unabated fortitude , and thus keep up a valiant place in his Captain 's mind , he advanced , and eyeing the wreck exclaimed -- `` The thistle the ass refused ; it pricked his mouth too keenly , sir ; ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! '' 
`` What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck ? 
Man , man ! 
did I not know thee brave as fearless fire -LRB- and as mechanical -RRB- I could swear thou wert a poltroon . 
Groan nor laugh should be heard before a wreck . '' 
`` Aye , sir , '' said Starbuck drawing near , '' 't is a solemn sight ; an omen , and an ill one . '' 
`` Omen ? 
omen ? 
-- the dictionary ! 
If the gods think to speak outright to man , they will honorably speak outright ; not shake their heads , and give an old wives ' darkling hint . 
-- Begone ! 
Ye two are the opposite poles of one thing ; Starbuck is Stubb reversed , and Stubb is Starbuck ; and ye two are all mankind ; and Ahab stands alone among the millions of the peopled earth , nor gods nor men his neighbors ! 
Cold , cold -- I shiver ! 
-- How now ? 
Aloft there ! 
D'ye see him ? 
Sing out for every spout , though he spout ten times a second ! '' 
The day was nearly done ; only the hem of his golden robe was rustling . 
Soon it was almost dark , but the look-out men still remained unset . 
`` Ca n't see the spout now , sir ; -- too dark '' -- cried a voice from the air . 
`` How heading when last seen ? '' 
`` As before , sir , -- straight to leeward . '' 
`` Good ! 
he will travel slower now 't is night . 
Down royals and top-gallant stunsails , Mr. Starbuck . 
We must not run over him before morning ; he 's making a passage now , and may heave-to a while . 
Helm there ! 
keep her full before the wind ! 
-- Aloft ! 
come down ! 
-- Mr. Stubb , send a fresh hand to the fore-mast head , and see it manned till morning . '' 
-- Then advancing towards the doubloon in the main-mast -- `` Men , this gold is mine , for I earned it ; but I shall let it abide here till the White Whale is dead ; and then , whosoever of ye first raises him , upon the day he shall be killed , this gold is that man 's ; and if on that day I shall again raise him , then , ten times its sum shall be divided among all of ye ! 
Away now ! 
