Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself , as his measureless power of deceiving and bedevilling so many others . 
But it is time to return to the Pequod . 
`` I fear not thy epidemic , man , '' said Ahab from the bulwarks , to Captain Mayhew , who stood in the boat 's stern ; `` come on board . '' 
But now Gabriel started to his feet . 
`` Think , think of the fevers , yellow and bilious ! 
Beware of the horrible plague ! '' 
`` Gabriel ! 
Gabriel ! '' 
cried Captain Mayhew ; `` thou must either - '' But that instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead , and its seethings drowned all speech . 
`` Hast thou seen the White Whale ? '' 
demanded Ahab , when the boat drifted back . 
`` Think , think of thy whale-boat , stoven and sunk ! 
Beware of the horrible tail ! '' 
`` I tell thee again , Gabriel , that - '' But again the boat tore ahead as if dragged by fiends . 
Nothing was said for some moments , while a succession of riotous waves rolled by which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas were tumbling , not heaving it . 
Meantime , the hoisted sperm whale 's head jogged about very violently , and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant . 
When this interlude was over , Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning Moby Dick ; not , however , without frequent interruptions from Gabriel , whenever his name was mentioned , and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him . 
It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home , when upon speaking a whale-ship , her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick , and the havoc he had made . 
Greedily sucking in this intelligence , Gabriel solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale , in case the monster should be seen ; in his gibbering insanity , pronouncing the White Whale to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated ; the Shakers receiving the Bible . 
But when , some year or two afterwards , Moby Dick was fairly sighted from the mast-heads , Macey , the chief mate , burned with ardor to encounter him ; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the opportunity , despite all the archangel 's denunciations and forewarnings , Macey succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat . 
With them he pushed off ; and , after much weary pulling , and many perilous , unsuccessful onsets , he at last succeeded in getting one iron fast . 
Meantime , Gabriel , ascending to the main-royal mast-head , was tossing one arm in frantic gestures , and hurling forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his divinity . 
Now , while Macey , the mate , was standing up in his boat 's bow , and with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations upon the whale , and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance , lo ! 
a broad white shadow rose from the sea ; by its quick , fanning motion , temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen . 
Next instant , the luckless mate , so full of furious life , was smitten bodily into the air , and making a long arc in his descent , fell into the sea at the distance of about fifty yards . 
Not a chip of the boat was harmed , nor a hair of any oarsman 's head ; but the mate for ever sank . 
It is well to parenthesize here , that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-Whale Fishery , this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any . 
Sometimes , nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated ; oftener the boat 's bow is knocked off , or the thigh-board , on which the headsman stands , is torn from its place and accompanies the body . 
But strangest of all is the circumstance , that in more instances than one , when the body has been recovered , not a single mark of violence is discernible the man being stark dead . 
The whole calamity , with the falling form of Macey , was plainly descried from the ship . 
Raising a piercing shriek -- `` The vial ! 
the vial ! '' 
Gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale . 
This terrible event clothed the archangel with added influence ; because his credulous disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it , instead of only making a general prophecy , which any one might have done , and so have chanced to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed . 
He became a nameless terror to the ship . 
Mayhew having concluded his narration , Ahab put such questions to him , that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt the White Whale , if opportunity should offer . 
To which Ahab answered -- `` Aye . '' 
Straightway , then , Gabriel once more started to his feet , glaring upon the old man , and vehemently exclaimed , with downward pointed finger -- `` Think , think of the blasphemer -- dead , and down there ! 
-- beware of the blasphemer 's end ! '' 
Ahab stolidly turned aside ; then said to Mayhew , `` Captain , I have just bethought me of my letter-bag ; there is a letter for one of thy officers , if I mistake not . 
Starbuck , look over the bag . '' 
Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships , whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed , depends upon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans . 
Thus , most letters never reach their mark ; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three years or more . 
Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand . 
It was sorely tumbled , damp , and covered with a dull , spotted , green mould , in consequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin . 
Of such a letter , Death himself might well have been the post-boy . 
`` Can ` st not read it ? '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Give it me , man . 
Aye , aye , aye it 's but a dim scrawl ; -- what 's this ? '' 
As he was studying it out , Starbuck took a long cutting-spade pole , and with his knife slightly split the end , to insert the letter there , and in that way , hand it to the boat , without its coming any closer to the ship . 
Meantime , Ahab holding the letter , muttered , `` Mr. Har -- yes , Mr. Harry -- -LRB- a woman 's pinny hand , -- the man 's wife , I 'll wager -RRB- -- Aye -- Mr. Harry Macey , Ship Jeroboam ; why it 's Macey , and he 's dead ! '' 
`` Poor fellow ! 
poor fellow ! 
and from his wife , '' sighed Mayhew ; `` but let me have it . '' 
`` Nay , keep it thyself , '' cried Gabriel to Ahab ; `` thou art soon going that way . '' 
`` Curses throttle thee ! '' 
yelled Ahab . 
`` Captain Mayhew , stand by now to receive it '' ; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck 's hands , he caught it in the slit of the pole , and reached it over towards the boat . 
But as he did so , the oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing ; the boat drifted a little towards the ship 's stern ; so that , as if by magic , the letter suddenly ranged along with Gabriel 's eager hand . 
He clutched it in an instant , seized the boat-knife , and impaling the letter on it , sent it thus loaded back into the ship . 
It fell at Ahab 's feet . 
Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way with their oars , and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from the Pequod . 
As , after this interlude , the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the whale , many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair . 
The Monkey-Rope In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale , there is much running backwards and forwards among the crew . 
Now hands are wanted here , and then again hands are wanted there . 
There is no staying in any one place ; for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere . 
It is much the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene . 
We must now retrace our way a little . 
It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in the whale 's back , the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there cut by the spades of the mates . 
But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as that same hook get fixed in that hole ? 
It was inserted there by my particular friend Queequeg , whose duty it was , as harpooneer , to descend upon the monster 's back for the special purpose referred to . 
But in very many cases , circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the whole tensing or stripping operation is concluded . 
The whale , be it observed , lies almost entirely submerged , excepting the immediate parts operated upon . 
So down there , some ten feet below the level of the deck , the poor harpooneer flounders about , half on the whale and half in the water , as the vast mass revolves like a tread-mill beneath him . 
On the occasion in question , Queequeg figured in the Highland costume -- a shirt and socks -- in which to my eyes , at least , he appeared to uncommon advantage ; and no one had a better chance to observe him , as will presently be seen . 
Being the savage 's bowsman , that is , the person who pulled the bow-oar in his boat -LRB- the second one from forward -RRB- , it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale 's back . 
You have seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord . 
Just so , from the ship 's steep side , did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea , by what is technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope , attached to a strong strip of canvas belted round his waist . 
It was a humorously perilous business for both of us . 
For , before we proceed further , it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends ; fast to Queequeg 's broad canvas belt , and fast to my narrow leather one . 
So that for better or for worse , we two , for the time , were wedded ; and should poor Queequeg sink to rise no more , then both usage and honor demanded , that instead of cutting the cord , it should drag me down in his wake . 
So , then , an elongated Siamese ligature united us . 
Queequeg was my own inseparable twin brother ; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the hempen bond entailed . 
So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then , that while earnestly watching his motions , I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two ; that my free will had received a mortal wound ; and that another 's mistake or misfortune might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death . 
Therefore , I saw that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence ; for its even-handed equity never could have so gross an injustice . 
And yet still further pondering -- while I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship , which would threaten to jam him -- still further pondering , I say , I saw that this situation of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes ; only , in most cases , he , one way or other , has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of other mortals . 
If your banker breaks , you snap ; if your apothecary by mistake sends you poison in your pills , you die . 
True , you may say that , by exceeding caution , you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil chances of life . 
But handle Queequeg 's monkey-rope heedfully as I would , sometimes he jerked it so , that I came very near sliding overboard . 
Nor could I possibly forget that , do what I would , I only had the management of one end of it . 
* * The monkey-rope is found in all whalers ; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together . 
This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb , in order to afford to the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder . 
I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and the ship -- where he would occasionally fall , from the incessant rolling and swaying of both . 
But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to . 
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night , the sharks now freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow from the carcass -- the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive . 
And right in among those sharks was Queequeg ; who often pushed them aside with his floundering feet . 
A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted by such prey as a dead whale , the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark will seldom touch a man . 
Nevertheless , it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous finger in the pie , it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them . 
Accordingly , besides the monkey-rope , with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark -- he was provided with still another protection . 
Suspended over the side in one of the stages , Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple of keen whale-spades , wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could reach . 
This procedure of theirs , to be sure , was very disinterested and benevolent of them . 
They meant Queequeg 's best happiness , I admit ; but in their hasty zeal to befriend him , and from the circumstance that both he and the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water , those indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tall . 
But poor Queequeg , I suppose , straining and gasping there with that great iron hook -- poor Queequeg , I suppose , only prayed to his Yojo , and gave up his life into the hands of his gods . 
Well , well , my dear comrade and twin-brother , thought I , as I drew in and then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea -- what matters it , after all ? 
Are you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world ? 
That unsounded ocean you gasp in , is Life ; those sharks , your foes ; those spades , your friends ; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad pickle and peril , poor lad . 
But courage ! 
there is good cheer in store for you , Queequeg . 
For now , as with blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side ; the steward advances , and with a benevolent , consolatory glance hands him -- what ? 
Some hot Cognac ? 
No ! 
hands him , ye gods ! 
hands him a cup of tepid ginger and water ! 
`` Ginger ? 
Do I smell ginger ? '' 
suspiciously asked Stubb , coming near . 
`` Yes , this must be ginger , '' peering into the as yet untasted cup . 
Then standing as if incredulous for a while , he calmly walked towards the astonished steward slowly saying , `` Ginger ? 
ginger ? 
and will you have the goodness to tell me , Mr. Dough-Boy , where lies the virtue of ginger ? 
Ginger ! 
is ginger the sort of fuel you use , Dough-boy , to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal ? 
Ginger ! 
-- what the devil is ginger ? 
-- sea-coal ? 
firewood ? 
-- lucifer matches ? 
-- tinder ? 
-- gunpowder ? 
-- what the devil is ginger , I say , that you offer this cup to our poor Queequeg here . '' 
`` There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business , '' he suddenly added , now approaching Starbuck , who had just come from forward . 
`` Will you look at that kannakin , sir ; smell of it , if you please . '' 
Then watching the mate 's countenance , he added , `` The steward , Mr. Starbuck , had the face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg , there , this instant off the whale . 
Is the steward an apothecary , sir ? 
and may I ask whether this is the sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man ? '' 
`` I trust not , '' said Starbuck , `` it is poor stuff enough . '' 
`` Aye , aye , steward , '' cried Stubb , `` we 'll teach you to drug it harpooneer ; none of your apothecary 's medicine here ; you want to poison us , do ye ? 
You have got out insurances on our lives and want to give way with their oars , and pocket the proceeds , do ye ? '' 
`` It was not me , '' cried Dough-Boy , `` it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger on board ; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits , but only this ginger-jub -- so she called it . '' 
`` Ginger-jub ! 
you gingerly rascal ! 
take that ! 
and run along with ye to the lockers , and get something better . 
I hope I do no wrong , Mr. Starbuck . 
It is the captain 's orders -- grog for the harpooneer on a whale . '' 
`` Enough , '' replied Starbuck , `` only do n't hit him again , but - '' `` Oh , I never hurt when I hit , except when I hit a whale or something of that sort ; and this fellow 's a weazel . 
What were you about saying , sir ? '' 
`` Only this : go down with him , and get what thou wantest thyself . '' 
When Stubb reappeared , he came with a dark flask in one hand , and a sort of tea-caddy in the other . 
The first contained strong spirits , and was handed to Queequeg ; the second was Aunt Charity 's gift , and that was freely given to the waves . 
Stubb and Flask Kill a Right Whale ; and Then Have a Talk Over Him It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale 's prodigious head hanging to the Pequod 's side . 
But we must let it continue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend to it . 
For the present other matters press , and the best we can do now for the head , is to pray heaven the tackles may hold . 
Now , during the past night and forenoon , the Pequod had gradually drifted into a sea , which , by its occasional patches of yellow brit , gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of Right Whales , a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near . 
And though all hands commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures ; and though the Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all , and though she had passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat ; yet now that a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded , to the surprise of all , the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day , if opportunity offered . 
Nor was this long wanting . 
Tall spouts were seen to leeward ; and two boats , Stubb 's and Flask 's , were detached in pursuit . 
Pulling further and further away , they at last became almost invisible to the men at the masthead . 
But suddenly in the distance , they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water , and soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast . 
An interval passed and the boats were in plain sight , in the act of being dragged right towards the ship by the towing whale . 
So close did the monster come to the hull , that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice ; but suddenly going down in a maelstrom , within three rods of the planks , he wholly disappeared from view , as if diving under the keel . 
`` Cut , cut ! '' 
was the cry from the ship to the boats , which , for one instant , seemed on the point of being brought with a deadly dash against the vessel 's side . 
But having plenty of line yet in the tubs , and the whale not sounding very rapidly , they paid out abundance of rope , and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of the ship . 
For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical ; for while they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction , and still plied their oars in another , the contending strain threatened to take them under . 
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain . 
And they stuck to it till they did gain it ; when instantly , a swift tremor was felt running like lightning along the keel , as the strained line , scraping beneath the ship , suddenly rose to view under her bows , snapping and quivering ; and so flinging off its drippings , that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water , while the whale beyond also rose to sight , and once more the boats were free to fly . 
But the fagged whale abated his speed , and blindly altering his course , went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him , so that they performed a complete circuit . 
Meantime , they hauled more and more upon their lines , till close flanking him on both sides , Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance ; and thus round and round the Pequod the battle went , while the multitudes of sharks that had before swum round the Sperm Whale 's body , rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled , thirstily drinking at every new gash , as the eager Israelites did at the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock . 
At last his spout grew thick , and with a frightful roll and vomit , he turned upon his back a corpse . 
While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes , and in other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing , some conversation ensued between them . 
`` I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard , '' said Stubb , not without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a leviathan . 
`` Wants with it ? '' 
said Flask , coiling some spare line in the boat 's bow , `` did you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale 's head hoisted on her starboard side , and at the same time a Right Whale 's on the larboard ; did you never hear , Stubb , that that ship can never afterwards capsize ? '' 
`` Why not ? 
`` I do n't know , but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so , and he seems to know all about ships ' charms . 
But I sometimes think he 'll charm the ship to no good at last . 
I do n't half like that chap , Stubb . 
Did you ever notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake 's head , Stubb ? '' 
`` Sink him ! 
I never look at him at all ; but if ever I get a chance of a dark night , and he standing hard by the bulwarks , and no one by ; look down there , Flask '' -- pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands -- `` Aye , will I ! 
Flask , I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise . 
Do you believe that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship ? 
He 's the devil , I say . 
The reason why you do n't see his tail , is because he tucks it up out of sight ; he carries it coiled away in his pocket , I guess . 
Blast him ! 
now that I think of it , he 's always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes of his boots . '' 
`` He sleeps in his boots , do n't he ? 
He has n't got any hammock ; but I 've seen him lay of nights in a coil of rigging . '' 
`` No doubt , and it 's because of his cursed tail ; he coils it down , do ye see , in the eye of the rigging . '' 
`` What 's the old man have so much to do with him for ? '' 
`` Striking up a swap or a bargain , I suppose . '' 
`` Bargain ? 
-- about what ? '' 
`` Why , do ye see , the old man is hard bent after that White Whale , and the devil there is trying to come round him , and get him to swap away his silver watch , or his soul , or something of that sort , and then he 'll surrender Moby Dick . '' 
`` Pooh ! 
Stubb , you are skylarking ; how can Fedallah do that ? '' 
`` I do n't know , Flask , but the devil is a curious chap , and a wicked one , I tell ye . 
Why , they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship once , switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike , and inquiring if the old governor was at home . 
Well , he was at home , and asked the devil what he wanted . 
The devil , switching his hoofs , up and says , ' I want John . ' 
` What for ? ' 
says the old governor . 
` What business is that of yours , ' says the devil , getting mad , -- ' I want to use him . ' 
` Take him , ' says the governor -- and by the Lord , Flask , if the devil did n't give John the Asiatic cholera before he got through with him , I 'll eat this whale in one mouthful . 
But look sharp -- ai n't you all ready there ? 
Well , then , pull ahead , and let 's get the whale alongside . '' 
`` I think I remember some such story as you were telling , '' said Flask , when at last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship , `` but I ca n't remember where . '' 
`` Three Spaniards ? 
Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes ? 
Did ye read it there , Flask ? 
I guess ye did ? '' 
`` No : never saw such a book ; heard of it , though . 
But now , tell me , Stubb , do you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now , was the same you say is now on board the Pequod ? '' 
`` Am I the same man that helped kill this whale ? 
Does n't the devil live for ever ; who ever heard that the devil was dead ? 
Did you ever see any parson a wearing mourning for the devil ? 
And if the devil has a latch-key to get into the admiral 's cabin , do n't you suppose he can crawl into a porthole ? 
Tell me that , Mr. Flask ? '' 
`` How old do you suppose Fedallah is , Stubb ? '' 
`` Do you see that mainmast there ? '' 
pointing to the ship ; `` well , that 's the figure one ; now take all the hoops in the Pequod 's hold , and string 'em along in a row with that mast , for oughts , do you see ; well , that would n't begin to be Fedallah 's age . 
Nor all the coopers in creation could n't show hoops enough to make oughts enough . '' 
`` But see here , Stubb , I thought you a little boasted just now , that you meant to give Fedallah a sea-toss , if you got a good chance . 
Now , if he 's so old as all those hoops of yours come to , and if he is going to live for ever , what good will it do to pitch him overboard -- tell me that ? 
`` Give him a good ducking , anyhow . '' 
`` But he 'd crawl back . '' 
`` Duck him again ; and keep ducking him . '' 
`` Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you , though -- yes , and drown you -- what then ? '' 
`` I should like to see him try it ; I 'd give him such a pair of black eyes that he would n't dare to show his face in the admiral 's cabin again for a long while , let alone down in the orlop there , where he lives , and hereabouts on the upper decks where he sneaks so much . 
Damn the devil , Flask ; do you suppose I 'm afraid of the devil ? 
Who 's afraid of him , except the old governor who dares n't catch him and put him in double-darbies , as he deserves , but lets him go about kidnapping people ; aye , and signed a bond with him , that all the people the devil kidnapped , he 'd roast for him ? 
There 's a governor ! '' 
`` Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab ? '' 
`` Do I suppose it ? 
You 'll know it before long , Flask . 
But I am going now to keep a sharp look-out on him ; and if I see anything very suspicious going on , I 'll just take him by the nape of his neck , and say -- Look here , Beelzebub , you do n't do it ; and if he makes any fuss , by the Lord I 'll make a grab into his pocket for his tail , take it to the capstan , and give him such a wrenching and heaving , that his tail will come short off at the stump -- do you see ; and then , I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion , he 'll sneak off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs . '' 
`` And what will you do with the tail , Stubb ? '' 
`` Do with it ? 
Sell it for an ox whip when we get home ; -- what else ? '' 
`` Now , do you mean what you say , and have been saying all along , Stubb ? '' 
`` Mean or not mean , here we are at the ship . '' 
The boats were here hailed , to tow the whale on the larboard side , where fluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him . 
`` Did n't I tell you so ? '' 
said Flask ; `` yes , you 'll soon see this right whale 's head hoisted up opposite that parmacety 's . '' 
In good time , Flask 's saying proved true . 
As before , the Pequod steeply leaned over towards the sperm whale 's head , now , by the counterpoise of both heads , she regained her even keel ; though sorely strained , you may well believe . 
So , when on one side you hoist in Locke 's head , you go over that way ; but now , on the other side , hoist in Kant 's and you come back again ; but in very poor plight . 
Thus , some minds for ever keep trimming boat . 
Oh , ye foolish ! 
throw all these thunder-heads overboard , and then you will float light and right . 
In disposing of the body of a right whale , when brought alongside the ship , the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm whale ; only , in the latter instance , the head is cut off whole , but in the former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck , with all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece . 
But nothing like this , in the present case , had been done . 
The carcases of both whales had dropped astern ; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers . 
Meantime , Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale 's head , and ever and anon glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand . 
And Ahab chanced so to stand , that the Parsee occupied his shadow ; while , if the Parsee 's shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with , and lengthen Ahab 's . 
As the crew toiled on , Laplandish speculations were bandied among them , concerning all these passing things . 
The Sperm Whale 's Head - Contrasted View Here , now , are two great whales , laying their heads together ; let us join them , and lay together our own . 
Of the grand order of folio leviathans , the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale are by far the most noteworthy . 
They are the only whales regularly hunted by man . 
To the Nantucketer , they present the two extremes of all the known varieties of the whale . 
As the external difference between them is mainly observable in their heads ; and as a head of each is this moment hanging from the Pequod 's side ; and as we may freely go from one to the other , by merely stepping across the deck : -- where , I should like to know , will you obtain a better chance to study practical cetology than here ? 
In the first place , you are struck by the general contrast between these heads . 
Both are massive enough in all conscience ; but , there is a certain mathematical symmetry in the Sperm Whale 's which the Right Whale 's sadly lacks . 
There is more character in the Sperm Whale 's head . 
As you behold it , you involuntarily yield the immense superiority to him , in point of pervading dignity . 
In the present instance , too , this dignity is heightened by the pepper and salt color of his head at the summit , giving token of advanced age and large experience . 
In short , he is what the fishermen technically call a `` grey-headed whale . '' 
Let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads -- namely , the two most important organs , the eye and the ear . 
Far back on the side of the head , and low down , near the angle of either whale 's jaw , if you narrowly search , you will at last see a lashless eye , which you would fancy to be a young colt 's eye ; so out of all proportion is it to the magnitude of the head . 
Now , from this peculiar sideway position of the whale 's eyes , it is plain that he can never see an object which is exactly ahead , no more than he can one exactly astern . 
In a word , the position of the whale 's eyes corresponds to that of a man 's ears ; and you may fancy , for yourself , how it would fare with you , did you sideways survey objects through your ears . 
You would find that you could only command some thirty degrees of vision in advance of the straight side-line of sight ; and about thirty more behind it . 
If your bitterest foe were walking straight towards you , with dagger uplifted in broad day , you would not be able to see him , any more than if he were stealing upon you from behind . 
In a word , you would have two backs , so to speak ; but , at the same time , also , two fronts -LRB- side fronts -RRB- : for what is it that makes the front of a man -- what , indeed , but his eyes ? 
Moreover , while in most other animals that I can now think of , the eyes are so planted as imperceptibly to blend their visual power , so as to produce one picture and not two to the brain ; the peculiar position of the whale 's eyes , effectually divided as they are by many cubic feet of solid head , which towers between them like a great mountain separating two lakes in valleys ; this , of course , must wholly separate the impressions which each independent organ imparts . 
The whale , therefore , must see one distinct picture on this side , and another distinct picture on that side ; while all between must be profound darkness and nothingness to him . 
Man may , in effect , be said to look out on the world from a sentry-box with two joined sashes for his window . 
But with the whale , these two sashes are separately inserted , making two distinct windows , but sadly impairing the view . 
This peculiarity of the whale 's eyes is a thing always to be borne in mind in the fishery ; and to be remembered by the reader in some subsequent scenes . 
A curious and most puzzling question might be started concerning this visual matter as touching the Leviathan . 
But I must be content with a hint . 
So long as a man 's eyes are open in the light , the act of seeing is involuntary ; that is , he can not then help mechanically seeing whatever objects are before him . 
Nevertheless , any one 's experience will teach him , that though he can take in an undiscriminating sweep of things at one glance , it is quite impossible for him , attentively , and completely , to examine any two things -- however large or however small -- at one and the same instant of time ; never mind if they lie side by side and touch each other . 
But if you now come to separate these two objects , and surround each by a circle of profound darkness ; then , in order to see one of them , in such a manner as to bring your mind to bear on it , the other will be utterly excluded from your contemporary consciousness . 
How is it , then , with the whale ? 
True , both his eyes , in themselves , must simultaneously act ; but is his brain so much more comprehensive , combining , and subtle than man 's , that he can at the same moment of time attentively examine two distinct prospects , one on one side of him , and the other in an exactly opposite direction ? 
If he can , then is it as marvellous a thing in him , as if a man were able simultaneously to go through the demonstrations of two distinct problems in Euclid . 
Nor , strictly investigated , is there any incongruity in this comparison . 
It may be but an idle whim , but it has always seemed to me , that the extraordinary vacillations of movement displayed by some whales when beset by three or four boats ; the timidity and liability to queer frights , so common to such whales ; I think that all this indirectly proceeds from the helpless perplexity of volition , in which their divided and diametrically opposite powers of vision must involve them . 
But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye . 
If you are an entire stranger to their race , you might hunt over these two heads for hours , and never discover that organ . 
The ear has no external leaf whatever ; and into the hole itself you can hardly insert a quill , so wondrously minute is it . 
It is lodged a little behind the eye . 
With respect to their ears , this important difference is to be observed between the sperm whale and the right . 
While the ears of the former has an external opening , that of the latter is entirely and evenly covered over with a membrane , so as to be quite imperceptible from without . 
Is it not curious , that so vast a being as the whale should see the world through so small an eye , and hear the thunder through an ear which is smaller than a hare 's ? 
But if his eyes were broad as the lens of Herschel 's great telescope ; and his ears capacious as the porches of cathedrals ; would that make him any longer of sight , or sharper of hearing ? 
Not at all . 
-- Why then do you try to `` enlarge '' your mind ? 
Subtilize it . 
Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand , cant over the sperm whale 's head , so , that it may lie bottom up ; then , ascending by a ladder to the summit , have a peep down the mouth ; and were it not that the body is now completely separated from it , with a lantern we might descend into the great Kentucky Mammoth Cave of his stomach . 
But let us hold on here by this tooth , and look about us where we are . 
What a really beautiful and chaste-looking mouth ! 
from floor to ceiling , lined , or rather papered with a glistening white membrane , glossy as bridal satins . 
But come out now , and look at this portentous lower jaw , which seems like the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box , with the hinge at one end , instead of one side . 
If you pry it up , so as to get it overhead , and expose its rows of teeth , it seems a terrific portcullis ; and such , alas ! 
it proves to many a poor wight in the fishery , upon whom these spikes fall with impaling force . 
But far more terrible is it to behold , when fathoms down in the sea , you see some sulky whale , floating there suspended , with his prodigious jaw , some fifteen feet long , hanging straight down at right-angles with his body ; for all the world like a ship 's jibboom . 
This whale is not dead ; he is only dispirited ; out of sorts , perhaps ; hypochondriac ; and so supine , that the hinges of his jaw have relaxed , leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight , a reproach to all his tribe , who must , no doubt , imprecate lock-jaws upon him . 
In most cases this lower jaw -- being easily unhinged by a practised artist -- is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of extracting the ivory teeth , and furnishing a supply of that hard white whalebone with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curious articles including canes , umbrella-stocks , and handles to riding-whips . 
With a long , weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board , as if it were an anchor ; and when the proper time comes -- some few days after the other work -- Queequeg , Daggoo , and Tashtego , being all accomplished dentists , are set to drawing teeth . 
With a keen cutting-spade , Queequeg lances the gums ; then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts , and a tackle being rigged from aloft , they drag out these teeth , as Michigan oxen drag stumps of old oaks out of wild woodlands . 
There are generally forty-two teeth in all ; in old whales , much worn down , but undecayed ; nor filled after our artificial fashion . 
The jaw is afterwards sawn into slabs , and piled away like joists for building houses . 
The Right Whale 's Head - Contrasted View Crossing the deck , let us now have a good long look at the the Right Whale 's head . 
As in general shape the noble Sperm Whale 's head may be compared to a Roman war-chariot -LRB- especially in front , where it is so broadly rounded -RRB- ; so , at a broad view , the Right Whale 's head bears a rather inelegant resemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe . 
Two hundred years ago an old Dutch voyager likened its shape to that of a shoemaker 's last . 
And in this same last or shoe , that old woman of the nursery tale with the swarming brood , might very comfortably be lodged , she and all her progeny . 
But as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assume different aspects , according to your point of view . 
If you stand on its summit and look at these two f-shaped spout-holes , you would take the whole head for an enormous bass viol , and these spiracles , the apertures in its soundingboard . 
Then , again , if you fix your eye upon this strange , crested , comblike incrustation on the top of the mass -- this green , barnacled thing , which the Greenlanders call the `` crown , '' and the Southern fishers the `` bonnet '' of the Right Whale ; fixing your eyes solely on this , you would take the head for the trunk of some huge oak , with a bird 's nest in its crotch . 
At any rate , when you watch those live crabs that nestle here on this bonnet , such an idea will be almost sure to occur to you ; unless , indeed , your fancy has been fixed by the technical term `` crown '' also bestowed upon it ; in which case you will take great interest in thinking how this mighty monster is actually a diademed king of the sea , whose green crown has been put together for him in this marvellous manner . 
But if this whale be a king , he is a very sulky looking fellow to grace a diadem . 
Look at that hanging lower lip ! 
what a huge sulk and pout is there ! 
a sulk and pout , by carpenter 's measurement , about twenty feet long and five feet deep ; a sulk and pout that will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more . 
A great pity , now , that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped . 
The fissure is about a foot across . 
Probably the mother during an important interval was sailing down the Peruvian coast , when earthquakes caused the beach to gape . 
Over this lip , as over a slippery threshold , we now slide into the mouth . 
Upon my word were I at Mackinaw , I should take this to be the inside of an Indian wigwam . 
Good Lord ! 
is this the road that Jonah went ? 
The roof is about twelve feet high , and runs to a pretty sharp angle , as if there were a regular ridge-pole there ; while these ribbed , arched , hairy sides , present us with those wondrous , half vertical , scimitar-shaped slats of whalebone , say three hundred on a side , which depending from the upper part of the head or crown bone , form those Venetian blinds which have elsewhere been cursorily mentioned . 
The edges of these bones are fringed with hairy fibres , through which the Right Whale strains the water , and in whose intricacies he retains the small fish , when openmouthed he goes through the seas of brit in feeding time . 
In the central blinds of bone , as they stand in their natural order , there are certain curious marks , curves , hollows , and ridges , whereby some whalemen calculate the creature 's age , as the age of an oak by its circular rings . 
Though the certainty of this criterion is far from demonstrable , yet it has the savor of analogical probability . 
At any rate , if we yield to it , we must grant a far greater age to the Right Whale than at first glance will seem reasonable . 
In old times , there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies concerning these blinds . 
One voyager in Purchas calls them the wondrous `` whiskers '' inside of the whale 's mouth ; * another , `` hogs ' bristles '' ; a third old gentleman in Hackluyt uses the following elegant language : `` There are about two hundred and fifty fins growing on each side of his upper chop , which arch over his tongue on each side of his mouth . '' 
* This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker , or rather a moustache , consisting of a few scattered white hairs on the upper part of the outer end of the lower jaw . 
Sometimes these tufts impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemn countenance . 
As every one knows , these same `` hogs ' bristles , '' `` fins , '' `` whiskers , '' `` blinds , '' or whatever you please , furnish to the ladies their busks and other stiffening contrivances . 
But in this particular , the demand has long been on the decline . 
It was in Queen Anne 's time that the bone was in its glory , the farthingale being then all the fashion . 
And as those ancient dames moved about gaily , though in the jaws of the whale , as you may say ; even so , in a shower , with the like thoughtlessness , do we nowadays fly under the same jaws for protection ; the umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone . 
But now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment , and , standing in the Right Whale 's mouth , look around you afresh . 
Seeing all these colonnades of bone so methodically ranged about , would you not think you were inside of the great Haarlem organ , and gazing upon its thousand pipes ? 
For a carpet to the organ we have a rug of the softest Turkey -- the tongue , which is glued , as it were , to the floor of the mouth . 
It is very fat and tender , and apt to tear in pieces in hoisting it on deck . 
This particular tongue now before us ; at a passing glance I should say it was a six-barreler ; that is , it will yield you about that amount of oil . 
Ere this , you must have plainly seen the truth of what I started with -- that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have almost entirely different heads . 
To sum up , then : in the Right Whale 's there is no great well of sperm ; no ivory teeth at all ; no long , slender mandible of a lower jaw , like the Sperm Whale 's . 
Nor in the Sperm Whale are there any of those blinds of bone ; no huge lower lip ; and scarcely anything of a tongue . 
Again , the Right Whale has two external spout-holes , the Sperm Whale only one . 
Look your last now , on these venerable hooded heads , while they yet lie together ; for one will soon sink , unrecorded , in the sea ; the other will not be very long in following . 
Can you catch the expression of the Sperm Whale 's there ? 
It is the same he died with , only some of the longer wrinkles in the forehead seem now faded away . 
I think his broad brow to be full of a prairie-like placidity , born of a speculative indifference as to death . 
But mark the other head 's expression . 
See that amazing lower lip , pressed by accident against the vessel 's side , so as firmly to embrace the jaw . 
Does not this whole head seem to speak of an enormous practical resolution in facing death ? 
This Right Whale I take to have been a Stoic ; the Sperm Whale , a Platonian , who might have taken up Spinoza in his latter years . 
The Battering-Ram Ere quitting , for the nonce , the Sperm Whale 's head , I would have you , as a sensible physiologist , simply -- particularly remark its front aspect , in all its compacted collectedness . 
I would have you investigate it now with the sole view of forming to yourself some unexaggerated , intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power may be lodged there . 
Here is a vital point ; for you must either satisfactorily settle this matter with yourself , or for ever remain an infidel as to one of the most appalling , but not the less true events , perhaps anywhere to be found in all recorded history . 
You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the Sperm Whale , the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane to the water ; you observe that the lower part of that front slopes considerably backwards , so as to furnish more of a retreat for the long socket which receives the boom-like lower jaw ; you observe that the mouth is entirely under the head , much in the same way , indeed , as though your own mouth were entirely under your chin . 
Moreover you observe that the whale has no external nose ; and that what nose he has -- his spout hole -- is on the top of his head ; you observe that his eyes and ears are at the sides of his head ; nearly one third of his entire length from the front . 
Wherefore , you must now have perceived that the front of the Sperm Whale 's head is a dead , blind wall , without a single organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever . 
Furthermore , you are now to consider that only in the extreme , lower , backward sloping part of the front of the head , is there the slightest vestige of bone ; and not till you get near twenty feet from the forehead do you come to the full cranial development . 
So that this whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad . 
Finally , though , as will soon be revealed , its contents partly comprise the most delicate oil ; yet , you are now to be apprised of the nature of the substance which so impregnably invests all that apparent effeminacy . 
In some previous place I have described to you how the blubber wraps the body of the whale , as the rind wraps an orange . 
Just so with the head ; but with this difference : about the head this envelope , though not so thick is of a boneless toughness , inestimable by any man who has not handled it . 
The severest pointed harpoon , the sharpest lance darted by the strongest human arm , impotently rebounds from it . 
It is as though the forehead of the Sperm Whale were paved with horses ' hoofs . 
I do not think that any sensation lurks in it . 
Bethink yourself also of another thing . 
When two large , loaded Indian-men chance to crowd and crush towards each other in the docks , what do the sailors do ? 
They do not suspend between them , at the point of coming contact , any merely hard substance , like iron or wood . 
No , they hold there a large , round wad of tow and cork , enveloped in the thickest and toughest of ox-hide . 
That bravely and uninjured takes the jam which would have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron crow-bars . 
By itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact I drive at . 
But supplementary to this , it has hypothetically occurred to me , that as ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder in them , capable , at will , of distension or contraction ; and as the Sperm Whale , as far as I know , has no such provision in him ; considering , too , the otherwise inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head altogether beneath the surface , and anon swims with it high elevated out of the water ; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope ; considering the unique interior of his head ; it has hypothetically occurred to me , I say , that those mystical lung-celled honeycombs there may possibly have some hitherto unknown and unsuspected connexion with the outer air , so as to be susceptible to atmospheric distension and contraction . 
If this be so , fancy the irresistibleness of that might , to which the most impalpable and destructive of all elements contributes . 
Now , mark . 
Unerringly impelling this dead , impregnable , uninjurable wall , and this most buoyant thing within ; there swims behind it all a mass of tremendous life , only to be adequately estimated as piled wood is -- by the cord ; and all obedient to one volition , as the smallest insect . 
So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all the specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in this expansive monster ; when I shall show you some of his more inconsiderable braining feats ; I trust you will have renounced all ignorant incredulity , and be ready to abide by this ; that though the Sperm Whale stove a passage through the Isthmus of Darien , and mixed the Atlantic with the Pacific , you would not elevate one hair of your eye-brow . 
For unless you own the whale , you are but a provincial and sentimentalist in Truth . 
But clear Truth is a thing for salamander giants only to encounter ; how small the chances for the provincials then ? 
What befell the weakling youth lifting the dread goddess 's veil at Lais ? 
The Great Heidelburgh Tun Now comes the Baling of the Case . 
But to comprehend it aright , you must know something of the curious internal structure of the thing operated upon . 
Regarding the Sperm Whale 's head as a solid oblong , you may , on an inclined plane , sideways divide it into two quoins , * whereof the lower is the bony structure , forming the cranium and jaws , and the upper an unctuous mass wholly free from bones ; its broad forward end forming the expanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale . 
At the middle of the forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin , and then you have two almost equal parts , which before were naturally divided by an internal wall of a thick tendinous substance . 
* Quoin is not a Euclidean term . 
It belongs to the pure nautical mathematics . 
I know not that it has been defined before . 
A quoin is a solid which differs from a wedge in having its sharp end formed by the steep inclination of one side , instead of the mutual tapering of both sides . 
The lower subdivided part , called the junk , is one immense honeycomb of oil , formed by the crossing and recrossing , into ten thousand infiltrated cells , of tough elastic white fibres throughout its whole extent . 
The upper part , known as the Case , may be regarded as the great Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale . 
And as that famous great tierce is mystically carved in front , so the whale 's vast plaited forehead forms innumerable strange devices for the emblematical adornment of his wondrous tun . 
Moreover , as that of Heidelburgh was always replenished with the most excellent of the wines of the Rhenish valleys , so the tun of the whale contains by far the most precious of all his oily vintages ; namely , the highly-prized spermaceti , in its absolutely pure , limpid , and odoriferous state . 
Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed in any other part of the creature . 
Though in life it remains perfectly fluid , yet , upon exposure to the air , after death , it soon begins to concrete ; sending forth beautiful crystalline shoots , as when the first thin delicate ice is just forming in water . 
A large whale 's case generally yields about five hundred gallons of sperm , though from unavoidable circumstances , considerable of it is spilled , leaks , and dribbles away , or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish business of securing what you can . 
I know not with what fine and costly material the Heidelburgh Tun was coated within , but in superlative richness that coating could not possibly have compared with the silken pearl-colored membrane , like the lining of a fine pelisse , forming the inner surface of the Sperm Whale 's case . 
It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale embraces the entire length of the entire top of the head ; and since -- as has been elsewhere set forth -- the head embraces one third of the whole length of the creature , then setting that length down at eighty feet for a good sized whale , you have more than twenty-six feet for the depth of the tun , when it is lengthwise hoisted up and down against a ship 's side . 
As in decapitating the whale , the operator 's instrument is brought close to the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into the spermaceti magazine ; he has , therefore , to be uncommonly heedful , lest a careless , untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary and wastingly let out its invaluable contents . 
It is this decapitated end of the head , also , which is at last elevated out of the water , and retained in that position by the enormous cutting tackles , whose hempen combinations , on one side , make quite a wilderness of ropes in that quarter . 
Thus much being said , attend now , I pray you , to that marvellous and -- in this particular instance -- almost fatal operation whereby the Sperm Whale 's great Heidelburgh Tun is tapped . 
Cistern and Buckets Nimble as a cat , Tashtego mounts aloft ; and without altering his erect posture , runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm , to the part where it exactly projects over the hoisted Tun . 
He has carried with him a light tackle called a whip , consisting of only two parts , travelling through a single-sheaved block . 
Securing this block , so that it hangs down from the yard-arm , he swings one end of the rope , till it is caught and firmly held by a hand on the deck . 
Then , hand-over-hand , down the other part , the Indian drops through the air , till dexterously he lands on the summit of the head . 
There -- still high elevated above the rest of the company , to whom he vivaciously cries -- he seems some Turkish Muezzin calling the good people to prayers from the top of a tower . 
A short-handled sharp spade being sent up to him , he diligently searches for the proper place to begin breaking into the Tun . 
In this business he proceeds very heedfully , like a treasure-hunter in some old house , sounding the walls to find where the gold is masoned in . 
By the time this cautious search is over , a stout ironbound bucket , precisely like a well-bucket , has been attached to one end of the whip ; while the other end , being stretched across the deck , is there held by two or three alert hands . 
These last now hoist the bucket within grasp of the Indian , to whom another person has reached up a very long pole . 
Inserting this pole into the bucket , Tashtego downward guides the bucket into the Tun , till it entirely disappears ; then giving the word to the seamen at the whip , up comes the bucket again , all bubbling like a dairy-maid 's pail of new milk . 
Carefully lowered from its height , the full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointed hand , and quickly emptied into a large tub . 
Then remounting aloft , it again goes through the same round until the deep cistern will yield no more . 
Towards the end , Tashtego has to ram his long pole harder and harder , and deeper and deeper into the Tun , until some twenty feet of the pole have gone down . 
Now , the people of the Pequod had been baling some time in this way ; several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm ; when all at once a queer accident happened . 
Whether it was that Tashtego , that wild Indian , was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment his one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head ; or whether the place where he stood was so treacherous and oozy ; or whether the Evil One himself would have it to fall out so , without stating his particular reasons ; how it was exactly , there is no telling now ; but , on a sudden , as the eightieth or ninetieth bucket came suckingly up -- my God ! 
poor Tashtego -- like the twin reciprocating bucket in a veritable well , dropped head-foremost down into this great Tun of Heidelburgh , and with a horrible oily gurgling , went clean out of sight ! 
`` Man overboard ! '' 
cried Daggoo , who amid the general consternation first came to his senses . 
`` Swing the bucket this way ! '' 
and putting one foot into it , so as the better to secure his slippery hand-hold on the whip itself the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the head , almost before Tashtego could have reached its interior bottom . 
Meantime , there was a terrible tumult . 
Looking over the side , they saw the before lifeless head throbbing and heaving just below the surface of the sea , as if that moment seized with some momentous idea ; whereas it was only the poor Indian unconsciously revealing by those struggles the perilous depth to which he had sunk . 
At this instant , while Daggoo , on the summit of the head , was clearing the whip -- which had somehow got foul of the great cutting tackles -- a sharp cracking noise was heard ; and to the unspeakable horror of all , one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore out , and with a vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung , till the drunk ship reeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg . 
The one remaining hook , upon which the entire strain now depended , seemed every instant to be on the point of giving way ; an event still more likely from the violent motions of the head . 
`` Come down , come down ! '' 
yelled the seamen to Daggoo , but with one hand holding on to the heavy tackles , so that if the head should drop , he would still remain suspended ; the negro having cleared the foul line , rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well , meaning that the buried harpooneer should grasp it , and so be hoisted out . 
`` In heaven 's name , man , '' cried Stubb , `` are you ramming home a cartridge there ? 
-- Avast ! 
How will that help him ; jamming that iron-bound bucket on top of his head ? 
Avast , will ye ! '' 
`` Stand clear of the tackle ! '' 
cried a voice like the bursting of a rocket . 
Almost in the same instant , with a thunder-boom , the enormous mass dropped into the sea , like Niagara 's Table-Rock into the whirlpool ; the suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it , to far down her glittering copper ; and all caught their breath , as half swinging -- now over the sailors ' heads , and now over the water -- Daggoo , through a thick mist of spray , was dimly beheld clinging to the pendulous tackles , while poor , buried-alive Tashtego was sinking utterly down to the bottom of the sea ! 
But hardly had the blinding vapor cleared away , when a naked figure with a boardingsword in his hand , was for one swift moment seen hovering over the bulwarks . 
The next , a loud splash announced that my brave Queequeg had dived to the rescue . 
One packed rush was made to the side , and every eye counted every ripple , as moment followed moment , and no sign of either the sinker or the diver could be seen . 
Some hands now jumped into a boat alongside , and pushed a little off from the ship . 
`` Ha ! 
ha ! '' 
cried Daggoo , all at once , from his now quiet , swinging perch overhead ; and looking further off from the side , we saw an arm thrust upright from the blue waves ; a sight strange to see , as an arm thrust forth from the grass over a grave . 
`` Both ! 
both ! 
-- it is both ! '' 
- cried Daggoo again with a joyful shout ; and soon after , Queequeg was seen boldly striking out with one hand , and with the other clutching the long hair of the Indian . 
Drawn into the waiting boat , they were quickly brought to the deck ; but Tashtego was long in coming to , and Queequeg did not look very brisk . 
Now , how had this noble rescue been accomplished ? 
Why , diving after the slowly descending head , Queequeg with his keen sword had made side lunges near its bottom , so as to scuttle a large hole there ; then dropping his sword , had thrust his long arm far inwards and upwards , and so hauled out our poor Tash by the head . 
He averred , that upon first thrusting in for him , a leg was presented ; but well knowing that that was not as it ought to be , and might occasion great trouble ; -- he had thrust back the leg , and by a dexterous heave and toss , had wrought a somerset upon the Indian ; so that with the next trial , he came forth in the good old way -- head foremost . 
As for the great head itself , that was doing as well as could be expected . 
And thus , through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of Queequeg , the deliverance , or rather , delivery of Tashtego , was successfully accomplished , in the teeth , too , of the most untoward and apparently hopeless impediments ; which is a lesson by no means to be forgotten . 
Midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing and boxing , riding and rowing . 
I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header 's will be sure to seem incredible to some landsmen , though they themselves may have either seen or heard of some one 's falling into a cistern ashore ; an accident which not seldom happens , and with much less reason too than the Indian 's , considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb of the Sperm Whale 's well . 
But , peradventure , it may be sagaciously urged , how is this ? 
We thought the tissued , infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale , was the lightest and most corky part about him ; and yet thou makest it sink in an element of a far greater specific gravity than itself . 
We have thee there . 
Not at all , but I have ye ; for at the time poor Tash fell in , the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents , leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well -- a double welded , hammered substance , as I have before said , much heavier than the sea water , and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost . 
But the tendency to rapid sinking in this substance was in the present instance materially counteracted by the other parts of the head remaining undetached from it , so that it sank very slowly and deliberately indeed , affording Queequeg a fair chance for performing his agile obstetrics on the run , as you may say . 
Yes , it was a running delivery , so it was . 
Now , had Tashtego perished in that head , it had been a very precious perishing ; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrant spermaceti ; coffined , hearsed , and tombed in the secret inner chamber and sanctum sanctorum of the whale . 
Only one sweeter end can readily be recalled -- the delicious death of an Ohio honey-hunter , who seeking honey in the crotch of a hollow tree , found such exceeding store of it , that leaning too far over , it sucked him in , so that he died embalmed . 
How many , think ye , have likewise fallen into Plato 's honey head , and sweetly perished there ? 
The Prairie To scan the lines of his face , or feel the bumps on the head of this Leviathan ; this is a thing which no Physiognomist or Phrenologist has as yet undertaken . 
Such an enterprise would seem almost as hopeful as for Lavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the Rock of Gibraltar , or for Gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated the Dome of the Pantheon . 
Still , in that famous work of his , Lavater not only treats of the various faces of men , but also attentively studies the faces of horses , birds , serpents , and fish ; and dwells in detail upon the modifications of expression discernible therein . 
Nor have Gall and his disciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hints touching the phrenological characteristics of other beings than man . 
Therefore , though I am but ill qualified for a pioneer , in the application of these two semi-sciences to the whale , I will do my endeavor . 
I try all things ; I achieve what I can . 
Physiognomically regarded , the Sperm Whale is an anomalous creature . 
He has no proper nose . 
And since the nose is the central and most conspicuous of the features ; and since it perhaps most modifies and finally controls their combined expression ; hence it would seem that its entire absence , as an external appendage , must very largely affect the countenance of the whale . 
For as in landscape gardening , a spire , cupola , monument , or tower of some sort , is deemed almost indispensable to the completion of the scene ; so no face can be physiognomically in keeping without the elevated open-work belfry of the nose . 
Dash the nose from Phidias 's marble Jove , and what a sorry remainder ! 
Nevertheless , Leviathan is of so mighty a magnitude , all his proportions are so stately , that the same deficiency which in the sculptured Jove were hideous , in him is no blemish at all . 
Nay , it is an added grandeur . 
A nose to the whale would have been impertinent . 
As on your physiognomical voyage you sail round his vast head in your jollyboat , your noble conceptions of him are never insulted by the reflection that he has a nose to be pulled . 
A pestilent conceit , which so often will insist upon obtruding even when beholding the mightiest royal beadle on his throne . 
In some particulars , perhaps the most imposing physiognomical view to be had of the Sperm Whale , is that of the full front of his head . 
This aspect is sublime . 
In thought , a fine human brow is like the East when troubled with the morning . 
In the repose of the pasture , the curled brow of the bull has a touch of the grand in it . 
Pushing heavy cannon up mountain defiles , the elephant 's brow is majestic . 
Human or animal , the mystical brow is as that great golden seal affixed by the German Emperors to their decrees . 
It signifies -- `` God : done this day by my hand . '' 
But in most creatures , nay in man himself , very often the brow is but a mere strip of alpine land lying along the snow line . 
Few are the foreheads which like Shakespeare 's or Melancthon 's rise so high , and descend so low , that the eyes themselves seem clear , eternal , tideless mountain lakes ; and all above them in the forehead 's wrinkles , you seem to track the antlered thoughts descending there to drink , as the Highland hunters track the snow prints of the deer . 
But in the great Sperm Whale , this high and mighty god-like dignity inherent in the brow is so immensely amplified , that gazing on it , in that full front view , you feel the Deity and the dread powers more forcibly than in beholding any other object in living nature . 
