The mayor came to meet him , and urged him to retrace his steps . 
Cravatte was in possession of the mountains as far as Arche , and beyond ; there was danger even with an escort ; it merely exposed three or four unfortunate gendarmes to no purpose . 
`` Therefore , '' said the Bishop , `` I intend to go without escort . '' 
`` You do not really mean that , Monseigneur ! '' 
exclaimed the mayor . 
`` I do mean it so thoroughly that I absolutely refuse any gendarmes , and shall set out in an hour . '' 
`` Set out ? '' 
`` Set out . '' 
`` Alone ? '' 
`` Alone . '' 
`` Monseigneur , you will not do that ! '' 
`` There exists yonder in the mountains , '' said the Bishop , `` a tiny community no bigger than that , which I have not seen for three years . 
They are my good friends , those gentle and honest shepherds . 
They own one goat out of every thirty that they tend . 
They make very pretty woollen cords of various colors , and they play the mountain airs on little flutes with six holes . 
They need to be told of the good God now and then . 
What would they say to a bishop who was afraid ? 
What would they say if I did not go ? '' 
`` But the brigands , Monseigneur ? '' 
`` Hold , '' said the Bishop , `` I must think of that . 
You are right . 
I may meet them . 
They , too , need to be told of the good God . '' 
`` But , Monseigneur , there is a band of them ! 
A flock of wolves ! '' 
`` Monsieur le maire , it may be that it is of this very flock of wolves that Jesus has constituted me the shepherd . 
Who knows the ways of Providence ? '' 
`` They will rob you , Monseigneur . '' 
`` I have nothing . '' 
`` They will kill you . '' 
`` An old goodman of a priest , who passes along mumbling his prayers ? 
Bah ! 
To what purpose ? '' 
`` Oh , mon Dieu ! 
what if you should meet them ! '' 
`` I should beg alms of them for my poor . '' 
`` Do not go , Monseigneur . 
In the name of Heaven ! 
You are risking your life ! '' 
`` Monsieur le maire , '' said the Bishop , `` is that really all ? 
I am not in the world to guard my own life , but to guard souls . '' 
They had to allow him to do as he pleased . 
He set out , accompanied only by a child who offered to serve as a guide . 
His obstinacy was bruited about the country-side , and caused great consternation . 
He would take neither his sister nor Madame Magloire . 
He traversed the mountain on mule-back , encountered no one , and arrived safe and sound at the residence of his `` good friends , '' the shepherds . 
He remained there for a fortnight , preaching , administering the sacrament , teaching , exhorting . 
When the time of his departure approached , he resolved to chant a Te Deum pontifically . 
He mentioned it to the cure . 
But what was to be done ? 
There were no episcopal ornaments . 
They could only place at his disposal a wretched village sacristy , with a few ancient chasubles of threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said the Bishop . 
`` Let us announce our Te Deum from the pulpit , nevertheless , Monsieur le Cure . 
Things will arrange themselves . '' 
They instituted a search in the churches of the neighborhood . 
All the magnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have sufficed to clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly . 
While they were thus embarrassed , a large chest was brought and deposited in the presbytery for the Bishop , by two unknown horsemen , who departed on the instant . 
The chest was opened ; it contained a cope of cloth of gold , a mitre ornamented with diamonds , an archbishop 's cross , a magnificent crosier , -- all the pontifical vestments which had been stolen a month previously from the treasury of Notre Dame d'Embrun . 
In the chest was a paper , on which these words were written , `` From Cravatte to Monseigneur Bienvenu . '' 
`` Did not I say that things would come right of themselves ? '' 
said the Bishop . 
Then he added , with a smile , `` To him who contents himself with the surplice of a curate , God sends the cope of an archbishop . '' 
`` Monseigneur , '' murmured the cure , throwing back his head with a smile . 
`` God -- or the Devil . '' 
The Bishop looked steadily at the cure , and repeated with authority , `` God ! '' 
When he returned to Chastelar , the people came out to stare at him as at a curiosity , all along the road . 
At the priest 's house in Chastelar he rejoined Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire , who were waiting for him , and he said to his sister : `` Well ! 
was I in the right ? 
The poor priest went to his poor mountaineers with empty hands , and he returns from them with his hands full . 
I set out bearing only my faith in God ; I have brought back the treasure of a cathedral . '' 
That evening , before he went to bed , he said again : `` Let us never fear robbers nor murderers . 
Those are dangers from without , petty dangers . 
Let us fear ourselves . 
Prejudices are the real robbers ; vices are the real murderers . 
The great dangers lie within ourselves . 
What matters it what threatens our head or our purse ! 
Let us think only of that which threatens our soul . '' 
Then , turning to his sister : `` Sister , never a precaution on the part of the priest , against his fellow-man . 
That which his fellow does , God permits . 
Let us confine ourselves to prayer , when we think that a danger is approaching us . 
Let us pray , not for ourselves , but that our brother may not fall into sin on our account . '' 
However , such incidents were rare in his life . 
We relate those of which we know ; but generally he passed his life in doing the same things at the same moment . 
One month of his year resembled one hour of his day . 
As to what became of `` the treasure '' of the cathedral of Embrun , we should be embarrassed by any inquiry in that direction . 
It consisted of very handsome things , very tempting things , and things which were very well adapted to be stolen for the benefit of the unfortunate . 
Stolen they had already been elsewhere . 
Half of the adventure was completed ; it only remained to impart a new direction to the theft , and to cause it to take a short trip in the direction of the poor . 
However , we make no assertions on this point . 
Only , a rather obscure note was found among the Bishop 's papers , which may bear some relation to this matter , and which is couched in these terms , `` The question is , to decide whether this should be turned over to the cathedral or to the hospital . '' 
The senator above mentioned was a clever man , who had made his own way , heedless of those things which present obstacles , and which are called conscience , sworn faith , justice , duty : he had marched straight to his goal , without once flinching in the line of his advancement and his interest . 
He was an old attorney , softened by success ; not a bad man by any means , who rendered all the small services in his power to his sons , his sons-in-law , his relations , and even to his friends , having wisely seized upon , in life , good sides , good opportunities , good windfalls . 
Everything else seemed to him very stupid . 
He was intelligent , and just sufficiently educated to think himself a disciple of Epicurus ; while he was , in reality , only a product of Pigault-Lebrun . 
He laughed willingly and pleasantly over infinite and eternal things , and at the `` Crotchets of that good old fellow the Bishop . '' 
He even sometimes laughed at him with an amiable authority in the presence of M. Myriel himself , who listened to him . 
On some semi-official occasion or other , I do not recollect what , Count *** -LSB- this senator -RSB- and M. Myriel were to dine with the prefect . 
At dessert , the senator , who was slightly exhilarated , though still perfectly dignified , exclaimed : -- `` Egad , Bishop , let 's have a discussion . 
It is hard for a senator and a bishop to look at each other without winking . 
We are two augurs . 
I am going to make a confession to you . 
I have a philosophy of my own . '' 
`` And you are right , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` As one makes one 's philosophy , so one lies on it . 
You are on the bed of purple , senator . '' 
The senator was encouraged , and went on : -- `` Let us be good fellows . '' 
`` Good devils even , '' said the Bishop . 
`` I declare to you , '' continued the senator , `` that the Marquis d'Argens , Pyrrhon , Hobbes , and M. Naigeon are no rascals . 
I have all the philosophers in my library gilded on the edges . '' 
`` Like yourself , Count , '' interposed the Bishop . 
The senator resumed : -- `` I hate Diderot ; he is an ideologist , a declaimer , and a revolutionist , a believer in God at bottom , and more bigoted than Voltaire . 
Voltaire made sport of Needham , and he was wrong , for Needham 's eels prove that God is useless . 
A drop of vinegar in a spoonful of flour paste supplies the fiat lux . 
Suppose the drop to be larger and the spoonful bigger ; you have the world . 
Man is the eel . 
Then what is the good of the Eternal Father ? 
The Jehovah hypothesis tires me , Bishop . 
It is good for nothing but to produce shallow people , whose reasoning is hollow . 
Down with that great All , which torments me ! 
Hurrah for Zero which leaves me in peace ! 
Between you and me , and in order to empty my sack , and make confession to my pastor , as it behooves me to do , I will admit to you that I have good sense . 
I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus , who preaches renunciation and sacrifice to the last extremity . 
'T is the counsel of an avaricious man to beggars . 
Renunciation ; why ? 
Sacrifice ; to what end ? 
I do not see one wolf immolating himself for the happiness of another wolf . 
Let us stick to nature , then . 
We are at the top ; let us have a superior philosophy . 
What is the advantage of being at the top , if one sees no further than the end of other people 's noses ? 
Let us live merrily . 
Life is all . 
That man has another future elsewhere , on high , below , anywhere , I do n't believe ; not one single word of it . 
Ah ! 
sacrifice and renunciation are recommended to me ; I must take heed to everything I do ; I must cudgel my brains over good and evil , over the just and the unjust , over the fas and the nefas . 
Why ? 
Because I shall have to render an account of my actions . 
When ? 
After death . 
What a fine dream ! 
After my death it will be a very clever person who can catch me . 
Have a handful of dust seized by a shadow-hand , if you can . 
Let us tell the truth , we who are initiated , and who have raised the veil of Isis : there is no such thing as either good or evil ; there is vegetation . 
Let us seek the real . 
Let us get to the bottom of it . 
Let us go into it thoroughly . 
What the deuce ! 
let us go to the bottom of it ! 
We must scent out the truth ; dig in the earth for it , and seize it . 
Then it gives you exquisite joys . 
Then you grow strong , and you laugh . 
I am square on the bottom , I am . 
Immortality , Bishop , is a chance , a waiting for dead men 's shoes . 
Ah ! 
what a charming promise ! 
trust to it , if you like ! 
What a fine lot Adam has ! 
We are souls , and we shall be angels , with blue wings on our shoulder-blades . 
Do come to my assistance : is it not Tertullian who says that the blessed shall travel from star to star ? 
Very well . 
We shall be the grasshoppers of the stars . 
And then , besides , we shall see God . 
Ta , ta , ta ! 
What twaddle all these paradises are ! 
God is a nonsensical monster . 
I would not say that in the Moniteur , egad ! 
but I may whisper it among friends . 
Inter pocula . 
To sacrifice the world to paradise is to let slip the prey for the shadow . 
Be the dupe of the infinite ! 
I 'm not such a fool . 
I am a nought . 
I call myself Monsieur le Comte Nought , senator . 
Did I exist before my birth ? 
No . 
Shall I exist after death ? 
No . 
What am I ? 
A little dust collected in an organism . 
What am I to do on this earth ? 
The choice rests with me : suffer or enjoy . 
Whither will suffering lead me ? 
To nothingness ; but I shall have suffered . 
Whither will enjoyment lead me ? 
To nothingness ; but I shall have enjoyed myself . 
My choice is made . 
One must eat or be eaten . 
I shall eat . 
It is better to be the tooth than the grass . 
Such is my wisdom . 
After which , go whither I push thee , the grave-digger is there ; the Pantheon for some of us : all falls into the great hole . 
End . 
Finis . 
Total liquidation . 
This is the vanishing-point . 
Death is death , believe me . 
I laugh at the idea of there being any one who has anything to tell me on that subject . 
Fables of nurses ; bugaboo for children ; Jehovah for men . 
No ; our to-morrow is the night . 
Beyond the tomb there is nothing but equal nothingness . 
You have been Sardanapalus , you have been Vincent de Paul -- it makes no difference . 
That is the truth . 
Then live your life , above all things . 
Make use of your I while you have it . 
In truth , Bishop , I tell you that I have a philosophy of my own , and I have my philosophers . 
I do n't let myself be taken in with that nonsense . 
Of course , there must be something for those who are down , -- for the barefooted beggars , knife-grinders , and miserable wretches . 
Legends , chimeras , the soul , immortality , paradise , the stars , are provided for them to swallow . 
They gobble it down . 
They spread it on their dry bread . 
He who has nothing else has the good . 
God . 
That is the least he can have . 
I oppose no objection to that ; but I reserve Monsieur Naigeon for myself . 
The good God is good for the populace . '' 
The Bishop clapped his hands . 
`` That 's talking ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` What an excellent and really marvellous thing is this materialism ! 
Not every one who wants it can have it . 
Ah ! 
when one does have it , one is no longer a dupe , one does not stupidly allow one 's self to be exiled like Cato , nor stoned like Stephen , nor burned alive like Jeanne d'Arc . 
Those who have succeeded in procuring this admirable materialism have the joy of feeling themselves irresponsible , and of thinking that they can devour everything without uneasiness , -- places , sinecures , dignities , power , whether well or ill acquired , lucrative recantations , useful treacheries , savory capitulations of conscience , -- and that they shall enter the tomb with their digestion accomplished . 
How agreeable that is ! 
I do not say that with reference to you , senator . 
Nevertheless , it is impossible for me to refrain from congratulating you . 
You great lords have , so you say , a philosophy of your own , and for yourselves , which is exquisite , refined , accessible to the rich alone , good for all sauces , and which seasons the voluptuousness of life admirably . 
This philosophy has been extracted from the depths , and unearthed by special seekers . 
But you are good-natured princes , and you do not think it a bad thing that belief in the good God should constitute the philosophy of the people , very much as the goose stuffed with chestnuts is the truffled turkey of the poor . '' 
In order to furnish an idea of the private establishment of the Bishop of D -- , and of the manner in which those two sainted women subordinated their actions , their thoughts , their feminine instincts even , which are easily alarmed , to the habits and purposes of the Bishop , without his even taking the trouble of speaking in order to explain them , we can not do better than transcribe in this place a letter from Mademoiselle Baptistine to Madame the Vicomtess de Boischevron , the friend of her childhood . 
This letter is in our possession . 
D -- , Dec. 16 , 18 -- . 
MY GOOD MADAM : Not a day passes without our speaking of you . 
It is our established custom ; but there is another reason besides . 
Just imagine , while washing and dusting the ceilings and walls , Madam Magloire has made some discoveries ; now our two chambers hung with antique paper whitewashed over , would not discredit a chateau in the style of yours . 
Madam Magloire has pulled off all the paper . 
There were things beneath . 
My drawing-room , which contains no furniture , and which we use for spreading out the linen after washing , is fifteen feet in height , eighteen square , with a ceiling which was formerly painted and gilded , and with beams , as in yours . 
This was covered with a cloth while this was the hospital . 
And the woodwork was of the era of our grandmothers . 
But my room is the one you ought to see . 
Madam Magloire has discovered , under at least ten thicknesses of paper pasted on top , some paintings , which without being good are very tolerable . 
The subject is Telemachus being knighted by Minerva in some gardens , the name of which escapes me . 
In short , where the Roman ladies repaired on one single night . 
What shall I say to you ? 
I have Romans , and Roman ladies -LSB- here occurs an illegible word -RSB- , and the whole train . 
Madam Magloire has cleaned it all off ; this summer she is going to have some small injuries repaired , and the whole revarnished , and my chamber will be a regular museum . 
She has also found in a corner of the attic two wooden pier-tables of ancient fashion . 
They asked us two crowns of six francs each to regild them , but it is much better to give the money to the poor ; and they are very ugly besides , and I should much prefer a round table of mahogany . 
I am always very happy . 
My brother is so good . 
He gives all he has to the poor and sick . 
We are very much cramped . 
The country is trying in the winter , and we really must do something for those who are in need . 
We are almost comfortably lighted and warmed . 
You see that these are great treats . 
My brother has ways of his own . 
When he talks , he says that a bishop ought to be so . 
Just imagine ! 
the door of our house is never fastened . 
Whoever chooses to enter finds himself at once in my brother 's room . 
He fears nothing , even at night . 
That is his sort of bravery , he says . 
He does not wish me or Madame Magloire feel any fear for him . 
He exposes himself to all sorts of dangers , and he does not like to have us even seem to notice it . 
One must know how to understand him . 
He goes out in the rain , he walks in the water , he travels in winter . 
He fears neither suspicious roads nor dangerous encounters , nor night . 
Last year he went quite alone into a country of robbers . 
He would not take us . 
He was absent for a fortnight . 
On his return nothing had happened to him ; he was thought to be dead , but was perfectly well , and said , `` This is the way I have been robbed ! '' 
And then he opened a trunk full of jewels , all the jewels of the cathedral of Embrun , which the thieves had given him . 
When he returned on that occasion , I could not refrain from scolding him a little , taking care , however , not to speak except when the carriage was making a noise , so that no one might hear me . 
At first I used to say to myself , `` There are no dangers which will stop him ; he is terrible . '' 
Now I have ended by getting used to it . 
I make a sign to Madam Magloire that she is not to oppose him . 
He risks himself as he sees fit . 
I carry off Madam Magloire , I enter my chamber , I pray for him and fall asleep . 
I am at ease , because I know that if anything were to happen to him , it would be the end of me . 
I should go to the good God with my brother and my bishop . 
It has cost Madam Magloire more trouble than it did me to accustom herself to what she terms his imprudences . 
But now the habit has been acquired . 
We pray together , we tremble together , and we fall asleep . 
If the devil were to enter this house , he would be allowed to do so . 
After all , what is there for us to fear in this house ? 
There is always some one with us who is stronger than we . 
The devil may pass through it , but the good God dwells here . 
This suffices me . 
My brother has no longer any need of saying a word to me . 
I understand him without his speaking , and we abandon ourselves to the care of Providence . 
That is the way one has to do with a man who possesses grandeur of soul . 
I have interrogated my brother with regard to the information which you desire on the subject of the Faux family . 
You are aware that he knows everything , and that he has memories , because he is still a very good royalist . 
They really are a very ancient Norman family of the generalship of Caen . 
Five hundred years ago there was a Raoul de Faux , a Jean de Faux , and a Thomas de Faux , who were gentlemen , and one of whom was a seigneur de Rochefort . 
The last was Guy-Etienne-Alexandre , and was commander of a regiment , and something in the light horse of Bretagne . 
His daughter , Marie-Louise , married Adrien-Charles de Gramont , son of the Duke Louis de Gramont , peer of France , colonel of the French guards , and lieutenant-general of the army . 
It is written Faux , Fauq , and Faoucq . 
Good Madame , recommend us to the prayers of your sainted relative , Monsieur the Cardinal . 
As for your dear Sylvanie , she has done well in not wasting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me . 
She is well , works as you would wish , and loves me . 
That is all that I desire . 
The souvenir which she sent through you reached me safely , and it makes me very happy . 
My health is not so very bad , and yet I grow thinner every day . 
Farewell ; my paper is at an end , and this forces me to leave you . 
A thousand good wishes . 
BAPTISTINE . 
P.S. Your grand nephew is charming . 
Do you know that he will soon be five years old ? 
Yesterday he saw some one riding by on horseback who had on knee-caps , and he said , `` What has he got on his knees ? '' 
He is a charming child ! 
His little brother is dragging an old broom about the room , like a carriage , and saying , `` Hu ! '' 
As will be perceived from this letter , these two women understood how to mould themselves to the Bishop 's ways with that special feminine genius which comprehends the man better than he comprehends himself . 
The Bishop of D -- , in spite of the gentle and candid air which never deserted him , sometimes did things that were grand , bold , and magnificent , without seeming to have even a suspicion of the fact . 
They trembled , but they let him alone . 
Sometimes Madame Magloire essayed a remonstrance in advance , but never at the time , nor afterwards . 
They never interfered with him by so much as a word or sign , in any action once entered upon . 
At certain moments , without his having occasion to mention it , when he was not even conscious of it himself in all probability , so perfect was his simplicity , they vaguely felt that he was acting as a bishop ; then they were nothing more than two shadows in the house . 
They served him passively ; and if obedience consisted in disappearing , they disappeared . 
They understood , with an admirable delicacy of instinct , that certain cares may be put under constraint . 
Thus , even when believing him to be in peril , they understood , I will not say his thought , but his nature , to such a degree that they no longer watched over him . 
They confided him to God . 
Moreover , Baptistine said , as we have just read , that her brother 's end would prove her own . 
Madame Magloire did not say this , but she knew it . 
At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the preceding pages , he did a thing which , if the whole town was to be believed , was even more hazardous than his trip across the mountains infested with bandits . 
In the country near D -- a man lived quite alone . 
This man , we will state at once , was a former member of the Convention . 
His name was G -- Member of the Convention , G -- was mentioned with a sort of horror in the little world of D -- A member of the Convention -- can you imagine such a thing ? 
That existed from the time when people called each other thou , and when they said `` citizen . '' 
This man was almost a monster . 
He had not voted for the death of the king , but almost . 
He was a quasi-regicide . 
He had been a terrible man . 
How did it happen that such a man had not been brought before a provost 's court , on the return of the legitimate princes ? 
They need not have cut off his head , if you please ; clemency must be exercised , agreed ; but a good banishment for life . 
An example , in short , etc. . 
Besides , he was an atheist , like all the rest of those people . 
Gossip of the geese about the vulture . 
Was G -- a vulture after all ? 
Yes ; if he were to be judged by the element of ferocity in this solitude of his . 
As he had not voted for the death of the king , he had not been included in the decrees of exile , and had been able to remain in France . 
He dwelt at a distance of three-quarters of an hour from the city , far from any hamlet , far from any road , in some hidden turn of a very wild valley , no one knew exactly where . 
He had there , it was said , a sort of field , a hole , a lair . 
There were no neighbors , not even passers-by . 
Since he had dwelt in that valley , the path which led thither had disappeared under a growth of grass . 
The locality was spoken of as though it had been the dwelling of a hangman . 
Nevertheless , the Bishop meditated on the subject , and from time to time he gazed at the horizon at a point where a clump of trees marked the valley of the former member of the Convention , and he said , `` There is a soul yonder which is lonely . '' 
And he added , deep in his own mind , `` I owe him a visit . '' 
But , let us avow it , this idea , which seemed natural at the first blush , appeared to him after a moment 's reflection , as strange , impossible , and almost repulsive . 
For , at bottom , he shared the general impression , and the old member of the Convention inspired him , without his being clearly conscious of the fact himself , with that sentiment which borders on hate , and which is so well expressed by the word estrangement . 
Still , should the scab of the sheep cause the shepherd to recoil ? 
No . 
But what a sheep ! 
The good Bishop was perplexed . 
Sometimes he set out in that direction ; then he returned . 
Finally , the rumor one day spread through the town that a sort of young shepherd , who served the member of the Convention in his hovel , had come in quest of a doctor ; that the old wretch was dying , that paralysis was gaining on him , and that he would not live over night . 
-- `` Thank God ! '' 
some added . 
The Bishop took his staff , put on his cloak , on account of his too threadbare cassock , as we have mentioned , and because of the evening breeze which was sure to rise soon , and set out . 
The sun was setting , and had almost touched the horizon when the Bishop arrived at the excommunicated spot . 
With a certain beating of the heart , he recognized the fact that he was near the lair . 
He strode over a ditch , leaped a hedge , made his way through a fence of dead boughs , entered a neglected paddock , took a few steps with a good deal of boldness , and suddenly , at the extremity of the waste land , and behind lofty brambles , he caught sight of the cavern . 
It was a very low hut , poor , small , and clean , with a vine nailed against the outside . 
Near the door , in an old wheel-chair , the arm-chair of the peasants , there was a white-haired man , smiling at the sun . 
Near the seated man stood a young boy , the shepherd lad . 
He was offering the old man a jar of milk . 
While the Bishop was watching him , the old man spoke : `` Thank you , '' he said , `` I need nothing . '' 
And his smile quitted the sun to rest upon the child . 
The Bishop stepped forward . 
At the sound which he made in walking , the old man turned his head , and his face expressed the sum total of the surprise which a man can still feel after a long life . 
`` This is the first time since I have been here , '' said he , `` that any one has entered here . 
Who are you , sir ? '' 
The Bishop answered : -- `` My name is Bienvenu Myriel . '' 
`` Bienvenu Myriel ? 
I have heard that name . 
Are you the man whom the people call Monseigneur Welcome ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
The old man resumed with a half-smile `` In that case , you are my bishop ? '' 
`` Something of that sort . '' 
`` Enter , sir . '' 
The member of the Convention extended his hand to the Bishop , but the Bishop did not take it . 
The Bishop confined himself to the remark : -- `` I am pleased to see that I have been misinformed . 
You certainly do not seem to me to be ill . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the old man , `` I am going to recover . '' 
He paused , and then said : -- `` I shall die three hours hence . '' 
Then he continued : -- `` I am something of a doctor ; I know in what fashion the last hour draws on . 
Yesterday , only my feet were cold ; to-day , the chill has ascended to my knees ; now I feel it mounting to my waist ; when it reaches the heart , I shall stop . 
The sun is beautiful , is it not ? 
I had myself wheeled out here to take a last look at things . 
You can talk to me ; it does not fatigue me . 
You have done well to come and look at a man who is on the point of death . 
It is well that there should be witnesses at that moment . 
One has one 's caprices ; I should have liked to last until the dawn , but I know that I shall hardly live three hours . 
It will be night then . 
What does it matter , after all ? 
Dying is a simple affair . 
One has no need of the light for that . 
So be it . 
I shall die by starlight . '' 
The old man turned to the shepherd lad : -- `` Go to thy bed ; thou wert awake all last night ; thou art tired . '' 
The child entered the hut . 
The old man followed him with his eyes , and added , as though speaking to himself : -- `` I shall die while he sleeps . 
The two slumbers may be good neighbors . '' 
The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been . 
He did not think he discerned God in this manner of dying ; let us say the whole , for these petty contradictions of great hearts must be indicated like the rest : he , who on occasion , was so fond of laughing at `` His Grace , '' was rather shocked at not being addressed as Monseigneur , and he was almost tempted to retort `` citizen . '' 
He was assailed by a fancy for peevish familiarity , common enough to doctors and priests , but which was not habitual with him . 
This man , after all , this member of the Convention , this representative of the people , had been one of the powerful ones of the earth ; for the first time in his life , probably , the Bishop felt in a mood to be severe . 
Meanwhile , the member of the Convention had been surveying him with a modest cordiality , in which one could have distinguished , possibly , that humility which is so fitting when one is on the verge of returning to dust . 
The Bishop , on his side , although he generally restrained his curiosity , which , in his opinion , bordered on a fault , could not refrain from examining the member of the Convention with an attention which , as it did not have its course in sympathy , would have served his conscience as a matter of reproach , in connection with any other man . 
A member of the Convention produced on him somewhat the effect of being outside the pale of the law , even of the law of charity . 
G -- , calm , his body almost upright , his voice vibrating , was one of those octogenarians who form the subject of astonishment to the physiologist . 
The Revolution had many of these men , proportioned to the epoch . 
In this old man one was conscious of a man put to the proof . 
Though so near to his end , he preserved all the gestures of health . 
In his clear glance , in his firm tone , in the robust movement of his shoulders , there was something calculated to disconcert death . 
Azrael , the Mohammedan angel of the sepulchre , would have turned back , and thought that he had mistaken the door . 
G -- seemed to be dying because he willed it so . 
There was freedom in his agony . 
His legs alone were motionless . 
It was there that the shadows held him fast . 
His feet were cold and dead , but his head survived with all the power of life , and seemed full of light . 
G -- , at this solemn moment , resembled the king in that tale of the Orient who was flesh above and marble below . 
There was a stone there . 
The Bishop sat down . 
The exordium was abrupt . 
`` I congratulate you , '' said he , in the tone which one uses for a reprimand . 
`` You did not vote for the death of the king , after all . '' 
The old member of the Convention did not appear to notice the bitter meaning underlying the words `` after all . '' 
He replied . 
The smile had quite disappeared from his face . 
`` Do not congratulate me too much , sir . 
I did vote for the death of the tyrant . '' 
It was the tone of austerity answering the tone of severity . 
`` What do you mean to say ? '' 
resumed the Bishop . 
`` I mean to say that man has a tyrant , -- ignorance . 
I voted for the death of that tyrant . 
That tyrant engendered royalty , which is authority falsely understood , while science is authority rightly understood . 
Man should be governed only by science . '' 
`` And conscience , '' added the Bishop . 
`` It is the same thing . 
Conscience is the quantity of innate science which we have within us . '' 
Monseigneur Bienvenu listened in some astonishment to this language , which was very new to him . 
The member of the Convention resumed : -- `` So far as Louis XVI . 
was concerned , I said ` no . ' 
I did not think that I had the right to kill a man ; but I felt it my duty to exterminate evil . 
I voted the end of the tyrant , that is to say , the end of prostitution for woman , the end of slavery for man , the end of night for the child . 
In voting for the Republic , I voted for that . 
I voted for fraternity , concord , the dawn . 
I have aided in the overthrow of prejudices and errors . 
The crumbling away of prejudices and errors causes light . 
We have caused the fall of the old world , and the old world , that vase of miseries , has become , through its upsetting upon the human race , an urn of joy . '' 
`` Mixed joy , '' said the Bishop . 
`` You may say troubled joy , and to-day , after that fatal return of the past , which is called 1814 , joy which has disappeared ! 
Alas ! 
The work was incomplete , I admit : we demolished the ancient regime in deeds ; we were not able to suppress it entirely in ideas . 
To destroy abuses is not sufficient ; customs must be modified . 
The mill is there no longer ; the wind is still there . '' 
`` You have demolished . 
It may be of use to demolish , but I distrust a demolition complicated with wrath . '' 
`` Right has its wrath , Bishop ; and the wrath of right is an element of progress . 
In any case , and in spite of whatever may be said , the French Revolution is the most important step of the human race since the advent of Christ . 
Incomplete , it may be , but sublime . 
It set free all the unknown social quantities ; it softened spirits , it calmed , appeased , enlightened ; it caused the waves of civilization to flow over the earth . 
It was a good thing . 
The French Revolution is the consecration of humanity . '' 
The Bishop could not refrain from murmuring : -- `` Yes ? ' 
93 ! '' 
The member of the Convention straightened himself up in his chair with an almost lugubrious solemnity , and exclaimed , so far as a dying man is capable of exclamation : -- `` Ah , there you go ; ' 93 ! 
I was expecting that word . 
A cloud had been forming for the space of fifteen hundred years ; at the end of fifteen hundred years it burst . 
You are putting the thunderbolt on its trial . '' 
The Bishop felt , without , perhaps , confessing it , that something within him had suffered extinction . 
Nevertheless , he put a good face on the matter . 
He replied : -- `` The judge speaks in the name of justice ; the priest speaks in the name of pity , which is nothing but a more lofty justice . 
A thunderbolt should commit no error . '' 
And he added , regarding the member of the Convention steadily the while , `` Louis XVII . ? '' 
The conventionary stretched forth his hand and grasped the Bishop 's arm . 
`` Louis XVII . ! 
let us see . 
For whom do you mourn ? 
is it for the innocent child ? 
very good ; in that case I mourn with you . 
Is it for the royal child ? 
I demand time for reflection . 
To me , the brother of Cartouche , an innocent child who was hung up by the armpits in the Place de Greve , until death ensued , for the sole crime of having been the brother of Cartouche , is no less painful than the grandson of Louis XV. , an innocent child , martyred in the tower of the Temple , for the sole crime of having been grandson of Louis XV . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said the Bishop , `` I like not this conjunction of names . '' 
`` Cartouche ? 
Louis XV . ? 
To which of the two do you object ? '' 
A momentary silence ensued . 
The Bishop almost regretted having come , and yet he felt vaguely and strangely shaken . 
The conventionary resumed : -- `` Ah , Monsieur Priest , you love not the crudities of the true . 
Christ loved them . 
He seized a rod and cleared out the Temple . 
His scourge , full of lightnings , was a harsh speaker of truths . 
When he cried , ` Sinite parvulos , ' he made no distinction between the little children . 
It would not have embarrassed him to bring together the Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod . 
