They have , in the country of Pontarlier , whither you are going , Monsieur Valjean , a truly patriarchal and truly charming industry , my sister . 
It is their cheese-dairies , which they call fruitieres . ' 
`` Then my brother , while urging the man to eat , explained to him , with great minuteness , what these fruitieres of Pontarlier were ; that they were divided into two classes : the big barns which belong to the rich , and where there are forty or fifty cows which produce from seven to eight thousand cheeses each summer , and the associated fruitieres , which belong to the poor ; these are the peasants of mid-mountain , who hold their cows in common , and share the proceeds . 
` They engage the services of a cheese-maker , whom they call the grurin ; the grurin receives the milk of the associates three times a day , and marks the quantity on a double tally . 
It is towards the end of April that the work of the cheese-dairies begins ; it is towards the middle of June that the cheese-makers drive their cows to the mountains . ' 
`` The man recovered his animation as he ate . 
My brother made him drink that good Mauves wine , which he does not drink himself , because he says that wine is expensive . 
My brother imparted all these details with that easy gayety of his with which you are acquainted , interspersing his words with graceful attentions to me . 
He recurred frequently to that comfortable trade of grurin , as though he wished the man to understand , without advising him directly and harshly , that this would afford him a refuge . 
One thing struck me . 
This man was what I have told you . 
Well , neither during supper , nor during the entire evening , did my brother utter a single word , with the exception of a few words about Jesus when he entered , which could remind the man of what he was , nor of what my brother was . 
To all appearances , it was an occasion for preaching him a little sermon , and of impressing the Bishop on the convict , so that a mark of the passage might remain behind . 
This might have appeared to any one else who had this , unfortunate man in his hands to afford a chance to nourish his soul as well as his body , and to bestow upon him some reproach , seasoned with moralizing and advice , or a little commiseration , with an exhortation to conduct himself better in the future . 
My brother did not even ask him from what country he came , nor what was his history . 
For in his history there is a fault , and my brother seemed to avoid everything which could remind him of it . 
To such a point did he carry it , that at one time , when my brother was speaking of the mountaineers of Pontarlier , who exercise a gentle labor near heaven , and who , he added , are happy because they are innocent , he stopped short , fearing lest in this remark there might have escaped him something which might wound the man . 
By dint of reflection , I think I have comprehended what was passing in my brother 's heart . 
He was thinking , no doubt , that this man , whose name is Jean Valjean , had his misfortune only too vividly present in his mind ; that the best thing was to divert him from it , and to make him believe , if only momentarily , that he was a person like any other , by treating him just in his ordinary way . 
Is not this indeed , to understand charity well ? 
Is there not , dear Madame , something truly evangelical in this delicacy which abstains from sermon , from moralizing , from allusions ? 
and is not the truest pity , when a man has a sore point , not to touch it at all ? 
It has seemed to me that this might have been my brother 's private thought . 
In any case , what I can say is that , if he entertained all these ideas , he gave no sign of them ; from beginning to end , even to me he was the same as he is every evening , and he supped with this Jean Valjean with the same air and in the same manner in which he would have supped with M. Gedeon le Provost , or with the curate of the parish . 
`` Towards the end , when he had reached the figs , there came a knock at the door . 
It was Mother Gerbaud , with her little one in her arms . 
My brother kissed the child on the brow , and borrowed fifteen sous which I had about me to give to Mother Gerbaud . 
The man was not paying much heed to anything then . 
He was no longer talking , and he seemed very much fatigued . 
After poor old Gerbaud had taken her departure , my brother said grace ; then he turned to the man and said to him , ` You must be in great need of your bed . ' 
Madame Magloire cleared the table very promptly . 
I understood that we must retire , in order to allow this traveller to go to sleep , and we both went up stairs . 
Nevertheless , I sent Madame Magloire down a moment later , to carry to the man 's bed a goat skin from the Black Forest , which was in my room . 
The nights are frigid , and that keeps one warm . 
It is a pity that this skin is old ; all the hair is falling out . 
My brother bought it while he was in Germany , at Tottlingen , near the sources of the Danube , as well as the little ivory-handled knife which I use at table . 
`` Madame Magloire returned immediately . 
We said our prayers in the drawing-room , where we hang up the linen , and then we each retired to our own chambers , without saying a word to each other . '' 
After bidding his sister good night , Monseigneur Bienvenu took one of the two silver candlesticks from the table , handed the other to his guest , and said to him , -- `` Monsieur , I will conduct you to your room . '' 
The man followed him . 
As might have been observed from what has been said above , the house was so arranged that in order to pass into the oratory where the alcove was situated , or to get out of it , it was necessary to traverse the Bishop 's bedroom . 
At the moment when he was crossing this apartment , Madame Magloire was putting away the silverware in the cupboard near the head of the bed . 
This was her last care every evening before she went to bed . 
The Bishop installed his guest in the alcove . 
A fresh white bed had been prepared there . 
The man set the candle down on a small table . 
`` Well , '' said the Bishop , `` may you pass a good night . 
To-morrow morning , before you set out , you shall drink a cup of warm milk from our cows . '' 
`` Thanks , Monsieur l'Abbe , '' said the man . 
Hardly had he pronounced these words full of peace , when all of a sudden , and without transition , he made a strange movement , which would have frozen the two sainted women with horror , had they witnessed it . 
Even at this day it is difficult for us to explain what inspired him at that moment . 
Did he intend to convey a warning or to throw out a menace ? 
Was he simply obeying a sort of instinctive impulse which was obscure even to himself ? 
He turned abruptly to the old man , folded his arms , and bending upon his host a savage gaze , he exclaimed in a hoarse voice : -- `` Ah ! 
really ! 
You lodge me in your house , close to yourself like this ? '' 
He broke off , and added with a laugh in which there lurked something monstrous : -- `` Have you really reflected well ? 
How do you know that I have not been an assassin ? '' 
The Bishop replied : -- `` That is the concern of the good God . '' 
Then gravely , and moving his lips like one who is praying or talking to himself , he raised two fingers of his right hand and bestowed his benediction on the man , who did not bow , and without turning his head or looking behind him , he returned to his bedroom . 
When the alcove was in use , a large serge curtain drawn from wall to wall concealed the altar . 
The Bishop knelt before this curtain as he passed and said a brief prayer . 
A moment later he was in his garden , walking , meditating , contemplating , his heart and soul wholly absorbed in those grand and mysterious things which God shows at night to the eyes which remain open . 
As for the man , he was actually so fatigued that he did not even profit by the nice white sheets . 
Snuffing out his candle with his nostrils after the manner of convicts , he dropped , all dressed as he was , upon the bed , where he immediately fell into a profound sleep . 
Midnight struck as the Bishop returned from his garden to his apartment . 
A few minutes later all were asleep in the little house . 
Towards the middle of the night Jean Valjean woke . 
Jean Valjean came from a poor peasant family of Brie . 
He had not learned to read in his childhood . 
When he reached man 's estate , he became a tree-pruner at Faverolles . 
His mother was named Jeanne Mathieu ; his father was called Jean Valjean or Vlajean , probably a sobriquet , and a contraction of viola Jean , `` here 's Jean . '' 
Jean Valjean was of that thoughtful but not gloomy disposition which constitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures . 
On the whole , however , there was something decidedly sluggish and insignificant about Jean Valjean in appearance , at least . 
He had lost his father and mother at a very early age . 
His mother had died of a milk fever , which had not been properly attended to . 
His father , a tree-pruner , like himself , had been killed by a fall from a tree . 
All that remained to Jean Valjean was a sister older than himself , -- a widow with seven children , boys and girls . 
This sister had brought up Jean Valjean , and so long as she had a husband she lodged and fed her young brother . 
The husband died . 
The eldest of the seven children was eight years old . 
The youngest , one . 
Jean Valjean had just attained his twenty-fifth year . 
He took the father 's place , and , in his turn , supported the sister who had brought him up . 
This was done simply as a duty and even a little churlishly on the part of Jean Valjean . 
Thus his youth had been spent in rude and ill-paid toil . 
He had never known a `` kind woman friend '' in his native parts . 
He had not had the time to fall in love . 
He returned at night weary , and ate his broth without uttering a word . 
His sister , mother Jeanne , often took the best part of his repast from his bowl while he was eating , -- a bit of meat , a slice of bacon , the heart of the cabbage , -- to give to one of her children . 
As he went on eating , with his head bent over the table and almost into his soup , his long hair falling about his bowl and concealing his eyes , he had the air of perceiving nothing and allowing it . 
There was at Faverolles , not far from the Valjean thatched cottage , on the other side of the lane , a farmer 's wife named Marie-Claude ; the Valjean children , habitually famished , sometimes went to borrow from Marie-Claude a pint of milk , in their mother 's name , which they drank behind a hedge or in some alley corner , snatching the jug from each other so hastily that the little girls spilled it on their aprons and down their necks . 
If their mother had known of this marauding , she would have punished the delinquents severely . 
Jean Valjean gruffly and grumblingly paid Marie-Claude for the pint of milk behind their mother 's back , and the children were not punished . 
In pruning season he earned eighteen sous a day ; then he hired out as a hay-maker , as laborer , as neat-herd on a farm , as a drudge . 
He did whatever he could . 
His sister worked also but what could she do with seven little children ? 
It was a sad group enveloped in misery , which was being gradually annihilated . 
A very hard winter came . 
Jean had no work . 
The family had no bread . 
No bread literally . 
Seven children ! 
One Sunday evening , Maubert Isabeau , the baker on the Church Square at Faverolles , was preparing to go to bed , when he heard a violent blow on the grated front of his shop . 
He arrived in time to see an arm passed through a hole made by a blow from a fist , through the grating and the glass . 
The arm seized a loaf of bread and carried it off . 
Isabeau ran out in haste ; the robber fled at the full speed of his legs . 
Isabeau ran after him and stopped him . 
The thief had flung away the loaf , but his arm was still bleeding . 
It was Jean Valjean . 
This took place in 1795 . 
Jean Valjean was taken before the tribunals of the time for theft and breaking and entering an inhabited house at night . 
He had a gun which he used better than any one else in the world , he was a bit of a poacher , and this injured his case . 
There exists a legitimate prejudice against poachers . 
The poacher , like the smuggler , smacks too strongly of the brigand . 
Nevertheless , we will remark cursorily , there is still an abyss between these races of men and the hideous assassin of the towns . 
The poacher lives in the forest , the smuggler lives in the mountains or on the sea . 
The cities make ferocious men because they make corrupt men . 
The mountain , the sea , the forest , make savage men ; they develop the fierce side , but often without destroying the humane side . 
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty . 
The terms of the Code were explicit . 
There occur formidable hours in our civilization ; there are moments when the penal laws decree a shipwreck . 
What an ominous minute is that in which society draws back and consummates the irreparable abandonment of a sentient being ! 
Jean Valjean was condemned to five years in the galleys . 
On the 22d of April , 1796 , the victory of Montenotte , won by the general-in-chief of the army of Italy , whom the message of the Directory to the Five Hundred , of the 2d of Floreal , year IV. , calls Buona-Parte , was announced in Paris ; on that same day a great gang of galley-slaves was put in chains at Bicetre . 
Jean Valjean formed a part of that gang . 
An old turnkey of the prison , who is now nearly eighty years old , still recalls perfectly that unfortunate wretch who was chained to the end of the fourth line , in the north angle of the courtyard . 
He was seated on the ground like the others . 
He did not seem to comprehend his position , except that it was horrible . 
It is probable that he , also , was disentangling from amid the vague ideas of a poor man , ignorant of everything , something excessive . 
While the bolt of his iron collar was being riveted behind his head with heavy blows from the hammer , he wept , his tears stifled him , they impeded his speech ; he only managed to say from time to time , `` I was a tree-pruner at Faverolles . '' 
Then still sobbing , he raised his right hand and lowered it gradually seven times , as though he were touching in succession seven heads of unequal heights , and from this gesture it was divined that the thing which he had done , whatever it was , he had done for the sake of clothing and nourishing seven little children . 
He set out for Toulon . 
He arrived there , after a journey of twenty-seven days , on a cart , with a chain on his neck . 
At Toulon he was clothed in the red cassock . 
All that had constituted his life , even to his name , was effaced ; he was no longer even Jean Valjean ; he was number 24,601 . 
What became of his sister ? 
What became of the seven children ? 
Who troubled himself about that ? 
What becomes of the handful of leaves from the young tree which is sawed off at the root ? 
It is always the same story . 
These poor living beings , these creatures of God , henceforth without support , without guide , without refuge , wandered away at random , -- who even knows ? 
-- each in his own direction perhaps , and little by little buried themselves in that cold mist which engulfs solitary destinies ; gloomy shades , into which disappear in succession so many unlucky heads , in the sombre march of the human race . 
They quitted the country . 
The clock-tower of what had been their village forgot them ; the boundary line of what had been their field forgot them ; after a few years ' residence in the galleys , Jean Valjean himself forgot them . 
In that heart , where there had been a wound , there was a scar . 
That is all . 
Only once , during all the time which he spent at Toulon , did he hear his sister mentioned . 
This happened , I think , towards the end of the fourth year of his captivity . 
I know not through what channels the news reached him . 
Some one who had known them in their own country had seen his sister . 
She was in Paris . 
She lived in a poor street Rear Saint-Sulpice , in the Rue du Gindre . 
She had with her only one child , a little boy , the youngest . 
Where were the other six ? 
Perhaps she did not know herself . 
Every morning she went to a printing office , No. 3 Rue du Sabot , where she was a folder and stitcher . 
She was obliged to be there at six o'clock in the morning -- long before daylight in winter . 
In the same building with the printing office there was a school , and to this school she took her little boy , who was seven years old . 
But as she entered the printing office at six , and the school only opened at seven , the child had to wait in the courtyard , for the school to open , for an hour -- one hour of a winter night in the open air ! 
They would not allow the child to come into the printing office , because he was in the way , they said . 
When the workmen passed in the morning , they beheld this poor little being seated on the pavement , overcome with drowsiness , and often fast asleep in the shadow , crouched down and doubled up over his basket . 
When it rained , an old woman , the portress , took pity on him ; she took him into her den , where there was a pallet , a spinning-wheel , and two wooden chairs , and the little one slumbered in a corner , pressing himself close to the cat that he might suffer less from cold . 
At seven o'clock the school opened , and he entered . 
That is what was told to Jean Valjean . 
They talked to him about it for one day ; it was a moment , a flash , as though a window had suddenly been opened upon the destiny of those things whom he had loved ; then all closed again . 
He heard nothing more forever . 
Nothing from them ever reached him again ; he never beheld them ; he never met them again ; and in the continuation of this mournful history they will not be met with any more . 
Towards the end of this fourth year Jean Valjean 's turn to escape arrived . 
His comrades assisted him , as is the custom in that sad place . 
He escaped . 
He wandered for two days in the fields at liberty , if being at liberty is to be hunted , to turn the head every instant , to quake at the slightest noise , to be afraid of everything , -- of a smoking roof , of a passing man , of a barking dog , of a galloping horse , of a striking clock , of the day because one can see , of the night because one can not see , of the highway , of the path , of a bush , of sleep . 
On the evening of the second day he was captured . 
He had neither eaten nor slept for thirty-six hours . 
The maritime tribunal condemned him , for this crime , to a prolongation of his term for three years , which made eight years . 
In the sixth year his turn to escape occurred again ; he availed himself of it , but could not accomplish his flight fully . 
He was missing at roll-call . 
The cannon were fired , and at night the patrol found him hidden under the keel of a vessel in process of construction ; he resisted the galley guards who seized him . 
Escape and rebellion . 
This case , provided for by a special code , was punished by an addition of five years , two of them in the double chain . 
Thirteen years . 
In the tenth year his turn came round again ; he again profited by it ; he succeeded no better . 
Three years for this fresh attempt . 
Sixteen years . 
Finally , I think it was during his thirteenth year , he made a last attempt , and only succeeded in getting retaken at the end of four hours of absence . 
Three years for those four hours . 
Nineteen years . 
In October , 1815 , he was released ; he had entered there in 1796 , for having broken a pane of glass and taken a loaf of bread . 
Room for a brief parenthesis . 
This is the second time , during his studies on the penal question and damnation by law , that the author of this book has come across the theft of a loaf of bread as the point of departure for the disaster of a destiny . 
Claude Gaux had stolen a loaf ; Jean Valjean had stolen a loaf . 
English statistics prove the fact that four thefts out of five in London have hunger for their immediate cause . 
Jean Valjean had entered the galleys sobbing and shuddering ; he emerged impassive . 
He had entered in despair ; he emerged gloomy . 
What had taken place in that soul ? 
Let us try to say it . 
It is necessary that society should look at these things , because it is itself which creates them . 
He was , as we have said , an ignorant man , but he was not a fool . 
The light of nature was ignited in him . 
Unhappiness , which also possesses a clearness of vision of its own , augmented the small amount of daylight which existed in this mind . 
Beneath the cudgel , beneath the chain , in the cell , in hardship , beneath the burning sun of the galleys , upon the plank bed of the convict , he withdrew into his own consciousness and meditated . 
He constituted himself the tribunal . 
He began by putting himself on trial . 
He recognized the fact that he was not an innocent man unjustly punished . 
He admitted that he had committed an extreme and blameworthy act ; that that loaf of bread would probably not have been refused to him had he asked for it ; that , in any case , it would have been better to wait until he could get it through compassion or through work ; that it is not an unanswerable argument to say , `` Can one wait when one is hungry ? '' 
That , in the first place , it is very rare for any one to die of hunger , literally ; and next , that , fortunately or unfortunately , man is so constituted that he can suffer long and much , both morally and physically , without dying ; that it is therefore necessary to have patience ; that that would even have been better for those poor little children ; that it had been an act of madness for him , a miserable , unfortunate wretch , to take society at large violently by the collar , and to imagine that one can escape from misery through theft ; that that is in any case a poor door through which to escape from misery through which infamy enters ; in short , that he was in the wrong . 
Then he asked himself -- Whether he had been the only one in fault in his fatal history . 
Whether it was not a serious thing , that he , a laborer , out of work , that he , an industrious man , should have lacked bread . 
And whether , the fault once committed and confessed , the chastisement had not been ferocious and disproportioned . 
Whether there had not been more abuse on the part of the law , in respect to the penalty , than there had been on the part of the culprit in respect to his fault . 
Whether there had not been an excess of weights in one balance of the scale , in the one which contains expiation . 
Whether the over-weight of the penalty was not equivalent to the annihilation of the crime , and did not result in reversing the situation , of replacing the fault of the delinquent by the fault of the repression , of converting the guilty man into the victim , and the debtor into the creditor , and of ranging the law definitely on the side of the man who had violated it . 
Whether this penalty , complicated by successive aggravations for attempts at escape , had not ended in becoming a sort of outrage perpetrated by the stronger upon the feebler , a crime of society against the individual , a crime which was being committed afresh every day , a crime which had lasted nineteen years . 
He asked himself whether human society could have the right to force its members to suffer equally in one case for its own unreasonable lack of foresight , and in the other case for its pitiless foresight ; and to seize a poor man forever between a defect and an excess , a default of work and an excess of punishment . 
Whether it was not outrageous for society to treat thus precisely those of its members who were the least well endowed in the division of goods made by chance , and consequently the most deserving of consideration . 
These questions put and answered , he judged society and condemned it . 
He condemned it to his hatred . 
He made it responsible for the fate which he was suffering , and he said to himself that it might be that one day he should not hesitate to call it to account . 
He declared to himself that there was no equilibrium between the harm which he had caused and the harm which was being done to him ; he finally arrived at the conclusion that his punishment was not , in truth , unjust , but that it most assuredly was iniquitous . 
Anger may be both foolish and absurd ; one can be irritated wrongfully ; one is exasperated only when there is some show of right on one 's side at bottom . 
Jean Valjean felt himself exasperated . 
And besides , human society had done him nothing but harm ; he had never seen anything of it save that angry face which it calls Justice , and which it shows to those whom it strikes . 
Men had only touched him to bruise him . 
Every contact with them had been a blow . 
Never , since his infancy , since the days of his mother , of his sister , had he ever encountered a friendly word and a kindly glance . 
From suffering to suffering , he had gradually arrived at the conviction that life is a war ; and that in this war he was the conquered . 
He had no other weapon than his hate . 
He resolved to whet it in the galleys and to bear it away with him when he departed . 
There was at Toulon a school for the convicts , kept by the Ignorantin friars , where the most necessary branches were taught to those of the unfortunate men who had a mind for them . 
He was of the number who had a mind . 
He went to school at the age of forty , and learned to read , to write , to cipher . 
He felt that to fortify his intelligence was to fortify his hate . 
In certain cases , education and enlightenment can serve to eke out evil . 
This is a sad thing to say ; after having judged society , which had caused his unhappiness , he judged Providence , which had made society , and he condemned it also . 
Thus during nineteen years of torture and slavery , this soul mounted and at the same time fell . 
Light entered it on one side , and darkness on the other . 
Jean Valjean had not , as we have seen , an evil nature . 
He was still good when he arrived at the galleys . 
He there condemned society , and felt that he was becoming wicked ; he there condemned Providence , and was conscious that he was becoming impious . 
It is difficult not to indulge in meditation at this point . 
Does human nature thus change utterly and from top to bottom ? 
Can the man created good by God be rendered wicked by man ? 
Can the soul be completely made over by fate , and become evil , fate being evil ? 
Can the heart become misshapen and contract incurable deformities and infirmities under the oppression of a disproportionate unhappiness , as the vertebral column beneath too low a vault ? 
Is there not in every human soul , was there not in the soul of Jean Valjean in particular , a first spark , a divine element , incorruptible in this world , immortal in the other , which good can develop , fan , ignite , and make to glow with splendor , and which evil can never wholly extinguish ? 
Grave and obscure questions , to the last of which every physiologist would probably have responded no , and that without hesitation , had he beheld at Toulon , during the hours of repose , which were for Jean Valjean hours of revery , this gloomy galley-slave , seated with folded arms upon the bar of some capstan , with the end of his chain thrust into his pocket to prevent its dragging , serious , silent , and thoughtful , a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath , condemned by civilization , and regarding heaven with severity . 
Certainly , -- and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact , -- the observing physiologist would have beheld an irremediable misery ; he would , perchance , have pitied this sick man , of the law 's making ; but he would not have even essayed any treatment ; he would have turned aside his gaze from the caverns of which he would have caught a glimpse within this soul , and , like Dante at the portals of hell , he would have effaced from this existence the word which the finger of God has , nevertheless , inscribed upon the brow of every man , -- hope . 
Was this state of his soul , which we have attempted to analyze , as perfectly clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for those who read us ? 
Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive , after their formation , and had he seen distinctly during the process of their formation , all the elements of which his moral misery was composed ? 
Had this rough and unlettered man gathered a perfectly clear perception of the succession of ideas through which he had , by degrees , mounted and descended to the lugubrious aspects which had , for so many years , formed the inner horizon of his spirit ? 
Was he conscious of all that passed within him , and of all that was working there ? 
That is something which we do not presume to state ; it is something which we do not even believe . 
There was too much ignorance in Jean Valjean , even after his misfortune , to prevent much vagueness from still lingering there . 
At times he did not rightly know himself what he felt . 
Jean Valjean was in the shadows ; he suffered in the shadows ; he hated in the shadows ; one might have said that he hated in advance of himself . 
He dwelt habitually in this shadow , feeling his way like a blind man and a dreamer . 
Only , at intervals , there suddenly came to him , from without and from within , an access of wrath , a surcharge of suffering , a livid and rapid flash which illuminated his whole soul , and caused to appear abruptly all around him , in front , behind , amid the gleams of a frightful light , the hideous precipices and the sombre perspective of his destiny . 
The flash passed , the night closed in again ; and where was he ? 
He no longer knew . 
The peculiarity of pains of this nature , in which that which is pitiless -- that is to say , that which is brutalizing -- predominates , is to transform a man , little by little , by a sort of stupid transfiguration , into a wild beast ; sometimes into a ferocious beast . 
Jean Valjean 's successive and obstinate attempts at escape would alone suffice to prove this strange working of the law upon the human soul . 
Jean Valjean would have renewed these attempts , utterly useless and foolish as they were , as often as the opportunity had presented itself , without reflecting for an instant on the result , nor on the experiences which he had already gone through . 
He escaped impetuously , like the wolf who finds his cage open . 
Instinct said to him , `` Flee ! '' 
Reason would have said , `` Remain ! '' 
But in the presence of so violent a temptation , reason vanished ; nothing remained but instinct . 
The beast alone acted . 
When he was recaptured , the fresh severities inflicted on him only served to render him still more wild . 
One detail , which we must not omit , is that he possessed a physical strength which was not approached by a single one of the denizens of the galleys . 
At work , at paying out a cable or winding up a capstan , Jean Valjean was worth four men . 
He sometimes lifted and sustained enormous weights on his back ; and when the occasion demanded it , he replaced that implement which is called a jack-screw , and was formerly called orgueil -LSB- pride -RSB- , whence , we may remark in passing , is derived the name of the Rue Montorgueil , near the Halles -LSB- Fishmarket -RSB- in Paris . 
His comrades had nicknamed him Jean the Jack-screw . 
Once , when they were repairing the balcony of the town-hall at Toulon , one of those admirable caryatids of Puget , which support the balcony , became loosened , and was on the point of falling . 
Jean Valjean , who was present , supported the caryatid with his shoulder , and gave the workmen time to arrive . 
His suppleness even exceeded his strength . 
Certain convicts who were forever dreaming of escape , ended by making a veritable science of force and skill combined . 
It is the science of muscles . 
An entire system of mysterious statics is daily practised by prisoners , men who are forever envious of the flies and birds . 
To climb a vertical surface , and to find points of support where hardly a projection was visible , was play to Jean Valjean . 
An angle of the wall being given , with the tension of his back and legs , with his elbows and his heels fitted into the unevenness of the stone , he raised himself as if by magic to the third story . 
He sometimes mounted thus even to the roof of the galley prison . 
He spoke but little . 
He laughed not at all . 
An excessive emotion was required to wring from him , once or twice a year , that lugubrious laugh of the convict , which is like the echo of the laugh of a demon . 
To all appearance , he seemed to be occupied in the constant contemplation of something terrible . 
He was absorbed , in fact . 
Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete nature and a crushed intelligence , he was confusedly conscious that some monstrous thing was resting on him . 
In that obscure and wan shadow within which he crawled , each time that he turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance , he perceived with terror , mingled with rage , a sort of frightful accumulation of things , collecting and mounting above him , beyond the range of his vision , -- laws , prejudices , men , and deeds , -- whose outlines escaped him , whose mass terrified him , and which was nothing else than that prodigious pyramid which we call civilization . 
He distinguished , here and there in that swarming and formless mass , now near him , now afar off and on inaccessible table-lands , some group , some detail , vividly illuminated ; here the galley-sergeant and his cudgel ; there the gendarme and his sword ; yonder the mitred archbishop ; away at the top , like a sort of sun , the Emperor , crowned and dazzling . 
It seemed to him that these distant splendors , far from dissipating his night , rendered it more funereal and more black . 
All this -- laws , prejudices , deeds , men , things -- went and came above him , over his head , in accordance with the complicated and mysterious movement which God imparts to civilization , walking over him and crushing him with I know not what peacefulness in its cruelty and inexorability in its indifference . 
Souls which have fallen to the bottom of all possible misfortune , unhappy men lost in the lowest of those limbos at which no one any longer looks , the reproved of the law , feel the whole weight of this human society , so formidable for him who is without , so frightful for him who is beneath , resting upon their heads . 
In this situation Jean Valjean meditated ; and what could be the nature of his meditation ? 
If the grain of millet beneath the millstone had thoughts , it would , doubtless , think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought . 
All these things , realities full of spectres , phantasmagories full of realities , had eventually created for him a sort of interior state which is almost indescribable . 
At times , amid his convict toil , he paused . 
He fell to thinking . 
His reason , at one and the same time riper and more troubled than of yore , rose in revolt . 
Everything which had happened to him seemed to him absurd ; everything that surrounded him seemed to him impossible . 
He said to himself , `` It is a dream . '' 
He gazed at the galley-sergeant standing a few paces from him ; the galley-sergeant seemed a phantom to him . 
All of a sudden the phantom dealt him a blow with his cudgel . 
Visible nature hardly existed for him . 
It would almost be true to say that there existed for Jean Valjean neither sun , nor fine summer days , nor radiant sky , nor fresh April dawns . 
I know not what vent-hole daylight habitually illumined his soul . 
To sum up , in conclusion , that which can be summed up and translated into positive results in all that we have just pointed out , we will confine ourselves to the statement that , in the course of nineteen years , Jean Valjean , the inoffensive tree-pruner of Faverolles , the formidable convict of Toulon , had become capable , thanks to the manner in which the galleys had moulded him , of two sorts of evil action : firstly , of evil action which was rapid , unpremeditated , dashing , entirely instinctive , in the nature of reprisals for the evil which he had undergone ; secondly , of evil action which was serious , grave , consciously argued out and premeditated , with the false ideas which such a misfortune can furnish . 
His deliberate deeds passed through three successive phases , which natures of a certain stamp can alone traverse , -- reasoning , will , perseverance . 
He had for moving causes his habitual wrath , bitterness of soul , a profound sense of indignities suffered , the reaction even against the good , the innocent , and the just , if there are any such . 
The point of departure , like the point of arrival , for all his thoughts , was hatred of human law ; that hatred which , if it be not arrested in its development by some providential incident , becomes , within a given time , the hatred of society , then the hatred of the human race , then the hatred of creation , and which manifests itself by a vague , incessant , and brutal desire to do harm to some living being , no matter whom . 
It will be perceived that it was not without reason that Jean Valjean 's passport described him as a very dangerous man . 
From year to year this soul had dried away slowly , but with fatal sureness . 
When the heart is dry , the eye is dry . 
On his departure from the galleys it had been nineteen years since he had shed a tear . 
A man overboard ! 
What matters it ? 
The vessel does not halt . 
The wind blows . 
That sombre ship has a path which it is forced to pursue . 
It passes on . 
The man disappears , then reappears ; he plunges , he rises again to the surface ; he calls , he stretches out his arms ; he is not heard . 
The vessel , trembling under the hurricane , is wholly absorbed in its own workings ; the passengers and sailors do not even see the drowning man ; his miserable head is but a speck amid the immensity of the waves . 
He gives vent to desperate cries from out of the depths . 
What a spectre is that retreating sail ! 
He gazes and gazes at it frantically . 
It retreats , it grows dim , it diminishes in size . 
He was there but just now , he was one of the crew , he went and came along the deck with the rest , he had his part of breath and of sunlight , he was a living man . 
Now , what has taken place ? 
He has slipped , he has fallen ; all is at an end . 
He is in the tremendous sea . 
Under foot he has nothing but what flees and crumbles . 
The billows , torn and lashed by the wind , encompass him hideously ; the tossings of the abyss bear him away ; all the tongues of water dash over his head ; a populace of waves spits upon him ; confused openings half devour him ; every time that he sinks , he catches glimpses of precipices filled with night ; frightful and unknown vegetations seize him , knot about his feet , draw him to them ; he is conscious that he is becoming an abyss , that he forms part of the foam ; the waves toss him from one to another ; he drinks in the bitterness ; the cowardly ocean attacks him furiously , to drown him ; the enormity plays with his agony . 
It seems as though all that water were hate . 
Nevertheless , he struggles . 
He tries to defend himself ; he tries to sustain himself ; he makes an effort ; he swims . 
He , his petty strength all exhausted instantly , combats the inexhaustible . 
Where , then , is the ship ? 
Yonder . 
Barely visible in the pale shadows of the horizon . 
The wind blows in gusts ; all the foam overwhelms him . 
He raises his eyes and beholds only the lividness of the clouds . 
He witnesses , amid his death-pangs , the immense madness of the sea . 
He is tortured by this madness ; he hears noises strange to man , which seem to come from beyond the limits of the earth , and from one knows not what frightful region beyond . 
There are birds in the clouds , just as there are angels above human distresses ; but what can they do for him ? 
They sing and fly and float , and he , he rattles in the death agony . 
He feels himself buried in those two infinities , the ocean and the sky , at one and the same time : the one is a tomb ; the other is a shroud . 
Night descends ; he has been swimming for hours ; his strength is exhausted ; that ship , that distant thing in which there were men , has vanished ; he is alone in the formidable twilight gulf ; he sinks , he stiffens himself , he twists himself ; he feels under him the monstrous billows of the invisible ; he shouts . 
There are no more men . 
Where is God ? 
He shouts . 
Help ! 
Help ! 
He still shouts on . 
Nothing on the horizon ; nothing in heaven . 
He implores the expanse , the waves , the seaweed , the reef ; they are deaf . 
He beseeches the tempest ; the imperturbable tempest obeys only the infinite . 
Around him darkness , fog , solitude , the stormy and nonsentient tumult , the undefined curling of those wild waters . 
In him horror and fatigue . 
Beneath him the depths . 
Not a point of support . 
He thinks of the gloomy adventures of the corpse in the limitless shadow . 
The bottomless cold paralyzes him . 
His hands contract convulsively ; they close , and grasp nothingness . 
Winds , clouds , whirlwinds , gusts , useless stars ! 
What is to be done ? 
The desperate man gives up ; he is weary , he chooses the alternative of death ; he resists not ; he lets himself go ; he abandons his grip ; and then he tosses forevermore in the lugubrious dreary depths of engulfment . 
Oh , implacable march of human societies ! 
Oh , losses of men and of souls on the way ! 
Ocean into which falls all that the law lets slip ! 
Disastrous absence of help ! 
Oh , moral death ! 
The sea is the inexorable social night into which the penal laws fling their condemned . 
The sea is the immensity of wretchedness . 
The soul , going down stream in this gulf , may become a corpse . 
Who shall resuscitate it ? 
When the hour came for him to take his departure from the galleys , when Jean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words , Thou art free ! 
the moment seemed improbable and unprecedented ; a ray of vivid light , a ray of the true light of the living , suddenly penetrated within him . 
But it was not long before this ray paled . 
Jean Valjean had been dazzled by the idea of liberty . 
He had believed in a new life . 
He very speedily perceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow passport is provided . 
And this was encompassed with much bitterness . 
He had calculated that his earnings , during his sojourn in the galleys , ought to amount to a hundred and seventy-one francs . 
It is but just to add that he had forgotten to include in his calculations the forced repose of Sundays and festival days during nineteen years , which entailed a diminution of about eighty francs . 
At all events , his hoard had been reduced by various local levies to the sum of one hundred and nine francs fifteen sous , which had been counted out to him on his departure . 
He had understood nothing of this , and had thought himself wronged . 
Let us say the word -- robbed . 
On the day following his liberation , he saw , at Grasse , in front of an orange-flower distillery , some men engaged in unloading bales . 
He offered his services . 
Business was pressing ; they were accepted . 
He set to work . 
He was intelligent , robust , adroit ; he did his best ; the master seemed pleased . 
While he was at work , a gendarme passed , observed him , and demanded his papers . 
It was necessary to show him the yellow passport . 
That done , Jean Valjean resumed his labor . 
A little while before he had questioned one of the workmen as to the amount which they earned each day at this occupation ; he had been told thirty sous . 
When evening arrived , as he was forced to set out again on the following day , he presented himself to the owner of the distillery and requested to be paid . 
The owner did not utter a word , but handed him fifteen sous . 
He objected . 
He was told , `` That is enough for thee . '' 
He persisted . 
The master looked him straight between the eyes , and said to him `` Beware of the prison . '' 
There , again , he considered that he had been robbed . 
Society , the State , by diminishing his hoard , had robbed him wholesale . 
Now it was the individual who was robbing him at retail . 
Liberation is not deliverance . 
One gets free from the galleys , but not from the sentence . 
That is what happened to him at Grasse . 
We have seen in what manner he was received at D -- As the Cathedral clock struck two in the morning , Jean Valjean awoke . 
What woke him was that his bed was too good . 
It was nearly twenty years since he had slept in a bed , and , although he had not undressed , the sensation was too novel not to disturb his slumbers . 
He had slept more than four hours . 
His fatigue had passed away . 
He was accustomed not to devote many hours to repose . 
He opened his eyes and stared into the gloom which surrounded him ; then he closed them again , with the intention of going to sleep once more . 
When many varied sensations have agitated the day , when various matters preoccupy the mind , one falls asleep once , but not a second time . 
Sleep comes more easily than it returns . 
This is what happened to Jean Valjean . 
He could not get to sleep again , and he fell to thinking . 
He was at one of those moments when the thoughts which one has in one 's mind are troubled . 
There was a sort of dark confusion in his brain . 
His memories of the olden time and of the immediate present floated there pell-mell and mingled confusedly , losing their proper forms , becoming disproportionately large , then suddenly disappearing , as in a muddy and perturbed pool . 
Many thoughts occurred to him ; but there was one which kept constantly presenting itself afresh , and which drove away all others . 
We will mention this thought at once : he had observed the six sets of silver forks and spoons and the ladle which Madame Magloire had placed on the table . 
Those six sets of silver haunted him . 
-- They were there . 
-- A few paces distant . 
-- Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the one in which he then was , the old servant-woman had been in the act of placing them in a little cupboard near the head of the bed . 
-- He had taken careful note of this cupboard . 
-- On the right , as you entered from the dining-room . 
-- They were solid . 
-- And old silver . 
-- From the ladle one could get at least two hundred francs . 
-- Double what he had earned in nineteen years . 
-- It is true that he would have earned more if `` the administration had not robbed him . '' 
His mind wavered for a whole hour in fluctuations with which there was certainly mingled some struggle . 
Three o'clock struck . 
He opened his eyes again , drew himself up abruptly into a sitting posture , stretched out his arm and felt of his knapsack , which he had thrown down on a corner of the alcove ; then he hung his legs over the edge of the bed , and placed his feet on the floor , and thus found himself , almost without knowing it , seated on his bed . 
He remained for a time thoughtfully in this attitude , which would have been suggestive of something sinister for any one who had seen him thus in the dark , the only person awake in that house where all were sleeping . 
All of a sudden he stooped down , removed his shoes and placed them softly on the mat beside the bed ; then he resumed his thoughtful attitude , and became motionless once more . 
Throughout this hideous meditation , the thoughts which we have above indicated moved incessantly through his brain ; entered , withdrew , re-entered , and in a manner oppressed him ; and then he thought , also , without knowing why , and with the mechanical persistence of revery , of a convict named Brevet , whom he had known in the galleys , and whose trousers had been upheld by a single suspender of knitted cotton . 
The checkered pattern of that suspender recurred incessantly to his mind . 
He remained in this situation , and would have so remained indefinitely , even until daybreak , had not the clock struck one -- the half or quarter hour . 
It seemed to him that that stroke said to him , `` Come on ! '' 
He rose to his feet , hesitated still another moment , and listened ; all was quiet in the house ; then he walked straight ahead , with short steps , to the window , of which he caught a glimpse . 
The night was not very dark ; there was a full moon , across which coursed large clouds driven by the wind . 
This created , outdoors , alternate shadow and gleams of light , eclipses , then bright openings of the clouds ; and indoors a sort of twilight . 
This twilight , sufficient to enable a person to see his way , intermittent on account of the clouds , resembled the sort of livid light which falls through an air-hole in a cellar , before which the passersby come and go . 
On arriving at the window , Jean Valjean examined it . 
It had no grating ; it opened in the garden and was fastened , according to the fashion of the country , only by a small pin . 
He opened it ; but as a rush of cold and piercing air penetrated the room abruptly , he closed it again immediately . 
He scrutinized the garden with that attentive gaze which studies rather than looks . 
The garden was enclosed by a tolerably low white wall , easy to climb . 
Far away , at the extremity , he perceived tops of trees , spaced at regular intervals , which indicated that the wall separated the garden from an avenue or lane planted with trees . 
Having taken this survey , he executed a movement like that of a man who has made up his mind , strode to his alcove , grasped his knapsack , opened it , fumbled in it , pulled out of it something which he placed on the bed , put his shoes into one of his pockets , shut the whole thing up again , threw the knapsack on his shoulders , put on his cap , drew the visor down over his eyes , felt for his cudgel , went and placed it in the angle of the window ; then returned to the bed , and resolutely seized the object which he had deposited there . 
It resembled a short bar of iron , pointed like a pike at one end . 
It would have been difficult to distinguish in that darkness for what employment that bit of iron could have been designed . 
Perhaps it was a lever ; possibly it was a club . 
In the daytime it would have been possible to recognize it as nothing more than a miner 's candlestick . 
Convicts were , at that period , sometimes employed in quarrying stone from the lofty hills which environ Toulon , and it was not rare for them to have miners ' tools at their command . 
These miners ' candlesticks are of massive iron , terminated at the lower extremity by a point , by means of which they are stuck into the rock . 
He took the candlestick in his right hand ; holding his breath and trying to deaden the sound of his tread , he directed his steps to the door of the adjoining room , occupied by the Bishop , as we already know . 
On arriving at this door , he found it ajar . 
The Bishop had not closed it . 
Jean Valjean listened . 
Not a sound . 
He gave the door a push . 
He pushed it gently with the tip of his finger , lightly , with the furtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering . 
The door yielded to this pressure , and made an imperceptible and silent movement , which enlarged the opening a little . 
He waited a moment ; then gave the door a second and a bolder push . 
It continued to yield in silence . 
The opening was now large enough to allow him to pass . 
But near the door there stood a little table , which formed an embarrassing angle with it , and barred the entrance . 
Jean Valjean recognized the difficulty . 
It was necessary , at any cost , to enlarge the aperture still further . 
He decided on his course of action , and gave the door a third push , more energetic than the two preceding . 
This time a badly oiled hinge suddenly emitted amid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry . 
Jean Valjean shuddered . 
The noise of the hinge rang in his ears with something of the piercing and formidable sound of the trump of the Day of Judgment . 
In the fantastic exaggerations of the first moment he almost imagined that that hinge had just become animated , and had suddenly assumed a terrible life , and that it was barking like a dog to arouse every one , and warn and to wake those who were asleep . 
He halted , shuddering , bewildered , and fell back from the tips of his toes upon his heels . 
He heard the arteries in his temples beating like two forge hammers , and it seemed to him that his breath issued from his breast with the roar of the wind issuing from a cavern . 
It seemed impossible to him that the horrible clamor of that irritated hinge should not have disturbed the entire household , like the shock of an earthquake ; the door , pushed by him , had taken the alarm , and had shouted ; the old man would rise at once ; the two old women would shriek out ; people would come to their assistance ; in less than a quarter of an hour the town would be in an uproar , and the gendarmerie on hand . 
For a moment he thought himself lost . 
He remained where he was , petrified like the statue of salt , not daring to make a movement . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
The door had fallen wide open . 
He ventured to peep into the next room . 
Nothing had stirred there . 
He lent an ear . 
Nothing was moving in the house . 
The noise made by the rusty hinge had not awakened any one . 
This first danger was past ; but there still reigned a frightful tumult within him . 
Nevertheless , he did not retreat . 
Even when he had thought himself lost , he had not drawn back . 
His only thought now was to finish as soon as possible . 
He took a step and entered the room . 
This room was in a state of perfect calm . 
Here and there vague and confused forms were distinguishable , which in the daylight were papers scattered on a table , open folios , volumes piled upon a stool , an arm-chair heaped with clothing , a prie-Dieu , and which at that hour were only shadowy corners and whitish spots . 
Jean Valjean advanced with precaution , taking care not to knock against the furniture . 
He could hear , at the extremity of the room , the even and tranquil breathing of the sleeping Bishop . 
