He chose the principal street . 
He walked straight on at a venture , keeping close to the houses like a sad and humiliated man . 
He did not turn round a single time . 
Had he done so , he would have seen the host of the Cross of Colbas standing on his threshold , surrounded by all the guests of his inn , and all the passers-by in the street , talking vivaciously , and pointing him out with his finger ; and , from the glances of terror and distrust cast by the group , he might have divined that his arrival would speedily become an event for the whole town . 
He saw nothing of all this . 
People who are crushed do not look behind them . 
They know but too well the evil fate which follows them . 
Thus he proceeded for some time , walking on without ceasing , traversing at random streets of which he knew nothing , forgetful of his fatigue , as is often the case when a man is sad . 
All at once he felt the pangs of hunger sharply . 
Night was drawing near . 
He glanced about him , to see whether he could not discover some shelter . 
The fine hostelry was closed to him ; he was seeking some very humble public house , some hovel , however lowly . 
Just then a light flashed up at the end of the streets ; a pine branch suspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against the white sky of the twilight . 
He proceeded thither . 
It proved to be , in fact , a public house . 
The public house which is in the Rue de Chaffaut . 
The wayfarer halted for a moment , and peeped through the window into the interior of the low-studded room of the public house , illuminated by a small lamp on a table and by a large fire on the hearth . 
Some men were engaged in drinking there . 
The landlord was warming himself . 
An iron pot , suspended from a crane , bubbled over the flame . 
The entrance to this public house , which is also a sort of an inn , is by two doors . 
One opens on the street , the other upon a small yard filled with manure . 
The traveller dare not enter by the street door . 
He slipped into the yard , halted again , then raised the latch timidly and opened the door . 
`` Who goes there ? '' 
said the master . 
`` Some one who wants supper and bed . '' 
`` Good . 
We furnish supper and bed here . '' 
He entered . 
All the men who were drinking turned round . 
The lamp illuminated him on one side , the firelight on the other . 
They examined him for some time while he was taking off his knapsack . 
The host said to him , `` There is the fire . 
The supper is cooking in the pot . 
Come and warm yourself , comrade . '' 
He approached and seated himself near the hearth . 
He stretched out his feet , which were exhausted with fatigue , to the fire ; a fine odor was emitted by the pot . 
All that could be distinguished of his face , beneath his cap , which was well pulled down , assumed a vague appearance of comfort , mingled with that other poignant aspect which habitual suffering bestows . 
It was , moreover , a firm , energetic , and melancholy profile . 
This physiognomy was strangely composed ; it began by seeming humble , and ended by seeming severe . 
The eye shone beneath its lashes like a fire beneath brushwood . 
One of the men seated at the table , however , was a fishmonger who , before entering the public house of the Rue de Chaffaut , had been to stable his horse at Labarre 's . 
It chanced that he had that very morning encountered this unprepossessing stranger on the road between Bras d'Asse and -- I have forgotten the name . 
I think it was Escoublon . 
Now , when he met him , the man , who then seemed already extremely weary , had requested him to take him on his crupper ; to which the fishmonger had made no reply except by redoubling his gait . 
This fishmonger had been a member half an hour previously of the group which surrounded Jacquin Labarre , and had himself related his disagreeable encounter of the morning to the people at the Cross of Colbas . 
From where he sat he made an imperceptible sign to the tavern-keeper . 
The tavern-keeper went to him . 
They exchanged a few words in a low tone . 
The man had again become absorbed in his reflections . 
The tavern-keeper returned to the fireplace , laid his hand abruptly on the shoulder of the man , and said to him : -- `` You are going to get out of here . '' 
The stranger turned round and replied gently , `` Ah ! 
You know ? 
-- '' `` Yes . '' 
`` I was sent away from the other inn . '' 
`` And you are to be turned out of this one . '' 
`` Where would you have me go ? '' 
`` Elsewhere . '' 
The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed . 
As he went out , some children who had followed him from the Cross of Colbas , and who seemed to be lying in wait for him , threw stones at him . 
He retraced his steps in anger , and threatened them with his stick : the children dispersed like a flock of birds . 
He passed before the prison . 
At the door hung an iron chain attached to a bell . 
He rang . 
The wicket opened . 
`` Turnkey , '' said he , removing his cap politely , `` will you have the kindness to admit me , and give me a lodging for the night ? '' 
A voice replied : -- `` The prison is not an inn . 
Get yourself arrested , and you will be admitted . '' 
The wicket closed again . 
He entered a little street in which there were many gardens . 
Some of them are enclosed only by hedges , which lends a cheerful aspect to the street . 
In the midst of these gardens and hedges he caught sight of a small house of a single story , the window of which was lighted up . 
He peered through the pane as he had done at the public house . 
Within was a large whitewashed room , with a bed draped in printed cotton stuff , and a cradle in one corner , a few wooden chairs , and a double-barrelled gun hanging on the wall . 
A table was spread in the centre of the room . 
A copper lamp illuminated the tablecloth of coarse white linen , the pewter jug shining like silver , and filled with wine , and the brown , smoking soup-tureen . 
At this table sat a man of about forty , with a merry and open countenance , who was dandling a little child on his knees . 
Close by a very young woman was nursing another child . 
The father was laughing , the child was laughing , the mother was smiling . 
The stranger paused a moment in revery before this tender and calming spectacle . 
What was taking place within him ? 
He alone could have told . 
It is probable that he thought that this joyous house would be hospitable , and that , in a place where he beheld so much happiness , he would find perhaps a little pity . 
He tapped on the pane with a very small and feeble knock . 
They did not hear him . 
He tapped again . 
He heard the woman say , `` It seems to me , husband , that some one is knocking . '' 
`` No , '' replied the husband . 
He tapped a third time . 
The husband rose , took the lamp , and went to the door , which he opened . 
He was a man of lofty stature , half peasant , half artisan . 
He wore a huge leather apron , which reached to his left shoulder , and which a hammer , a red handkerchief , a powder-horn , and all sorts of objects which were upheld by the girdle , as in a pocket , caused to bulge out . 
He carried his head thrown backwards ; his shirt , widely opened and turned back , displayed his bull neck , white and bare . 
He had thick eyelashes , enormous black whiskers , prominent eyes , the lower part of his face like a snout ; and besides all this , that air of being on his own ground , which is indescribable . 
`` Pardon me , sir , '' said the wayfarer , `` Could you , in consideration of payment , give me a plate of soup and a corner of that shed yonder in the garden , in which to sleep ? 
Tell me ; can you ? 
For money ? '' 
`` Who are you ? '' 
demanded the master of the house . 
The man replied : `` I have just come from Puy-Moisson . 
I have walked all day long . 
I have travelled twelve leagues . 
Can you ? 
-- if I pay ? '' 
`` I would not refuse , '' said the peasant , `` to lodge any respectable man who would pay me . 
But why do you not go to the inn ? '' 
`` There is no room . '' 
`` Bah ! 
Impossible . 
This is neither a fair nor a market day . 
Have you been to Labarre ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
The traveller replied with embarrassment : `` I do not know . 
He did not receive me . '' 
`` Have you been to What 's - his-name 's , in the Rue Chaffaut ? '' 
The stranger 's embarrassment increased ; he stammered , `` He did not receive me either . '' 
The peasant 's countenance assumed an expression of distrust ; he surveyed the newcomer from head to feet , and suddenly exclaimed , with a sort of shudder : -- `` Are you the man ? 
-- '' He cast a fresh glance upon the stranger , took three steps backwards , placed the lamp on the table , and took his gun down from the wall . 
Meanwhile , at the words , Are you the man ? 
the woman had risen , had clasped her two children in her arms , and had taken refuge precipitately behind her husband , staring in terror at the stranger , with her bosom uncovered , and with frightened eyes , as she murmured in a low tone , `` Tso-maraude . '' 
-LSB- 1 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- Patois of the French Alps : chat de maraude , rascally marauder . 
All this took place in less time than it requires to picture it to one 's self . 
After having scrutinized the man for several moments , as one scrutinizes a viper , the master of the house returned to the door and said : -- `` Clear out ! '' 
`` For pity 's sake , a glass of water , '' said the man . 
`` A shot from my gun ! '' 
said the peasant . 
Then he closed the door violently , and the man heard him shoot two large bolts . 
A moment later , the window-shutter was closed , and the sound of a bar of iron which was placed against it was audible outside . 
Night continued to fall . 
A cold wind from the Alps was blowing . 
By the light of the expiring day the stranger perceived , in one of the gardens which bordered the street , a sort of hut , which seemed to him to be built of sods . 
He climbed over the wooden fence resolutely , and found himself in the garden . 
He approached the hut ; its door consisted of a very low and narrow aperture , and it resembled those buildings which road-laborers construct for themselves along the roads . 
He thought without doubt , that it was , in fact , the dwelling of a road-laborer ; he was suffering from cold and hunger , but this was , at least , a shelter from the cold . 
This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night . 
He threw himself flat on his face , and crawled into the hut . 
It was warm there , and he found a tolerably good bed of straw . 
He lay , for a moment , stretched out on this bed , without the power to make a movement , so fatigued was he . 
Then , as the knapsack on his back was in his way , and as it furnished , moreover , a pillow ready to his hand , he set about unbuckling one of the straps . 
At that moment , a ferocious growl became audible . 
He raised his eyes . 
The head of an enormous dog was outlined in the darkness at the entrance of the hut . 
It was a dog 's kennel . 
He was himself vigorous and formidable ; he armed himself with his staff , made a shield of his knapsack , and made his way out of the kennel in the best way he could , not without enlarging the rents in his rags . 
He left the garden in the same manner , but backwards , being obliged , in order to keep the dog respectful , to have recourse to that manoeuvre with his stick which masters in that sort of fencing designate as la rose couverte . 
When he had , not without difficulty , repassed the fence , and found himself once more in the street , alone , without refuge , without shelter , without a roof over his head , chased even from that bed of straw and from that miserable kennel , he dropped rather than seated himself on a stone , and it appears that a passer-by heard him exclaim , `` I am not even a dog ! '' 
He soon rose again and resumed his march . 
He went out of the town , hoping to find some tree or haystack in the fields which would afford him shelter . 
He walked thus for some time , with his head still drooping . 
When he felt himself far from every human habitation , he raised his eyes and gazed searchingly about him . 
He was in a field . 
Before him was one of those low hills covered with close-cut stubble , which , after the harvest , resemble shaved heads . 
The horizon was perfectly black . 
This was not alone the obscurity of night ; it was caused by very low-hanging clouds which seemed to rest upon the hill itself , and which were mounting and filling the whole sky . 
Meanwhile , as the moon was about to rise , and as there was still floating in the zenith a remnant of the brightness of twilight , these clouds formed at the summit of the sky a sort of whitish arch , whence a gleam of light fell upon the earth . 
The earth was thus better lighted than the sky , which produces a particularly sinister effect , and the hill , whose contour was poor and mean , was outlined vague and wan against the gloomy horizon . 
The whole effect was hideous , petty , lugubrious , and narrow . 
There was nothing in the field or on the hill except a deformed tree , which writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer . 
This man was evidently very far from having those delicate habits of intelligence and spirit which render one sensible to the mysterious aspects of things ; nevertheless , there was something in that sky , in that hill , in that plain , in that tree , which was so profoundly desolate , that after a moment of immobility and revery he turned back abruptly . 
There are instants when nature seems hostile . 
He retraced his steps ; the gates of D -- were closed . 
D -- , which had sustained sieges during the wars of religion , was still surrounded in 1815 by ancient walls flanked by square towers which have been demolished since . 
He passed through a breach and entered the town again . 
It might have been eight o'clock in the evening . 
As he was not acquainted with the streets , he recommenced his walk at random . 
In this way he came to the prefecture , then to the seminary . 
As he passed through the Cathedral Square , he shook his fist at the church . 
At the corner of this square there is a printing establishment . 
It is there that the proclamations of the Emperor and of the Imperial Guard to the army , brought from the Island of Elba and dictated by Napoleon himself , were printed for the first time . 
Worn out with fatigue , and no longer entertaining any hope , he lay down on a stone bench which stands at the doorway of this printing office . 
At that moment an old woman came out of the church . 
She saw the man stretched out in the shadow . 
`` What are you doing there , my friend ? '' 
said she . 
He answered harshly and angrily : `` As you see , my good woman , I am sleeping . '' 
The good woman , who was well worthy the name , in fact , was the Marquise de R -- `` On this bench ? '' 
she went on . 
`` I have had a mattress of wood for nineteen years , '' said the man ; `` to-day I have a mattress of stone . '' 
`` You have been a soldier ? '' 
`` Yes , my good woman , a soldier . '' 
`` Why do you not go to the inn ? '' 
`` Because I have no money . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
said Madame de R -- , `` I have only four sous in my purse . '' 
`` Give it to me all the same . '' 
The man took the four sous . 
Madame de R -- continued : `` You can not obtain lodgings in an inn for so small a sum . 
But have you tried ? 
It is impossible for you to pass the night thus . 
You are cold and hungry , no doubt . 
Some one might have given you a lodging out of charity . '' 
`` I have knocked at all doors . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` I have been driven away everywhere . '' 
The `` good woman '' touched the man 's arm , and pointed out to him on the other side of the street a small , low house , which stood beside the Bishop 's palace . 
`` You have knocked at all doors ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Have you knocked at that one ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Knock there . '' 
That evening , the Bishop of D -- , after his promenade through the town , remained shut up rather late in his room . 
He was busy over a great work on Duties , which was never completed , unfortunately . 
He was carefully compiling everything that the Fathers and the doctors have said on this important subject . 
His book was divided into two parts : firstly , the duties of all ; secondly , the duties of each individual , according to the class to which he belongs . 
The duties of all are the great duties . 
There are four of these . 
Saint Matthew points them out : duties towards God -LRB- Matt . 
vi . -RRB- 
; duties towards one 's self -LRB- Matt . 
v. 29 , 30 -RRB- ; duties towards one 's neighbor -LRB- Matt . 
vii . 
12 -RRB- ; duties towards animals -LRB- Matt . 
vi . 
20 , 25 -RRB- . 
As for the other duties the Bishop found them pointed out and prescribed elsewhere : to sovereigns and subjects , in the Epistle to the Romans ; to magistrates , to wives , to mothers , to young men , by Saint Peter ; to husbands , fathers , children and servants , in the Epistle to the Ephesians ; to the faithful , in the Epistle to the Hebrews ; to virgins , in the Epistle to the Corinthians . 
Out of these precepts he was laboriously constructing a harmonious whole , which he desired to present to souls . 
At eight o'clock he was still at work , writing with a good deal of inconvenience upon little squares of paper , with a big book open on his knees , when Madame Magloire entered , according to her wont , to get the silver-ware from the cupboard near his bed . 
A moment later , the Bishop , knowing that the table was set , and that his sister was probably waiting for him , shut his book , rose from his table , and entered the dining-room . 
The dining-room was an oblong apartment , with a fireplace , which had a door opening on the street -LRB- as we have said -RRB- , and a window opening on the garden . 
Madame Magloire was , in fact , just putting the last touches to the table . 
As she performed this service , she was conversing with Mademoiselle Baptistine . 
A lamp stood on the table ; the table was near the fireplace . 
A wood fire was burning there . 
One can easily picture to one 's self these two women , both of whom were over sixty years of age . 
Madame Magloire small , plump , vivacious ; Mademoiselle Baptistine gentle , slender , frail , somewhat taller than her brother , dressed in a gown of puce-colored silk , of the fashion of 1806 , which she had purchased at that date in Paris , and which had lasted ever since . 
To borrow vulgar phrases , which possess the merit of giving utterance in a single word to an idea which a whole page would hardly suffice to express , Madame Magloire had the air of a peasant , and Mademoiselle Baptistine that of a lady . 
Madame Magloire wore a white quilted cap , a gold Jeannette cross on a velvet ribbon upon her neck , the only bit of feminine jewelry that there was in the house , a very white fichu puffing out from a gown of coarse black woollen stuff , with large , short sleeves , an apron of cotton cloth in red and green checks , knotted round the waist with a green ribbon , with a stomacher of the same attached by two pins at the upper corners , coarse shoes on her feet , and yellow stockings , like the women of Marseilles . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine 's gown was cut on the patterns of 1806 , with a short waist , a narrow , sheath-like skirt , puffed sleeves , with flaps and buttons . 
She concealed her gray hair under a frizzed wig known as the baby wig . 
Madame Magloire had an intelligent , vivacious , and kindly air ; the two corners of her mouth unequally raised , and her upper lip , which was larger than the lower , imparted to her a rather crabbed and imperious look . 
So long as Monseigneur held his peace , she talked to him resolutely with a mixture of respect and freedom ; but as soon as Monseigneur began to speak , as we have seen , she obeyed passively like her mistress . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine did not even speak . 
She confined herself to obeying and pleasing him . 
She had never been pretty , even when she was young ; she had large , blue , prominent eyes , and a long arched nose ; but her whole visage , her whole person , breathed forth an ineffable goodness , as we stated in the beginning . 
She had always been predestined to gentleness ; but faith , charity , hope , those three virtues which mildly warm the soul , had gradually elevated that gentleness to sanctity . 
Nature had made her a lamb , religion had made her an angel . 
Poor sainted virgin ! 
Sweet memory which has vanished ! 
Mademoiselle Baptistine has so often narrated what passed at the episcopal residence that evening , that there are many people now living who still recall the most minute details . 
At the moment when the Bishop entered , Madame Magloire was talking with considerable vivacity . 
She was haranguing Mademoiselle Baptistine on a subject which was familiar to her and to which the Bishop was also accustomed . 
The question concerned the lock upon the entrance door . 
It appears that while procuring some provisions for supper , Madame Magloire had heard things in divers places . 
People had spoken of a prowler of evil appearance ; a suspicious vagabond had arrived who must be somewhere about the town , and those who should take it into their heads to return home late that night might be subjected to unpleasant encounters . 
The police was very badly organized , moreover , because there was no love lost between the Prefect and the Mayor , who sought to injure each other by making things happen . 
It behooved wise people to play the part of their own police , and to guard themselves well , and care must be taken to duly close , bar and barricade their houses , and to fasten the doors well . 
Madame Magloire emphasized these last words ; but the Bishop had just come from his room , where it was rather cold . 
He seated himself in front of the fire , and warmed himself , and then fell to thinking of other things . 
He did not take up the remark dropped with design by Madame Magloire . 
She repeated it . 
Then Mademoiselle Baptistine , desirous of satisfying Madame Magloire without displeasing her brother , ventured to say timidly : -- `` Did you hear what Madame Magloire is saying , brother ? '' 
`` I have heard something of it in a vague way , '' replied the Bishop . 
Then half-turning in his chair , placing his hands on his knees , and raising towards the old servant woman his cordial face , which so easily grew joyous , and which was illuminated from below by the firelight , -- `` Come , what is the matter ? 
What is the matter ? 
Are we in any great danger ? '' 
Then Madame Magloire began the whole story afresh , exaggerating it a little without being aware of the fact . 
It appeared that a Bohemian , a bare-footed vagabond , a sort of dangerous mendicant , was at that moment in the town . 
He had presented himself at Jacquin Labarre 's to obtain lodgings , but the latter had not been willing to take him in . 
He had been seen to arrive by the way of the boulevard Gassendi and roam about the streets in the gloaming . 
A gallows-bird with a terrible face . 
`` Really ! '' 
said the Bishop . 
This willingness to interrogate encouraged Madame Magloire ; it seemed to her to indicate that the Bishop was on the point of becoming alarmed ; she pursued triumphantly : -- `` Yes , Monseigneur . 
That is how it is . 
There will be some sort of catastrophe in this town to-night . 
Every one says so . 
And withal , the police is so badly regulated '' -LRB- a useful repetition -RRB- . 
`` The idea of living in a mountainous country , and not even having lights in the streets at night ! 
One goes out . 
Black as ovens , indeed ! 
And I say , Monseigneur , and Mademoiselle there says with me -- '' `` I , '' interrupted his sister , `` say nothing . 
What my brother does is well done . '' 
Madame Magloire continued as though there had been no protest : -- `` We say that this house is not safe at all ; that if Monseigneur will permit , I will go and tell Paulin Musebois , the locksmith , to come and replace the ancient locks on the doors ; we have them , and it is only the work of a moment ; for I say that nothing is more terrible than a door which can be opened from the outside with a latch by the first passer-by ; and I say that we need bolts , Monseigneur , if only for this night ; moreover , Monseigneur has the habit of always saying ` come in ' ; and besides , even in the middle of the night , O mon Dieu ! 
there is no need to ask permission . '' 
At that moment there came a tolerably violent knock on the door . 
`` Come in , '' said the Bishop . 
The door opened . 
It opened wide with a rapid movement , as though some one had given it an energetic and resolute push . 
A man entered . 
We already know the man . 
It was the wayfarer whom we have seen wandering about in search of shelter . 
He entered , advanced a step , and halted , leaving the door open behind him . 
He had his knapsack on his shoulders , his cudgel in his hand , a rough , audacious , weary , and violent expression in his eyes . 
The fire on the hearth lighted him up . 
He was hideous . 
It was a sinister apparition . 
Madame Magloire had not even the strength to utter a cry . 
She trembled , and stood with her mouth wide open . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine turned round , beheld the man entering , and half started up in terror ; then , turning her head by degrees towards the fireplace again , she began to observe her brother , and her face became once more profoundly calm and serene . 
The Bishop fixed a tranquil eye on the man . 
As he opened his mouth , doubtless to ask the new-comer what he desired , the man rested both hands on his staff , directed his gaze at the old man and the two women , and without waiting for the Bishop to speak , he said , in a loud voice : -- `` See here . 
My name is Jean Valjean . 
I am a convict from the galleys . 
I have passed nineteen years in the galleys . 
I was liberated four days ago , and am on my way to Pontarlier , which is my destination . 
I have been walking for four days since I left Toulon . 
I have travelled a dozen leagues to-day on foot . 
This evening , when I arrived in these parts , I went to an inn , and they turned me out , because of my yellow passport , which I had shown at the town-hall . 
I had to do it . 
I went to an inn . 
They said to me , ` Be off , ' at both places . 
No one would take me . 
I went to the prison ; the jailer would not admit me . 
I went into a dog 's kennel ; the dog bit me and chased me off , as though he had been a man . 
One would have said that he knew who I was . 
I went into the fields , intending to sleep in the open air , beneath the stars . 
There were no stars . 
I thought it was going to rain , and I re-entered the town , to seek the recess of a doorway . 
Yonder , in the square , I meant to sleep on a stone bench . 
A good woman pointed out your house to me , and said to me , ` Knock there ! ' 
I have knocked . 
What is this place ? 
Do you keep an inn ? 
I have money -- savings . 
One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous , which I earned in the galleys by my labor , in the course of nineteen years . 
I will pay . 
What is that to me ? 
I have money . 
I am very weary ; twelve leagues on foot ; I am very hungry . 
Are you willing that I should remain ? '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` you will set another place . '' 
The man advanced three paces , and approached the lamp which was on the table . 
`` Stop , '' he resumed , as though he had not quite understood ; `` that 's not it . 
Did you hear ? 
I am a galley-slave ; a convict . 
I come from the galleys . '' 
He drew from his pocket a large sheet of yellow paper , which he unfolded . 
`` Here 's my passport . 
Yellow , as you see . 
This serves to expel me from every place where I go . 
Will you read it ? 
I know how to read . 
I learned in the galleys . 
There is a school there for those who choose to learn . 
Hold , this is what they put on this passport : ` Jean Valjean , discharged convict , native of ' -- that is nothing to you -- ` has been nineteen years in the galleys : five years for house-breaking and burglary ; fourteen years for having attempted to escape on four occasions . 
He is a very dangerous man . ' 
There ! 
Every one has cast me out . 
Are you willing to receive me ? 
Is this an inn ? 
Will you give me something to eat and a bed ? 
Have you a stable ? '' 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` you will put white sheets on the bed in the alcove . '' 
We have already explained the character of the two women 's obedience . 
Madame Magloire retired to execute these orders . 
The Bishop turned to the man . 
`` Sit down , sir , and warm yourself . 
We are going to sup in a few moments , and your bed will be prepared while you are supping . '' 
At this point the man suddenly comprehended . 
The expression of his face , up to that time sombre and harsh , bore the imprint of stupefaction , of doubt , of joy , and became extraordinary . 
He began stammering like a crazy man : -- `` Really ? 
What ! 
You will keep me ? 
You do not drive me forth ? 
A convict ! 
You call me sir ! 
You do not address me as thou ? 
` Get out of here , you dog ! ' 
is what people always say to me . 
I felt sure that you would expel me , so I told you at once who I am . 
Oh , what a good woman that was who directed me hither ! 
I am going to sup ! 
A bed with a mattress and sheets , like the rest of the world ! 
a bed ! 
It is nineteen years since I have slept in a bed ! 
You actually do not want me to go ! 
You are good people . 
Besides , I have money . 
I will pay well . 
Pardon me , monsieur the inn-keeper , but what is your name ? 
I will pay anything you ask . 
You are a fine man . 
You are an inn-keeper , are you not ? '' 
`` I am , '' replied the Bishop , `` a priest who lives here . '' 
`` A priest ! '' 
said the man . 
`` Oh , what a fine priest ! 
Then you are not going to demand any money of me ? 
You are the cure , are you not ? 
the cure of this big church ? 
Well ! 
I am a fool , truly ! 
I had not perceived your skull-cap . '' 
As he spoke , he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner , replaced his passport in his pocket , and seated himself . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine gazed mildly at him . 
He continued : `` You are humane , Monsieur le Cure ; you have not scorned me . 
A good priest is a very good thing . 
Then you do not require me to pay ? '' 
`` No , '' said the Bishop ; `` keep your money . 
How much have you ? 
Did you not tell me one hundred and nine francs ? '' 
`` And fifteen sous , '' added the man . 
`` One hundred and nine francs fifteen sous . 
And how long did it take you to earn that ? '' 
`` Nineteen years . '' 
`` Nineteen years ! '' 
The Bishop sighed deeply . 
The man continued : `` I have still the whole of my money . 
In four days I have spent only twenty-five sous , which I earned by helping unload some wagons at Grasse . 
Since you are an abbe , I will tell you that we had a chaplain in the galleys . 
And one day I saw a bishop there . 
Monseigneur is what they call him . 
He was the Bishop of Majore at Marseilles . 
He is the cure who rules over the other cures , you understand . 
Pardon me , I say that very badly ; but it is such a far-off thing to me ! 
You understand what we are ! 
He said mass in the middle of the galleys , on an altar . 
He had a pointed thing , made of gold , on his head ; it glittered in the bright light of midday . 
We were all ranged in lines on the three sides , with cannons with lighted matches facing us . 
We could not see very well . 
He spoke ; but he was too far off , and we did not hear . 
That is what a bishop is like . '' 
While he was speaking , the Bishop had gone and shut the door , which had remained wide open . 
Madame Magloire returned . 
She brought a silver fork and spoon , which she placed on the table . 
`` Madame Magloire , '' said the Bishop , `` place those things as near the fire as possible . '' 
And turning to his guest : `` The night wind is harsh on the Alps . 
You must be cold , sir . '' 
Each time that he uttered the word sir , in his voice which was so gently grave and polished , the man 's face lighted up . 
Monsieur to a convict is like a glass of water to one of the shipwrecked of the Medusa . 
Ignominy thirsts for consideration . 
`` This lamp gives a very bad light , '' said the Bishop . 
Madame Magloire understood him , and went to get the two silver candlesticks from the chimney-piece in Monseigneur 's bed-chamber , and placed them , lighted , on the table . 
`` Monsieur le Cure , '' said the man , `` you are good ; you do not despise me . 
You receive me into your house . 
You light your candles for me . 
Yet I have not concealed from you whence I come and that I am an unfortunate man . '' 
The Bishop , who was sitting close to him , gently touched his hand . 
`` You could not help telling me who you were . 
This is not my house ; it is the house of Jesus Christ . 
This door does not demand of him who enters whether he has a name , but whether he has a grief . 
You suffer , you are hungry and thirsty ; you are welcome . 
And do not thank me ; do not say that I receive you in my house . 
No one is at home here , except the man who needs a refuge . 
I say to you , who are passing by , that you are much more at home here than I am myself . 
Everything here is yours . 
What need have I to know your name ? 
Besides , before you told me you had one which I knew . '' 
The man opened his eyes in astonishment . 
`` Really ? 
You knew what I was called ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the Bishop , `` you are called my brother . '' 
`` Stop , Monsieur le Cure , '' exclaimed the man . 
`` I was very hungry when I entered here ; but you are so good , that I no longer know what has happened to me . '' 
The Bishop looked at him , and said , -- `` You have suffered much ? '' 
`` Oh , the red coat , the ball on the ankle , a plank to sleep on , heat , cold , toil , the convicts , the thrashings , the double chain for nothing , the cell for one word ; even sick and in bed , still the chain ! 
Dogs , dogs are happier ! 
Nineteen years ! 
I am forty-six . 
Now there is the yellow passport . 
That is what it is like . '' 
`` Yes , '' resumed the Bishop , `` you have come from a very sad place . 
Listen . 
There will be more joy in heaven over the tear-bathed face of a repentant sinner than over the white robes of a hundred just men . 
If you emerge from that sad place with thoughts of hatred and of wrath against mankind , you are deserving of pity ; if you emerge with thoughts of good-will and of peace , you are more worthy than any one of us . '' 
In the meantime , Madame Magloire had served supper : soup , made with water , oil , bread , and salt ; a little bacon , a bit of mutton , figs , a fresh cheese , and a large loaf of rye bread . 
She had , of her own accord , added to the Bishop 's ordinary fare a bottle of his old Mauves wine . 
The Bishop 's face at once assumed that expression of gayety which is peculiar to hospitable natures . 
`` To table ! '' 
he cried vivaciously . 
As was his custom when a stranger supped with him , he made the man sit on his right . 
Mademoiselle Baptistine , perfectly peaceable and natural , took her seat at his left . 
The Bishop asked a blessing ; then helped the soup himself , according to his custom . 
The man began to eat with avidity . 
All at once the Bishop said : `` It strikes me there is something missing on this table . '' 
Madame Magloire had , in fact , only placed the three sets of forks and spoons which were absolutely necessary . 
Now , it was the usage of the house , when the Bishop had any one to supper , to lay out the whole six sets of silver on the table-cloth -- an innocent ostentation . 
This graceful semblance of luxury was a kind of child 's play , which was full of charm in that gentle and severe household , which raised poverty into dignity . 
Madame Magloire understood the remark , went out without saying a word , and a moment later the three sets of silver forks and spoons demanded by the Bishop were glittering upon the cloth , symmetrically arranged before the three persons seated at the table . 
Now , in order to convey an idea of what passed at that table , we can not do better than to transcribe here a passage from one of Mademoiselle Baptistine 's letters to Madame Boischevron , wherein the conversation between the convict and the Bishop is described with ingenious minuteness . '' 
... This man paid no attention to any one . 
He ate with the voracity of a starving man . 
However , after supper he said : '' ` Monsieur le Cure of the good God , all this is far too good for me ; but I must say that the carters who would not allow me to eat with them keep a better table than you do . ' 
`` Between ourselves , the remark rather shocked me . 
My brother replied : -- '' ` They are more fatigued than I. ' '' ` No , ' returned the man , ` they have more money . 
You are poor ; I see that plainly . 
You can not be even a curate . 
Are you really a cure ? 
Ah , if the good God were but just , you certainly ought to be a cure ! ' '' 
` The good God is more than just , ' said my brother . 
`` A moment later he added : -- '' ` Monsieur Jean Valjean , is it to Pontarlier that you are going ? ' '' 
` With my road marked out for me . ' 
`` I think that is what the man said . 
Then he went on : -- '' ` I must be on my way by daybreak to-morrow . 
Travelling is hard . 
If the nights are cold , the days are hot . ' '' 
` You are going to a good country , ' said my brother . 
` During the Revolution my family was ruined . 
I took refuge in Franche-Comte at first , and there I lived for some time by the toil of my hands . 
My will was good . 
I found plenty to occupy me . 
One has only to choose . 
There are paper mills , tanneries , distilleries , oil factories , watch factories on a large scale , steel mills , copper works , twenty iron foundries at least , four of which , situated at Lods , at Chatillon , at Audincourt , and at Beure , are tolerably large . ' 
`` I think I am not mistaken in saying that those are the names which my brother mentioned . 
Then he interrupted himself and addressed me : -- '' ` Have we not some relatives in those parts , my dear sister ? ' 
`` I replied , -- '' ` We did have some ; among others , M. de Lucenet , who was captain of the gates at Pontarlier under the old regime . ' '' 
` Yes , ' resumed my brother ; ` but in ' 93 , one had no longer any relatives , one had only one 's arms . 
I worked . 
