Against the wall , under some remnants of calico , one glimpsed a safe , but of such dimensions that it must contain something besides bills and money . 
Monsieur Lheureux , in fact , went in for pawnbroking , and it was there that he had put Madame Bovary 's gold chain , together with the earrings of poor old Tellier , who , at last forced to sell out , had bought a meagre store of grocery at Quincampoix , where he was dying of catarrh amongst his candles , that were less yellow than his face . 
Lheureux sat down in a large cane arm-chair , saying : `` What news ? '' 
`` See ! '' 
And she showed him the paper . 
`` Well how can I help it ? '' 
Then she grew angry , reminding him of the promise he had given not to pay away her bills . 
He acknowledged it . 
`` But I was pressed myself ; the knife was at my own throat . '' 
`` And what will happen now ? '' 
she went on . 
`` Oh , it 's very simple ; a judgment and then a distraint -- that 's about it ! '' 
Emma kept down a desire to strike him , and asked gently if there was no way of quieting Monsieur Vincart . 
`` I dare say ! 
Quiet Vincart ! 
You do n't know him ; he 's more ferocious than an Arab ! '' 
Still Monsieur Lheureux must interfere . 
`` Well , listen . 
It seems to me so far I 've been very good to you . '' 
And opening one of his ledgers , `` See , '' he said . 
Then running up the page with his finger , `` Let 's see ! 
let 's see ! 
August 3d , two hundred francs ; June 17th , a hundred and fifty ; March 23d , forty-six . 
In April -- '' He stopped , as if afraid of making some mistake . 
`` Not to speak of the bills signed by Monsieur Bovary , one for seven hundred francs , and another for three hundred . 
As to your little installments , with the interest , why , there 's no end to 'em ; one gets quite muddled over 'em . 
I 'll have nothing more to do with it . '' 
She wept ; she even called him `` her good Monsieur Lheureux . '' 
But he always fell back upon `` that rascal Vincart . '' 
Besides , he had n't a brass farthing ; no one was paying him now-a-days ; they were eating his coat off his back ; a poor shopkeeper like him could n't advance money . 
Emma was silent , and Monsieur Lheureux , who was biting the feathers of a quill , no doubt became uneasy at her silence , for he went on -- `` Unless one of these days I have something coming in , I might -- '' `` Besides , '' said she , `` as soon as the balance of Barneville -- '' `` What ! '' 
And on hearing that Langlois had not yet paid he seemed much surprised . 
Then in a honied voice -- `` And we agree , you say ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
to anything you like . '' 
On this he closed his eyes to reflect , wrote down a few figures , and declaring it would be very difficult for him , that the affair was shady , and that he was being bled , he wrote out four bills for two hundred and fifty francs each , to fall due month by month . 
`` Provided that Vincart will listen to me ! 
However , it 's settled . 
I do n't play the fool ; I 'm straight enough . '' 
Next he carelessly showed her several new goods , not one of which , however , was in his opinion worthy of madame . 
`` When I think that there 's a dress at threepence-halfpenny a yard , and warranted fast colours ! 
And yet they actually swallow it ! 
Of course you understand one does n't tell them what it really is ! '' 
He hoped by this confession of dishonesty to others to quite convince her of his probity to her . 
Then he called her back to show her three yards of guipure that he had lately picked up `` at a sale . '' 
`` Is n't it lovely ? '' 
said Lheureux . 
`` It is very much used now for the backs of arm-chairs . 
It 's quite the rage . '' 
And , more ready than a juggler , he wrapped up the guipure in some blue paper and put it in Emma 's hands . 
`` But at least let me know -- '' `` Yes , another time , '' he replied , turning on his heel . 
That same evening she urged Bovary to write to his mother , to ask her to send as quickly as possible the whole of the balance due from the father 's estate . 
The mother-in-law replied that she had nothing more , the winding up was over , and there was due to them besides Barneville an income of six hundred francs , that she would pay them punctually . 
Then Madame Bovary sent in accounts to two or three patients , and she made large use of this method , which was very successful . 
She was always careful to add a postscript : `` Do not mention this to my husband ; you know how proud he is . 
Excuse me . 
Yours obediently . '' 
There were some complaints ; she intercepted them . 
To get money she began selling her old gloves , her old hats , the old odds and ends , and she bargained rapaciously , her peasant blood standing her in good stead . 
Then on her journey to town she picked up nick-nacks secondhand , that , in default of anyone else , Monsieur Lheureux would certainly take off her hands . 
She bought ostrich feathers , Chinese porcelain , and trunks ; she borrowed from Felicite , from Madame Lefrancois , from the landlady at the Croix-Rouge , from everybody , no matter where . 
With the money she at last received from Barneville she paid two bills ; the other fifteen hundred francs fell due . 
She renewed the bills , and thus it was continually . 
Sometimes , it is true , she tried to make a calculation , but she discovered things so exorbitant that she could not believe them possible . 
Then she recommenced , soon got confused , gave it all up , and thought no more about it . 
The house was very dreary now . 
Tradesmen were seen leaving it with angry faces . 
Handkerchiefs were lying about on the stoves , and little Berthe , to the great scandal of Madame Homais , wore stockings with holes in them . 
If Charles timidly ventured a remark , she answered roughly that it was n't her fault . 
What was the meaning of all these fits of temper ? 
He explained everything through her old nervous illness , and reproaching himself with having taken her infirmities for faults , accused himself of egotism , and longed to go and take her in his arms . 
`` Ah , no ! '' 
he said to himself ; `` I should worry her . '' 
And he did not stir . 
After dinner he walked about alone in the garden ; he took little Berthe on his knees , and unfolding his medical journal , tried to teach her to read . 
But the child , who never had any lessons , soon looked up with large , sad eyes and began to cry . 
Then he comforted her ; went to fetch water in her can to make rivers on the sand path , or broke off branches from the privet hedges to plant trees in the beds . 
This did not spoil the garden much , all choked now with long weeds . 
They owed Lestiboudois for so many days . 
Then the child grew cold and asked for her mother . 
`` Call the servant , '' said Charles . 
`` You know , dearie , that mamma does not like to be disturbed . '' 
Autumn was setting in , and the leaves were already falling , as they did two years ago when she was ill . 
Where would it all end ? 
And he walked up and down , his hands behind his back . 
Madame was in her room , which no one entered . 
She stayed there all day long , torpid , half dressed , and from time to time burning Turkish pastilles which she had bought at Rouen in an Algerian 's shop . 
In order not to have at night this sleeping man stretched at her side , by dint of manoeuvring , she at last succeeded in banishing him to the second floor , while she read till morning extravagant books , full of pictures of orgies and thrilling situations . 
Often , seized with fear , she cried out , and Charles hurried to her . 
`` Oh , go away ! '' 
she would say . 
Or at other times , consumed more ardently than ever by that inner flame to which adultery added fuel , panting , tremulous , all desire , she threw open her window , breathed in the cold air , shook loose in the wind her masses of hair , too heavy , and , gazing upon the stars , longed for some princely love . 
She thought of him , of Leon . 
She would then have given anything for a single one of those meetings that surfeited her . 
These were her gala days . 
She wanted them to be sumptuous , and when he alone could not pay the expenses , she made up the deficit liberally , which happened pretty well every time . 
He tried to make her understand that they would be quite as comfortable somewhere else , in a smaller hotel , but she always found some objection . 
One day she drew six small silver-gilt spoons from her bag -LRB- they were old Roualt 's wedding present -RRB- , begging him to pawn them at once for her , and Leon obeyed , though the proceeding annoyed him . 
He was afraid of compromising himself . 
Then , on , reflection , he began to think his mistress 's ways were growing odd , and that they were perhaps not wrong in wishing to separate him from her . 
In fact someone had sent his mother a long anonymous letter to warn her that he was `` ruining himself with a married woman , '' and the good lady at once conjuring up the eternal bugbear of families , the vague pernicious creature , the siren , the monster , who dwells fantastically in depths of love , wrote to Lawyer Dubocage , his employer , who behaved perfectly in the affair . 
He kept him for three quarters of an hour trying to open his eyes , to warn him of the abyss into which he was falling . 
Such an intrigue would damage him later on , when he set up for himself . 
He implored him to break with her , and , if he would not make this sacrifice in his own interest , to do it at least for his , Dubocage 's sake . 
At last Leon swore he would not see Emma again , and he reproached himself with not having kept his word , considering all the worry and lectures this woman might still draw down upon him , without reckoning the jokes made by his companions as they sat round the stove in the morning . 
Besides , he was soon to be head clerk ; it was time to settle down . 
So he gave up his flute , exalted sentiments , and poetry ; for every bourgeois in the flush of his youth , were it but for a day , a moment , has believed himself capable of immense passions , of lofty enterprises . 
The most mediocre libertine has dreamed of sultanas ; every notary bears within him the debris of a poet . 
He was bored now when Emma suddenly began to sob on his breast , and his heart , like the people who can only stand a certain amount of music , dozed to the sound of a love whose delicacies he no longer noted . 
They knew one another too well for any of those surprises of possession that increase its joys a hundred-fold . 
She was as sick of him as he was weary of her . 
Emma found again in adultery all the platitudes of marriage . 
But how to get rid of him ? 
Then , though she might feel humiliated at the baseness of such enjoyment , she clung to it from habit or from corruption , and each day she hungered after them the more , exhausting all felicity in wishing for too much of it . 
She accused Leon of her baffled hopes , as if he had betrayed her ; and she even longed for some catastrophe that would bring about their separation , since she had not the courage to make up her mind to it herself . 
She none the less went on writing him love letters , in virtue of the notion that a woman must write to her lover . 
But whilst she wrote it was another man she saw , a phantom fashioned out of her most ardent memories , of her finest reading , her strongest lusts , and at last he became so real , so tangible , that she palpitated wondering , without , however , the power to imagine him clearly , so lost was he , like a god , beneath the abundance of his attributes . 
He dwelt in that azure land where silk ladders hang from balconies under the breath of flowers , in the light of the moon . 
She felt him near her ; he was coming , and would carry her right away in a kiss . 
Then she fell back exhausted , for these transports of vague love wearied her more than great debauchery . 
She now felt constant ache all over her . 
Often she even received summonses , stamped paper that she barely looked at . 
She would have liked not to be alive , or to be always asleep . 
On Mid-Lent she did not return to Yonville , but in the evening went to a masked ball . 
She wore velvet breeches , red stockings , a club wig , and three-cornered hat cocked on one side . 
She danced all night to the wild tones of the trombones ; people gathered round her , and in the morning she found herself on the steps of the theatre together with five or six masks , debardeuses * and sailors , Leon 's comrades , who were talking about having supper . 
* People dressed as longshoremen . 
The neighbouring cafes were full . 
They caught sight of one on the harbour , a very indifferent restaurant , whose proprietor showed them to a little room on the fourth floor . 
The men were whispering in a corner , no doubt consorting about expenses . 
There were a clerk , two medical students , and a shopman -- what company for her ! 
As to the women , Emma soon perceived from the tone of their voices that they must almost belong to the lowest class . 
Then she was frightened , pushed back her chair , and cast down her eyes . 
The others began to eat ; she ate nothing . 
Her head was on fire , her eyes smarted , and her skin was ice-cold . 
In her head she seemed to feel the floor of the ball-room rebounding again beneath the rhythmical pulsation of the thousands of dancing feet . 
And now the smell of the punch , the smoke of the cigars , made her giddy . 
She fainted , and they carried her to the window . 
Day was breaking , and a great stain of purple colour broadened out in the pale horizon over the St. Catherine hills . 
The livid river was shivering in the wind ; there was no one on the bridges ; the street lamps were going out . 
She revived , and began thinking of Berthe asleep yonder in the servant 's room . 
Then a cart filled with long strips of iron passed by , and made a deafening metallic vibration against the walls of the houses . 
She slipped away suddenly , threw off her costume , told Leon she must get back , and at last was alone at the Hotel de Boulogne . 
Everything , even herself , was now unbearable to her . 
She wished that , taking wing like a bird , she could fly somewhere , far away to regions of purity , and there grow young again . 
She went out , crossed the Boulevard , the Place Cauchoise , and the Faubourg , as far as an open street that overlooked some gardens . 
She walked rapidly ; the fresh air calming her ; and , little by little , the faces of the crowd , the masks , the quadrilles , the lights , the supper , those women , all disappeared like mists fading away . 
Then , reaching the `` Croix-Rouge , '' she threw herself on the bed in her little room on the second floor , where there were pictures of the `` Tour de Nesle . '' 
At four o'clock Hivert awoke her . 
When she got home , Felicite showed her behind the clock a grey paper . 
She read -- `` In virtue of the seizure in execution of a judgment . '' 
What judgment ? 
As a matter of fact , the evening before another paper had been brought that she had not yet seen , and she was stunned by these words -- `` By order of the king , law , and justice , to Madame Bovary . '' 
Then , skipping several lines , she read , `` Within twenty-four hours , without fail -- '' But what ? 
`` To pay the sum of eight thousand francs . '' 
And there was even at the bottom , `` She will be constrained thereto by every form of law , and notably by a writ of distraint on her furniture and effects . '' 
What was to be done ? 
In twenty-four hours -- tomorrow . 
Lheureux , she thought , wanted to frighten her again ; for she saw through all his devices , the object of his kindnesses . 
What reassured her was the very magnitude of the sum . 
However , by dint of buying and not paying , of borrowing , signing bills , and renewing these bills that grew at each new falling-in , she had ended by preparing a capital for Monsieur Lheureux which he was impatiently awaiting for his speculations . 
She presented herself at his place with an offhand air . 
`` You know what has happened to me ? 
No doubt it 's a joke ! '' 
`` How so ? '' 
He turned away slowly , and , folding his arms , said to her -- `` My good lady , did you think I should go on to all eternity being your purveyor and banker , for the love of God ? 
Now be just . 
I must get back what I 've laid out . 
Now be just . '' 
She cried out against the debt . 
`` Ah ! 
so much the worse . 
The court has admitted it . 
There 's a judgment . 
It 's been notified to you . 
Besides , it is n't my fault . 
It 's Vincart 's . '' 
`` Could you not -- ? '' 
`` Oh , nothing whatever . '' 
`` But still , now talk it over . '' 
And she began beating about the bush ; she had known nothing about it ; it was a surprise . 
`` Whose fault is that ? '' 
said Lheureux , bowing ironically . 
`` While I 'm slaving like a nigger , you go gallivanting about . '' 
`` Ah ! 
no lecturing . '' 
`` It never does any harm , '' he replied . 
She turned coward ; she implored him ; she even pressed her pretty white and slender hand against the shopkeeper 's knee . 
`` There , that 'll do ! 
Anyone 'd think you wanted to seduce me ! '' 
`` You are a wretch ! '' 
she cried . 
`` Oh , oh ! 
go it ! 
go it ! '' 
`` I will show you up . 
I shall tell my husband . '' 
`` All right ! 
I too . 
I 'll show your husband something . '' 
And Lheureux drew from his strong box the receipt for eighteen hundred francs that she had given him when Vincart had discounted the bills . 
`` Do you think , '' he added , `` that he 'll not understand your little theft , the poor dear man ? '' 
She collapsed , more overcome than if felled by the blow of a pole-axe . 
He was walking up and down from the window to the bureau , repeating all the while -- `` Ah ! 
I 'll show him ! 
I 'll show him ! '' 
Then he approached her , and in a soft voice said -- `` It is n't pleasant , I know ; but , after all , no bones are broken , and , since that is the only way that is left for you paying back my money -- '' `` But where am I to get any ? '' 
said Emma , wringing her hands . 
`` Bah ! 
when one has friends like you ! '' 
And he looked at her in so keen , so terrible a fashion , that she shuddered to her very heart . 
`` I promise you , '' she said , `` to sign -- '' `` I 've enough of your signatures . '' 
`` I will sell something . '' 
`` Get along ! '' 
he said , shrugging his shoulders ; `` you 've not got anything . '' 
And he called through the peep-hole that looked down into the shop -- `` Annette , do n't forget the three coupons of No. 14 . '' 
The servant appeared . 
Emma understood , and asked how much money would be wanted to put a stop to the proceedings . 
`` It is too late . '' 
`` But if I brought you several thousand francs -- a quarter of the sum -- a third -- perhaps the whole ? '' 
`` No ; it 's no use ! '' 
And he pushed her gently towards the staircase . 
`` I implore you , Monsieur Lheureux , just a few days more ! '' 
She was sobbing . 
`` There ! 
tears now ! '' 
`` You are driving me to despair ! '' 
`` What do I care ? '' 
said he , shutting the door . 
She was stoical the next day when Maitre Hareng , the bailiff , with two assistants , presented himself at her house to draw up the inventory for the distraint . 
They began with Bovary 's consulting-room , and did not write down the phrenological head , which was considered an `` instrument of his profession '' ; but in the kitchen they counted the plates ; the saucepans , the chairs , the candlesticks , and in the bedroom all the nick-nacks on the whatnot . 
They examined her dresses , the linen , the dressing-room ; and her whole existence to its most intimate details , was , like a corpse on whom a post-mortem is made , outspread before the eyes of these three men . 
Maitre Hareng , buttoned up in his thin black coat , wearing a white choker and very tight foot-straps , repeated from time to time -- `` Allow me , madame . 
You allow me ? '' 
Often he uttered exclamations . 
`` Charming ! 
very pretty . '' 
Then he began writing again , dipping his pen into the horn inkstand in his left hand . 
When they had done with the rooms they went up to the attic . 
She kept a desk there in which Rodolphe 's letters were locked . 
It had to be opened . 
`` Ah ! 
a correspondence , '' said Maitre Hareng , with a discreet smile . 
`` But allow me , for I must make sure the box contains nothing else . '' 
And he tipped up the papers lightly , as if to shake out napoleons . 
Then she grew angered to see this coarse hand , with fingers red and pulpy like slugs , touching these pages against which her heart had beaten . 
They went at last . 
Felicite came back . 
Emma had sent her out to watch for Bovary in order to keep him off , and they hurriedly installed the man in possession under the roof , where he swore he would remain . 
During the evening Charles seemed to her careworn . 
Emma watched him with a look of anguish , fancying she saw an accusation in every line of his face . 
Then , when her eyes wandered over the chimney-piece ornamented with Chinese screens , over the large curtains , the armchairs , all those things , in a word , that had , softened the bitterness of her life , remorse seized her or rather an immense regret , that , far from crushing , irritated her passion . 
Charles placidly poked the fire , both his feet on the fire-dogs . 
Once the man , no doubt bored in his hiding-place , made a slight noise . 
`` Is anyone walking upstairs ? '' 
said Charles . 
`` No , '' she replied ; `` it is a window that has been left open , and is rattling in the wind . '' 
The next day , Sunday , she went to Rouen to call on all the brokers whose names she knew . 
They were at their country-places or on journeys . 
She was not discouraged ; and those whom she did manage to see she asked for money , declaring she must have some , and that she would pay it back . 
Some laughed in her face ; all refused . 
At two o'clock she hurried to Leon , and knocked at the door . 
No one answered . 
At length he appeared . 
`` What brings you here ? '' 
`` Do I disturb you ? '' 
`` No ; but -- '' And he admitted that his landlord did n't like his having `` women '' there . 
`` I must speak to you , '' she went on . 
Then he took down the key , but she stopped him . 
`` No , no ! 
Down there , in our home ! '' 
And they went to their room at the Hotel de Boulogne . 
On arriving she drank off a large glass of water . 
She was very pale . 
She said to him -- `` Leon , you will do me a service ? '' 
And , shaking him by both hands that she grasped tightly , she added -- `` Listen , I want eight thousand francs . '' 
`` But you are mad ! '' 
`` Not yet . '' 
And thereupon , telling him the story of the distraint , she explained her distress to him ; for Charles knew nothing of it ; her mother-in-law detested her ; old Rouault could do nothing ; but he , Leon , he would set about finding this indispensable sum . 
`` How on earth can I ? '' 
`` What a coward you are ! '' 
she cried . 
Then he said stupidly , `` You are exaggerating the difficulty . 
Perhaps , with a thousand crowns or so the fellow could be stopped . '' 
All the greater reason to try and do something ; it was impossible that they could not find three thousand francs . 
Besides , Leon , could be security instead of her . 
`` Go , try , try ! 
I will love you so ! '' 
He went out , and came back at the end of an hour , saying , with solemn face -- `` I have been to three people with no success . '' 
Then they remained sitting face to face at the two chimney corners , motionless , in silence . 
Emma shrugged her shoulders as she stamped her feet . 
He heard her murmuring -- `` If I were in your place I should soon get some . '' 
`` But where ? '' 
`` At your office . '' 
And she looked at him . 
An infernal boldness looked out from her burning eyes , and their lids drew close together with a lascivious and encouraging look , so that the young man felt himself growing weak beneath the mute will of this woman who was urging him to a crime . 
Then he was afraid , and to avoid any explanation he smote his forehead , crying -- `` Morel is to come back to-night ; he will not refuse me , I hope '' -LRB- this was one of his friends , the son of a very rich merchant -RRB- ; `` and I will bring it you to-morrow , '' he added . 
Emma did not seem to welcome this hope with all the joy he had expected . 
Did she suspect the lie ? 
He went on , blushing -- `` However , if you do n't see me by three o'clock do not wait for me , my darling . 
I must be off now ; forgive me ! 
Goodbye ! '' 
He pressed her hand , but it felt quite lifeless . 
Emma had no strength left for any sentiment . 
Four o'clock struck , and she rose to return to Yonville , mechanically obeying the force of old habits . 
The weather was fine . 
It was one of those March days , clear and sharp , when the sun shines in a perfectly white sky . 
The Rouen folk , in Sunday-clothes , were walking about with happy looks . 
She reached the Place du Parvis . 
People were coming out after vespers ; the crowd flowed out through the three doors like a stream through the three arches of a bridge , and in the middle one , more motionless than a rock , stood the beadle . 
Then she remembered the day when , all anxious and full of hope , she had entered beneath this large nave , that had opened out before her , less profound than her love ; and she walked on weeping beneath her veil , giddy , staggering , almost fainting . 
`` Take care ! '' 
cried a voice issuing from the gate of a courtyard that was thrown open . 
She stopped to let pass a black horse , pawing the ground between the shafts of a tilbury , driven by a gentleman in sable furs . 
Who was it ? 
She knew him . 
The carriage darted by and disappeared . 
Why , it was he -- the Viscount . 
She turned away ; the street was empty . 
She was so overwhelmed , so sad , that she had to lean against a wall to keep herself from falling . 
Then she thought she had been mistaken . 
Anyhow , she did not know . 
All within her and around her was abandoning her . 
She felt lost , sinking at random into indefinable abysses , and it was almost with joy that , on reaching the `` Croix-Rouge , '' she saw the good Homais , who was watching a large box full of pharmaceutical stores being hoisted on to the `` Hirondelle . '' 
In his hand he held tied in a silk handkerchief six cheminots for his wife . 
Madame Homais was very fond of these small , heavy turban-shaped loaves , that are eaten in Lent with salt butter ; a last vestige of Gothic food that goes back , perhaps , to the time of the Crusades , and with which the robust Normans gorged themselves of yore , fancying they saw on the table , in the light of the yellow torches , between tankards of hippocras and huge boars ' heads , the heads of Saracens to be devoured . 
The druggist 's wife crunched them up as they had done -- heroically , despite her wretched teeth . 
And so whenever Homais journeyed to town , he never failed to bring her home some that he bought at the great baker 's in the Rue Massacre . 
`` Charmed to see you , '' he said , offering Emma a hand to help her into the `` Hirondelle . '' 
Then he hung up his cheminots to the cords of the netting , and remained bare-headed in an attitude pensive and Napoleonic . 
But when the blind man appeared as usual at the foot of the hill he exclaimed -- `` I ca n't understand why the authorities tolerate such culpable industries . 
Such unfortunates should be locked up and forced to work . 
Progress , my word ! 
creeps at a snail 's pace . 
We are floundering about in mere barbarism . '' 
The blind man held out his hat , that flapped about at the door , as if it were a bag in the lining that had come unnailed . 
`` This , '' said the chemist , `` is a scrofulous affection . '' 
And though he knew the poor devil , he pretended to see him for the first time , murmured something about `` cornea , '' `` opaque cornea , '' `` sclerotic , '' `` facies , '' then asked him in a paternal tone -- `` My friend , have you long had this terrible infirmity ? 
Instead of getting drunk at the public , you 'd do better to die yourself . '' 
He advised him to take good wine , good beer , and good joints . 
The blind man went on with his song ; he seemed , moreover , almost idiotic . 
At last Monsieur Homais opened his purse -- `` Now there 's a sou ; give me back two lairds , and do n't forget my advice : you 'll be the better for it . '' 
Hivert openly cast some doubt on the efficacy of it . 
But the druggist said that he would cure himself with an antiphlogistic pomade of his own composition , and he gave his address -- `` Monsieur Homais , near the market , pretty well known . '' 
`` Now , '' said Hivert , `` for all this trouble you 'll give us your performance . '' 
The blind man sank down on his haunches , with his head thrown back , whilst he rolled his greenish eyes , lolled out his tongue , and rubbed his stomach with both hands as he uttered a kind of hollow yell like a famished dog . 
Emma , filled with disgust , threw him over her shoulder a five-franc piece . 
It was all her fortune . 
It seemed to her very fine thus to throw it away . 
The coach had gone on again when suddenly Monsieur Homais leant out through the window , crying -- `` No farinaceous or milk food , wear wool next the skin , and expose the diseased parts to the smoke of juniper berries . '' 
The sight of the well-known objects that defiled before her eyes gradually diverted Emma from her present trouble . 
An intolerable fatigue overwhelmed her , and she reached her home stupefied , discouraged , almost asleep . 
`` Come what may come ! '' 
she said to herself . 
`` And then , who knows ? 
Why , at any moment could not some extraordinary event occur ? 
Lheureux even might die ! '' 
At nine o'clock in the morning she was awakened by the sound of voices in the Place . 
There was a crowd round the market reading a large bill fixed to one of the posts , and she saw Justin , who was climbing on to a stone and tearing down the bill . 
But at this moment the rural guard seized him by the collar . 
Monsieur Homais came out of his shop , and Mere Lefrangois , in the midst of the crowd , seemed to be perorating . 
`` Madame ! 
madame ! '' 
cried Felicite , running in , `` it 's abominable ! '' 
And the poor girl , deeply moved , handed her a yellow paper that she had just torn off the door . 
Emma read with a glance that all her furniture was for sale . 
Then they looked at one another silently . 
The servant and mistress had no secret one from the other . 
At last Felicite sighed -- `` If I were you , madame , I should go to Monsieur Guillaumin . '' 
`` Do you think -- '' And this question meant to say -- `` You who know the house through the servant , has the master spoken sometimes of me ? '' 
`` Yes , you 'd do well to go there . '' 
She dressed , put on her black gown , and her hood with jet beads , and that she might not be seen -LRB- there was still a crowd on the Place -RRB- , she took the path by the river , outside the village . 
She reached the notary 's gate quite breathless . 
The sky was sombre , and a little snow was falling . 
At the sound of the bell , Theodore in a red waistcoat appeared on the steps ; he came to open the door almost familiarly , as to an acquaintance , and showed her into the dining-room . 
A large porcelain stove crackled beneath a cactus that filled up the niche in the wall , and in black wood frames against the oak-stained paper hung Steuben 's `` Esmeralda '' and Schopin 's `` Potiphar . '' 
The ready-laid table , the two silver chafing-dishes , the crystal door-knobs , the parquet and the furniture , all shone with a scrupulous , English cleanliness ; the windows were ornamented at each corner with stained glass . 
`` Now this , '' thought Emma , `` is the dining-room I ought to have . '' 
The notary came in pressing his palm-leaf dressing-gown to his breast with his left arm , while with the other hand he raised and quickly put on again his brown velvet cap , pretentiously cocked on the right side , whence looked out the ends of three fair curls drawn from the back of the head , following the line of his bald skull . 
After he had offered her a seat he sat down to breakfast , apologising profusely for his rudeness . 
`` I have come , '' she said , `` to beg you , sir -- '' `` What , madame ? 
I am listening . '' 
And she began explaining her position to him . 
Monsieur Guillaumin knew it , being secretly associated with the linendraper , from whom he always got capital for the loans on mortgages that he was asked to make . 
So he knew -LRB- and better than she herself -RRB- the long story of the bills , small at first , bearing different names as endorsers , made out at long dates , and constantly renewed up to the day , when , gathering together all the protested bills , the shopkeeper had bidden his friend Vincart take in his own name all the necessary proceedings , not wishing to pass for a tiger with his fellow-citizens . 
She mingled her story with recriminations against Lheureux , to which the notary replied from time to time with some insignificant word . 
Eating his cutlet and drinking his tea , he buried his chin in his sky-blue cravat , into which were thrust two diamond pins , held together by a small gold chain ; and he smiled a singular smile , in a sugary , ambiguous fashion . 
But noticing that her feet were damp , he said -- `` Do get closer to the stove ; put your feet up against the porcelain . '' 
She was afraid of dirtying it . 
The notary replied in a gallant tone -- `` Beautiful things spoil nothing . '' 
Then she tried to move him , and , growing moved herself , she began telling him about the poorness of her home , her worries , her wants . 
He could understand that ; an elegant woman ! 
and , without leaving off eating , he had turned completely round towards her , so that his knee brushed against her boot , whose sole curled round as it smoked against the stove . 
But when she asked for a thousand sous , he closed his lips , and declared he was very sorry he had not had the management of her fortune before , for there were hundreds of ways very convenient , even for a lady , of turning her money to account . 
They might , either in the turf-peats of Grumesnil or building-ground at Havre , almost without risk , have ventured on some excellent speculations ; and he let her consume herself with rage at the thought of the fabulous sums that she would certainly have made . 
`` How was it , '' he went on , `` that you did n't come to me ? '' 
`` I hardly know , '' she said . 
`` Why , hey ? 
Did I frighten you so much ? 
It is I , on the contrary , who ought to complain . 
We hardly know one another ; yet I am very devoted to you . 
You do not doubt that , I hope ? '' 
He held out his hand , took hers , covered it with a greedy kiss , then held it on his knee ; and he played delicately with her fingers whilst he murmured a thousand blandishments . 
His insipid voice murmured like a running brook ; a light shone in his eyes through the glimmering of his spectacles , and his hand was advancing up Emma 's sleeve to press her arm . 
She felt against her cheek his panting breath . 
This man oppressed her horribly . 
She sprang up and said to him -- `` Sir , I am waiting . '' 
`` For what ? '' 
said the notary , who suddenly became very pale . 
`` This money . '' 
`` But -- '' Then , yielding to the outburst of too powerful a desire , `` Well , yes ! '' 
He dragged himself towards her on his knees , regardless of his dressing-gown . 
`` For pity 's sake , stay . 
I love you ! '' 
He seized her by her waist . 
Madame Bovary 's face flushed purple . 
She recoiled with a terrible look , crying -- `` You are taking a shameless advantage of my distress , sir ! 
I am to be pitied -- not to be sold . '' 
And she went out . 
The notary remained quite stupefied , his eyes fixed on his fine embroidered slippers . 
They were a love gift , and the sight of them at last consoled him . 
Besides , he reflected that such an adventure might have carried him too far . 
`` What a wretch ! 
what a scoundrel ! 
what an infamy ! '' 
she said to herself , as she fled with nervous steps beneath the aspens of the path . 
The disappointment of her failure increased the indignation of her outraged modesty ; it seemed to her that Providence pursued her implacably , and , strengthening herself in her pride , she had never felt so much esteem for herself nor so much contempt for others . 
A spirit of warfare transformed her . 
She would have liked to strike all men , to spit in their faces , to crush them , and she walked rapidly straight on , pale , quivering , maddened , searching the empty horizon with tear-dimmed eyes , and as it were rejoicing in the hate that was choking her . 
When she saw her house a numbness came over her . 
She could not go on ; and yet she must . 
Besides , whither could she flee ? 
Felicite was waiting for her at the door . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` No ! '' 
said Emma . 
And for a quarter of an hour the two of them went over the various persons in Yonville who might perhaps be inclined to help her . 
But each time that Felicite named someone Emma replied -- `` Impossible ! 
they will not ! '' 
`` And the master 'll soon be in . '' 
`` I know that well enough . 
Leave me alone . '' 
She had tried everything ; there was nothing more to be done now ; and when Charles came in she would have to say to him -- `` Go away ! 
This carpet on which you are walking is no longer ours . 
In your own house you do not possess a chair , a pin , a straw , and it is I , poor man , who have ruined you . '' 
Then there would be a great sob ; next he would weep abundantly , and at last , the surprise past , he would forgive her . 
`` Yes , '' she murmured , grinding her teeth , `` he will forgive me , he who would give a million if I would forgive him for having known me ! 
Never ! 
never ! '' 
This thought of Bovary 's superiority to her exasperated her . 
Then , whether she confessed or did not confess , presently , immediately , to-morrow , he would know the catastrophe all the same ; so she must wait for this horrible scene , and bear the weight of his magnanimity . 
The desire to return to Lheureux 's seized her -- what would be the use ? 
To write to her father -- it was too late ; and perhaps , she began to repent now that she had not yielded to that other , when she heard the trot of a horse in the alley . 
It was he ; he was opening the gate ; he was whiter than the plaster wall . 
Rushing to the stairs , she ran out quickly to the square ; and the wife of the mayor , who was talking to Lestiboudois in front of the church , saw her go in to the tax-collector 's . 
She hurried off to tell Madame Caron , and the two ladies went up to the attic , and , hidden by some linen spread across props , stationed themselves comfortably for overlooking the whole of Binet 's room . 
He was alone in his garret , busy imitating in wood one of those indescribable bits of ivory , composed of crescents , of spheres hollowed out one within the other , the whole as straight as an obelisk , and of no use whatever ; and he was beginning on the last piece -- he was nearing his goal . 
In the twilight of the workshop the white dust was flying from his tools like a shower of sparks under the hoofs of a galloping horse ; the two wheels were turning , droning ; Binet smiled , his chin lowered , his nostrils distended , and , in a word , seemed lost in one of those complete happinesses that , no doubt , belong only to commonplace occupations , which amuse the mind with facile difficulties , and satisfy by a realisation of that beyond which such minds have not a dream . 
`` Ah ! 
there she is ! '' 
exclaimed Madame Tuvache . 
But it was impossible because of the lathe to hear what she was saying . 
At last these ladies thought they made out the word `` francs , '' and Madame Tuvache whispered in a low voice -- `` She is begging him to give her time for paying her taxes . '' 
`` Apparently ! '' 
replied the other . 
They saw her walking up and down , examining the napkin-rings , the candlesticks , the banister rails against the walls , while Binet stroked his beard with satisfaction . 
`` Do you think she wants to order something of him ? '' 
said Madame Tuvache . 
`` Why , he does n't sell anything , '' objected her neighbour . 
The tax-collector seemed to be listening with wide-open eyes , as if he did not understand . 
She went on in a tender , suppliant manner . 
She came nearer to him , her breast heaving ; they no longer spoke . 
`` Is she making him advances ? '' 
said Madame Tuvache . 
Binet was scarlet to his very ears . 
She took hold of his hands . 
`` Oh , it 's too much ! '' 
And no doubt she was suggesting something abominable to him ; for the tax-collector -- yet he was brave , had fought at Bautzen and at Lutzen , had been through the French campaign , and had even been recommended for the cross -- suddenly , as at the sight of a serpent , recoiled as far as he could from her , crying -- `` Madame ! 
what do you mean ? '' 
`` Women like that ought to be whipped , '' said Madame Tuvache . 
`` But where is she ? '' 
continued Madame Caron , for she had disappeared whilst they spoke ; then catching sight of her going up the Grande Rue , and turning to the right as if making for the cemetery , they were lost in conjectures . 
`` Nurse Rollet , '' she said on reaching the nurse 's , `` I am choking ; unlace me ! '' 
She fell on the bed sobbing . 
Nurse Rollet covered her with a petticoat and remained standing by her side . 
Then , as she did not answer , the good woman withdrew , took her wheel and began spinning flax . 
`` Oh , leave off ! '' 
she murmured , fancying she heard Binet 's lathe . 
`` What 's bothering her ? '' 
said the nurse to herself . 
`` Why has she come here ? '' 
She had rushed thither ; impelled by a kind of horror that drove her from her home . 
Lying on her back , motionless , and with staring eyes , she saw things but vaguely , although she tried to with idiotic persistence . 
She looked at the scales on the walls , two brands smoking end to end , and a long spider crawling over her head in a rent in the beam . 
At last she began to collect her thoughts . 
She remembered -- one day -- Leon -- Oh ! 
how long ago that was -- the sun was shining on the river , and the clematis were perfuming the air . 
Then , carried away as by a rushing torrent , she soon began to recall the day before . 
`` What time is it ? '' 
she asked . 
