answered Sancho Panza . 
`` Well , then , you must know , sister , that a knight-adventurer is a thing that in two words is seen drubbed and emperor , that is to-day the most miserable and needy being in the world , and to-morrow will have two or three crowns of kingdoms to give his squire . '' 
`` Then how is it , '' said the hostess , `` that belonging to so good a master as this , you have not , to judge by appearances , even so much as a county ? '' 
`` It is too soon yet , '' answered Sancho , `` for we have only been a month going in quest of adventures , and so far we have met with nothing that can be called one , for it will happen that when one thing is looked for another thing is found ; however , if my master Don Quixote gets well of this wound , or fall , and I am left none the worse of it , I would not change my hopes for the best title in Spain . '' 
To all this conversation Don Quixote was listening very attentively , and sitting up in bed as well as he could , and taking the hostess by the hand he said to her , `` Believe me , fair lady , you may call yourself fortunate in having in this castle of yours sheltered my person , which is such that if I do not myself praise it , it is because of what is commonly said , that self-praise debaseth ; but my squire will inform you who I am . 
I only tell you that I shall preserve for ever inscribed on my memory the service you have rendered me in order to tender you my gratitude while life shall last me ; and would to Heaven love held me not so enthralled and subject to its laws and to the eyes of that fair ingrate whom I name between my teeth , but that those of this lovely damsel might be the masters of my liberty . '' 
The hostess , her daughter , and the worthy Maritornes listened in bewilderment to the words of the knight-errant ; for they understood about as much of them as if he had been talking Greek , though they could perceive they were all meant for expressions of good-will and blandishments ; and not being accustomed to this kind of language , they stared at him and wondered to themselves , for he seemed to them a man of a different sort from those they were used to , and thanking him in pothouse phrase for his civility they left him , while the Asturian gave her attention to Sancho , who needed it no less than his master . 
The carrier had made an arrangement with her for recreation that night , and she had given him her word that when the guests were quiet and the family asleep she would come in search of him and meet his wishes unreservedly . 
And it is said of this good lass that she never made promises of the kind without fulfilling them , even though she made them in a forest and without any witness present , for she plumed herself greatly on being a lady and held it no disgrace to be in such an employment as servant in an inn , because , she said , misfortunes and ill-luck had brought her to that position . 
The hard , narrow , wretched , rickety bed of Don Quixote stood first in the middle of this star-lit stable , and close beside it Sancho made his , which merely consisted of a rush mat and a blanket that looked as if it was of threadbare canvas rather than of wool . 
Next to these two beds was that of the carrier , made up , as has been said , of the pack-saddles and all the trappings of the two best mules he had , though there were twelve of them , sleek , plump , and in prime condition , for he was one of the rich carriers of Arevalo , according to the author of this history , who particularly mentions this carrier because he knew him very well , and they even say was in some degree a relation of his ; besides which Cide Hamete Benengeli was a historian of great research and accuracy in all things , as is very evident since he would not pass over in silence those that have been already mentioned , however trifling and insignificant they might be , an example that might be followed by those grave historians who relate transactions so curtly and briefly that we hardly get a taste of them , all the substance of the work being left in the inkstand from carelessness , perverseness , or ignorance . 
A thousand blessings on the author of `` Tablante de Ricamonte '' and that of the other book in which the deeds of the Conde Tomillas are recounted ; with what minuteness they describe everything ! 
To proceed , then : after having paid a visit to his team and given them their second feed , the carrier stretched himself on his pack-saddles and lay waiting for his conscientious Maritornes . 
Sancho was by this time plastered and had lain down , and though he strove to sleep the pain of his ribs would not let him , while Don Quixote with the pain of his had his eyes as wide open as a hare 's . 
The inn was all in silence , and in the whole of it there was no light except that given by a lantern that hung burning in the middle of the gateway . 
This strange stillness , and the thoughts , always present to our knight 's mind , of the incidents described at every turn in the books that were the cause of his misfortune , conjured up to his imagination as extraordinary a delusion as can well be conceived , which was that he fancied himself to have reached a famous castle -LRB- for , as has been said , all the inns he lodged in were castles to his eyes -RRB- , and that the daughter of the innkeeper was daughter of the lord of the castle , and that she , won by his high-bred bearing , had fallen in love with him , and had promised to come to his bed for a while that night without the knowledge of her parents ; and holding all this fantasy that he had constructed as solid fact , he began to feel uneasy and to consider the perilous risk which his virtue was about to encounter , and he resolved in his heart to commit no treason to his lady Dulcinea del Toboso , even though the queen Guinevere herself and the dame Quintanona should present themselves before him . 
While he was taken up with these vagaries , then , the time and the hour -- an unlucky one for him -- arrived for the Asturian to come , who in her smock , with bare feet and her hair gathered into a fustian coif , with noiseless and cautious steps entered the chamber where the three were quartered , in quest of the carrier ; but scarcely had she gained the door when Don Quixote perceived her , and sitting up in his bed in spite of his plasters and the pain of his ribs , he stretched out his arms to receive his beauteous damsel . 
The Asturian , who went all doubled up and in silence with her hands before her feeling for her lover , encountered the arms of Don Quixote , who grasped her tightly by the wrist , and drawing her towards him , while she dared not utter a word , made her sit down on the bed . 
He then felt her smock , and although it was of sackcloth it appeared to him to be of the finest and softest silk : on her wrists she wore some glass beads , but to him they had the sheen of precious Orient pearls : her hair , which in some measure resembled a horse 's mane , he rated as threads of the brightest gold of Araby , whose refulgence dimmed the sun himself : her breath , which no doubt smelt of yesterday 's stale salad , seemed to him to diffuse a sweet aromatic fragrance from her mouth ; and , in short , he drew her portrait in his imagination with the same features and in the same style as that which he had seen in his books of the other princesses who , smitten by love , came with all the adornments that are here set down , to see the sorely wounded knight ; and so great was the poor gentleman 's blindness that neither touch , nor smell , nor anything else about the good lass that would have made any but a carrier vomit , were enough to undeceive him ; on the contrary , he was persuaded he had the goddess of beauty in his arms , and holding her firmly in his grasp he went on to say in low , tender voice : `` Would that found myself , lovely and exalted lady , in a position to repay such a favour as that which you , by the sight of your great beauty , have granted me ; but fortune , which is never weary of persecuting the good , has chosen to place me upon this bed , where I lie so bruised and broken that though my inclination would gladly comply with yours it is impossible ; besides , to this impossibility another yet greater is to be added , which is the faith that I have pledged to the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso , sole lady of my most secret thoughts ; and were it not that this stood in the way I should not be so insensible a knight as to miss the happy opportunity which your great goodness has offered me . '' 
Maritornes was fretting and sweating at finding herself held so fast by Don Quixote , and not understanding or heeding the words he addressed to her , she strove without speaking to free herself . 
The worthy carrier , whose unholy thoughts kept him awake , was aware of his doxy the moment she entered the door , and was listening attentively to all Don Quixote said ; and jealous that the Asturian should have broken her word with him for another , drew nearer to Don Quixote 's bed and stood still to see what would come of this talk which he could not understand ; but when he perceived the wench struggling to get free and Don Quixote striving to hold her , not relishing the joke he raised his arm and delivered such a terrible cuff on the lank jaws of the amorous knight that he bathed all his mouth in blood , and not content with this he mounted on his ribs and with his feet tramped all over them at a pace rather smarter than a trot . 
The bed which was somewhat crazy and not very firm on its feet , unable to support the additional weight of the carrier , came to the ground , and at the mighty crash of this the innkeeper awoke and at once concluded that it must be some brawl of Maritornes ' , because after calling loudly to her he got no answer . 
With this suspicion he got up , and lighting a lamp hastened to the quarter where he had heard the disturbance . 
The wench , seeing that her master was coming and knowing that his temper was terrible , frightened and panic-stricken made for the bed of Sancho Panza , who still slept , and crouching upon it made a ball of herself . 
The innkeeper came in exclaiming , `` Where art thou , strumpet ? 
Of course this is some of thy work . '' 
At this Sancho awoke , and feeling this mass almost on top of him fancied he had the nightmare and began to distribute fisticuffs all round , of which a certain share fell upon Maritornes , who , irritated by the pain and flinging modesty aside , paid back so many in return to Sancho that she woke him up in spite of himself . 
He then , finding himself so handled , by whom he knew not , raising himself up as well as he could , grappled with Maritornes , and he and she between them began the bitterest and drollest scrimmage in the world . 
The carrier , however , perceiving by the light of the innkeeper candle how it fared with his ladylove , quitting Don Quixote , ran to bring her the help she needed ; and the innkeeper did the same but with a different intention , for his was to chastise the lass , as he believed that beyond a doubt she alone was the cause of all the harmony . 
And so , as the saying is , cat to rat , rat to rope , rope to stick , the carrier pounded Sancho , Sancho the lass , she him , and the innkeeper her , and all worked away so briskly that they did not give themselves a moment 's rest ; and the best of it was that the innkeeper 's lamp went out , and as they were left in the dark they all laid on one upon the other in a mass so unmercifully that there was not a sound spot left where a hand could light . 
It so happened that there was lodging that night in the inn a caudrillero of what they call the Old Holy Brotherhood of Toledo , who , also hearing the extraordinary noise of the conflict , seized his staff and the tin case with his warrants , and made his way in the dark into the room crying : `` Hold ! 
in the name of the Jurisdiction ! 
Hold ! 
in the name of the Holy Brotherhood ! '' 
The first that he came upon was the pummelled Don Quixote , who lay stretched senseless on his back upon his broken-down bed , and , his hand falling on the beard as he felt about , he continued to cry , `` Help for the Jurisdiction ! '' 
but perceiving that he whom he had laid hold of did not move or stir , he concluded that he was dead and that those in the room were his murderers , and with this suspicion he raised his voice still higher , calling out , `` Shut the inn gate ; see that no one goes out ; they have killed a man here ! '' 
This cry startled them all , and each dropped the contest at the point at which the voice reached him . 
The innkeeper retreated to his room , the carrier to his pack-saddles , the lass to her crib ; the unlucky Don Quixote and Sancho alone were unable to move from where they were . 
The cuadrillero on this let go Don Quixote 's beard , and went out to look for a light to search for and apprehend the culprits ; but not finding one , as the innkeeper had purposely extinguished the lantern on retreating to his room , he was compelled to have recourse to the hearth , where after much time and trouble he lit another lamp . 
By this time Don Quixote had recovered from his swoon ; and in the same tone of voice in which he had called to his squire the day before when he lay stretched `` in the vale of the stakes , '' he began calling to him now , `` Sancho , my friend , art thou asleep ? 
sleepest thou , friend Sancho ? '' 
`` How can I sleep , curses on it ! '' 
returned Sancho discontentedly and bitterly , `` when it is plain that all the devils have been at me this night ? '' 
`` Thou mayest well believe that , '' answered Don Quixote , `` because , either I know little , or this castle is enchanted , for thou must know-but this that I am now about to tell thee thou must swear to keep secret until after my death . '' 
`` I swear it , '' answered Sancho . 
`` I say so , '' continued Don Quixote , `` because I hate taking away anyone 's good name . '' 
`` I say , '' replied Sancho , `` that I swear to hold my tongue about it till the end of your worship 's days , and God grant I may be able to let it out tomorrow . '' 
`` Do I do thee such injuries , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote , `` that thou wouldst see me dead so soon ? '' 
`` It is not for that , '' replied Sancho , `` but because I hate keeping things long , and I do n't want them to grow rotten with me from over-keeping . '' 
`` At any rate , '' said Don Quixote , `` I have more confidence in thy affection and good nature ; and so I would have thee know that this night there befell me one of the strangest adventures that I could describe , and to relate it to thee briefly thou must know that a little while ago the daughter of the lord of this castle came to me , and that she is the most elegant and beautiful damsel that could be found in the wide world . 
What I could tell thee of the charms of her person ! 
of her lively wit ! 
of other secret matters which , to preserve the fealty I owe to my lady Dulcinea del Toboso , I shall pass over unnoticed and in silence ! 
I will only tell thee that , either fate being envious of so great a boon placed in my hands by good fortune , or perhaps -LRB- and this is more probable -RRB- this castle being , as I have already said , enchanted , at the time when I was engaged in the sweetest and most amorous discourse with her , there came , without my seeing or knowing whence it came , a hand attached to some arm of some huge giant , that planted such a cuff on my jaws that I have them all bathed in blood , and then pummelled me in such a way that I am in a worse plight than yesterday when the carriers , on account of Rocinante 's misbehaviour , inflicted on us the injury thou knowest of ; whence conjecture that there must be some enchanted Moor guarding the treasure of this damsel 's beauty , and that it is not for me . '' 
`` Not for me either , '' said Sancho , `` for more than four hundred Moors have so thrashed me that the drubbing of the stakes was cakes and fancy-bread to it . 
But tell me , senor , what do you call this excellent and rare adventure that has left us as we are left now ? 
Though your worship was not so badly off , having in your arms that incomparable beauty you spoke of ; but I , what did I have , except the heaviest whacks I think I had in all my life ? 
Unlucky me and the mother that bore me ! 
for I am not a knight-errant and never expect to be one , and of all the mishaps , the greater part falls to my share . '' 
`` Then thou hast been thrashed too ? '' 
said Don Quixote . 
`` Did n't I say so ? 
worse luck to my line ! '' 
said Sancho . 
`` Be not distressed , friend , '' said Don Quixote , `` for I will now make the precious balsam with which we shall cure ourselves in the twinkling of an eye . '' 
By this time the cuadrillero had succeeded in lighting the lamp , and came in to see the man that he thought had been killed ; and as Sancho caught sight of him at the door , seeing him coming in his shirt , with a cloth on his head , and a lamp in his hand , and a very forbidding countenance , he said to his master , `` Senor , can it be that this is the enchanted Moor coming back to give us more castigation if there be anything still left in the ink-bottle ? '' 
`` It can not be the Moor , '' answered Don Quixote , `` for those under enchantment do not let themselves be seen by anyone . '' 
`` If they do n't let themselves be seen , they let themselves be felt , '' said Sancho ; `` if not , let my shoulders speak to the point . '' 
`` Mine could speak too , '' said Don Quixote , `` but that is not a sufficient reason for believing that what we see is the enchanted Moor . '' 
The officer came up , and finding them engaged in such a peaceful conversation , stood amazed ; though Don Quixote , to be sure , still lay on his back unable to move from pure pummelling and plasters . 
The officer turned to him and said , `` Well , how goes it , good man ? '' 
`` I would speak more politely if I were you , '' replied Don Quixote ; `` is it the way of this country to address knights-errant in that style , you booby ? '' 
The cuadrillero finding himself so disrespectfully treated by such a sorry-looking individual , lost his temper , and raising the lamp full of oil , smote Don Quixote such a blow with it on the head that he gave him a badly broken pate ; then , all being in darkness , he went out , and Sancho Panza said , `` That is certainly the enchanted Moor , Senor , and he keeps the treasure for others , and for us only the cuffs and lamp-whacks . '' 
`` That is the truth , '' answered Don Quixote , `` and there is no use in troubling oneself about these matters of enchantment or being angry or vexed at them , for as they are invisible and visionary we shall find no one on whom to avenge ourselves , do what we may ; rise , Sancho , if thou canst , and call the alcaide of this fortress , and get him to give me a little oil , wine , salt , and rosemary to make the salutiferous balsam , for indeed I believe I have great need of it now , because I am losing much blood from the wound that phantom gave me . '' 
Sancho got up with pain enough in his bones , and went after the innkeeper in the dark , and meeting the officer , who was looking to see what had become of his enemy , he said to him , `` Senor , whoever you are , do us the favour and kindness to give us a little rosemary , oil , salt , and wine , for it is wanted to cure one of the best knights-errant on earth , who lies on yonder bed wounded by the hands of the enchanted Moor that is in this inn . '' 
When the officer heard him talk in this way , he took him for a man out of his senses , and as day was now beginning to break , he opened the inn gate , and calling the host , he told him what this good man wanted . 
The host furnished him with what he required , and Sancho brought it to Don Quixote , who , with his hand to his head , was bewailing the pain of the blow of the lamp , which had done him no more harm than raising a couple of rather large lumps , and what he fancied blood was only the sweat that flowed from him in his sufferings during the late storm . 
To be brief , he took the materials , of which he made a compound , mixing them all and boiling them a good while until it seemed to him they had come to perfection . 
He then asked for some vial to pour it into , and as there was not one in the inn , he decided on putting it into a tin oil-bottle or flask of which the host made him a free gift ; and over the flask he repeated more than eighty paternosters and as many more ave-marias , salves , and credos , accompanying each word with a cross by way of benediction , at all which there were present Sancho , the innkeeper , and the cuadrillero ; for the carrier was now peacefully engaged in attending to the comfort of his mules . 
This being accomplished , he felt anxious to make trial himself , on the spot , of the virtue of this precious balsam , as he considered it , and so he drank near a quart of what could not be put into the flask and remained in the pigskin in which it had been boiled ; but scarcely had he done drinking when he began to vomit in such a way that nothing was left in his stomach , and with the pangs and spasms of vomiting he broke into a profuse sweat , on account of which he bade them cover him up and leave him alone . 
They did so , and he lay sleeping more than three hours , at the end of which he awoke and felt very great bodily relief and so much ease from his bruises that he thought himself quite cured , and verily believed he had hit upon the balsam of Fierabras ; and that with this remedy he might thenceforward , without any fear , face any kind of destruction , battle , or combat , however perilous it might be . 
Sancho Panza , who also regarded the amendment of his master as miraculous , begged him to give him what was left in the pigskin , which was no small quantity . 
Don Quixote consented , and he , taking it with both hands , in good faith and with a better will , gulped down and drained off very little less than his master . 
But the fact is , that the stomach of poor Sancho was of necessity not so delicate as that of his master , and so , before vomiting , he was seized with such gripings and retchings , and such sweats and faintness , that verily and truly he believed his last hour had come , and finding himself so racked and tormented he cursed the balsam and the thief that had given it to him . 
Don Quixote seeing him in this state said , `` It is my belief , Sancho , that this mischief comes of thy not being dubbed a knight , for I am persuaded this liquor can not be good for those who are not so . '' 
`` If your worship knew that , '' returned Sancho -- `` woe betide me and all my kindred ! 
-- why did you let me taste it ? '' 
At this moment the draught took effect , and the poor squire began to discharge both ways at such a rate that the rush mat on which he had thrown himself and the canvas blanket he had covering him were fit for nothing afterwards . 
He sweated and perspired with such paroxysms and convulsions that not only he himself but all present thought his end had come . 
This tempest and tribulation lasted about two hours , at the end of which he was left , not like his master , but so weak and exhausted that he could not stand . 
Don Quixote , however , who , as has been said , felt himself relieved and well , was eager to take his departure at once in quest of adventures , as it seemed to him that all the time he loitered there was a fraud upon the world and those in it who stood in need of his help and protection , all the more when he had the security and confidence his balsam afforded him ; and so , urged by this impulse , he saddled Rocinante himself and put the pack-saddle on his squire 's beast , whom likewise he helped to dress and mount the ass ; after which he mounted his horse and turning to a corner of the inn he laid hold of a pike that stood there , to serve him by way of a lance . 
All that were in the inn , who were more than twenty persons , stood watching him ; the innkeeper 's daughter was likewise observing him , and he too never took his eyes off her , and from time to time fetched a sigh that he seemed to pluck up from the depths of his bowels ; but they all thought it must be from the pain he felt in his ribs ; at any rate they who had seen him plastered the night before thought so . 
As soon as they were both mounted , at the gate of the inn , he called to the host and said in a very grave and measured voice , `` Many and great are the favours , Senor Alcaide , that I have received in this castle of yours , and I remain under the deepest obligation to be grateful to you for them all the days of my life ; if I can repay them in avenging you of any arrogant foe who may have wronged you , know that my calling is no other than to aid the weak , to avenge those who suffer wrong , and to chastise perfidy . 
Search your memory , and if you find anything of this kind you need only tell me of it , and I promise you by the order of knighthood which I have received to procure you satisfaction and reparation to the utmost of your desire . '' 
The innkeeper replied to him with equal calmness , `` Sir Knight , I do not want your worship to avenge me of any wrong , because when any is done me I can take what vengeance seems good to me ; the only thing I want is that you pay me the score that you have run up in the inn last night , as well for the straw and barley for your two beasts , as for supper and beds . '' 
`` Then this is an inn ? '' 
said Don Quixote . 
`` And a very respectable one , '' said the innkeeper . 
`` I have been under a mistake all this time , '' answered Don Quixote , `` for in truth I thought it was a castle , and not a bad one ; but since it appears that it is not a castle but an inn , all that can be done now is that you should excuse the payment , for I can not contravene the rule of knights-errant , of whom I know as a fact -LRB- and up to the present I have read nothing to the contrary -RRB- that they never paid for lodging or anything else in the inn where they might be ; for any hospitality that might be offered them is their due by law and right in return for the insufferable toil they endure in seeking adventures by night and by day , in summer and in winter , on foot and on horseback , in hunger and thirst , cold and heat , exposed to all the inclemencies of heaven and all the hardships of earth . '' 
`` I have little to do with that , '' replied the innkeeper ; `` pay me what you owe me , and let us have no more talk of chivalry , for all I care about is to get my money . '' 
`` You are a stupid , scurvy innkeeper , '' said Don Quixote , and putting spurs to Rocinante and bringing his pike to the slope he rode out of the inn before anyone could stop him , and pushed on some distance without looking to see if his squire was following him . 
The innkeeper when he saw him go without paying him ran to get payment of Sancho , who said that as his master would not pay neither would he , because , being as he was squire to a knight-errant , the same rule and reason held good for him as for his master with regard to not paying anything in inns and hostelries . 
At this the innkeeper waxed very wroth , and threatened if he did not pay to compel him in a way that he would not like . 
To which Sancho made answer that by the law of chivalry his master had received he would not pay a rap , though it cost him his life ; for the excellent and ancient usage of knights-errant was not going to be violated by him , nor should the squires of such as were yet to come into the world ever complain of him or reproach him with breaking so just a privilege . 
The ill-luck of the unfortunate Sancho so ordered it that among the company in the inn there were four woolcarders from Segovia , three needle-makers from the Colt of Cordova , and two lodgers from the Fair of Seville , lively fellows , tender-hearted , fond of a joke , and playful , who , almost as if instigated and moved by a common impulse , made up to Sancho and dismounted him from his ass , while one of them went in for the blanket of the host 's bed ; but on flinging him into it they looked up , and seeing that the ceiling was somewhat lower than what they required for their work , they decided upon going out into the yard , which was bounded by the sky , and there , putting Sancho in the middle of the blanket , they began to raise him high , making sport with him as they would with a dog at Shrovetide . 
The cries of the poor blanketed wretch were so loud that they reached the ears of his master , who , halting to listen attentively , was persuaded that some new adventure was coming , until he clearly perceived that it was his squire who uttered them . 
Wheeling about he came up to the inn with a laborious gallop , and finding it shut went round it to see if he could find some way of getting in ; but as soon as he came to the wall of the yard , which was not very high , he discovered the game that was being played with his squire . 
He saw him rising and falling in the air with such grace and nimbleness that , had his rage allowed him , it is my belief he would have laughed . 
He tried to climb from his horse on to the top of the wall , but he was so bruised and battered that he could not even dismount ; and so from the back of his horse he began to utter such maledictions and objurgations against those who were blanketing Sancho as it would be impossible to write down accurately : they , however , did not stay their laughter or their work for this , nor did the flying Sancho cease his lamentations , mingled now with threats , now with entreaties but all to little purpose , or none at all , until from pure weariness they left off . 
They then brought him his ass , and mounting him on top of it they put his jacket round him ; and the compassionate Maritornes , seeing him so exhausted , thought fit to refresh him with a jug of water , and that it might be all the cooler she fetched it from the well . 
Sancho took it , and as he was raising it to his mouth he was stopped by the cries of his master exclaiming , `` Sancho , my son , drink not water ; drink it not , my son , for it will kill thee ; see , here I have the blessed balsam -LRB- and he held up the flask of liquor -RRB- , and with drinking two drops of it thou wilt certainly be restored . '' 
At these words Sancho turned his eyes asquint , and in a still louder voice said , `` Can it be your worship has forgotten that I am not a knight , or do you want me to end by vomiting up what bowels I have left after last night ? 
Keep your liquor in the name of all the devils , and leave me to myself ! '' 
and at one and the same instant he left off talking and began drinking ; but as at the first sup he perceived it was water he did not care to go on with it , and begged Maritornes to fetch him some wine , which she did with right good will , and paid for it with her own money ; for indeed they say of her that , though she was in that line of life , there was some faint and distant resemblance to a Christian about her . 
When Sancho had done drinking he dug his heels into his ass , and the gate of the inn being thrown open he passed out very well pleased at having paid nothing and carried his point , though it had been at the expense of his usual sureties , his shoulders . 
It is true that the innkeeper detained his alforjas in payment of what was owing to him , but Sancho took his departure in such a flurry that he never missed them . 
The innkeeper , as soon as he saw him off , wanted to bar the gate close , but the blanketers would not agree to it , for they were fellows who would not have cared two farthings for Don Quixote , even had he been really one of the knights-errant of the Round Table . 
Sancho reached his master so limp and faint that he could not urge on his beast . 
When Don Quixote saw the state he was in he said , `` I have now come to the conclusion , good Sancho , that this castle or inn is beyond a doubt enchanted , because those who have so atrociously diverted themselves with thee , what can they be but phantoms or beings of another world ? 
and I hold this confirmed by having noticed that when I was by the wall of the yard witnessing the acts of thy sad tragedy , it was out of my power to mount upon it , nor could I even dismount from Rocinante , because they no doubt had me enchanted ; for I swear to thee by the faith of what I am that if I had been able to climb up or dismount , I would have avenged thee in such a way that those braggart thieves would have remembered their freak for ever , even though in so doing I knew that I contravened the laws of chivalry , which , as I have often told thee , do not permit a knight to lay hands on him who is not one , save in case of urgent and great necessity in defence of his own life and person . '' 
`` I would have avenged myself too if I could , '' said Sancho , `` whether I had been dubbed knight or not , but I could not ; though for my part I am persuaded those who amused themselves with me were not phantoms or enchanted men , as your worship says , but men of flesh and bone like ourselves ; and they all had their names , for I heard them name them when they were tossing me , and one was called Pedro Martinez , and another Tenorio Hernandez , and the innkeeper , I heard , was called Juan Palomeque the Left-handed ; so that , senor , your not being able to leap over the wall of the yard or dismount from your horse came of something else besides enchantments ; and what I make out clearly from all this is , that these adventures we go seeking will in the end lead us into such misadventures that we shall not know which is our right foot ; and that the best and wisest thing , according to my small wits , would be for us to return home , now that it is harvest-time , and attend to our business , and give over wandering from Zeca to Mecca and from pail to bucket , as the saying is . '' 
`` How little thou knowest about chivalry , Sancho , '' replied Don Quixote ; `` hold thy peace and have patience ; the day will come when thou shalt see with thine own eyes what an honourable thing it is to wander in the pursuit of this calling ; nay , tell me , what greater pleasure can there be in the world , or what delight can equal that of winning a battle , and triumphing over one 's enemy ? 
None , beyond all doubt . '' 
`` Very likely , '' answered Sancho , `` though I do not know it ; all I know is that since we have been knights-errant , or since your worship has been one -LRB- for I have no right to reckon myself one of so honourable a number -RRB- we have never won any battle except the one with the Biscayan , and even out of that your worship came with half an ear and half a helmet the less ; and from that till now it has been all cudgellings and more cudgellings , cuffs and more cuffs , I getting the blanketing over and above , and falling in with enchanted persons on whom I can not avenge myself so as to know what the delight , as your worship calls it , of conquering an enemy is like . '' 
`` That is what vexes me , and what ought to vex thee , Sancho , '' replied Don Quixote ; `` but henceforward I will endeavour to have at hand some sword made by such craft that no kind of enchantments can take effect upon him who carries it , and it is even possible that fortune may procure for me that which belonged to Amadis when he was called ` The Knight of the Burning Sword , ' which was one of the best swords that ever knight in the world possessed , for , besides having the said virtue , it cut like a razor , and there was no armour , however strong and enchanted it might be , that could resist it . '' 
`` Such is my luck , '' said Sancho , `` that even if that happened and your worship found some such sword , it would , like the balsam , turn out serviceable and good for dubbed knights only , and as for the squires , they might sup sorrow . '' 
`` Fear not that , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote : `` Heaven will deal better by thee . '' 
Thus talking , Don Quixote and his squire were going along , when , on the road they were following , Don Quixote perceived approaching them a large and thick cloud of dust , on seeing which he turned to Sancho and said : `` This is the day , Sancho , on which will be seen the boon my fortune is reserving for me ; this , I say , is the day on which as much as on any other shall be displayed the might of my arm , and on which I shall do deeds that shall remain written in the book of fame for all ages to come . 
Seest thou that cloud of dust which rises yonder ? 
Well , then , all that is churned up by a vast army composed of various and countless nations that comes marching there . '' 
`` According to that there must be two , '' said Sancho , `` for on this opposite side also there rises just such another cloud of dust . '' 
Don Quixote turned to look and found that it was true , and rejoicing exceedingly , he concluded that they were two armies about to engage and encounter in the midst of that broad plain ; for at all times and seasons his fancy was full of the battles , enchantments , adventures , crazy feats , loves , and defiances that are recorded in the books of chivalry , and everything he said , thought , or did had reference to such things . 
Now the cloud of dust he had seen was raised by two great droves of sheep coming along the same road in opposite directions , which , because of the dust , did not become visible until they drew near , but Don Quixote asserted so positively that they were armies that Sancho was led to believe it and say , `` Well , and what are we to do , senor ? '' 
`` What ? '' 
said Don Quixote : `` give aid and assistance to the weak and those who need it ; and thou must know , Sancho , that this which comes opposite to us is conducted and led by the mighty emperor Alifanfaron , lord of the great isle of Trapobana ; this other that marches behind me is that of his enemy the king of the Garamantas , Pentapolin of the Bare Arm , for he always goes into battle with his right arm bare . '' 
`` But why are these two lords such enemies ? '' 
`` They are at enmity , '' replied Don Quixote , `` because this Alifanfaron is a furious pagan and is in love with the daughter of Pentapolin , who is a very beautiful and moreover gracious lady , and a Christian , and her father is unwilling to bestow her upon the pagan king unless he first abandons the religion of his false prophet Mahomet , and adopts his own . '' 
`` By my beard , '' said Sancho , `` but Pentapolin does quite right , and I will help him as much as I can . '' 
`` In that thou wilt do what is thy duty , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote ; `` for to engage in battles of this sort it is not requisite to be a dubbed knight . '' 
`` That I can well understand , '' answered Sancho ; `` but where shall we put this ass where we may be sure to find him after the fray is over ? 
for I believe it has not been the custom so far to go into battle on a beast of this kind . '' 
`` That is true , '' said Don Quixote , `` and what you had best do with him is to leave him to take his chance whether he be lost or not , for the horses we shall have when we come out victors will be so many that even Rocinante will run a risk of being changed for another . 
But attend to me and observe , for I wish to give thee some account of the chief knights who accompany these two armies ; and that thou mayest the better see and mark , let us withdraw to that hillock which rises yonder , whence both armies may be seen . '' 
They did so , and placed themselves on a rising ground from which the two droves that Don Quixote made armies of might have been plainly seen if the clouds of dust they raised had not obscured them and blinded the sight ; nevertheless , seeing in his imagination what he did not see and what did not exist , he began thus in a loud voice : `` That knight whom thou seest yonder in yellow armour , who bears upon his shield a lion crowned crouching at the feet of a damsel , is the valiant Laurcalco , lord of the Silver Bridge ; that one in armour with flowers of gold , who bears on his shield three crowns argent on an azure field , is the dreaded Micocolembo , grand duke of Quirocia ; that other of gigantic frame , on his right hand , is the ever dauntless Brandabarbaran de Boliche , lord of the three Arabias , who for armour wears that serpent skin , and has for shield a gate which , according to tradition , is one of those of the temple that Samson brought to the ground when by his death he revenged himself upon his enemies . 
But turn thine eyes to the other side , and thou shalt see in front and in the van of this other army the ever victorious and never vanquished Timonel of Carcajona , prince of New Biscay , who comes in armour with arms quartered azure , vert , white , and yellow , and bears on his shield a cat or on a field tawny with a motto which says Miau , which is the beginning of the name of his lady , who according to report is the peerless Miaulina , daughter of the duke Alfeniquen of the Algarve ; the other , who burdens and presses the loins of that powerful charger and bears arms white as snow and a shield blank and without any device , is a novice knight , a Frenchman by birth , Pierres Papin by name , lord of the baronies of Utrique ; that other , who with iron-shod heels strikes the flanks of that nimble parti-coloured zebra , and for arms bears azure vair , is the mighty duke of Nerbia , Espartafilardo del Bosque , who bears for device on his shield an asparagus plant with a motto in Castilian that says , Rastrea mi suerte . '' 
And so he went on naming a number of knights of one squadron or the other out of his imagination , and to all he assigned off-hand their arms , colours , devices , and mottoes , carried away by the illusions of his unheard-of craze ; and without a pause , he continued , `` People of divers nations compose this squadron in front ; here are those that drink of the sweet waters of the famous Xanthus , those that scour the woody Massilian plains , those that sift the pure fine gold of Arabia Felix , those that enjoy the famed cool banks of the crystal Thermodon , those that in many and various ways divert the streams of the golden Pactolus , the Numidians , faithless in their promises , the Persians renowned in archery , the Parthians and the Medes that fight as they fly , the Arabs that ever shift their dwellings , the Scythians as cruel as they are fair , the Ethiopians with pierced lips , and an infinity of other nations whose features I recognise and descry , though I can not recall their names . 
In this other squadron there come those that drink of the crystal streams of the olive-bearing Betis , those that make smooth their countenances with the water of the ever rich and golden Tagus , those that rejoice in the fertilising flow of the divine Genil , those that roam the Tartesian plains abounding in pasture , those that take their pleasure in the Elysian meadows of Jerez , the rich Manchegans crowned with ruddy ears of corn , the wearers of iron , old relics of the Gothic race , those that bathe in the Pisuerga renowned for its gentle current , those that feed their herds along the spreading pastures of the winding Guadiana famed for its hidden course , those that tremble with the cold of the pineclad Pyrenees or the dazzling snows of the lofty Apennine ; in a word , as many as all Europe includes and contains . '' 
Good God ! 
what a number of countries and nations he named ! 
giving to each its proper attributes with marvellous readiness ; brimful and saturated with what he had read in his lying books ! 
Sancho Panza hung upon his words without speaking , and from time to time turned to try if he could see the knights and giants his master was describing , and as he could not make out one of them he said to him : `` Senor , devil take it if there 's a sign of any man you talk of , knight or giant , in the whole thing ; maybe it 's all enchantment , like the phantoms last night . '' 
`` How canst thou say that ! '' 
answered Don Quixote ; `` dost thou not hear the neighing of the steeds , the braying of the trumpets , the roll of the drums ? '' 
`` I hear nothing but a great bleating of ewes and sheep , '' said Sancho ; which was true , for by this time the two flocks had come close . 
`` The fear thou art in , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote , `` prevents thee from seeing or hearing correctly , for one of the effects of fear is to derange the senses and make things appear different from what they are ; if thou art in such fear , withdraw to one side and leave me to myself , for alone I suffice to bring victory to that side to which I shall give my aid ; '' and so saying he gave Rocinante the spur , and putting the lance in rest , shot down the slope like a thunderbolt . 
Sancho shouted after him , crying , `` Come back , Senor Don Quixote ; I vow to God they are sheep and ewes you are charging ! 
Come back ! 
Unlucky the father that begot me ! 
what madness is this ! 
Look , there is no giant , nor knight , nor cats , nor arms , nor shields quartered or whole , nor vair azure or bedevilled . 
What are you about ? 
Sinner that I am before God ! '' 
But not for all these entreaties did Don Quixote turn back ; on the contrary he went on shouting out , `` Ho , knights , ye who follow and fight under the banners of the valiant emperor Pentapolin of the Bare Arm , follow me all ; ye shall see how easily I shall give him his revenge over his enemy Alifanfaron of the Trapobana . '' 
So saying , he dashed into the midst of the squadron of ewes , and began spearing them with as much spirit and intrepidity as if he were transfixing mortal enemies in earnest . 
The shepherds and drovers accompanying the flock shouted to him to desist ; seeing it was no use , they ungirt their slings and began to salute his ears with stones as big as one 's fist . 
Don Quixote gave no heed to the stones , but , letting drive right and left kept saying : `` Where art thou , proud Alifanfaron ? 
Come before me ; I am a single knight who would fain prove thy prowess hand to hand , and make thee yield thy life a penalty for the wrong thou dost to the valiant Pentapolin Garamanta . '' 
Here came a sugar-plum from the brook that struck him on the side and buried a couple of ribs in his body . 
Feeling himself so smitten , he imagined himself slain or badly wounded for certain , and recollecting his liquor he drew out his flask , and putting it to his mouth began to pour the contents into his stomach ; but ere he had succeeded in swallowing what seemed to him enough , there came another almond which struck him on the hand and on the flask so fairly that it smashed it to pieces , knocking three or four teeth and grinders out of his mouth in its course , and sorely crushing two fingers of his hand . 
Such was the force of the first blow and of the second , that the poor knight in spite of himself came down backwards off his horse . 
The shepherds came up , and felt sure they had killed him ; so in all haste they collected their flock together , took up the dead beasts , of which there were more than seven , and made off without waiting to ascertain anything further . 
All this time Sancho stood on the hill watching the crazy feats his master was performing , and tearing his beard and cursing the hour and the occasion when fortune had made him acquainted with him . 
Seeing him , then , brought to the ground , and that the shepherds had taken themselves off , he ran to him and found him in very bad case , though not unconscious ; and said he : `` Did I not tell you to come back , Senor Don Quixote ; and that what you were going to attack were not armies but droves of sheep ? '' 
`` That 's how that thief of a sage , my enemy , can alter and falsify things , '' answered Don Quixote ; `` thou must know , Sancho , that it is a very easy matter for those of his sort to make us believe what they choose ; and this malignant being who persecutes me , envious of the glory he knew I was to win in this battle , has turned the squadrons of the enemy into droves of sheep . 
At any rate , do this much , I beg of thee , Sancho , to undeceive thyself , and see that what I say is true ; mount thy ass and follow them quietly , and thou shalt see that when they have gone some little distance from this they will return to their original shape and , ceasing to be sheep , become men in all respects as I described them to thee at first . 
But go not just yet , for I want thy help and assistance ; come hither , and see how many of my teeth and grinders are missing , for I feel as if there was not one left in my mouth . '' 
Sancho came so close that he almost put his eyes into his mouth ; now just at that moment the balsam had acted on the stomach of Don Quixote , so , at the very instant when Sancho came to examine his mouth , he discharged all its contents with more force than a musket , and full into the beard of the compassionate squire . 
`` Holy Mary ! '' 
cried Sancho , `` what is this that has happened me ? 
Clearly this sinner is mortally wounded , as he vomits blood from the mouth ; '' but considering the matter a little more closely he perceived by the colour , taste , and smell , that it was not blood but the balsam from the flask which he had seen him drink ; and he was taken with such a loathing that his stomach turned , and he vomited up his inside over his very master , and both were left in a precious state . 
Sancho ran to his ass to get something wherewith to clean himself , and relieve his master , out of his alforjas ; but not finding them , he well-nigh took leave of his senses , and cursed himself anew , and in his heart resolved to quit his master and return home , even though he forfeited the wages of his service and all hopes of the promised island . 
Don Quixote now rose , and putting his left hand to his mouth to keep his teeth from falling out altogether , with the other he laid hold of the bridle of Rocinante , who had never stirred from his master 's side -- so loyal and well-behaved was he -- and betook himself to where the squire stood leaning over his ass with his hand to his cheek , like one in deep dejection . 
Seeing him in this mood , looking so sad , Don Quixote said to him : `` Bear in mind , Sancho , that one man is no more than another , unless he does more than another ; all these tempests that fall upon us are signs that fair weather is coming shortly , and that things will go well with us , for it is impossible for good or evil to last for ever ; and hence it follows that the evil having lasted long , the good must be now nigh at hand ; so thou must not distress thyself at the misfortunes which happen to me , since thou hast no share in them . '' 
`` How have I not ? '' 
replied Sancho ; `` was he whom they blanketed yesterday perchance any other than my father 's son ? 
and the alforjas that are missing to-day with all my treasures , did they belong to any other but myself ? '' 
`` What ! 
are the alforjas missing , Sancho ? '' 
said Don Quixote . 
`` Yes , they are missing , '' answered Sancho . 
`` In that case we have nothing to eat to-day , '' replied Don Quixote . 
`` It would be so , '' answered Sancho , `` if there were none of the herbs your worship says you know in these meadows , those with which knights-errant as unlucky as your worship are wont to supply such-like shortcomings . '' 
`` For all that , '' answered Don Quixote , `` I would rather have just now a quarter of bread , or a loaf and a couple of pilchards ' heads , than all the herbs described by Dioscorides , even with Doctor Laguna 's notes . 
Nevertheless , Sancho the Good , mount thy beast and come along with me , for God , who provides for all things , will not fail us -LRB- more especially when we are so active in his service as we are -RRB- , since he fails not the midges of the air , nor the grubs of the earth , nor the tadpoles of the water , and is so merciful that he maketh his sun to rise on the good and on the evil , and sendeth rain on the unjust and on the just . '' 
`` Your worship would make a better preacher than knight-errant , '' said Sancho . 
`` Knights-errant knew and ought to know everything , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote ; `` for there were knights-errant in former times as well qualified to deliver a sermon or discourse in the middle of an encampment , as if they had graduated in the University of Paris ; whereby we may see that the lance has never blunted the pen , nor the pen the lance . '' 
`` Well , be it as your worship says , '' replied Sancho ; `` let us be off now and find some place of shelter for the night , and God grant it may be somewhere where there are no blankets , nor blanketeers , nor phantoms , nor enchanted Moors ; for if there are , may the devil take the whole concern . '' 
`` Ask that of God , my son , '' said Don Quixote ; `` and do thou lead on where thou wilt , for this time I leave our lodging to thy choice ; but reach me here thy hand , and feel with thy finger , and find out how many of my teeth and grinders are missing from this right side of the upper jaw , for it is there I feel the pain . '' 
Sancho put in his fingers , and feeling about asked him , `` How many grinders used your worship have on this side ? '' 
`` Four , '' replied Don Quixote , `` besides the back-tooth , all whole and quite sound . '' 
`` Mind what you are saying , senor . '' 
`` I say four , if not five , '' answered Don Quixote , `` for never in my life have I had tooth or grinder drawn , nor has any fallen out or been destroyed by any decay or rheum . '' 
`` Well , then , '' said Sancho , `` in this lower side your worship has no more than two grinders and a half , and in the upper neither a half nor any at all , for it is all as smooth as the palm of my hand . '' 
`` Luckless that I am ! '' 
said Don Quixote , hearing the sad news his squire gave him ; `` I had rather they despoiled me of an arm , so it were not the sword-arm ; for I tell thee , Sancho , a mouth without teeth is like a mill without a millstone , and a tooth is much more to be prized than a diamond ; but we who profess the austere order of chivalry are liable to all this . 
Mount , friend , and lead the way , and I will follow thee at whatever pace thou wilt . '' 
Sancho did as he bade him , and proceeded in the direction in which he thought he might find refuge without quitting the high road , which was there very much frequented . 
As they went along , then , at a slow pace -- for the pain in Don Quixote 's jaws kept him uneasy and ill-disposed for speed -- Sancho thought it well to amuse and divert him by talk of some kind , and among the things he said to him was that which will be told in the following chapter . 
`` It seems to me , senor , that all these mishaps that have befallen us of late have been without any doubt a punishment for the offence committed by your worship against the order of chivalry in not keeping the oath you made not to eat bread off a tablecloth or embrace the queen , and all the rest of it that your worship swore to observe until you had taken that helmet of Malandrino 's , or whatever the Moor is called , for I do not very well remember . '' 
`` Thou art very right , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote , `` but to tell the truth , it had escaped my memory ; and likewise thou mayest rely upon it that the affair of the blanket happened to thee because of thy fault in not reminding me of it in time ; but I will make amends , for there are ways of compounding for everything in the order of chivalry . '' 
`` Why ! 
have I taken an oath of some sort , then ? '' 
said Sancho . 
`` It makes no matter that thou hast not taken an oath , '' said Don Quixote ; `` suffice it that I see thou art not quite clear of complicity ; and whether or no , it will not be ill done to provide ourselves with a remedy . '' 
`` In that case , '' said Sancho , `` mind that your worship does not forget this as you did the oath ; perhaps the phantoms may take it into their heads to amuse themselves once more with me ; or even with your worship if they see you so obstinate . '' 
While engaged in this and other talk , night overtook them on the road before they had reached or discovered any place of shelter ; and what made it still worse was that they were dying of hunger , for with the loss of the alforjas they had lost their entire larder and commissariat ; and to complete the misfortune they met with an adventure which without any invention had really the appearance of one . 
It so happened that the night closed in somewhat darkly , but for all that they pushed on , Sancho feeling sure that as the road was the king 's highway they might reasonably expect to find some inn within a league or two . 
Going along , then , in this way , the night dark , the squire hungry , the master sharp-set , they saw coming towards them on the road they were travelling a great number of lights which looked exactly like stars in motion . 
Sancho was taken aback at the sight of them , nor did Don Quixote altogether relish them : the one pulled up his ass by the halter , the other his hack by the bridle , and they stood still , watching anxiously to see what all this would turn out to be , and found that the lights were approaching them , and the nearer they came the greater they seemed , at which spectacle Sancho began to shake like a man dosed with mercury , and Don Quixote 's hair stood on end ; he , however , plucking up spirit a little , said : `` This , no doubt , Sancho , will be a most mighty and perilous adventure , in which it will be needful for me to put forth all my valour and resolution . '' 
`` Unlucky me ! '' 
answered Sancho ; `` if this adventure happens to be one of phantoms , as I am beginning to think it is , where shall I find the ribs to bear it ? '' 
`` Be they phantoms ever so much , '' said Don Quixote , `` I will not permit them to touch a thread of thy garments ; for if they played tricks with thee the time before , it was because I was unable to leap the walls of the yard ; but now we are on a wide plain , where I shall be able to wield my sword as I please . '' 
`` And if they enchant and cripple you as they did the last time , '' said Sancho , `` what difference will it make being on the open plain or not ? '' 
`` For all that , '' replied Don Quixote , `` I entreat thee , Sancho , to keep a good heart , for experience will tell thee what mine is . '' 
`` I will , please God , '' answered Sancho , and the two retiring to one side of the road set themselves to observe closely what all these moving lights might be ; and very soon afterwards they made out some twenty encamisados , all on horseback , with lighted torches in their hands , the awe-inspiring aspect of whom completely extinguished the courage of Sancho , who began to chatter with his teeth like one in the cold fit of an ague ; and his heart sank and his teeth chattered still more when they perceived distinctly that behind them there came a litter covered over with black and followed by six more mounted figures in mourning down to the very feet of their mules -- for they could perceive plainly they were not horses by the easy pace at which they went . 
And as the encamisados came along they muttered to themselves in a low plaintive tone . 
This strange spectacle at such an hour and in such a solitary place was quite enough to strike terror into Sancho 's heart , and even into his master 's ; and -LRB- save in Don Quixote 's case -RRB- did so , for all Sancho 's resolution had now broken down . 
It was just the opposite with his master , whose imagination immediately conjured up all this to him vividly as one of the adventures of his books . 
He took it into his head that the litter was a bier on which was borne some sorely wounded or slain knight , to avenge whom was a task reserved for him alone ; and without any further reasoning he laid his lance in rest , fixed himself firmly in his saddle , and with gallant spirit and bearing took up his position in the middle of the road where the encamisados must of necessity pass ; and as soon as he saw them near at hand he raised his voice and said : `` Halt , knights , or whosoever ye may be , and render me account of who ye are , whence ye come , where ye go , what it is ye carry upon that bier , for , to judge by appearances , either ye have done some wrong or some wrong has been done to you , and it is fitting and necessary that I should know , either that I may chastise you for the evil ye have done , or else that I may avenge you for the injury that has been inflicted upon you . '' 
`` We are in haste , '' answered one of the encamisados , `` and the inn is far off , and we can not stop to render you such an account as you demand ; '' and spurring his mule he moved on . 
Don Quixote was mightily provoked by this answer , and seizing the mule by the bridle he said , `` Halt , and be more mannerly , and render an account of what I have asked of you ; else , take my defiance to combat , all of you . '' 
The mule was shy , and was so frightened at her bridle being seized that rearing up she flung her rider to the ground over her haunches . 
An attendant who was on foot , seeing the encamisado fall , began to abuse Don Quixote , who now moved to anger , without any more ado , laying his lance in rest charged one of the men in mourning and brought him badly wounded to the ground , and as he wheeled round upon the others the agility with which he attacked and routed them was a sight to see , for it seemed just as if wings had that instant grown upon Rocinante , so lightly and proudly did he bear himself . 
The encamisados were all timid folk and unarmed , so they speedily made their escape from the fray and set off at a run across the plain with their lighted torches , looking exactly like maskers running on some gala or festival night . 
The mourners , too , enveloped and swathed in their skirts and gowns , were unable to bestir themselves , and so with entire safety to himself Don Quixote belaboured them all and drove them off against their will , for they all thought it was no man but a devil from hell come to carry away the dead body they had in the litter . 
Sancho beheld all this in astonishment at the intrepidity of his lord , and said to himself , `` Clearly this master of mine is as bold and valiant as he says he is . '' 
A burning torch lay on the ground near the first man whom the mule had thrown , by the light of which Don Quixote perceived him , and coming up to him he presented the point of the lance to his face , calling on him to yield himself prisoner , or else he would kill him ; to which the prostrate man replied , `` I am prisoner enough as it is ; I can not stir , for one of my legs is broken : I entreat you , if you be a Christian gentleman , not to kill me , which will be committing grave sacrilege , for I am a licentiate and I hold first orders . '' 
`` Then what the devil brought you here , being a churchman ? '' 
said Don Quixote . 
`` What , senor ? '' 
said the other . 
`` My bad luck . '' 
`` Then still worse awaits you , '' said Don Quixote , `` if you do not satisfy me as to all I asked you at first . '' 
`` You shall be soon satisfied , '' said the licentiate ; `` you must know , then , that though just now I said I was a licentiate , I am only a bachelor , and my name is Alonzo Lopez ; I am a native of Alcobendas , I come from the city of Baeza with eleven others , priests , the same who fled with the torches , and we are going to the city of Segovia accompanying a dead body which is in that litter , and is that of a gentleman who died in Baeza , where he was interred ; and now , as I said , we are taking his bones to their burial-place , which is in Segovia , where he was born . '' 
`` And who killed him ? '' 
asked Don Quixote . 
`` God , by means of a malignant fever that took him , '' answered the bachelor . 
`` In that case , '' said Don Quixote , `` the Lord has relieved me of the task of avenging his death had any other slain him ; but , he who slew him having slain him , there is nothing for it but to be silent , and shrug one 's shoulders ; I should do the same were he to slay myself ; and I would have your reverence know that I am a knight of La Mancha , Don Quixote by name , and it is my business and calling to roam the world righting wrongs and redressing injuries . '' 
`` I do not know how that about righting wrongs can be , '' said the bachelor , `` for from straight you have made me crooked , leaving me with a broken leg that will never see itself straight again all the days of its life ; and the injury you have redressed in my case has been to leave me injured in such a way that I shall remain injured for ever ; and the height of misadventure it was to fall in with you who go in search of adventures . '' 
`` Things do not all happen in the same way , '' answered Don Quixote ; `` it all came , Sir Bachelor Alonzo Lopez , of your going , as you did , by night , dressed in those surplices , with lighted torches , praying , covered with mourning , so that naturally you looked like something evil and of the other world ; and so I could not avoid doing my duty in attacking you , and I should have attacked you even had I known positively that you were the very devils of hell , for such I certainly believed and took you to be . '' 
`` As my fate has so willed it , '' said the bachelor , `` I entreat you , sir knight-errant , whose errand has been such an evil one for me , to help me to get from under this mule that holds one of my legs caught between the stirrup and the saddle . '' 
`` I would have talked on till to-morrow , '' said Don Quixote ; `` how long were you going to wait before telling me of your distress ? '' 
He at once called to Sancho , who , however , had no mind to come , as he was just then engaged in unloading a sumpter mule , well laden with provender , which these worthy gentlemen had brought with them . 
Sancho made a bag of his coat , and , getting together as much as he could , and as the bag would hold , he loaded his beast , and then hastened to obey his master 's call , and helped him to remove the bachelor from under the mule ; then putting him on her back he gave him the torch , and Don Quixote bade him follow the track of his companions , and beg pardon of them on his part for the wrong which he could not help doing them . 
And said Sancho , `` If by chance these gentlemen should want to know who was the hero that served them so , your worship may tell them that he is the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha , otherwise called the Knight of the Rueful Countenance . '' 
The bachelor then took his departure . 
I forgot to mention that before he did so he said to Don Quixote , `` Remember that you stand excommunicated for having laid violent hands on a holy thing , juxta illud , si quis , suadente diabolo . '' 
`` I do not understand that Latin , '' answered Don Quixote , `` but I know well I did not lay hands , only this pike ; besides , I did not think I was committing an assault upon priests or things of the Church , which , like a Catholic and faithful Christian as I am , I respect and revere , but upon phantoms and spectres of the other world ; but even so , I remember how it fared with Cid Ruy Diaz when he broke the chair of the ambassador of that king before his Holiness the Pope , who excommunicated him for the same ; and yet the good Roderick of Vivar bore himself that day like a very noble and valiant knight . '' 
On hearing this the bachelor took his departure , as has been said , without making any reply ; and Don Quixote asked Sancho what had induced him to call him the `` Knight of the Rueful Countenance '' more then than at any other time . 
`` I will tell you , '' answered Sancho ; `` it was because I have been looking at you for some time by the light of the torch held by that unfortunate , and verily your worship has got of late the most ill-favoured countenance I ever saw : it must be either owing to the fatigue of this combat , or else to the want of teeth and grinders . '' 
`` It is not that , '' replied Don Quixote , `` but because the sage whose duty it will be to write the history of my achievements must have thought it proper that I should take some distinctive name as all knights of yore did ; one being ` He of the Burning Sword , ' another ` He of the Unicorn , ' this one ` He of the Damsels , ' that ` He of the Phoenix , ' another ` The Knight of the Griffin , ' and another ` He of the Death , ' and by these names and designations they were known all the world round ; and so I say that the sage aforesaid must have put it into your mouth and mind just now to call me ` The Knight of the Rueful Countenance , ' as I intend to call myself from this day forward ; and that the said name may fit me better , I mean , when the opportunity offers , to have a very rueful countenance painted on my shield . '' 
`` There is no occasion , senor , for wasting time or money on making that countenance , '' said Sancho ; `` for all that need be done is for your worship to show your own , face to face , to those who look at you , and without anything more , either image or shield , they will call you ` Him of the Rueful Countenance ' and believe me I am telling you the truth , for I assure you , senor -LRB- and in good part be it said -RRB- , hunger and the loss of your grinders have given you such an ill-favoured face that , as I say , the rueful picture may be very well spared . '' 
Don Quixote laughed at Sancho 's pleasantry ; nevertheless he resolved to call himself by that name , and have his shield or buckler painted as he had devised . 
Don Quixote would have looked to see whether the body in the litter were bones or not , but Sancho would not have it , saying : `` Senor , you have ended this perilous adventure more safely for yourself than any of those I have seen : perhaps these people , though beaten and routed , may bethink themselves that it is a single man that has beaten them , and feeling sore and ashamed of it may take heart and come in search of us and give us trouble enough . 
The ass is in proper trim , the mountains are near at hand , hunger presses , we have nothing more to do but make good our retreat , and , as the saying is , the dead to the grave and the living to the loaf . '' 
And driving his ass before him he begged his master to follow , who , feeling that Sancho was right , did so without replying ; and after proceeding some little distance between two hills they found themselves in a wide and retired valley , where they alighted , and Sancho unloaded his beast , and stretched upon the green grass , with hunger for sauce , they breakfasted , dined , lunched , and supped all at once , satisfying their appetites with more than one store of cold meat which the dead man 's clerical gentlemen -LRB- who seldom put themselves on short allowance -RRB- had brought with them on their sumpter mule . 
But another piece of ill-luck befell them , which Sancho held the worst of all , and that was that they had no wine to drink , nor even water to moisten their lips ; and as thirst tormented them , Sancho , observing that the meadow where they were was full of green and tender grass , said what will be told in the following chapter . 
`` It can not be , senor , but that this grass is a proof that there must be hard by some spring or brook to give it moisture , so it would be well to move a little farther on , that we may find some place where we may quench this terrible thirst that plagues us , which beyond a doubt is more distressing than hunger . '' 
The advice seemed good to Don Quixote , and , he leading Rocinante by the bridle and Sancho the ass by the halter , after he had packed away upon him the remains of the supper , they advanced the meadow feeling their way , for the darkness of the night made it impossible to see anything ; but they had not gone two hundred paces when a loud noise of water , as if falling from great rocks , struck their ears . 
The sound cheered them greatly ; but halting to make out by listening from what quarter it came they heard unseasonably another noise which spoiled the satisfaction the sound of the water gave them , especially for Sancho , who was by nature timid and faint-hearted . 
They heard , I say , strokes falling with a measured beat , and a certain rattling of iron and chains that , together with the furious din of the water , would have struck terror into any heart but Don Quixote 's . 
The night was , as has been said , dark , and they had happened to reach a spot in among some tall trees , whose leaves stirred by a gentle breeze made a low ominous sound ; so that , what with the solitude , the place , the darkness , the noise of the water , and the rustling of the leaves , everything inspired awe and dread ; more especially as they perceived that the strokes did not cease , nor the wind lull , nor morning approach ; to all which might be added their ignorance as to where they were . 
But Don Quixote , supported by his intrepid heart , leaped on Rocinante , and bracing his buckler on his arm , brought his pike to the slope , and said , `` Friend Sancho , know that I by Heaven 's will have been born in this our iron age to revive in it the age of gold , or the golden as it is called ; I am he for whom perils , mighty achievements , and valiant deeds are reserved ; I am , I say again , he who is to revive the Knights of the Round Table , the Twelve of France and the Nine Worthies ; and he who is to consign to oblivion the Platirs , the Tablantes , the Olivantes and Tirantes , the Phoebuses and Belianises , with the whole herd of famous knights-errant of days gone by , performing in these in which I live such exploits , marvels , and feats of arms as shall obscure their brightest deeds . 
Thou dost mark well , faithful and trusty squire , the gloom of this night , its strange silence , the dull confused murmur of those trees , the awful sound of that water in quest of which we came , that seems as though it were precipitating and dashing itself down from the lofty mountains of the Moon , and that incessant hammering that wounds and pains our ears ; which things all together and each of itself are enough to instil fear , dread , and dismay into the breast of Mars himself , much more into one not used to hazards and adventures of the kind . 
Well , then , all this that I put before thee is but an incentive and stimulant to my spirit , making my heart burst in my bosom through eagerness to engage in this adventure , arduous as it promises to be ; therefore tighten Rocinante 's girths a little , and God be with thee ; wait for me here three days and no more , and if in that time I come not back , thou canst return to our village , and thence , to do me a favour and a service , thou wilt go to El Toboso , where thou shalt say to my incomparable lady Dulcinea that her captive knight hath died in attempting things that might make him worthy of being called hers . '' 
When Sancho heard his master 's words he began to weep in the most pathetic way , saying : `` Senor , I know not why your worship wants to attempt this so dreadful adventure ; it is night now , no one sees us here , we can easily turn about and take ourselves out of danger , even if we do n't drink for three days to come ; and as there is no one to see us , all the less will there be anyone to set us down as cowards ; besides , I have many a time heard the curate of our village , whom your worship knows well , preach that he who seeks danger perishes in it ; so it is not right to tempt God by trying so tremendous a feat from which there can be no escape save by a miracle , and Heaven has performed enough of them for your worship in delivering you from being blanketed as I was , and bringing you out victorious and safe and sound from among all those enemies that were with the dead man ; and if all this does not move or soften that hard heart , let this thought and reflection move it , that you will have hardly quitted this spot when from pure fear I shall yield my soul up to anyone that will take it . 
I left home and wife and children to come and serve your worship , trusting to do better and not worse ; but as covetousness bursts the bag , it has rent my hopes asunder , for just as I had them highest about getting that wretched unlucky island your worship has so often promised me , I see that instead and in lieu of it you mean to desert me now in a place so far from human reach : for God 's sake , master mine , deal not so unjustly by me , and if your worship will not entirely give up attempting this feat , at least put it off till morning , for by what the lore I learned when I was a shepherd tells me it can not want three hours of dawn now , because the mouth of the Horn is overhead and makes midnight in the line of the left arm . '' 
`` How canst thou see , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote , `` where it makes that line , or where this mouth or this occiput is that thou talkest of , when the night is so dark that there is not a star to be seen in the whole heaven ? '' 
`` That 's true , '' said Sancho , `` but fear has sharp eyes , and sees things underground , much more above in heavens ; besides , there is good reason to show that it now wants but little of day . '' 
`` Let it want what it may , '' replied Don Quixote , `` it shall not be said of me now or at any time that tears or entreaties turned me aside from doing what was in accordance with knightly usage ; and so I beg of thee , Sancho , to hold thy peace , for God , who has put it into my heart to undertake now this so unexampled and terrible adventure , will take care to watch over my safety and console thy sorrow ; what thou hast to do is to tighten Rocinante 's girths well , and wait here , for I shall come back shortly , alive or dead . '' 
Sancho perceiving it his master 's final resolve , and how little his tears , counsels , and entreaties prevailed with him , determined to have recourse to his own ingenuity and compel him , if he could , to wait till daylight ; and so , while tightening the girths of the horse , he quietly and without being felt , with his ass ' halter tied both Rocinante 's legs , so that when Don Quixote strove to go he was unable as the horse could only move by jumps . 
Seeing the success of his trick , Sancho Panza said : `` See there , senor ! 
Heaven , moved by my tears and prayers , has so ordered it that Rocinante can not stir ; and if you will be obstinate , and spur and strike him , you will only provoke fortune , and kick , as they say , against the pricks . '' 
Don Quixote at this grew desperate , but the more he drove his heels into the horse , the less he stirred him ; and not having any suspicion of the tying , he was fain to resign himself and wait till daybreak or until Rocinante could move , firmly persuaded that all this came of something other than Sancho 's ingenuity . 
So he said to him , `` As it is so , Sancho , and as Rocinante can not move , I am content to wait till dawn smiles upon us , even though I weep while it delays its coming . '' 
`` There is no need to weep , '' answered Sancho , `` for I will amuse your worship by telling stories from this till daylight , unless indeed you like to dismount and lie down to sleep a little on the green grass after the fashion of knights-errant , so as to be fresher when day comes and the moment arrives for attempting this extraordinary adventure you are looking forward to . '' 
`` What art thou talking about dismounting or sleeping for ? '' 
said Don Quixote . 
`` Am I , thinkest thou , one of those knights that take their rest in the presence of danger ? 
Sleep thou who art born to sleep , or do as thou wilt , for I will act as I think most consistent with my character . '' 
`` Be not angry , master mine , '' replied Sancho , `` I did not mean to say that ; '' and coming close to him he laid one hand on the pommel of the saddle and the other on the cantle so that he held his master 's left thigh in his embrace , not daring to separate a finger 's width from him ; so much afraid was he of the strokes which still resounded with a regular beat . 
Don Quixote bade him tell some story to amuse him as he had proposed , to which Sancho replied that he would if his dread of what he heard would let him ; `` Still , '' said he , `` I will strive to tell a story which , if I can manage to relate it , and nobody interferes with the telling , is the best of stories , and let your worship give me your attention , for here I begin . 
What was , was ; and may the good that is to come be for all , and the evil for him who goes to look for it -- your worship must know that the beginning the old folk used to put to their tales was not just as each one pleased ; it was a maxim of Cato Zonzorino the Roman , that says ` the evil for him that goes to look for it , ' and it comes as pat to the purpose now as ring to finger , to show that your worship should keep quiet and not go looking for evil in any quarter , and that we should go back by some other road , since nobody forces us to follow this in which so many terrors affright us . '' 
`` Go on with thy story , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote , `` and leave the choice of our road to my care . '' 
`` I say then , '' continued Sancho , `` that in a village of Estremadura there was a goat-shepherd -- that is to say , one who tended goats -- which shepherd or goatherd , as my story goes , was called Lope Ruiz , and this Lope Ruiz was in love with a shepherdess called Torralva , which shepherdess called Torralva was the daughter of a rich grazier , and this rich grazier - '' `` If that is the way thou tellest thy tale , Sancho , '' said Don Quixote , `` repeating twice all thou hast to say , thou wilt not have done these two days ; go straight on with it , and tell it like a reasonable man , or else say nothing . '' 
`` Tales are always told in my country in the very way I am telling this , '' answered Sancho , `` and I can not tell it in any other , nor is it right of your worship to ask me to make new customs . '' 
`` Tell it as thou wilt , '' replied Don Quixote ; `` and as fate will have it that I can not help listening to thee , go on . '' 
`` And so , lord of my soul , '' continued Sancho , as I have said , this shepherd was in love with Torralva the shepherdess , who was a wild buxom lass with something of the look of a man about her , for she had little moustaches ; I fancy I see her now . '' 
`` Then you knew her ? '' 
said Don Quixote . 
`` I did not know her , '' said Sancho , `` but he who told me the story said it was so true and certain that when I told it to another I might safely declare and swear I had seen it all myself . 
And so in course of time , the devil , who never sleeps and puts everything in confusion , contrived that the love the shepherd bore the shepherdess turned into hatred and ill-will , and the reason , according to evil tongues , was some little jealousy she caused him that crossed the line and trespassed on forbidden ground ; and so much did the shepherd hate her from that time forward that , in order to escape from her , he determined to quit the country and go where he should never set eyes on her again . 
Torralva , when she found herself spurned by Lope , was immediately smitten with love for him , though she had never loved him before . '' 
`` That is the natural way of women , '' said Don Quixote , `` to scorn the one that loves them , and love the one that hates them : go on , Sancho . '' 
`` It came to pass , '' said Sancho , `` that the shepherd carried out his intention , and driving his goats before him took his way across the plains of Estremadura to pass over into the Kingdom of Portugal . 
Torralva , who knew of it , went after him , and on foot and barefoot followed him at a distance , with a pilgrim 's staff in her hand and a scrip round her neck , in which she carried , it is said , a bit of looking-glass and a piece of a comb and some little pot or other of paint for her face ; but let her carry what she did , I am not going to trouble myself to prove it ; all I say is , that the shepherd , they say , came with his flock to cross over the river Guadiana , which was at that time swollen and almost overflowing its banks , and at the spot he came to there was neither ferry nor boat nor anyone to carry him or his flock to the other side , at which he was much vexed , for he perceived that Torralva was approaching and would give him great annoyance with her tears and entreaties ; however , he went looking about so closely that he discovered a fisherman who had alongside of him a boat so small that it could only hold one person and one goat ; but for all that he spoke to him and agreed with him to carry himself and his three hundred goats across . 
The fisherman got into the boat and carried one goat over ; he came back and carried another over ; he came back again , and again brought over another -- let your worship keep count of the goats the fisherman is taking across , for if one escapes the memory there will be an end of the story , and it will be impossible to tell another word of it . 
To proceed , I must tell you the landing place on the other side was miry and slippery , and the fisherman lost a great deal of time in going and coming ; still he returned for another goat , and another , and another . '' 
`` Take it for granted he brought them all across , '' said Don Quixote , `` and do n't keep going and coming in this way , or thou wilt not make an end of bringing them over this twelvemonth . '' 
`` How many have gone across so far ? '' 
said Sancho . 
`` How the devil do I know ? '' 
replied Don Quixote . 
`` There it is , '' said Sancho , `` what I told you , that you must keep a good count ; well then , by God , there is an end of the story , for there is no going any farther . '' 
`` How can that be ? '' 
said Don Quixote ; `` is it so essential to the story to know to a nicety the goats that have crossed over , that if there be a mistake of one in the reckoning , thou canst not go on with it ? '' 
`` No , senor , not a bit , '' replied Sancho ; `` for when I asked your worship to tell me how many goats had crossed , and you answered you did not know , at that very instant all I had to say passed away out of my memory , and , faith , there was much virtue in it , and entertainment . '' 
`` So , then , '' said Don Quixote , `` the story has come to an end ? '' 
`` As much as my mother has , '' said Sancho . 
`` In truth , '' said Don Quixote , `` thou hast told one of the rarest stories , tales , or histories , that anyone in the world could have imagined , and such a way of telling it and ending it was never seen nor will be in a lifetime ; though I expected nothing else from thy excellent understanding . 
But I do not wonder , for perhaps those ceaseless strokes may have confused thy wits . '' 
`` All that may be , '' replied Sancho , `` but I know that as to my story , all that can be said is that it ends there where the mistake in the count of the passage of the goats begins . '' 
`` Let it end where it will , well and good , '' said Don Quixote , `` and let us see if Rocinante can go ; '' and again he spurred him , and again Rocinante made jumps and remained where he was , so well tied was he . 
Just then , whether it was the cold of the morning that was now approaching , or that he had eaten something laxative at supper , or that it was only natural -LRB- as is most likely -RRB- , Sancho felt a desire to do what no one could do for him ; but so great was the fear that had penetrated his heart , he dared not separate himself from his master by as much as the black of his nail ; to escape doing what he wanted was , however , also impossible ; so what he did for peace 's sake was to remove his right hand , which held the back of the saddle , and with it to untie gently and silently the running string which alone held up his breeches , so that on loosening it they at once fell down round his feet like fetters ; he then raised his shirt as well as he could and bared his hind quarters , no slim ones . 
But , this accomplished , which he fancied was all he had to do to get out of this terrible strait and embarrassment , another still greater difficulty presented itself , for it seemed to him impossible to relieve himself without making some noise , and he ground his teeth and squeezed his shoulders together , holding his breath as much as he could ; but in spite of his precautions he was unlucky enough after all to make a little noise , very different from that which was causing him so much fear . 
Don Quixote , hearing it , said , `` What noise is that , Sancho ? '' 
`` I do n't know , senor , '' said he ; `` it must be something new , for adventures and misadventures never begin with a trifle . '' 
Once more he tried his luck , and succeeded so well , that without any further noise or disturbance he found himself relieved of the burden that had given him so much discomfort . 
But as Don Quixote 's sense of smell was as acute as his hearing , and as Sancho was so closely linked with him that the fumes rose almost in a straight line , it could not be but that some should reach his nose , and as soon as they did he came to its relief by compressing it between his fingers , saying in a rather snuffing tone , `` Sancho , it strikes me thou art in great fear . '' 
`` I am , '' answered Sancho ; `` but how does your worship perceive it now more than ever ? '' 
`` Because just now thou smellest stronger than ever , and not of ambergris , '' answered Don Quixote . 
`` Very likely , '' said Sancho , `` but that 's not my fault , but your worship 's , for leading me about at unseasonable hours and at such unwonted paces . '' 
`` Then go back three or four , my friend , '' said Don Quixote , all the time with his fingers to his nose ; `` and for the future pay more attention to thy person and to what thou owest to mine ; for it is my great familiarity with thee that has bred this contempt . '' 
`` I 'll bet , '' replied Sancho , `` that your worship thinks I have done something I ought not with my person . '' 
`` It makes it worse to stir it , friend Sancho , '' returned Don Quixote . 
With this and other talk of the same sort master and man passed the night , till Sancho , perceiving that daybreak was coming on apace , very cautiously untied Rocinante and tied up his breeches . 
As soon as Rocinante found himself free , though by nature he was not at all mettlesome , he seemed to feel lively and began pawing -- for as to capering , begging his pardon , he knew not what it meant . 
Don Quixote , then , observing that Rocinante could move , took it as a good sign and a signal that he should attempt the dread adventure . 
By this time day had fully broken and everything showed distinctly , and Don Quixote saw that he was among some tall trees , chestnuts , which cast a very deep shade ; he perceived likewise that the sound of the strokes did not cease , but could not discover what caused it , and so without any further delay he let Rocinante feel the spur , and once more taking leave of Sancho , he told him to wait for him there three days at most , as he had said before , and if he should not have returned by that time , he might feel sure it had been God 's will that he should end his days in that perilous adventure . 
He again repeated the message and commission with which he was to go on his behalf to his lady Dulcinea , and said he was not to be uneasy as to the payment of his services , for before leaving home he had made his will , in which he would find himself fully recompensed in the matter of wages in due proportion to the time he had served ; but if God delivered him safe , sound , and unhurt out of that danger , he might look upon the promised island as much more than certain . 
Sancho began to weep afresh on again hearing the affecting words of his good master , and resolved to stay with him until the final issue and end of the business . 
From these tears and this honourable resolve of Sancho Panza 's the author of this history infers that he must have been of good birth and at least an old Christian ; and the feeling he displayed touched his but not so much as to make him show any weakness ; on the contrary , hiding what he felt as well as he could , he began to move towards that quarter whence the sound of the water and of the strokes seemed to come . 
Sancho followed him on foot , leading by the halter , as his custom was , his ass , his constant comrade in prosperity or adversity ; and advancing some distance through the shady chestnut trees they came upon a little meadow at the foot of some high rocks , down which a mighty rush of water flung itself . 
At the foot of the rocks were some rudely constructed houses looking more like ruins than houses , from among which came , they perceived , the din and clatter of blows , which still continued without intermission . 
Rocinante took fright at the noise of the water and of the blows , but quieting him Don Quixote advanced step by step towards the houses , commending himself with all his heart to his lady , imploring her support in that dread pass and enterprise , and on the way commending himself to God , too , not to forget him . 
Sancho who never quitted his side , stretched his neck as far as he could and peered between the legs of Rocinante to see if he could now discover what it was that caused him such fear and apprehension . 
They went it might be a hundred paces farther , when on turning a corner the true cause , beyond the possibility of any mistake , of that dread-sounding and to them awe-inspiring noise that had kept them all the night in such fear and perplexity , appeared plain and obvious ; and it was -LRB- if , reader , thou art not disgusted and disappointed -RRB- six fulling hammers which by their alternate strokes made all the din . 
When Don Quixote perceived what it was , he was struck dumb and rigid from head to foot . 
Sancho glanced at him and saw him with his head bent down upon his breast in manifest mortification ; and Don Quixote glanced at Sancho and saw him with his cheeks puffed out and his mouth full of laughter , and evidently ready to explode with it , and in spite of his vexation he could not help laughing at the sight of him ; and when Sancho saw his master begin he let go so heartily that he had to hold his sides with both hands to keep himself from bursting with laughter . 
Four times he stopped , and as many times did his laughter break out afresh with the same violence as at first , whereat Don Quixote grew furious , above all when he heard him say mockingly , `` Thou must know , friend Sancho , that of Heaven 's will I was born in this our iron age to revive in it the golden or age of gold ; I am he for whom are reserved perils , mighty achievements , valiant deeds ; '' and here he went on repeating the words that Don Quixote uttered the first time they heard the awful strokes . 
Don Quixote , then , seeing that Sancho was turning him into ridicule , was so mortified and vexed that he lifted up his pike and smote him two such blows that if , instead of catching them on his shoulders , he had caught them on his head there would have been no wages to pay , unless indeed to his heirs . 
Sancho seeing that he was getting an awkward return in earnest for his jest , and fearing his master might carry it still further , said to him very humbly , `` Calm yourself , sir , for by God I am only joking . '' 
`` Well , then , if you are joking I am not , '' replied Don Quixote . 
`` Look here , my lively gentleman , if these , instead of being fulling hammers , had been some perilous adventure , have I not , think you , shown the courage required for the attempt and achievement ? 
Am I , perchance , being , as I am , a gentleman , bound to know and distinguish sounds and tell whether they come from fulling mills or not ; and that , when perhaps , as is the case , I have never in my life seen any as you have , low boor as you are , that have been born and bred among them ? 
But turn me these six hammers into six giants , and bring them to beard me , one by one or all together , and if I do not knock them head over heels , then make what mockery you like of me . '' 
`` No more of that , senor , '' returned Sancho ; `` I own I went a little too far with the joke . 
But tell me , your worship , now that peace is made between us -LRB- and may God bring you out of all the adventures that may befall you as safe and sound as he has brought you out of this one -RRB- , was it not a thing to laugh at , and is it not a good story , the great fear we were in ? 
-- at least that I was in ; for as to your worship I see now that you neither know nor understand what either fear or dismay is . '' 
`` I do not deny , '' said Don Quixote , `` that what happened to us may be worth laughing at , but it is not worth making a story about , for it is not everyone that is shrewd enough to hit the right point of a thing . '' 
`` At any rate , '' said Sancho , `` your worship knew how to hit the right point with your pike , aiming at my head and hitting me on the shoulders , thanks be to God and my own smartness in dodging it . 
But let that pass ; all will come out in the scouring ; for I have heard say ` he loves thee well that makes thee weep ; ' and moreover that it is the way with great lords after any hard words they give a servant to give him a pair of breeches ; though I do not know what they give after blows , unless it be that knights-errant after blows give islands , or kingdoms on the mainland . '' 
`` It may be on the dice , '' said Don Quixote , `` that all thou sayest will come true ; overlook the past , for thou art shrewd enough to know that our first movements are not in our own control ; and one thing for the future bear in mind , that thou curb and restrain thy loquacity in my company ; for in all the books of chivalry that I have read , and they are innumerable , I never met with a squire who talked so much to his lord as thou dost to thine ; and in fact I feel it to be a great fault of thine and of mine : of thine , that thou hast so little respect for me ; of mine , that I do not make myself more respected . 
There was Gandalin , the squire of Amadis of Gaul , that was Count of the Insula Firme , and we read of him that he always addressed his lord with his cap in his hand , his head bowed down and his body bent double , more turquesco . 
And then , what shall we say of Gasabal , the squire of Galaor , who was so silent that in order to indicate to us the greatness of his marvellous taciturnity his name is only once mentioned in the whole of that history , as long as it is truthful ? 
From all I have said thou wilt gather , Sancho , that there must be a difference between master and man , between lord and lackey , between knight and squire : so that from this day forward in our intercourse we must observe more respect and take less liberties , for in whatever way I may be provoked with you it will be bad for the pitcher . 
The favours and benefits that I have promised you will come in due time , and if they do not your wages at least will not be lost , as I have already told you . '' 
`` All that your worship says is very well , '' said Sancho , `` but I should like to know -LRB- in case the time of favours should not come , and it might be necessary to fall back upon wages -RRB- how much did the squire of a knight-errant get in those days , and did they agree by the month , or by the day like bricklayers ? '' 
`` I do not believe , '' replied Don Quixote , `` that such squires were ever on wages , but were dependent on favour ; and if I have now mentioned thine in the sealed will I have left at home , it was with a view to what may happen ; for as yet I know not how chivalry will turn out in these wretched times of ours , and I do not wish my soul to suffer for trifles in the other world ; for I would have thee know , Sancho , that in this there is no condition more hazardous than that of adventurers . '' 
`` That is true , '' said Sancho , `` since the mere noise of the hammers of a fulling mill can disturb and disquiet the heart of such a valiant errant adventurer as your worship ; but you may be sure I will not open my lips henceforward to make light of anything of your worship 's , but only to honour you as my master and natural lord . '' 
`` By so doing , '' replied Don Quixote , `` shalt thou live long on the face of the earth ; for next to parents , masters are to be respected as though they were parents . '' 
It now began to rain a little , and Sancho was for going into the fulling mills , but Don Quixote had taken such an abhorrence to them on account of the late joke that he would not enter them on any account ; so turning aside to right they came upon another road , different from that which they had taken the night before . 
Shortly afterwards Don Quixote perceived a man on horseback who wore on his head something that shone like gold , and the moment he saw him he turned to Sancho and said : `` I think , Sancho , there is no proverb that is not true , all being maxims drawn from experience itself , the mother of all the sciences , especially that one that says , ` Where one door shuts , another opens . ' 
I say so because if last night fortune shut the door of the adventure we were looking for against us , cheating us with the fulling mills , it now opens wide another one for another better and more certain adventure , and if I do not contrive to enter it , it will be my own fault , and I can not lay it to my ignorance of fulling mills , or the darkness of the night . 
I say this because , if I mistake not , there comes towards us one who wears on his head the helmet of Mambrino , concerning which I took the oath thou rememberest . '' 
`` Mind what you say , your worship , and still more what you do , '' said Sancho , `` for I do n't want any more fulling mills to finish off fulling and knocking our senses out . '' 
`` The devil take thee , man , '' said Don Quixote ; `` what has a helmet to do with fulling mills ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' replied Sancho , `` but , faith , if I might speak as I used , perhaps I could give such reasons that your worship would see you were mistaken in what you say . '' 
`` How can I be mistaken in what I say , unbelieving traitor ? '' 
returned Don Quixote ; `` tell me , seest thou not yonder knight coming towards us on a dappled grey steed , who has upon his head a helmet of gold ? '' 
`` What I see and make out , '' answered Sancho , `` is only a man on a grey ass like my own , who has something that shines on his head . '' 
`` Well , that is the helmet of Mambrino , '' said Don Quixote ; `` stand to one side and leave me alone with him ; thou shalt see how , without saying a word , to save time , I shall bring this adventure to an issue and possess myself of the helmet I have so longed for . '' 
`` I will take care to stand aside , '' said Sancho ; `` but God grant , I say once more , that it may be marjoram and not fulling mills . '' 
`` I have told thee , brother , on no account to mention those fulling mills to me again , '' said Don Quixote , `` or I vow -- and I say no more-I 'll full the soul out of you . '' 
Sancho held his peace in dread lest his master should carry out the vow he had hurled like a bowl at him . 
The fact of the matter as regards the helmet , steed , and knight that Don Quixote saw , was this . 
In that neighbourhood there were two villages , one of them so small that it had neither apothecary 's shop nor barber , which the other that was close to it had , so the barber of the larger served the smaller , and in it there was a sick man who required to be bled and another man who wanted to be shaved , and on this errand the barber was going , carrying with him a brass basin ; but as luck would have it , as he was on the way it began to rain , and not to spoil his hat , which probably was a new one , he put the basin on his head , and being clean it glittered at half a league 's distance . 
He rode upon a grey ass , as Sancho said , and this was what made it seem to Don Quixote to be a dapple-grey steed and a knight and a golden helmet ; for everything he saw he made to fall in with his crazy chivalry and ill-errant notions ; and when he saw the poor knight draw near , without entering into any parley with him , at Rocinante 's top speed he bore down upon him with the pike pointed low , fully determined to run him through and through , and as he reached him , without checking the fury of his charge , he cried to him : `` Defend thyself , miserable being , or yield me of thine own accord that which is so reasonably my due . '' 
The barber , who without any expectation or apprehension of it saw this apparition coming down upon him , had no other way of saving himself from the stroke of the lance but to let himself fall off his ass ; and no sooner had he touched the ground than he sprang up more nimbly than a deer and sped away across the plain faster than the wind . 
He left the basin on the ground , with which Don Quixote contented himself , saying that the pagan had shown his discretion and imitated the beaver , which finding itself pressed by the hunters bites and cuts off with its teeth that for which , by its natural instinct , it knows it is pursued . 
He told Sancho to pick up the helmet , and he taking it in his hands said : `` By God the basin is a good one , and worth a real of eight if it is worth a maravedis , '' and handed it to his master , who immediately put it on his head , turning it round , now this way , now that , in search of fitment , and not finding it he said , `` Clearly the pagan to whose measure this famous head-piece was first forged must have had a very large head ; but the worst of it is half of it is wanting . '' 
When Sancho heard him call the basin a headpiece he was unable to restrain his laughter , but remembering his master 's wrath he checked himself in the midst of it . 
`` What art thou laughing at , Sancho ? '' 
said Don Quixote . 
`` I am laughing , '' said he , `` to think of the great head the pagan must have had who owned this helmet , for it looks exactly like a regular barber 's basin . '' 
`` Dost thou know what I suspect , Sancho ? '' 
said Don Quixote ; `` that this wonderful piece of this enchanted helmet must by some strange accident have come into the hands of some one who was unable to recognise or realise its value , and who , not knowing what he did , and seeing it to be of the purest gold , must have melted down one half for the sake of what it might be worth , and of the other made this which is like a barber 's basin as thou sayest ; but be it as it may , to me who recognise it , its transformation makes no difference , for I will set it to rights at the first village where there is a blacksmith , and in such style that that helmet the god of smithies forged for the god of battles shall not surpass it or even come up to it ; and in the meantime I will wear it as well as I can , for something is better than nothing ; all the more as it will be quite enough to protect me from any chance blow of a stone . '' 
`` That is , '' said Sancho , `` if it is not shot with a sling as they were in the battle of the two armies , when they signed the cross on your worship 's grinders and smashed the flask with that blessed draught that made me vomit my bowels up . '' 
`` It does not grieve me much to have lost it , '' said Don Quixote , `` for thou knowest , Sancho , that I have the receipt in my memory . '' 
`` So have I , '' answered Sancho , `` but if ever I make it , or try it again as long as I live , may this be my last hour ; moreover , I have no intention of putting myself in the way of wanting it , for I mean , with all my five senses , to keep myself from being wounded or from wounding anyone : as to being blanketed again I say nothing , for it is hard to prevent mishaps of that sort , and if they come there is nothing for it but to squeeze our shoulders together , hold our breath , shut our eyes , and let ourselves go where luck and the blanket may send us . '' 
