He would attempt to explain , but at his first words , they would interrupt him : `` That 's so ... . 
You are a foreigner . '' 
They would say it with a certain envy , doubtless thinking of their loved ones now suffering the privations and dangers of war ... . 
But the fact that he was a foreigner would instantly create a vague atmosphere of spiritual aloofness , an alienation that Julio had not known in the good old days when people sought each other without considering nationality , without feeling that disavowal of danger which isolates and concentrates human groups . 
The ladies generally bade him adieu with malicious suspicion . 
What was he doing hanging around there ? 
In search of his usual lucky adventure ? 
... And their smiles were rather grave , the smiles of older folk who know the true significance of life and commiserate the deluded ones still seeking diversion in frivolities . 
This attitude was as annoying to Julio as though it were a manifestation of pity . 
They were supposing him still exercising the only function of which he was capable ; he was n't good for anything else . 
On the other hand , these empty heads , still keeping something of their old appearance , now appeared animated by the grand sentiment of maternity -- an abstract maternity which seemed to be extending to all the men of the nation -- a desire for self-sacrifice , of knowing first-hand the privations of the lowly , and aiding all the ills that flesh is heir to . 
This same yearning was inspiring Marguerite when she came away from her lessons . 
She was advancing from one overpowering dread to another , accepting the first rudiments of surgery as the greatest of scientific marvels . 
At the same time , she was astonished at the avidity with which she was assimilating these hitherto unsuspected mysteries . 
Sometimes with a funny assumption of assurance , she would even believe she had mistaken her vocation . 
`` Who knows but what I was born to be a famous doctor ? '' 
she would exclaim . 
Her great fear was that she might lose her self-control when the time came to put her newly acquired knowledge into practice . 
To see herself before the foul odors of decomposing flesh , to contemplate the flow of blood -- a horrible thing for her who had always felt an invincible repugnance toward all the unpleasant conditions of ordinary life ! 
But these hesitations were short , and she was suddenly animated by a dashing energy . 
These were times of sacrifice . 
Were not the men snatched every day from the comforts of sensuous existence to endure the rude life of a soldier ? 
... She would be , a soldier in petticoats , facing pain , battling with it , plunging her hands into putrefaction , flashing like a ray of sunlight into the places where soldiers were expecting the approach of death . 
She proudly narrated to Desnoyers all the progress that she was making in the training school , the complicated bandages that she was learning to adjust , sometimes over a mannikin , at others over the flesh of an employee , trying to play the part of a sorely wounded patient . 
She , so dainty , so incapable in her own home of the slightest physical effort , was learning the most skilful ways of lifting a human body from the ground and carrying it on her back . 
Who knew but that she might render this very service some day on the battlefield ! 
She was ready for the greatest risks , with the ignorant audacity of women impelled by flashes of heroism . 
All her admiration was for the English army nurses , slender women of nervous vigor whose photographs were appearing in the papers , wearing pantaloons , riding boots and white helmets . 
Julio listened to her with astonishment . 
Was this woman really Marguerite ? 
... War was obliterating all her winning vanities . 
She was no longer fluttering about in bird-like fashion . 
Her feet were treading the earth with resolute firmness , calm and secure in the new strength which was developing within . 
When one of his caresses would remind her that she was a woman , she would always say the same thing , `` What luck that you are a foreigner ! 
... What happiness to know that you do not have to go to war ! '' 
In her anxiety for sacrifice , she wanted to go to the battlefields , and yet at the same time , she was rejoicing to see her lover exempt from military duty . 
This preposterous lack of logic was not gratefully received by Julio but irritated him as an unconscious offense . 
`` One might suppose that she was protecting me ! '' 
he thought . 
`` She is the man and rejoices that I , the weak comrade , should be protected from danger ... . 
What a grotesque situation ! '' 
... Fortunately , at times when Marguerite presented herself at the studio , she was again her old self , making him temporarily forget his annoyance . 
She would arrive with the same joy in a vacation that the college student or the employee feels on a holiday . 
Responsibility was teaching her to know the value of time . 
`` No classes to-day ! '' 
she would call out on entering ; and tossing her hat on a divan , she would begin a dance-step , retreating with infantile coquetry from the arms of her lover . 
But in a few minutes she would recover her customary gravity , the serious look that had become habitual with her since the outbreak of hostilities . 
She spoke often of her mother , always sad , but striving to hide her grief and keeping herself up in the hope of a letter from her son ; she spoke , too , of the war , commenting on the latest events with the rhetorical optimism of the official dispatches . 
She could describe the first flag taken from the enemy as minutely as though it were a garment of unparalleled elegance . 
From a window , she had seen the Minister of War . 
She was very much affected when repeating the story of some fugitive Belgians recently arrived at the hospital . 
They were the only patients that she had been able to assist until now . 
Paris was not receiving the soldiers wounded in battle ; by order of the Government , they were being sent from the front to the hospitals in the South . 
She no longer evinced toward Julio the resistance of the first few days . 
Her training as a nurse was giving her a certain passivity . 
She seemed to be ignoring material attractions , stripping them of the spiritual importance which she had hitherto attributed to them . 
She wanted to make Julio happy , although her mind was concentrated on other matters . 
One afternoon , she felt the necessity of communicating certain news which had been filling her mind since the day before . 
Springing up from the couch , she hunted for her handbag which contained a letter . 
She wanted to read it again to tell its contents to somebody with that irresistible impulse which forestalls confession . 
It was a letter which her brother had sent her from the Vosges . 
In it he spoke of Laurier more than of himself . 
They belonged to different batteries , but were in the same division and had taken part in the same combats . 
The officer was filled with admiration for his former brother-in-law . 
Who could have guessed that a future hero was hidden within that silent and tranquil engineer ! 
... But he was a genuine hero , just the same ! 
All the officials had agreed with Marguerite 's brother on seeing how calmly he fulfilled his duty , facing death with the same coolness as though he were in his factory near Paris . 
He had asked for the dangerous post of lookout , slipping as near as possible to the enemy 's lines in order to verify the exactitude of the artillery discharge , rectifying it by telephone . 
A German shell had demolished the house on the roof of which he was concealed , and Laurier , on crawling out unhurt from the ruins , had readjusted his telephone and gone tranquilly on , continuing the same work in the shelter of a nearby grove . 
His battery , picked out by the enemy 's aeroplanes , had received the concentrated fire of the artillery opposite . 
In a few minutes all the force were rolling on the ground -- the captain and many soldiers dead , officers wounded and almost all the gunners . 
There only remained as chief , Laurier , the Impassive -LRB- as his comrades nicknamed him -RRB- , and aided by the few artillerymen still on their feet , he continued firing under a rain of iron and fire , so as to cover the retreat of a battalion . 
`` He has been mentioned twice in dispatches , '' Marguerite continued reading . 
`` I do not believe that it will be long before they give him the cross . 
He is valiant in every way . 
Who would have supposed all this a few weeks ago ? '' 
... She did not share the general astonishment . 
Living with Laurier had many times shown her the intrepidity of his character , the fearlessness concealed under that placid exterior . 
On that account , her instincts had warned her against rousing her husband 's wrath in the first days of her infidelity . 
She still remembered the way he looked the night he surprised her leaving Julio 's home . 
His was the passion that kills , and , nevertheless , he had not attempted the least violence with her ... . 
The memory of his consideration was awakening in Marguerite a sentiment of gratitude . 
Perhaps he had loved her as no other man had . 
Her eyes , with an irresistible desire for comparison , sought Julio 's , admiring his youthful grace and distinction . 
The image of Laurier , heavy and ordinary , came into her mind as a consolation . 
Certainly the officer whom she had seen at the station when saying good-bye to her brother , did not seem to her like her old husband . 
But Marguerite wished to forget the pallid lieutenant with the sad countenance who had passed before her eyes , preferring to remember him only as the manufacturer preoccupied with profits and incapable of comprehending what she was accustomed to call `` the delicate refinements of a chic woman . '' 
Decidedly Julio was the more fascinating . 
She did not repent of her past . 
She did not wish to repent of it . 
And her loving selfishness made her repeat once more the same old exclamation -- `` How fortunate that you are a foreigner ! 
... What a relief to know that you are safe from the dangers of war ! '' 
Julio felt the usual exasperation at hearing this . 
He came very near to closing his beloved 's mouth with his hand . 
Was she trying to make fun of him ? 
... It was fairly insulting to place him apart from other men . 
Meanwhile , with blind irrelevance , she persisted in talking about Laurier , commenting upon his achievements . 
`` I do not love him , I never have loved him . 
Do not look so cross ! 
How could the poor man ever be compared with you ? 
You must admit , though , that his new existence is rather interesting . 
I rejoice in his brave deeds as though an old friend had done them , a family visitor whom I had not seen for a long time ... . 
The poor man deserved a better fate . 
He ought to have married some other woman , some companion more on a level with his ideals ... . 
I tell you that I really pity him ! '' 
And this pity was so intense that her eyes filled with tears , awakening the tortures of jealousy in her lover . 
After these interviews , Desnoyers was more ill-tempered and despondent than ever . 
`` I am beginning to realize that we are in a false position , '' he said one morning to Argensola . 
`` Life is going to become increasingly painful . 
It is difficult to remain tranquil , continuing the same old existence in the midst of a people at war . '' 
His companion had about come to the same conclusion . 
He , too , was beginning to feel that the life of a young foreigner in Paris was insufferable , now that it was so upset by war . 
`` One has to keep showing passports all the time in order that the police may be sure that they have not discovered a deserter . 
In the street car , the other afternoon , I had to explain that I was a Spaniard to some girls who were wondering why I was not at the front ... . 
One of them , as soon as she learned my nationality , asked me with great simplicity why I did not offer myself as a volunteer ... . 
Now they have invented a word for the stay-at-homes , calling them Les Embusques , the hidden ones ... . 
I am sick and tired of the ironical looks shot at me wherever I go ; it makes me wild to be taken for an Embusque . '' 
A flash of heroism was galvanizing the impressionable Bohemian . 
Now that everybody was going to the war , he was wishing to do the same thing . 
He was not afraid of death ; the only thing that was disturbing him was the military service , the uniform , the mechanical obedience to bugle-call , the blind subservience to the chiefs . 
Fighting was not offering any difficulties for him but his nature capriciously resented everything in the form of discipline . 
The foreign groups in Paris were trying to organize each its own legion of volunteers and he , too , was planning his -- a battalion of Spaniards and South Americans , reserving naturally the presidency of the organizing committee for himself , and later the command of the body . 
He had inserted notices in the papers , making the studio in the rue de la Pompe the recruiting office . 
In ten days , two volunteers had presented themselves ; a clerk , shivering in midsummer , who stipulated that he should be an officer because he was wearing a suitable jacket , and a Spanish tavern-keeper who at the very outset had wished to rob Argensola of his command on the futile pretext that he was a soldier in his youth while the Bohemian was only an artist . 
Twenty Spanish battalions were attempted with the same result in different parts of Paris . 
Each enthusiast wished to be commander of the others , with the individual haughtiness and aversion to discipline so characteristic of the race . 
Finally the future generalissimos , decided to enlist as simple volunteers ... but in a French regiment . 
`` I am waiting to see what the Garibaldis do , '' said Argensola modestly . 
`` Perhaps I may go with them . '' 
This glorious name made military service conceivable to him . 
But then he vacillated ; he would certainly have to obey somebody in this body of volunteers , and he did not believe in an obedience that was not preceded by long discussions ... . 
What next ! 
`` Life has changed in a fortnight , '' he continued . 
`` It seems as if we were living in another planet ; our former achievements are not appreciated . 
Others , most obscure and poor , those who formerly had the least consideration , are now promoted to the first ranks . 
The refined man of complex spirituality has disappeared for who knows how many years ! 
... Now the simple-minded man climbs triumphantly to the top , because , though his ideas are limited , they are sure and he knows how to obey . 
We are no longer the style . '' 
Desnoyers assented . 
It was so ; they were no longer fashionable . 
None knew that better than he , for he who was once the sensation of the day , was now passing as a stranger among the very people who a few months before had raved over him . 
`` Your reign is over , '' laughed Argensola . 
`` The fact that you are a handsome fellow does n't help you one bit nowadays . 
In a uniform and with a cross on my breast , I could soon get the best of you in a rival love affair . 
In times of peace , the officers only set the girls of the provinces to dreaming ; but now that we are at war , there has awakened in every woman the ancestral enthusiasm that her remote grandmothers used to feel for the strong and aggressive beast ... . 
The high-born dames who a few months ago were complicating their desires with psychological subtleties , are now admiring the military man with the same simplicity that the maid has for the common soldier . 
Before a uniform , they feel the humble and servile enthusiasm of the female of the lower animals before the crests , foretops and gay plumes of the fighting males . 
Look out , master ! 
... We shall have to follow the new course of events or resign ourselves to everlasting obscurity . 
The tango is dead . '' 
And Desnoyers agreed that truly they were two beings on the other side of the river of life which at one bound had changed its course . 
There was no longer any place in the new existence for that poor painter of souls , nor for that hero of a frivolous life who , from five to seven every afternoon , had attained the triumphs most envied by mankind . 
War had extended one of its antennae even to the avenue Victor Hugo . 
It was a silent war in which the enemy , bland , shapeless and gelatinous , seemed constantly to be escaping from the hands only to renew hostilities a little later on . 
`` I have Germany in my own house , '' growled Marcelo Desnoyers . 
`` Germany '' was Dona Elena , the wife of von Hartrott . 
Why had not her son -- that professor of inexhaustible sufficiency whom he now believed to have been a spy -- taken her home with him ? 
For what sentimental caprice had she wished to stay with her sister , losing the opportunity of returning to Berlin before the frontiers were closed ? 
The presence of this woman in his home was the cause of many compunctions and alarms . 
Fortunately , the chauffeur and all the men-servants were in the army . 
The two chinas received an order in a threatening tone . 
They must be very careful when talking to the French maids -- not the slightest allusion to the nationality of Dona Elena 's husband nor to the residence of her family . 
Dona Elena was an Argentinian . 
But in spite of the silence of the maids , Don Marcelo was always in fear of some outburst of exalted patriotism , and that his wife 's sister might suddenly find herself confined in a concentration camp under suspicion of having dealings with the enemy . 
Frau von Hartrott made his uneasiness worse . 
Instead of keeping a discreet silence , she was constantly introducing discord into the home with her opinions . 
During the first days of the war , she kept herself locked in her room , joining the family only when summoned to the dining room . 
With tightly puckered mouth and an absent-minded air , she would then seat herself at the table , pretending not to hear Don Marcelo 's verbal outpourings of enthusiasm . 
He enjoyed describing the departure of the troops , the moving scenes in the streets and at the stations , commenting on events with an optimism sure of the first news of the war . 
Two things were beyond all discussion . 
The bayonet was the secret of the French , and the Germans were shuddering with terror before its fatal , glistening point . 
... The '75 cannon had proved itself a unique jewel , its shots being absolutely sure . 
He was really feeling sorry for the enemy 's artillery since its projectiles so seldom exploded even when well aimed ... . 
Furthermore , the French troops had entered victoriously into Alsace ; many little towns were already theirs . 
`` Now it is as it was in the ' 70 's , '' he would exult , brandishing his fork and waving his napkin . 
`` We are going to kick them back to the other side of the Rhine -- kick them ! 
... That 's the word . '' 
Chichi always agreed gleefully while Dona Elena was raising her eyes to heaven , as though silently calling upon somebody hidden in the ceiling to bear witness to such errors and blasphemies . 
The kind Dona Luisa always sought her out afterwards in the retirement of her room , believing it necessary to give sisterly counsel to one living so far from home . 
The Romantica did not maintain her austere silence before the sister who had always venerated her superior instruction ; so now the poor lady was overwhelmed with accounts of the stupendous forces of Germany , enunciated with all the authority of a wife of a great Teutonic patriot , and a mother of an almost celebrated professor . 
According to her graphic picture , millions of men were now surging forth in enormous streams , thousands of cannons were filing by , and tremendous mortars like monstrous turrets . 
And towering above all this vast machinery of destruction was a man who alone was worth an army , a being who knew everything and could do everything , handsome , intelligent , and infallible as a god -- the Emperor . 
`` The French just do n't know what 's ahead of them , '' declared Dona Elena . 
`` We are going to annihilate them . 
It is merely a matter of two weeks . 
Before August is ended , the Emperor will have entered Paris . '' 
Senora Desnoyers was so greatly impressed by these dire prophecies that she could not hide them from her family . 
Chichi waxed indignant at her mother 's credulity and her aunt 's Germanism . 
Martial fervor was flaming up in the former Peoncito . 
Ay , if the women could only go to war ! 
... She enjoyed picturing herself on horseback in command of a regiment of dragoons , charging the enemy with other Amazons as dashing and buxom as she . 
Then her fondness for skating would predominate over her tastes for the cavalry , and she would long to be an Alpine hunter , a diable bleu among those who slid on long runners , with musket slung across the back and alpenstock in hand , over the snowy slopes of the Vosges . 
But the government did not appreciate the valorous women , and she could obtain no other part in the war but to admire the uniform of her true-love , Rene Lacour , converted into a soldier . 
The senator 's son certainly looked beautiful . 
He was tall and fair , of a rather feminine type recalling his dead mother . 
In his fiancee 's opinion , Rene was just `` a little sugar soldier . '' 
At first she had been very proud to walk the streets by the side of this warrior , believing that his uniform had greatly augmented his personal charm , but little by little a revulsion of feeling was clouding her joy . 
The senatorial prince was nothing but a common soldier . 
His illustrious father , fearful that the war might cut off forever the dynasty of the Lacours , indispensable to the welfare of the State , had had his son mustered into the auxiliary service of the army . 
By this arrangement , his heir need not leave Paris , ranking about as high as those who were kneading the bread or mending the soldiers ' cloaks . 
Only by going to the front could he claim -- as a student of the Ecole Centrale -- his title of sub-lieutenant in the Artillery Reserves . 
`` What happiness for me that you have to stay in Paris ! 
How delighted I am that you are just a private ! 
... '' And yet , at the same time , Chichi was thinking enviously of her friends whose lovers and brothers were officers . 
They could parade the streets , escorted by a gold-trimmed kepis that attracted the notice of the passers-by and the respectful salute of the lower ranks . 
Each time that Dona Luisa , terrified by the forecasts of her sister , undertook to communicate her dismay to her daughter , the girl would rage up and down , exclaiming : -- `` What lies my aunt tells you ! 
... Since her husband is a German , she sees everything as he wishes it to be . 
Papa knows more ; Rene 's father is better informed about these things . 
We are going to give them a thorough hiding ! 
What fun it will be when they hit my uncle and all my snippy cousins in Berlin ! 
... '' `` Hush , '' groaned her mother . 
`` Do not talk such nonsense . 
The war has turned you as crazy as your father . '' 
The good lady was scandalized at hearing the outburst of savage desires that the mere mention of the Kaiser always aroused in her daughter . 
In times of peace , Chichi had rather admired this personage . 
`` He 's not so bad-looking , '' she had commented , `` but with a very ordinary smile . '' 
Now all her wrath was concentrated upon him . 
The thousands of women that were weeping through his fault ! 
The mothers without sons , the wives without husbands , the poor children left in the burning towns ! 
... Ah , the vile wretch ! 
... And she would brandish her knife of the old Peoncito days -- a dagger with silver handle and sheath richly chased , a gift that her grandfather had exhumed from some forgotten souvenirs of his childhood in an old valise . 
The very first German that she came across was doomed to death . 
Dona Luisa was terrified to find her flourishing this weapon before her dressing mirror . 
She was no longer yearning to be a cavalryman nor a diable bleu . 
She would be entirely content if they would leave her , alone in some closed space with the detested monster . 
In just five minutes she would settle the universal conflict . 
`` Defend yourself , Boche , '' she would shriek , standing at guard as in her childhood she had seen the peons doing on the ranch . 
And with a knife-thrust above and below , she would pierce his imperial vitals . 
Immediately there resounded in her imagination , shouts of joy , the gigantic sigh of millions of women freed at last from the bloody nightmare -- thanks to her playing the role of Judith or Charlotte Corday , or a blend of all the heroic women who had killed for the common weal . 
Her savage fury made her continue her imaginary slaughter , dagger in hand . 
Second stroke ! 
-- the Crown Prince rolling to one side and his head to the other . 
A rain of dagger thrusts ! 
-- all the invincible generals of whom her aunt had been boasting fleeing with their insides in their hands -- and bringing up the rear , that fawning lackey who wished to receive the same things as those of highest rank -- the uncle from Berlin . 
... Ay , if she could only get the chance to make these longings a reality ! 
`` You are mad , '' protested her mother . 
`` Completely mad ! 
How can a ladylike girl talk in such a way ? '' 
... Surprising her niece in the ecstasy of these delirious ravings , Dona Elena would raise her eyes to heaven , abstaining thenceforth from communicating her opinions , reserving them wholly for the mother . 
Don Marcelo 's indignation took another bound when his wife repeated to him the news from her sister . 
All a lie ! 
... The war was progressing finely . 
On the Eastern frontier the French troops had advanced through the interior of Alsace and Lorraine . 
`` But -- Belgium is invaded , is n't it ? '' 
asked Dona Luisa . 
`` And those poor Belgians ? '' 
Desnoyers retorted indignantly . 
`` That invasion of Belgium is treason ... . 
And a treason never amounts to anything among decent people . '' 
He said it in all good faith as though war were a duel in which the traitor was henceforth ruled out and unable to continue his outrages . 
Besides , the heroic resistance of Belgium was nourishing the most absurd illusions in his heart . 
The Belgians were certainly supernatural men destined to the most stupendous achievements ... . 
And to think that heretofore he had never taken this plucky little nation into account ! 
... For several days , he considered Liege a holy city before whose walls the Teutonic power would be completely confounded . 
Upon the fall of Liege , his unquenchable faith sought another handle . 
There were still remaining many other Lieges in the interior . 
The Germans might force their way further in ; then we would see how many of them ever succeeded in getting out . 
The entry into Brussels did not disquiet him . 
An unprotected city ! 
... Its surrender was a foregone conclusion . 
Now the Belgians would be better able to defend Antwerp . 
Neither did the advance of the Germans toward the French frontier alarm him at all . 
In vain his sister-in-law , with malicious brevity , mentioned in the dining-room the progress of the invasion , so confusedly outlined in the daily papers . 
The Germans were already at the frontier . 
`` And what of that ? '' 
yelled Don Marcelo . 
`` Soon they will meet someone to talk to ! 
Joffre is going to meet them . 
Our armies are in the East , in the very place where they ought to be , on the true frontier , at the door of their home . 
But they have to deal with a treacherous and cowardly opponent that instead of marching face to face , leaps the walls of the corral like sheep-stealers ... . 
Their underhand tricks wo n't do them any good , though ! 
The French are already in Belgium and adjusting the accounts of the Germans . 
We shall smash them so effectually that never again will they be able to disturb the peace of the world . 
And that accursed individual with the rampant moustache we are going to put in a cage , and exhibit in the place de la Concorde ! '' 
Inspired by the paternal braggadocio , Chichi also launched forth exultingly an imaginary series of avenging torments and insults as a complement to this Imperial Exhibition . 
These allusions to the Emperor aggravated Frau von Hartrott more than anything else . 
In the first days of the war , her sister had surprised her weeping before the newspaper caricatures and leaflets sold in the streets . 
`` Such an excellent man ... so knightly ... such a good father to his family ! 
He was n't to blame for anything . 
It was his enemies who forced him to assume the offensive . '' 
Her veneration for exalted personages was making her take the attacks upon this admired grandee as though they were directed against her own family . 
One night in the dining room , she abandoned her tragic silence . 
Certain sarcasms , shot by Desnoyers at her hero , brought the tears to her eyes , and this sentimental indulgence turned her thoughts upon her sons who were undoubtedly taking part in the invasion . 
Her brother-in-law was longing for the extermination of all the enemy . 
`` May every barbarian be exterminated ! 
... every one of the bandits in pointed helmets who have just burned Louvain and other towns , shooting defenceless peasants , old men , women and children ! '' 
`` You forget that I am a mother , '' sobbed Frau von Hartrott . 
`` You forget that among those whose extermination you are imploring , are my sons . '' 
Her violent weeping made Desnoyers realize more than ever the abyss yawning between him and this woman lodged in his own house . 
His resentment , however , overleapt family considerations ... . 
She might weep for her sons all she wanted to ; that was her right . 
But these sons were aggressors and wantonly doing evil . 
It was the other mothers who were inspiring his pity -- those who were living tranquilly in their smiling little Belgian towns when their sons were suddenly shot down , their daughters violated and their houses burned to the ground . 
As though this description of the horrors of war were a fresh insult to her , Dona Elena wept harder than ever . 
What falsehoods ! 
The Kaiser was an excellent man . 
His soldiers were gentlemen , the German army was a model of civilization and goodness . 
Her husband had belonged to this army , her sons were marching in its ranks . 
And she knew her sons -- well-bred and incapable of wrong-doing . 
These Belgian calumnies she could no longer listen to ... and , with dramatic abandon , she flung herself into the arms of her sister . 
Senor Desnoyers raged against the fate that condemned him to live under the same roof with this woman . 
What an unfortunate complication for the family ! 
... and the frontiers were closed , making it impossible to get rid of her ! 
`` Very well , then , '' he thundered . 
`` Let us talk no more about it . 
We shall never reach an understanding , for we belong to two different worlds . 
It 's a great pity that you ca n't go back to your own people . '' 
After that , he refrained from mentioning the war in his sister-in-law 's presence . 
Chichi was the only one keeping up her aggressive and noisy enthusiasm . 
Upon reading in the papers the news of the shootings , sackings , burning of cities , and the dolorous flight of those who had seen their all reduced to ashes , she again felt the necessity of assuming the role of lady-assassin . 
Ay , if she could only once get her hands on one of those bandits ! 
... What did the men amount to anyway if they could n't exterminate the whole lot ? 
... Then she would look at Rene in his exquisitely fresh uniform , sweet-mannered and smiling as though all war meant to him was a mere change of attire , and she would exclaim enigmatically : `` What luck that you will never have to go to the front ! 
... How fine that you do n't run any risks ! '' 
And her lover would accept these words as but another proof of her affectionate interest . 
One day Don Marcelo was able to appreciate the horrors of the war without leaving Paris . 
Three thousand Belgian refugees were quartered provisionally in the circus before being distributed among the provinces . 
When Desnoyers entered this place , he saw in the vestibule the same posters which had been flaunting their spectacular gayeties when he had visited it a few months before with his family . 
Now he noticed the odor from a sick and miserable multitude crowded together -- like the exhalation from a prison or poorhouse infirmary . 
He saw a throng that seemed crazy or stupefied with grief . 
They did not know exactly where they were ; they had come thither , they did n't know how . 
The terrible spectacle of the invasion was still so persistent in their minds that it left room for no other impression . 
They were still seeing the helmeted men in their peaceful hamlets , their homes in flames , the soldiery firing upon those who were fleeing , the mutilated women done to death by incessant adulterous assault , the old men burned alive , the children stabbed in their cradles by human beasts inflamed by alcohol and license ... . 
Some of the octogenarians were weeping as they told how the soldiers of a civilized nation were cutting off the breasts from the women in order to nail them to the doors , how they had passed around as a trophy a new-born babe spiked on a bayonet , how they had shot aged men in the very armchair in which they were huddled in their sorrowful weakness , torturing them first with their jests and taunts . 
They had fled blindly , pursued by fire and shot , as crazed with terror as the people of the middle ages trying not to be ridden down by the hordes of galloping Huns and Mongols . 
And this flight had been across the country in its loveliest festal array , in the most productive of months , when the earth was bristling with ears of grain , when the August sky was most brilliant , and when the birds were greeting the opulent harvest with their glad songs ! 
In that circus , filled with the wandering crowds , the immense crime was living again . 
The children were crying with a sound like the bleating of lambs ; the men were looking wildly around with terrified eyes ; the frenzied women were howling like the insane . 
Families had become separated in the terror of flight . 
A mother of five little ones now had but one . 
The parents , as they realized the number missing , were thinking with anguish of those who had disappeared . 
Would they ever find them again ? 
... Or were they already dead ? 
... Don Marcelo returned home , grinding his teeth and waving his cane in an alarming manner . 
Ah , the bandits ! 
... If only his sister-in-law could change her sex ! 
Why was n't she a man ? 
... It would be better still if she could suddenly assume the form of her husband , von Hartrott . 
What an interesting interview the two brothers-in-law would have ! 
... The war was awakening religious sentiment in the men and increasing the devotion of the women . 
The churches were filled . 
Dona Luisa was no longer confining herself to those of her neighborhood . 
With the courage induced by extraordinary events , she was traversing Paris afoot and going from the Madeleine to Notre Dame , or to the Sacre Coeur on the heights of Montmartre . 
Religious festivals were now thronged like popular assemblies . 
The preachers were tribunes . 
Patriotic enthusiasm interrupted many sermon with applause . 
Each morning on opening the papers , before reading the war news , Senora Desnoyers would hunt other notices . 
`` Where was Father Amette going to be to-day ? '' 
Then , under the arched vaultings of that temple , would she unite her voice with the devout chorus imploring supernatural intervention . 
`` Lord , save France ! '' 
Patriotic religiosity was putting Sainte Genevieve at the head of the favored ones , so from all these fiestas , Dona Luisa , tremulous with faith , would return in expectation of a miracle similar to that which the patron saint of Paris had worked before the invading hordes of Attila . 
Dona Elena was also visiting the churches , but those nearest the house . 
Her brother-in-law saw her one afternoon entering Saint-Honoree d'Eylau . 
The building was filled with the faithful , and on the altar was a sheaf of flags -- France and the allied nations . 
The imploring crowd was not composed entirely of women . 
Desnoyers saw men of his age , pompous and grave , moving their lips and fixing steadfast eyes on the altar on which were reflected like lost stars , the flames of the candles . 
And again he felt envy . 
They were fathers who were recalling their childhood prayers , thinking of their sons in battle . 
Don Marcelo , who had always considered religion with indifference , suddenly recognized the necessity of faith . 
He wanted to pray like the others , with a vague , indefinite supplication , including all beings who were struggling and dying for a land that he had not tried to defend . 
He was scandalized to see von Hartrott 's wife kneeling among these people raising her eyes to the cross in a look of anguished entreaty . 
She was begging heaven to protect her husband , the German who perhaps at this moment was concentrating all his devilish faculties on the best organization for crushing the weak ; she was praying for her sons , officers of the King of Prussia , who revolver in hand were entering villages and farmlands , driving before them a horror-stricken crowd , leaving behind them fire and death . 
And these orisons were going to mingle with those of the mothers who were praying for the youth trying to check the onslaught of the barbarians -- with the petitions of these earnest men , rigid in their tragic grief ! 
... He had to make a great effort not to protest aloud , and he left the church . 
His sister-in-law had no right to kneel there among those people . 
`` They ought to put her out ! '' 
he growled indignantly . 
`` She is compromising God with her absurd entreaties . '' 
But in spite of his annoyance , he had to endure her living in his household , and at the same time had taken great pains to prevent her nationality being known outside . 
It was a severe trial for Don Marcelo to be obliged to keep silent when at table with his family . 
He had to avoid the hysterics of his sister-in-law who promptly burst into sighs and sobs at the slightest allusion to her hero ; and he feared equally the complaints of his wife , always ready to defend her sister , as though she were the victim ... . 
That a man in his own home should have to curb his tongue and speak tactfully ! 
... The only satisfaction permitted him was to announce the military moves . 
The French had entered Belgium . 
`` It appears that the Boches have had a good set-back . '' 
The slightest clash of cavalry , a simple encounter with the advance troops , he would glorify as a decisive victory . 
`` In Lorraine , too , we are making great headway ! '' 
... But suddenly the fountain of his bubbling optimism seemed to become choked up . 
To judge from the periodicals , nothing extraordinary was occurring . 
They continued publishing war-stories so as to keep enthusiasm at fever-heat , but nothing definite . 
The Government , too , was issuing communications of vague and rhetorical verbosity . 
Desnoyers became alarmed , his instinct warning him of danger . 
`` There is something wrong , '' he thought . 
`` There 's a spring broken somewhere ! '' 
This lack of encouraging news coincided exactly with the sudden rise in Dona Elena 's spirits . 
With whom had that woman been talking ? 
Whom did she meet when she was on the street ? 
... Without dropping her pose as a martyr , with the same woebegone look and drooping mouth , she was talking , and talking treacherously . 
The torment of Don Marcelo in being obliged to listen to the enemy harbored within his gates ! 
... The French had been vanquished in Lorraine and in Belgium at the same time . 
A body of the army had deserted the colors ; many prisoners , many cannon were captured . 
`` Lies ! 
German exaggerations ! '' 
howled Desnoyers . 
And Chichi with the derisive ha-ha 's of an insolent girl , drowned out the triumphant communications of the aunt from Berlin . 
`` I do n't know , of course , '' said the unwelcome lodger with mock humility . 
`` Perhaps it is not authentic . 
I have heard it said . '' 
Her host was furious . 
Where had she heard it said ? 
