And in order to console himself for this lack of little ones around his own hearth , he betook himself to the ranch of his overseer , Celedonio , where a band of little half-breeds gathered tremblingly and hopefully about him . 
Suddenly China died . 
The poor Misia Petrona passed away as discreetly as she had lived , trying even in her last hours to avoid all annoyance for her husband , asking his pardon with an imploring look for any trouble which her death might cause him . 
Elena came to the ranch in order to see her mother 's body for the last time , and Desnoyers who for more than a year had been supporting them behind his father-in-law 's back , took advantage of this occasion to overcome the old man 's resentment . 
`` Well , I 'll forgive her , '' said the ranchman finally . 
`` I 'll do it for the sake of my poor wife and for you . 
She may remain on the ranch , and that shameless gringo may come with her . '' 
But he would have nothing to do with him . 
The German was to be an employee under Desnoyers , and they could live in the office building as though they did not belong to the family . 
He would never say a word to Karl . 
But scarcely had the German returned before he began giving him orders rudely as though he were a perfect stranger . 
At other times he would pass by him as though he did not know him . 
Upon finding Elena in the house with his older daughter , he would go on without speaking to her . 
In vain his Romantica transfigured by maternity , improved all opportunities for putting her child in his way , calling him loudly by name : `` Julio ... Julio ! '' 
`` They want that brat of a singing gringo , that carrot top with a face like a skinned kid to be my grandson ? 
... I prefer Celedonio 's . '' 
And by way of emphasizing his protest , he entered the dwelling of his overseer , scattering among his dusky brood handfuls of dollars . 
After seven years of marriage , the wife of Desnoyers found that she , too , was going to become a mother . 
Her sister already had three sons . 
But what were they worth to Madariaga compared to the grandson that was going to come ? 
`` It will be a boy , '' he announced positively , `` because I need one so . 
It shall be named Julio , and I hope that it will look like my poor dead wife . '' 
Since the death of his wife he no longer called her the China , feeling something of a posthumous love for the poor woman who in her lifetime had endured so much , so timidly and silently . 
Now `` my poor dead wife '' cropped out every other instant in the conversation of the remorseful ranchman . 
His desires were fulfilled . 
Luisa gave birth to a boy who bore the name of Julio , and although he did not show in his somewhat sketchy features any striking resemblance to his grandmother , still he had the black hair and eyes and olive skin of a brunette . 
Welcome ! 
... This WAS a grandson ! 
In the generosity of his joy , he even permitted the German to enter the house for the baptismal ceremony . 
When Julio Desnoyers was two years old , his grandfather made the rounds of his estates , holding him on the saddle in front of him . 
He went from ranch to ranch in order to show him to the copper-colored populace , like an ancient monarch presenting his heir . 
Later on , when the child was able to say a few words , he entertained himself for hours at a time talking with the tot under the shade of the eucalyptus tree . 
A certain mental failing was beginning to be noticed in the old man . 
Although not exactly in his dotage , his aggressiveness was becoming very childish . 
Even in his most affectionate moments , he used to contradict everybody , and hunt up ways of annoying his relatives . 
`` Come here , you false prophet , '' he would say to Julio . 
`` You are a Frenchy . '' 
The grandchild protested as though he had been insulted . 
His mother had taught him that he was an Argentinian , and his father had suggested that she also add Spanish , in order to please the grandfather . 
`` Very well , then ; if you are not a Frenchy , shout , ` Down with Napoleon ! ' '' 
And he looked around him to see if Desnoyers might be near , believing that this would displease him greatly . 
But his son-in-law pursued the even tenor of his way , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` Down with Napoleon ! '' 
repeated Julio . 
And he instantly held out his hand while his grandfather went through his pockets . 
Karl 's sons , now four in number , used to circle around their grandparent like a humble chorus kept at a distance , and stare enviously at these gifts . 
In order to win his favor , they one day when they saw him alone , came boldly up to him , shouting in unison , `` Down with Napoleon ! '' 
`` You insolent gringoes ! '' 
ranted the old man . 
`` That 's what that shameless father has taught you ! 
If you say that again , I 'll chase you with a cat-o-nine-tails ... . 
The very idea of insulting a great man in that way ! '' 
While he tolerated this blond brood , he never would permit the slightest intimacy . 
Desnoyers and his wife often had to come to their rescue , accusing the grandfather of injustice . 
And in order to pour the vials of his wrath out on someone , the old plainsman would hunt up Celedonio , the best of his listeners , who invariably replied , `` Yes , Patron . 
That 's so , Patron . '' 
`` They 're not to blame , '' agreed the old man , `` but I ca n't abide them ! 
Besides , they are so like their father , so fair , with hair like a shredded carrot , and the two oldest wearing specs as if they were court clerks ! 
... They do n't seem like folks with those glasses ; they look like sharks . '' 
Madariaga had never seen any sharks , but he imagined them , without knowing why , with round , glassy eyes , like the bottoms of bottles . 
By the time he was eight years old , Julio was a famous little equestrian . 
`` To horse , peoncito , '' his grandfather would cry , and away they would race , streaking like lightning across the fields , midst thousands and thousands of horned herds . 
The `` peoncito , '' proud of his title , obeyed the master in everything , and so learned to whirl the lasso over the steers , leaving them bound and conquered . 
Upon making his pony take a deep ditch or creep along the edge of the cliffs , he sometimes fell under his mount , but clambered up gamely . 
`` Ah , fine cowboy ! '' 
exclaimed the grandfather bursting with pride in his exploits . 
`` Here are five dollars for you to give a handkerchief to some china . '' 
The old man , in his increasing mental confusion , did not gauge his gifts exactly with the lad 's years ; and the infantile horseman , while keeping the money , was wondering what china was referred to , and why he should make her a present . 
Desnoyers finally had to drag his son away from the baleful teachings of his grandfather . 
It was simply useless to have masters come to the house , or to send Julio to the country school . 
Madariaga would always steal his grandson away , and then they would scour the plains together . 
So when the boy was eleven years old , his father placed him in a big school in the Capital . 
The grandfather then turned his attention to Julio 's three-year-old sister , exhibiting her before him as he had her brother , as he took her from ranch to ranch . 
Everybody called Chicha 's little girl Chichi , but the grandfather bestowed on her the same nickname that he had given her brother , the `` peoncito . '' 
And Chichi , who was growing up wild , vigorous and wilful , breakfasting on meat and talking in her sleep of roast beef , readily fell in with the old man 's tastes . 
She was dressed like a boy , rode astride like a man , and in order to win her grandfather 's praises as `` fine cowboy , '' carried a knife in the back of her belt . 
The two raced the fields from sun to sun , Madariaga following the flying pigtail of the little Amazon as though it were a flag . 
When nine years old she , too , could lasso the cattle with much dexterity . 
What most irritated the ranchman was that his family would remember his age . 
He received as insults his son-in-law 's counsels to remain quietly at home , becoming more aggressive and reckless as he advanced in years , exaggerating his activity , as if he wished to drive Death away . 
He accepted no help except from his harum-scarum `` Peoncito . '' 
When Karl 's children , great hulking youngsters , hastened to his assistance and offered to hold his stirrup , he would repel them with snorts of indignation . 
`` So you think I am no longer able to help myself , eh ! 
... There 's still enough life in me to make those who are waiting for me to die , so as to grab my dollars , chew their disappointment a long while yet ! '' 
Since the German and his wife were kept pointedly apart from the family life , they had to put up with these allusions in silence . 
Karl , needing protection , constantly shadowed the Frenchman , improving every opportunity to overwhelm him with his eulogies . 
He never could thank him enough for all that he had done for him . 
He was his only champion . 
He longed for a chance to prove his gratitude , to die for him if necessary . 
His wife admired him with enthusiasm as `` the most gifted knight in the world . '' 
And Desnoyers received their devotion in gratified silence , accepting the German as an excellent comrade . 
As he controlled absolutely the family fortune , he aided Karl very generously without arousing the resentment of the old man . 
He also took the initiative in bringing about the realization of Karl 's pet ambition -- a visit to the Fatherland . 
So many years in America ! 
... For the very reason that Desnoyers himself had no desire to return to Europe , he wished to facilitate Karl 's trip , and gave him the means to make the journey with his entire family . 
The father-in-law had no curiosity as to who paid the expenses . 
`` Let them go ! '' 
he said gleefully , `` and may they never return ! '' 
Their absence was not a very long one , for they spent their year 's allowance in three months . 
Karl , who had apprised his parents of the great fortune which his marriage had brought him , wished to make an impression as a millionaire , in full enjoyment of his riches . 
Elena returned radiant , speaking with pride of her relatives -- of the baron , Colonel of Hussars , of the Captain of the Guard , of the Councillor at Court -- asserting that all countries were most insignificant when compared with her husband 's . 
She even affected a certain condescension toward Desnoyers , praising him as `` a very worthy man , but without ancient lineage or distinguished family -- and French , besides . '' 
Karl , on the other hand , showed the same devotion as before , keeping himself submissively in the background when with his brother-in-law who had the keys of the cash box and was his only defense against the browbeating old Patron ... . 
He had left his two older sons in a school in Germany . 
Years afterwards they reached an equal footing with the other grandchildren of the Spaniard who always begrudged them their existence , `` perfect frights , with carroty hair , and eyes like a shark . '' 
Suddenly the old man became very lonely , for they had also carried off his second `` Peoncito . '' 
The good Chicha could not tolerate her daughter 's growing up like a boy , parading ` round on horseback all the time , and glibly repeating her grandfather 's vulgarities . 
So she was now in a convent in the Capital , where the Sisters had to battle valiantly in order to tame the mischievous rebellion of their wild little pupil . 
When Julio and Chichi returned to the ranch for their vacations , the grandfather again concentrated his fondness on the first , as though the girl had merely been a substitute . 
Desnoyers was becoming indignant at his son 's dissipated life . 
He was no longer at college , and his existence was that of a student in a rich family who makes up for parental parsimony with all sorts of imprudent borrowings . 
But Madariaga came to the defense of his grandson . 
`` Ah , the fine cowboy ! '' 
... Seeing him again on the ranch , he admired the dash of the good looking youth , testing his muscles in order to convince himself of their strength , and making him to recount his nightly escapades as ringleader of a band of toughs in the Capital . 
He longed to go to Buenos Aires himself , just to see the youngster in the midst of this gay , wild life . 
But alas ! 
he was not seventeen like his grandson ; he had already passed eighty . 
`` Come here , you false prophet ! 
Tell me how many children you have ... . 
You must have a great many children , you know ! '' 
`` Father ! '' 
protested Chicha who was always hanging around , fearing her parent 's bad teachings . 
`` Stop nagging at me ! '' 
yelled the irate old fellow in a towering temper . 
`` I know what I 'm saying . '' 
Paternity figured largely in all his amorous fancies . 
He was almost blind , and the loss of his sight was accompanied by an increasing mental upset . 
His crazy senility took on a lewd character , expressing itself in language which scandalized or amused the community . 
`` Oh , you rascal , what a pretty fellow you are ! '' 
he said , leering at Julio with eyes which could no longer distinguish things except in a shadowy way . 
`` You are the living image of my poor dead wife ... . 
Have a good time , for Grandpa is always here with his money ! 
If you could only count on what your father gives you , you would live like a hermit . 
These Frenchies are a close-fisted lot ! 
But I am looking out for you . 
Peoncito ! 
Spend and enjoy yourself -- that 's what your Granddaddy has piled up the silver for ! '' 
When the Desnoyers children returned to the Capital , he spent his lonesome hours in going from ranch to ranch . 
A young half-breed would set the water for his shrub-tea to boiling on the hearth , and the old man would wonder confusedly if she were his daughter . 
Another , fifteen years old , would offer him a gourd filled with the bitter liquid and a silver pipe with which to sip it ... . 
A grandchild , perhaps -- he was n't sure . 
And so he passed the afternoons , silent and sluggish , drinking gourd after gourd of shrub tea , surrounded by families who stared at him with admiration and fear . 
Every time he mounted his horse for these excursions , his older daughter would protest . 
`` At eighty-four years ! 
Would it not be better for him to remain quietly at home ... '' Some day something terrible would happen . 
... And the terrible thing did happen . 
One evening the Patron 's horse came slowly home without its rider . 
The old man had fallen on the sloping highway , and when they found him , he was dead . 
Thus died the centaur as he had lived , with the lash hanging from his wrist , with his legs bowed by the saddle . 
A Spanish notary , almost as old as he , produced the will . 
The family was somewhat alarmed at seeing what a voluminous document it was . 
What terrible bequests had Madariaga dictated ? 
The reading of the first part tranquilized Karl and Elena . 
The old father had left considerable more to the wife of Desnoyers , but there still remained an enormous share for the Romantica and her children . 
`` I do this , '' he said , `` in memory of my poor dead wife , and so that people wo n't talk . '' 
After this , came eighty-six legacies . 
Eighty-five dark-hued individuals -LRB- women and men -RRB- , who had lived on the ranch for many years as tenants and retainers , were to receive the last paternal munificence of the old patriarch . 
At the head of these was Celedonio whom Madariaga had greatly enriched in his lifetime for no heavier work than listening to him and repeating , `` That 's so , Patron , that 's true ! '' 
More than a million dollars were represented by these bequests in lands and herds . 
The one who completed the list of beneficiaries was Julio Desnoyers . 
The grandfather had made special mention of this namesake , leaving him a plantation `` to meet his private expenses , making up for that which his father would not give him . '' 
`` But that represents hundreds of thousands of dollars ! '' 
protested Karl , who had been making himself almost obnoxious in his efforts to assure himself that his wife had not been overlooked in the will . 
The days following the reading of this will were very trying ones for the family . 
Elena and her children kept looking at the other group as though they had just waked up , contemplating them in an entirely new light . 
They seemed to forget what they were going to receive in their envy of the much larger share of their relatives . 
Desnoyers , benevolent and conciliatory , had a plan . 
An expert in administrative affairs , he realized that the distribution among the heirs was going to double the expenses without increasing the income . 
He was calculating , besides , the complications and disbursements necessary for a judicial division of nine immense ranches , hundreds of thousands of cattle , deposits in the banks , houses in the city , and debts to collect . 
Would it not be better for them all to continue living as before ? 
... Had they not lived most peaceably as a united family ? 
... The German received this suggestion by drawing himself up haughtily . 
No ; to each one should be given what was his . 
Let each live in his own sphere . 
He wished to establish himself in Europe , spending his wealth freely there . 
It was necessary for him to return to `` his world . '' 
As they looked squarely at each other , Desnoyers saw an unknown Karl , a Karl whose existence he had never suspected when he was under his protection , timid and servile . 
The Frenchman , too , was beginning to see things in a new light . 
`` Very well , '' he assented . 
`` Let each take his own . 
That seems fair to me . '' 
The `` Madariagan succession , '' as it was called in the language of the legal men interested in prolonging it in order to augment their fees -- was divided into two groups , separated by the ocean . 
The Desnoyers moved to Buenos Aires . 
The Hartrotts moved to Berlin as soon as Karl could sell all the legacy , to re-invest it in lands and industrial enterprises in his own country . 
Desnoyers no longer cared to live in the country . 
For twenty years , now , he had been the head of an enormous agricultural and stock raising business , overseeing hundreds of men in the various ranches . 
The parcelling out of the old man 's fortune among Elena and the other legatees had considerably constricted the radius of his authority , and it angered him to see established on the neighboring lands so many foreigners , almost all Germans , who had bought of Karl . 
Furthermore , he was getting old , his wife 's inheritance amounted to about twenty millions of dollars , and perhaps his brother-in-law was showing the better judgment in returning to Europe . 
So he leased some of the plantations , handed over the superintendence of others to those mentioned in the will who considered themselves left-handed members of the family -- of which Desnoyers as the Patron received their submissive allegiance -- and moved to Buenos Aires . 
By this move , he was able to keep an eye on his son who continued living a dissipated life without making any headway in his engineering studies . 
Then , too , Chichi was now almost a woman -- her robust development making her look older than she was -- and it was not expedient to keep her on the estate to become a rustic senorita like her mother . 
Dona Luisa had also tired of ranch life , the social triumphs of her sister making her a little restless . 
She was incapable of feeling jealous , but material ambitions made her anxious that her children should not bring up the rear of the procession in which the other grandchildren were cutting such a dashing figure . 
During the year , most wonderful reports from Germany were finding their way to the Desnoyers home in the Capital . 
`` The aunt from Berlin , '' as the children called her , kept sending long letters filled with accounts of dances , dinners , hunting parties and titles -- many high-sounding and military titles ; -- `` our brother , the Colonel , '' `` our cousin , the Baron , '' `` our uncle , the Intimate Councillor , '' `` our great-uncle , the Truly Intimate . '' 
All the extravagances of the German social ladder , which incessantly manufactures new titles in order to satisfy the thirst for honors of a people divided into castes , were enumerated with delight by the old Romantica . 
She even mentioned her husband 's secretary -LRB- a nobody -RRB- who , through working in the public offices , had acquired the title of Rechnungarath , Councillor of Calculations . 
She also referred with much pride to the retired Oberpedell which she had in her house , explaining that that meant `` Superior Porter . '' 
The news about her children was no less glorious . 
The oldest was the wise one of the family . 
He was devoted to philology and the historical sciences , but his sight was growing weaker all the time because of his omnivorous reading . 
Soon he would be a Doctor , and before he was thirty , a Herr Professor . 
The mother lamented that he had not military aspirations , considering that his tastes had somewhat distorted the lofty destinies of the family . 
Professorships , sciences and literature were more properly the perquisites of the Jews , unable , because of their race , to obtain preferment in the army ; but she was trying to console herself by keeping in mind that a celebrated professor could , in time , acquire a social rank almost equal to that of a colonel . 
Her other four sons would become officers . 
Their father was preparing the ground so that they might enter the Guard or some aristocratic regiment without any of the members being able to vote against their admission . 
The two daughters would surely marry , when they had reached a suitable age with officers of the Hussars whose names bore the magic `` von '' of petty nobility , haughty and charming gentlemen about whom the daughter of Misia Petrona waxed most enthusiastic . 
The establishment of the Hartrotts was in keeping with these new relationships . 
In the home in Berlin , the servants wore knee-breeches and white wigs on the nights of great banquets . 
Karl had bought an old castle with pointed towers , ghosts in the cellars , and various legends of assassinations , assaults and abductions which enlivened its history in an interesting way . 
An architect , decorated with many foreign orders , and bearing the title of `` Councillor of Construction , '' was engaged to modernize the mediaeval edifice without sacrificing its terrifying aspect . 
The Romantica described in anticipation the receptions in the gloomy salon , the light diffused by electricity , simulating torches , the crackling of the emblazoned hearth with its imitation logs bristling with flames of gas , all the splendor of modern luxury combined with the souvenirs of an epoch of omnipotent nobility -- the best , according to her , in history . 
And the hunting parties , the future hunting parties ! 
... in an annex of sandy and loose soil with pine woods -- in no way comparable to the rich ground of their native ranch , but which had the honor of being trodden centuries ago by the Princes of Brandenburg , founders of the reigning house of Prussia . 
And all this advancement in a single year ! 
... They had , of course , to compete with other oversea families who had amassed enormous fortunes in the United States , Brazil or the Pacific coast ; but these were Germans `` without lineage , '' coarse plebeians who were struggling in vain to force themselves into the great world by making donations to the imperial works . 
With all their millions , the very most that they could ever hope to attain would be to marry their daughters with ordinary soldiers . 
Whilst Karl ! 
... The relatives of Karl ! 
... and the Romantica let her pen run on , glorifying a family in whose bosom she fancied she had been born . 
From time to time were enclosed with Elena 's effusions brief , crisp notes directed to Desnoyers . 
The brother-in-law continued giving an account of his operations the same as when living on the ranch under his protection . 
But with this deference was now mixed a badly concealed pride , an evident desire to retaliate for his times of voluntary humiliation . 
Everything that he was doing was grand and glorious . 
He had invested his millions in the industrial enterprises of modern Germany . 
He was stockholder of munition factories as big as towns , and of navigation companies launching a ship every half year . 
The Emperor was interesting himself in these works , looking benevolently on all those who wished to aid him . 
Besides this , Karl was buying land . 
At first sight , it seemed foolish to have sold the fertile fields of their inheritance in order to acquire sandy Prussian wastes that yielded only to much artificial fertilizing ; but by becoming a land owner , he now belonged to the `` Agrarian Party , '' the aristocratic and conservative group par excellence , and thus he was living in two different but equally distinguished worlds -- that of the great industrial friends of the Emperor , and that of the Junkers , knights of the countryside , guardians of the old traditions and the supply-source of the officials of the King of Prussia . 
On hearing of these social strides , Desnoyers could not but think of the pecuniary sacrifices which they must represent . 
He knew Karl 's past , for on the ranch , under an impulse of gratitude , the German had one day revealed to the Frenchman the cause of his coming to America . 
He was a former officer in the German army , but the desire of living ostentatiously without other resources than his salary , had dragged him into committing such reprehensible acts as abstracting funds belonging to the regiment , incurring debts of honor and paying for them with forged signatures . 
These crimes had not been officially prosecuted through consideration of his father 's memory , but the members of his division had submitted him to a tribunal of honor . 
His brothers and friends had advised him to shoot himself as the only remedy ; but he loved life and had fled to South America where , in spite of humiliations , he had finally triumphed . 
Wealth effaces the spots of the past even more rapidly than Time . 
The news of his fortune on the other side of the ocean made his family give him a warm reception on his first voyage home ; introducing him again into their world . 
Nobody could remember shameful stories about a few hundred marks concerning a man who was talking about his father-in-law 's lands , more extensive than many German principalities . 
Now , upon installing himself definitely in his country , all was forgotten . 
But , oh , the contributions levied upon his vanity ... Desnoyers shrewdly guessed at the thousands of marks poured with both hands into the charitable works of the Empress , into the imperialistic propagandas , into the societies of veterans , into the clubs of aggression and expansion organized by German ambition . 
The frugal Frenchman , thrifty in his expenditures and free from social ambitions , smiled at the grandeurs of his brother-in-law . 
He considered Karl an excellent companion although of a childish pride . 
He recalled with satisfaction the years that they had passed together in the country . 
He could not forget the German who was always hovering around him , affectionate and submissive as a younger brother . 
When his family commented with a somewhat envious vivacity upon the glories of their Berlin relatives , Desnoyers would say smilingly , `` Leave them in peace ; they are paying very dear for their whistle . '' 
But the enthusiasm which the letters from Germany breathed finally created an atmosphere of disquietude and rebellion . 
Chichi led the attack . 
Why were they not going to Europe like other folks ? 
all their friends had been there . 
Even the Italian and Spanish shopkeepers were making the voyage , while she , the daughter of a Frenchman , had never seen Paris ! 
... Oh , Paris . 
The doctors in attendance on melancholy ladies were announcing the existence of a new and terrible disease , `` the mania for Paris . '' 
Dona Luisa supported her daughter . 
Why had she not gone to live in Europe like her sister , since she was the richer of the two ? 
Even Julio gravely declared that in the old world he could study to better advantage . 
America is not the land of the learned . 
Infected by the general unrest , the father finally began to wonder why the idea of going to Europe had not occurred to him long before . 
Thirty-four years without going to that country which was not his ! 
... It was high time to start ! 
He was living too near to his business . 
In vain the retired ranchman had tried to keep himself indifferent to the money market . 
Everybody was coining money around him . 
In the club , in the theatre , wherever he went , the people were talking about purchases of lands , of sales of stock , of quick negotiations with a triple profit , of portentous balances . 
The amount of money that he was keeping idle in the banks was beginning to weigh upon him . 
He finally ended by involving himself in some speculation ; like a gambler who can not see the roulette wheel without putting his hand in his pocket . 
His family was right . 
`` To Paris ! '' 
For in the Desnoyers ' mind , to go to Europe meant , of course , to go to Paris . 
Let the `` aunt from Berlin '' keep on chanting the glories of her husband 's country ! 
`` It 's sheer nonsense ! '' 
exclaimed Julio who had made grave geographical and ethnic comparisons in his nightly forays . 
`` There is no place but Paris ! '' 
Chichi saluted with an ironical smile the slightest doubt of it -- `` Perhaps they make as elegant fashions in Germany as in Paris ? 
... Bah ! '' 
Dona Luisa took up her children 's cry . 
`` Paris ! '' 
... Never had it even occurred to her to go to a Lutheran land to be protected by her sister . 
`` Let it be Paris , then ! '' 
said the Frenchman , as though he were speaking of an unknown city . 
He had accustomed himself to believe that he would never return to it . 
During the first years of his life in America , the trip would have been an impossibility because of the military service which he had evaded . 
Then he had vague news of different amnesties . 
After the time for conscription had long since passed , an inertness of will had made him consider a return to his country as somewhat absurd and useless . 
On the other side , nothing remained to attract him . 
He had even lost track of those country relatives with whom his mother had lived . 
In his heaviest hours he had tried to occupy his activity by planning an enormous mausoleum , all of marble , in La Recoleta , the cemetery of the rich , in order to move thither the remains of Madariaga as founder of the dynasty , following him with all his own when their hour should come . 
He was beginning to feel the weight of age . 
He was nearly seventy years old , and the rude life of the country , the horseback rides in the rain , the rivers forded upon his swimming horse , the nights passed in the open air , had brought on a rheumatism that was torturing his best days . 
His family , however , reawakened his enthusiasm . 
`` To Paris ! '' 
... He began to fancy that he was twenty again , and forgetting his habitual parsimony , wished his household to travel like royalty , in the most luxurious staterooms , and with personal servants . 
Two copper-hued country girls , born on the ranch and elevated to the rank of maids to the senora and her daughter , accompanied them on the voyage , their oblique eyes betraying not the slightest astonishment before the greatest novelties . 
Once in Paris , Desnoyers found himself quite bewildered . 
He confused the names of streets , proposed visits to buildings which had long since disappeared , and all his attempts to prove himself an expert authority on Paris were attended with disappointment . 
His children , guided by recent reading up , knew Paris better than he . 
He was considered a foreigner in his own country . 
At first , he even felt a certain strangeness in using his native tongue , for he had remained on the ranch without speaking a word of his language for years at a time . 
He was used to thinking in Spanish , and translating his ideas into the speech of his ancestors spattered his French with all kinds of Creole dialect . 
`` Where a man makes his fortune and raises his family , there is his true country , '' he said sententiously , remembering Madariaga . 
The image of that distant country dominated him with insistent obsession as soon as the impressions of the voyage had worn off . 
He had no French friends , and upon going into the street , his feet instinctively took him to the places where the Argentinians gathered together . 
It was the same with them . 
They had left their country only to feel , with increasing intensity , the desire to talk about it all the time . 
There he read the papers , commenting on the rising prices in the fields , on the prospects for the next harvests and on the sales of cattle . 
Returning home , his thoughts were still in America , and he chuckled with delight as he recalled the way in which the two chinas had defied the professional dignity of the French cook , preparing their native stews and other dishes in Creole style . 
He had settled the family in an ostentatious house in the avenida Victor Hugo , for which he paid a rental of twenty-eight thousand francs . 
Dona Luisa had to go and come many times before she could accustom herself to the imposing aspect of the concierges -- he , decorated with gold trimmings on his black uniform and wearing white whiskers like a notary in a comedy , she with a chain of gold upon her exuberant bosom , and receiving the tenants in a red and gold salon . 
In the rooms above was ultra-modern luxury , gilded and glacial , with white walls and glass doors with tiny panes which exasperated Desnoyers , who longed for the complicated carvings and rich furniture in vogue during his youth . 
He himself directed the arrangement and furnishings of the various rooms which always seemed empty . 
Chichi protested against her father 's avarice when she saw him buying slowly and with much calculation and hesitation . 
`` Avarice , no ! '' 
he retorted , `` it is because I know the worth of things . '' 
Nothing pleased him that he had not acquired at one-third of its value . 
Beating down those who overcharged but proved the superiority of the buyer . 
Paris offered him one delightful spot which he could not find anywhere else in the world -- the Hotel Drouot . 
He would go there every afternoon that he did not find other important auctions advertised in the papers . 
For many years , there was no famous failure in Parisian life , with its consequent liquidation , from which he did not carry something away . 
The use and need of these prizes were matters of secondary interest , the great thing was to get them for ridiculous prices . 
So the trophies from the auction-rooms now began to inundate the apartment which , at the beginning , he had been furnishing with such desperate slowness . 
His daughter now complained that the home was getting overcrowded . 
The furnishings and ornaments were handsome , but too many ... far too many ! 
The white walls seemed to scowl at the magnificent sets of chairs and the overflowing glass cabinets . 
Rich and velvety carpets over which had passed many generations , covered all the compartments . 
Showy curtains , not finding a vacant frame in the salons , adorned the doors leading into the kitchen . 
The wall mouldings gradually disappeared under an overlay of pictures , placed close together like the scales of a cuirass . 
Who now could accuse Desnoyers of avarice ? 
... He was investing far more than a fashionable contractor would have dreamed of spending . 
The underlying idea still was to acquire all this for a fourth of its price -- an exciting bait which lured the economical man into continuous dissipation . 
He could sleep well only when he had driven a good bargain during the day . 
He bought at auction thousands of bottles of wine consigned by bankrupt firms , and he who scarcely ever drank , packed his wine cellars to overflowing , advising his family to use the champagne as freely as ordinary wine . 
The failure of a furrier induced him to buy for fourteen thousand francs pelts worth ninety thousand . 
In consequence , the entire Desnoyers family seemed suddenly to be suffering as frightfully from cold as though a polar iceberg had invaded the avenida Victor Hugo . 
The father kept only one fur coat for himself but ordered three for his son . 
Chichi and Dona Luisa appeared arrayed in all kinds of silky and luxurious skins -- one day chinchilla , other days blue fox , marten or seal . 
The enraptured buyer would permit no one but himself to adorn the walls with his new acquisitions , using the hammer from the top of a step-ladder in order to save the expense of a professional picture hanger . 
He wished to set his children the example of economy . 
In his idle hours , he would change the position of the heaviest pieces of furniture , trying every kind of combination . 
This employment reminded him of those happy days when he handled great sacks of wheat and bundles of hides on the ranch . 
Whenever his son noticed that he was looking thoughtfully at a monumental sideboard or heavy piece , he prudently betook himself to other haunts . 
Desnoyers stood a little in awe of the two house-men , very solemn , correct creatures always in dress suit , who could not hide their astonishment at seeing a man with an income of more than a million francs engaged in such work . 
Finally it was the two coppery maids who aided their Patron , the three working contentedly together like companions in exile . 
Four automobiles completed the luxuriousness of the family . 
The children would have been more content with one -- small and dashing , in the very latest style . 
But Desnoyers was not the man to let a bargain slip past him , so one after the other , he had picked up the four , tempted by the price . 
They were as enormous and majestic as coaches of state . 
Their entrance into a street made the passers-by turn and stare . 
The chauffeur needed two assistants to help him keep this flock of mastodons in order , but the proud owner thought only of the skill with which he had gotten the best of the salesmen , anxious to get such monuments out of their sight . 
To his children he was always recommending simplicity and economy . 
`` We are not as rich as you suppose . 
We own a good deal of property , but it produces a scanty income . '' 
And then , after refusing a domestic expenditure of two hundred francs , he would put five thousand into an unnecessary purchase just because it would mean a great loss to the seller . 
Julio and his sister kept protesting to their mother , Dona Luisa -- Chichi even going so far as to announce that she would never marry a man like her father . 
`` Hush , hush ! '' 
exclaimed the scandalized Creole . 
`` He has his little peculiarities , but he is very good . 
Never has he given me any cause for complaint . 
I only hope that you may be lucky enough to find his equal . '' 
Her husband 's quarrelsomeness , his irritable character and his masterful will all sank into insignificance when she thought of his unvarying fidelity . 
In so many years of married life ... nothing ! 
His faithfulness had been unexceptional even in the country where many , surrounded by beasts , and intent on increasing their flocks , had seemed to become contaminated by the general animalism . 
She remembered her father only too well ! 
... Even her sister was obliged to live in apparent calmness with the vainglorious Karl , quite capable of disloyalty not because of any special lust , but just to imitate the doings of his superiors . 
Desnoyers and his wife were plodding through life in a routine affection , reminding Dona Luisa , in her limited imagination , of the yokes of oxen on the ranch who refused to budge whenever another animal was substituted for the regular companion . 
Her husband certainly was quick tempered , holding her responsible for all the whims with which he exasperated his children , yet he could never bear to have her out of his sight . 
The afternoons at the hotel Drouot would be most insipid for him unless she was at his side , the confidante of his plans and wrathful outbursts . 
`` To-day there is to be a sale of jewels ; shall we go ? '' 
He would make this proposition in such a gentle and coaxing voice -- the voice that Dona Luisa remembered in their first talks around the old home . 
And so they would go together , but by different routes ; -- she in one of the monumental vehicles because , accustomed to the leisurely carriage rides of the ranch , she no longer cared to walk ; and Desnoyers -- although owner of the four automobiles , heartily abominating them because he was conservative and uneasy with the complications of new machinery -- on foot under the pretext that , through lack of work , his body needed the exercise . 
When they met in the crowded salesrooms , they proceeded to examine the jewels together , fixing beforehand , the price they would offer . 
But he , quick to become exasperated by opposition , always went further , hurling numbers at his competitors as though they were blows . 
After such excursions , the senora would appear as majestic and dazzling as a basilica of Byzantium -- ears and neck decorated with great pearls , her bosom a constellation of brilliants , her hands radiating points of light of all colors of the rainbow . 
`` Too much , mama , '' Chichi would protest . 
`` They will take you for a pawnbroker 's lady ! '' 
But the Creole , satisfied with her splendor , the crowning glory of a humble life , attributed her daughter 's faultfinding to envy . 
Chichi was only a girl now , but later on she would thank her for having collected all these gems for her . 
Already the home was unable to accommodate so many purchases . 
In the cellars were piled up enough paintings , furniture , statues , and draperies to equip several other dwellings . 
Don Marcelo began to complain of the cramped space in an apartment costing twenty-eight thousand francs a year -- in reality large enough for a family four times the size of his . 
He was beginning to deplore being obliged to renounce some very tempting furniture bargains when a real estate agent smelled out the foreigner and relieved him of his embarrassment . 
Why not buy a castle ? 
... The entire family was delighted with the idea . 
An historic castle , the most historic that could be found , would supplement their luxurious establishment . 
Chichi paled with pride . 
Some of her friends had castles . 
Others , of old colonial family , who were accustomed to look down upon her for her country bringing up , would now cry with envy upon learning of this acquisition which was almost a patent of nobility . 
The mother smiled in the hope of months in the country which would recall the simple and happy life of her youth . 
Julio was less enthusiastic . 
The `` old man '' would expect him to spend much time away from Paris , but he consoled himself by reflecting that the suburban place would provide excuse for frequent automobile trips . 
Desnoyers thought of the relatives in Berlin . 
Why should he not have his castle like the others ? 
... The bargains were alluring . 
Historic mansions by the dozen were offered him . 
Their owners , exhausted by the expense of maintaining them , were more than anxious to sell . 
So he bought the castle of Villeblanche-sur-Marne , built in the time of the religious wars -- a mixture of palace and fortress with an Italian Renaissance facade , gloomy towers with pointed hoods , and moats in which swans were swimming . 
He could now live with some tracts of land over which to exercise his authority , struggling again with the resistance of men and things . 
Besides , the vast proportions of the rooms of the castle were very tempting and bare of furniture . 
This opportunity for placing the overflow from his cellars plunged him again into buying . 
With this atmosphere of lordly gloom , the antiques would harmonize beautifully , without that cry of protest which they always seemed to make when placed in contact with the glaring white walls of modern habitations . 
The historic residence required an endless outlay ; on that account it had changed owners so many times . 
But he and the land understood each other beautifully ... . 
So at the same time that he was filling the salons , he was going to begin farming and stock-raising in the extensive parks -- a reproduction in miniature of his enterprises in South America . 
