`` Do you really think it is nice ? '' 
said the mother , looking into her eyes . 
`` Yes , mama ; I think it is nice . '' 
But Doña Paula was always left in doubt as to whether the dress pleased her or not , or what she really thought . 
She seldom cried , and when she did , she took such pains to hide it that nobody knew of it . 
Whatever distress she felt was only betrayed by a slight line in her forehead , and great happiness with her was only evinced by a little more intensity in the gentle smile constantly upon her face . 
When Gonzalo wrote to her from abroad , she went to her mother and gave her the letter directly she read it . 
`` Do you like the lad ? '' 
asked Doña Paula , after reading the letter with more emotion than her daughter had shown in giving it to her . 
`` Do you like him ? '' 
returned the girl . 
`` I ? 
Yes . '' 
`` Then if you and papa like him , I like him too , '' said Cecilia . 
Who would have thought from those cold words that Cecilia had been in love with him for some time ? 
Nevertheless , as love is of all human sentiments the most difficult to conceal , and as there was no need to hide it when her parents ' consent had been given , she let it then be seen quite clearly . 
In temperaments like that of our heroine the slightest indication signifies a good deal . 
The happiness that filled her heart was soon seen in her face by all who knew her intimately . 
Few beings have known greater joy on earth than that which Cecilia experienced at that time . 
All the litter about the room , the paper patterns , the designs , the linen stretched in frames , the skeins of thread , all spoke a soft mysterious language to her ; the flashing of the scissors , the darting of the needles , prophesied future joys to her . 
Sometimes they said to her : `` You will be seen , Cecilia , going to mass on Sunday on the arm of your husband . 
He will carry your prayer-book , he will leave you to go to the altar of Our Lady and will stay behind among the men ; then he will wait for you at the door , will offer you the holy water , and then he will give you his arm again . '' 
At other times they seemed to say to her : `` In the morning you will rise very quietly to keep him from waking , you will brush his clothes , you will put the buttons on his shirt , and when the time comes you will give him his chocolate . '' 
Other voices seemed to say : `` And when you have a child ! '' 
But here the bride-elect felt her heart swell with delight , her hands trembled , and she cast a rapid glance at the needlewomen , fearing they had noticed her emotion . 
As the different articles of clothing were finished and ironed Cecilia put them away carefully in a press , and when that was full she took them to a room upstairs , where she artistically and carefully arranged the underclothing , petticoats , nightcaps , and dressing jackets upon long tables , set out for the purpose ; then she covered them delicately with a linen cloth and left the room , locking the door and putting the key in her pocket . 
After greeting the party Gonzalo took a seat near Pablito , and putting his hand familiarly on his shoulder he whispered in his ear : `` Which do you like best ? '' 
And as he bent toward his future brother-in-law he cast an earnest look at Ventura , who returned it with a peculiar glance . 
Then both turned their eyes to Cecilia , but she had not raised her head from her embroidery frame . 
`` Nieves , '' replied Pablo , without hesitation , in his falsetto voice . 
`` I knew it , and I applaud your taste , '' said Gonzalo , laughing . 
`` What a smooth skin -- what teeth ! '' 
`` And what a figure ! 
First rate , do n't you know ? '' 
Both looked at the embroideress , who raised her head , and seeing that the conversation was about her , she made a face . 
`` Come , do n't talk in a whisper , '' said Doña Paula with asperity peculiar to the women of the people . 
`` Let them be , señora , '' returned Nieves ; `` they are talking about me , and in that they show their good taste . '' 
`` Certainly . 
Pablo was calling my attention to the ruddiness of certain lips , the transparency of a certain skin , and the golden hue of certain hair . '' 
`` Then they were talking of you , Valentina , '' said Nieves , blushing and nudging her companion . 
`` What an idea ! 
Do n't worry about that , as if we do n't know who is the prettiest ! '' 
said the other , with evident pique . 
`` Gently , gently , señoras , '' exclaimed Gonzalo . 
`` It is true that Pablo began by talking of the perfections of Nieves , but it is certain that he had meant to go on to those of all the rest , if he had not been interrupted . 
Is it not so , Pablo ? '' 
`` Yes , I meant to go on to Valentina . '' 
Whereupon the girl referred to raised her head and looked at him with the half-frowning , half-roguish look that was peculiar to her . 
`` Take care , Nieves , that these young men do n't forget themselves . '' 
Pablo , without heeding the interruption , proceeded : `` And then from Teresa and Encarnacian , Elvira , and Generosa , I should have gone on to Venturita , for of course all men are at her feet ; to Cecilia , no , for she is engaged ; and then I should have said something about Señora Doña Paula , who , be it said without offense to anybody , is the most beautiful of all . '' 
`` What a humbug ! '' 
exclaimed the lady , pleased at her son 's flattery . 
Then Pablo rose from his armchair and embraced his mother affectionately . 
`` Get away , get away , flatterer ! '' 
she said , laughing . 
`` Come , open your purse , mama , '' said Venturita . 
`` I see ! 
A spiteful remark as usual , '' exclaimed the young man in a rage , as he turned his head to his sister ; but she only smiled to herself maliciously , without raising her head from her embroidery frame . 
`` You have done a great deal , '' said Gonzalo in a low voice , as he took a seat by the side of his fiancée . 
`` So , so , '' returned Cecilia , looking at him with her large , luminous eyes . 
`` But , indeed , it is a great deal . 
Yesterday you had not embroidered this clove . 
It looks to me like a clove . '' 
`` It is jasmine . '' 
`` Nor these two leaves , either . '' 
`` Bah ! 
That is nothing . '' 
`` And what are you embroidering now ? '' 
Cecilia went on plying her needle without answering . 
`` What are you embroidering now ? '' 
asked Gonzalo in a louder voice , thinking that she had not heard . 
`` A sheet -- hush ! '' 
returned the young girl , slightly raising her eyes in the direction of the embroideresses , and quickly dropping them again . 
At that moment Gonzalo 's and Venturita 's eyes met in a meaning glance over Cecilia 's head . 
`` Well , you see , every one to his taste , '' said Pablito , as he looked fixedly at Nieves , as much as to say : `` Do n't pay any attention . 
I only say that as a duty . '' 
`` What is there to suit everybody , Don Pablo ? '' 
asked Valentina in an ironical tone . 
`` Flowers , girl . '' 
`` Give them to the saints . '' 
`` And to pretty girls like you . '' 
`` If I am not pretty , I precede those that are , without any by your leave . '' 
`` The deuce she does ! 
Valentina puts her back up directly one goes near her , '' exclaimed the snubbed young man . 
The joke made the needlewomen laugh . 
`` Valentina does not like young men , '' said Encarnacian . 
`` She is quite right ; you get nothing from young men but promises , lost time , and often a lifetime of misery , '' said Doña Paula sententiously , unmindful of her own fortunate lot . 
`` As to that , Sarrio is quite demoralized ; there is hardly a girl who keeps company with one of her own class . 
The young man is at least expected to wear a cravat , to carry a cane and a cigarette-holder , although he may not have a plate to eat off . 
Young girls do not mind being seen at dusk nowadays with young gentlemen , nor do they object to returning from fairs on the arm of one of them , singing at the top of their voices . '' 
`` Poor young things ! 
I do n't know what you expect . 
Because the son of Don Rudesindo married Pepe la Esquilla , and the pilot of the ` Trinidad ' the Mechacan girl , you think all is gold that glitters . 
But seeing is believing . 
Look at Benita , the girl at Señor Matias 's , the sacristan . 
She does not look very pretty now , eh ? '' 
`` Benita has her marriage lines , '' said Encarnacian . 
`` Lines , eh ? 
She will see what her lines are worth . '' 
`` Señora , the lad can not desert her ; if he does , she will pursue him all her life . '' 
`` Silence , silence , chatterbox ; who put such ideas into your head ? '' 
`` It is a well-known fact that Benita has gone to law . '' 
`` Look here , señora , '' said the dark , sentimental girl , `` it is quite true that we run risks , but what are we to do ? 
The artisans of the town are just as bad ; they mostly spend Sunday and Monday and one day in the week at the tavern . 
How many are there who take their wages home to their wives regularly ? 
If the husband is a sailor , he sends it home one quarter , keeps it three quarters , and then keeps it altogether . 
The supplies ceasing , the unhappy woman is forced to work to get bread for her children . 
`` And then in other cases what thanks or reward does the wife get from her husband ? 
If he does go out with her on a Sunday afternoon , he stops at every public house on the road and leaves the poor creature at the door ; or if there is some friend with him , he shouts out some insulting remark at her that makes her blush like a peony . 
`` Yes , yes , señora , they are all such vagabonds . 
Goodness knows they are not worth the bread they eat . 
The other day I met Tomasina -- you know the girl at Uncle Rufio 's who married one of Prospero 's clerks less than a year ago -- well , she was at that moment going to get two reales from her father to buy some bread , for she had not had a mouthful all day . 
Her husband drinks nearly all his wages , so the poor thing has nothing to eat by the middle of the week . 
`` God help her ! 
And most nights the great pig comes home hopelessly drunk , and nearly beats her to death . 
Sometimes the poor thing goes to bed bruised and supperless . 
`` And then , seeing these things , people want a -- well , better hold one 's tongue ! 
But I do say , caramba , that if one has to go to the devil , it is better to go in a coach . '' 
`` Look here , '' intervened Valentina , raising her face with its habitual frown , albeit a trifle more pronounced , `` do n't go on like that ; you say you like young gentlemen . 
Well and good . 
I do n't care ; but do n't you throw all the dirty water on your own class . 
If they drink -- and there are those that do -- do n't I also see gentlemen coming home quite intoxicated ? 
And if they do beat their wives , half the time they would not do it if the women 's tongues were not so long , do n't you see ? 
And Don Ramon , the music-master , beat his wife when he came home one night . 
You must know that , as you live near . '' 
`` I do n't chatter about everything , girl , '' returned Teresa , somewhat dampened by the fear that her swarthy friend would make her reveal her nocturnal perambulations with Donato Rojo , the medical officer of health ; `` only I say there are many asses . '' 
`` Very well , leave them in peace , then , and do n't talk of them , and they wo n't talk of you . 
Every one for herself , and let sleeping dogs lie . '' 
`` Listen , Valentina , '' said Elvira , smiling maliciously . 
`` Do you think Cosme will beat you when you marry ? '' 
`` If I deserve it , he will . 
I would rather have a blow or two from my Cosme than the scorn of a fine gentleman -- so there ! '' 
`` That 's what I like to hear ; take a lesson , take a lesson , girls , '' said Pablito . 
Gonzalo , after talking for some time with his bride-elect , left his seat , took three or four turns up and down the room , and seated himself by the side of Venturita , with whom he was always on good terms , for they liked laughing and joking together after they had once become friendly . 
The girl was drawing some letters preparatory to embroidering them . 
`` Do n't come teasing here , Gonzalo ; you know how badly I draw , '' she said , while the look that she gave the youth was so flashing and provocative that it made him drop his eyes . 
`` I am not so sure of that . 
You do n't draw badly , '' he replied in a low voice that slightly trembled , as he bent his face down to the paper which Venturita had on her lap . 
`` Pure flattery . 
You will acknowledge that it might be better . '' 
`` Better -- better -- everything in the world might be better . 
This is good enough . '' 
`` You are getting quite a flatterer . 
I do n't want you to make fun of me , do you hear ? '' 
`` I do n't make fun of anybody , much less of you , '' he returned , without raising his eyes from the paper , and with his voice lower every minute , and evidently agitated . 
Venturita kept her eyes fixed upon him with a mocking expression , in which the triumph of satisfied pride was plainly visible . 
`` Come , then , you draw them , Mr. Clever , '' she said , as she passed him the pencil and paper with gracious condescension . 
The youth acceded to the suggestion , as he ventured to raise his eyes to the girl 's , but he quickly dropped them as if he feared their magnetism . 
He took the book from her lap on to his knee , put a piece of white paper on it , and proceeded to draw . 
But instead of the letters , he began to sketch , with some skill , the head of a woman ; first the hair parted in two braids , then the straight , pretty forehead , then a delicate nose , a pretty , short chin joined to the throat by a soft , graceful curve . 
It was wonderfully like Venturita . 
The girl , leaning on the shoulder of her future brother , followed the movements of the pencil , and a vain smile gradually overspread her face . 
After drawing the head Gonzalo proceeded to delineate the figure , and the peignoir , or dressing-gown , worn by the girl was soon reproduced ; but he took some time drawing minutely the silk bows with which it was fastened in front . 
When the picture was finished , Venturita asked him in a mischievous tone : `` Now put underneath who it is . '' 
The young man raised his head and their smiling eyes met . 
Then , quickly and decisively , he wrote under the drawing : `` The one I love best in all the world . '' 
Venturita took the paper in her hands and looked at it with delight for some moments ; then , with a pout of assumed disdain , she gave it back to him , saying : `` Take it , take it , you rude fellow . '' 
But before it reached Gonzalo 's hands Cecilia stretched out hers and snatched it from him laughingly , saying : `` What papers are these ? '' 
Then Venturita sprang from her seat , as if she had been stung , and caught hold of her sister 's hand . 
`` Give it up , give it up , Cecilia ! 
Let go ! '' 
she cried , with her face aflame and distorted with a forced smile . 
`` No , I want to see it . '' 
`` You shall see it afterward ; let go ! '' 
`` I want to see it now . '' 
`` Let be , child ; let her see it . 
What does it signify to you ? '' 
said Doña Paula . 
`` I do n't like anything being taken from me by force , '' Venturita cried , turning serious . 
Then realizing that she was losing ground , she resumed her smile , saying : `` Come , Cecilia , let go ; do n't be disagreeable . '' 
`` Do n't make such a fuss ! 
Let go yourself ; you are hurting me . '' 
`` Who are you to snatch the paper from my hand ? '' 
she returned , and really in a rage . 
`` Let go , let go , you ugly thing , you parrot nose , you fool ! 
Let go or I will scratch you , '' she added , with her eyes flashing and her face distorted with rage . 
Seeing her like this , the smile that had suffused Cecilia 's face suddenly left it , and opening her large eyes , full of surprise , she exclaimed : `` Goodness , you seem mad , child . 
Take it , take it ; I do n't want it . '' 
So she gave up the paper , which was crumpled in her hand , and Venturita , with her face still distorted with rage , tore it into a thousand pieces . 
`` In all the days of my life I never saw such a mad creature ! '' 
exclaimed Doña Paula in amazement . 
`` Ave Maria ! 
Ave Marie ! 
Wherever did you get such a bad temper from , child ? '' 
`` It would be from you , '' replied Venturita sulkily , without looking at anybody . 
`` You shameless girl ! 
If it were not for folk being here ! 
How dare you answer your mother like that ? 
Do n't you know the commandment of the law of God ? 
I will take you to-morrow to confess to Don Aquilino . '' 
`` Very well ; give my regards to Don Aquilino . '' 
`` Wait a bit , wait a bit , you bad girl ! '' 
cried the señora , making as though she would rise to chastise her daughter . 
But at that instant the figure of Don Rosendo , in his many colored dressing gown and silk tasseled velvet cap , appeared at the door . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
he asked with surprise at the sight of his wife 's excited state . 
Suffocated with sobs , Doña Paula then proceeded to give him an account of his daughter 's want of respect . 
Don Rosendo thought it behooved him to frown severely and say in a solemn tone : `` You have behaved badly , Ventura ; go and ask your mother 's pardon . '' 
We know that he was absent-minded , always absorbed in some idea , so this domestic episode only partially roused him from his preoccupation . 
Nevertheless , seeing his child obstinate , supercilious , and angry , he repeated his command with greater firmness . 
`` Come , daughter , go and ask your mother 's pardon , seeing that you have been rude to her . '' 
The girl made her usual scornful pout and murmured under her breath : `` As if I should think of doing such a thing ! '' 
`` Come , Venturita , what are you muttering there ? 
Come , before I get angry . '' 
`` Do , do , Venturita ; do n't behave like that , '' implored all the needlewomen in low tones . 
`` Do n't bother me . 
Will you leave me in peace ? '' 
she retorted , also in a low tone , albeit an angry one . 
`` Wo n't you do as I tell you ? '' 
now demanded Don Rosendo , with increased severity , `` wo n't you ? '' 
But the girl sat silent and motionless . 
`` Then leave the room at once ; get out of my sight ! '' 
stormed the father . 
Venturita rose from her seat and , stiff and sullen , she made her way through the party , and left the room , slamming the door heavily behind her . 
Don Rosendo , after standing a moment motionless with his eyes on the door by which his daughter had made her exit , turned round and said : `` I am sorry to have to be so severe with my children , but sometimes there is no help for it . '' 
The fierce expression soon faded from Belinchon 's fine face , and was superseded by his habitual look of thoughtful abstraction . 
`` Gonzalo , if it is not troubling you , I wish you would come with me into my study , '' he said , turning to his future son-in-law . 
The young man , who had several times started and turned pale during the last scene , was now filled with dismay , for he feared that the summons betokened nothing less than that Don Rosendo , having a suspicion of the inconstancy of his feelings , was now about to call him to account . 
So , with his head bent and very anxious , he followed Belinchon into the study , which was a spacious apartment , furnished with the luxury befitting a rich merchant -- a massive table and cabinets of mahogany , loaded with parcels of books and papers , a velvet carpet , sofas upholstered with brocade , and a colossal silver inkstand . 
A quarter of the room was filled with a heap of little packets , wrapped in paper of various colors , which would puzzle anybody who entered it for the first time . 
Not so Gonzalo , or any intimate friend of the house . 
Those packages were full of toothpicks ! 
`` How so ? '' 
the reader will ask . 
Don Rosendo Belinchon , a cod merchant of such renown , a dealer in toothpicks as well ? 
No , Don Rosendo did not deal in toothpicks ; he made them . 
And this not from any speculative motive , which would have been beneath him , but from a purely disinterested love of the thing . 
He had evinced the taste in early youth , but the assiduous occupations of his trade and the vicissitudes of his life had only hitherto permitted him to indulge his passion in a desultory way in leisure hours . 
But from the time he could leave his office to a few faithful underlings he gave himself up heart and soul to such a simple and useful amusement . 
In the morning at Graell 's shop , in the afternoon at the saloon , in the evening at home , or at Don Pedro Miranda 's , he was always working . 
His servant spent a great part of the day in preparing perfectly equal pieces of dry wood , from which his dexterous hand produced the queen of toothpicks . 
And as he never rested from his work , not even on holidays , the production was so excessive that there were not enough purchasers in town , and when the heap reached from the table to the ceiling he was obliged to despatch packets of them to his friends in the capital . 
Thanks to the noble efforts of this clever representative of his trade , we can say with pride that Sarrio attained the level of the great capitals in this interesting branch of civilization , and that no other Spanish or foreign town could compete with it , for the house of every rich man , as well as every poor one , boasted a well-cut toothpick , irrefutable testimony of the cultured refinement of its inhabitants . 
Don Rosendo signed to the young man to be seated on the sofa , which he did in visible agitation . 
Then the merchant proceeded to take a chair with an air of mystery , and placing himself opposite the youth , he gave him a dig in the ribs and jauntily said with a smile : `` Well , Gonzalito , and what do you think of this question of the slaughter-house ? '' 
`` The slaughter-house ? '' 
asked the young man , opening his eyes wide with surprise . 
`` Yes , the new slaughter-house ; do you think it ought to be put on the Escombrera , or on the Plaza de las Meanas , or at the back of Don Rudesindo 's houses ? '' 
Gonzalo seemed to see heaven open and , smiling with pleasure , he replied : `` I think it would be very well on the Plaza de las Meanas . 
It is very open -- very airy there . '' 
Then seeing that a frown gathered on his future father-in-law 's forehead , and that the smile suddenly left his face , he added stammeringly : `` I do n't think it would be bad at the Escombrera either . '' 
`` Much better , Gonzalo ; infinitely better . '' 
`` Maybe , maybe . '' 
`` But it must be , and I tell you plainly that to have it on the Plaza de las Meanas -LRB- this , mind you , quite between you and me -RRB- is an act of utter madness ; an act of ut-ter madness , '' he repeated , with additional stress on each syllable . 
`` And this opinion of mine , '' he added , `` is not , as you imagine , a thing of yesterday , or of to-day , but of all my life . 
From the time that I was capable of understanding anything I knew that the slaughter-house ought not to be where it is ; in a word , that it ought to be moved . 
Whither ? 
An internal voice always replied : ` To the Escombrera . ' 
Before I was able to give any scientific reason I was as convinced as I am now that it was there that it ought to be , and nowhere else . 
Now that the discussion of the problem is at hand , I feel obliged to support this opinion , to communicate my idea to the public , and to give it the result of my meditations . 
If you have nothing to do , I will now read you the letter that I am sending to the ` Progress of Lancia ' with this end in view . '' 
And in effect , without waiting for Gonzalo to reply , he turned to the table , took up some sheets of paper that were upon it , put on his spectacles , and , approaching the window , he commenced reading the letter in a voice which betrayed his emotion . 
The letter was written on business paper , large and ruled . 
All the letters that for years past he had sent to the `` Progress of Lancia '' and to other periodicals had been written on the same sort of paper , on both sides . 
He did not then know that the paper ought only to be written on one side for the press , but he soon acquired that valuable knowledge , as we shall see . 
Don Rosendo Belinchon evinced a taste for writing communications to the press almost simultaneously with that for toothpicks ; that is to say , it dated from his early years . 
A great advocate of human progress , of reform , of all kinds of discussion and instruction , it was natural that the press should inspire him with respect and enthusiasm . 
Newspapers had always been an indispensable element of his existence . 
He subscribed to many , both national and foreign , because , being educated for commerce , he was well versed in French and English , and he never missed devoting a couple of hours to reading the journals even on the busiest days . 
These hours had increased during later years , at the expense of the codfish business . 
The delight that our hero felt in the morning , after taking his chocolate , in perusing the leading articles of the `` Pabellon Nacional , '' the events of the `` Politica , '' and the light news of the `` Figaro , '' was so intense that the brightness of his face pervaded the atmosphere . 
Like all men of wide and lofty views , he was not exclusive in his press proclivities . 
He liked a paper as a paper , a pleasant medium of the progress of human reason , or , as he better expressed it , as a `` lofty manifestation of public opinion . '' 
The opinions that each supported were secondary matters . 
He subscribed to papers of every opinion , and enjoyed them all equally . 
If he had any particular predilection , it was for venomous articles and paragraphs , for their way of saying one thing and conveying another , of twisting phrases in such a manner that an apparently innocent clause was an envenomed shaft , filled Don Rosendo with such delight that he went nearly mad with joy . 
Sometimes on reading in `` La España '' a paragraph in this style : `` Yesterday the circular of the Señor President of the Supreme Court to his subordinates appeared at last . 
We congratulate General O'Donnell , the president of the Liberal party , and Señor Negrete and the Democratic Government party on the colossal work that they have consummated in a few moments of lucidity , '' he would exclaim , waving the paper in his hand : `` What spite , Caracoles ; what spite ! '' 
This liking , or , rather , passion for the press , was not fruitless , as we have said . 
Even in his youth he had sent two letters to a weekly paper published in Lancia , called `` Autumn , '' describing the annual festivities that took place in Sarrio in the month of September . 
These letters were read with profit and no little pleasure in the town , which encouraged him to write three more the following year , giving an account of the marvelous number of rockets that were sent off in Sarrio on the 13th , 14th , and 15th of the month , the beautiful illumination of the 16th , and the magnificent ball given at the Lyceum on the night of the 17th . 
After tasting the sweets of publicity , Don Rosendo could not do less than indulge in them from time to time . 
The least pretext sufficed for him to send a letter or a communication to the papers . 
Sometimes he signed them with his name , at other times with some pretty pseudonym or anagram . 
If the fisher-folk had a festival in honor of St. Telmo , Don Rosendo immediately wrote his letter to the `` Progress of Lancia '' or to the `` Bee , '' describing the decorations , the bonfires , the mass , the procession , etc. . 
If a banquet were given in the new school buildings on their inauguration , three or four days later the Lancian paper contained a letter publishing the speeches and improvised sonnets . 
If a bricklayer fell from a scaffolding , there was a communication from Don Rosendo asking for better protection for bricklayers who have to go on scaffoldings . 
If the son of Don Aquilino sang at a mass , there would be a letter from Don Rosendo describing the touching ceremony and praising the clear , musical voice and the serene appearance of the young priest . 
If the tides were high and strong and broke away some stones from the end of the pier , a letter ; if the boats from Bilbao declined to take on board the pilots of Sarrio , a communication ; if a harvest of maize were lost by the drought , a letter ; if the prevailing winds were from the northeast , a letter . 
In short , nothing happened on terra firma or in the atmosphere of the town worthy of mention without its being tackled by the clever , flowing pen of our merchant . 
How much work will the future historians of Sarrio be saved by this valuable material , accumulated by one of its most enlightened sons ! 
With advancing years Don Rosendo Belinchon 's letters assumed a character less romantic , we wo n't say frivolous -LRB- for it would not be either correct or respectful to apply such a term to that estimable gentleman -RRB- ; but it was noticeable that the subject-matter was not so much the junketings and recreations of the townsfolk , but something that would tend , directly or indirectly , to forward their moral and material interests . 
The trades , the schools , the salvage from shipwrecks , the building of a church or a prison , were the matters that he now most frequently treated to his own glory and to that of his birthplace . 
One of them , of vital interest for Sarrio , as he maintained , was the slaughter-house . 
He had not hitherto approached this question , because he knew that his opinion was at variance with that of a large number of his fellow-townsmen . 
But he considered `` that the time had now come to express it without any perambulation or circumlocution . '' 
The letter he now read , the first he had written on the subject , was addressed to the `` Progress of Lancia , '' and it ran thus : `` THE SENOR DIRECTOR OF THE ` PROGRESS OF LANCIA . ' '' 
Dear Sir -- The attention now accorded to natural physical science , and especially to the science of hygiene , as the health of places as well as people depends upon it , in view of its great practical utility , the timidity of those who , influenced by an education as erroneous as it was deficient , condemned the study of these great problems , being cumbered with antiquated , dull ideas , is now happily vanishing under the powerful movement of the nineteenth century , rightly called the century of enlightenment . '' 
* * * * * Don Rosendo 's style was always involved . 
He continued : * * * * * `` Now that civilization , released from the obstacles that crippled the conscience and the mind , opens a vast field to all , by means of the press , to express our independent ideas and give them forth to the world , trusting in the friendship that you have always accorded me , and in the kindness with which the public has hitherto received the humble efforts of the pen , '' etc. , etc. . 
* * * * * After three or four more paragraphs in this perambulatory style -LRB- which the editor of the `` Progress '' always had to curtail -RRB- Don Rosendo went into the question , putting forward the slaughter-house , or , as he termed it , `` the public massacre-hall , '' in all its bearings , so as to condemn its establishment on the Plaza de las Meanas in terms that left no room for doubt . 
The reasons given for the opposition were obvious . 
For one thing , the southeast winds , prevalent during the greater part of the year , would carry miasmic smells , etc. . 
For another thing , the difficulty of reaching solid ground for the cementing would cause an enormous expense , etc. . 
The necessity of passing through the town with the cattle , etc. . 
For another thing , the proximity of the houses , the bad effect on the mineral springs , etc. . 
In fact , Don Rosendo having given more than twenty reasons , in what he termed `` a clear , succinct style , '' he added that they would be given more fully in the forthcoming letters with which he purposed `` troubling the readers of the illustrious periodical . '' 
When the reading was over , Gonzalo pronounced the reasoning incontrovertible , and Don Rosendo -LRB- with his spectacles on his nose -RRB- declared that there was no gainsaying it . 
Having arrived at such a perfect understanding , they separated in a befittingly cheerful spirit . 
Don Rosendo remained in the library to copy his letter , and Gonzalo was about to return to the workroom ; but before he left the apartment his future father-in-law called him back to say : `` Mind , not a word to anybody of this . '' 
`` Don Rosendo , I swear ! '' 
returned the young man , raising his hand in sign of protest . 
The merchant , in an expansive frame of mind , continued : `` You will soon know something else which will be a pleasant surprise to you . 
It is an idea which came to me two months ago , and which I hope to carry out , God willing , very soon . 
Oh ! 
it is a brilliant idea ! 
It will make a radical change in Sarrio , you know ! '' 
The mysterious manner , the serious , agitated tone of his voice , the look of triumph which fulminated from his eyes as he spoke , surprised Gonzalo not a little . 
Nevertheless , he did not dare to ask for explanations , and his future father-in-law let him go with a vacant smile . 
The party in the workroom was meanwhile still being entertained by Pablito 's conversation , which was embellished by practical illustrations , in accordance with his versatile nature . 
Venturita had not yet returned , and Gonzalo reseated himself by the side of his betrothed and began talking to her with undisguised embarrassment and timidity , for , being unaccustomed to hide his feelings , his treachery weighed upon his soul . 
Sometimes Cecilia raised her head to reply , and her clear , serene , innocent glance made him blush . 
To overcome his confusion he thought he had better tell her his love and devotion in more ardent terms than hitherto . 
Like all irresolute natures , in a time of exigency he took the worst course to give himself a moment 's respite . 
Cecilia received the protestations in silence , without evincing the delight that women generally show on hearing expressions of affection from the one they love . 
`` You are very flattering to-day , Don Gonzalo . 
I do n't like being spoiled , '' she said at last with a smile . 
`` But it is a pleasure to tell you what I feel , '' he replied in a choked voice . 
`` Well , it is a pleasure I do not understand , '' she returned sweetly . 
`` The deeper my affection the less I like to speak of it . '' 
`` That is because you do not really love . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
she exclaimed , in such a genuine tone of reproach that our young man was taken aback . 
`` Yes , yes ; it is because you are naturally cold . 
The heat of feeling , like physical heat , can not remain long concealed ; there comes a time when it rises to the surface like the lava of volcanoes . 
And of all sentiments , love is the one that can best burst the strings of the tongue . 
It is only really felt when one can say in every tone and in every manner possible , ' I love you . ' 
What you said just now is absurd , for simultaneously with the birth of love in our hearts for anybody there comes the desire to express it ; and to satisfy this desire is the greatest of all delights . '' 
`` It may be , it may be , '' she remarked in a doubtful tone . 
`` Although I have not experienced it , I can well imagine it from what I suffer . 
But , Gonzalo , '' she added in a tremulous voice , `` for God 's sake do n't measure my affection by my words . 
I can not , I can never say what I feel . 
There seems to be a sort of lump in my throat , and nothing comes but foolish things , insignificant remarks , when I should like to utter words of affection ! 
Oh , it is a torture ! 
It is being like a dog without a tail . '' 
Gonzalo burst out laughing , and the girl , who had spoken more strongly than usual , turned red and bent her head . 
`` But nobody has cut out your tongue . '' 
`` In this matter you must consider that they have . '' 
`` Very well ; you must express yourself in writing , '' and at that moment he turned his head quickly toward the door , which had been swung open . 
It was Piscis . 
After muttering a `` Good-afternoon , '' he took his usual seat in the corner , followed by derisive glances of the needlewomen , toward whom , for this and other reasons , he vowed eternal hatred . 
After returning their mocking looks with one that was straight and fierce he remained silent for some minutes , but as his soul was burdened with solemn and profound secrets , and Pablito would not cease his attention to Nieves , he was boiling over with rage . 
After having whistled to attract his friend 's attention , he ventured to disburden his mind in public at the risk of his confidences not being understood and appreciated by the feminine element of the party . 
`` What is it , Piscis ? '' 
asked Pablito , hearing the whistle . 
`` Do you know why Romeo is neighing ? '' 
Then the needlewomen raised their heads in surprise , and Valentina , trying not to laugh , said to Teresa : `` Child , what is he saying ? '' 
`` Why does a horse neigh ? '' 
`` Because -- '' Although she spoke in a low tone Piscis heard her quite well , and turning from Pablo , who had taken the question quite seriously , and wished to hear about this peculiarity of Romeo 's , he said to Valentina in an angry tone : `` Will you be quiet , you chatterbox ? '' 
These emphatic words were received with an explosion of laughter by the workers . 
`` Do n't fuss yourself , Piscis ; let them be . 
Well , you took Romeo out ? 
I am glad of that . '' 
`` I harnessed him to the wagonette with Linda , '' returned the Centaur , with an angry look at the listening Valentina . 
`` If you could have seen -- shiver my shins ! 
-- how he behaved ! 
I with the whip , and he , thud , thud , against the dashboard . 
I returned to the stable and put on the kicking strap . 
Then I went out again . 
But what did the creature do this time ? 
He got between the wheel and the traces , and then he began neighing . 
Dash me ! 
I very nearly broke a lamp . '' 
`` I must get to the bottom of this , '' returned Pablito , profoundly interested , and leaving Nieves to go over to Piscis . 
`` I must think it over to-night , '' returned the Centaur , looking very grave , `` and we will see to-morrow what we can do . '' 
The two friends then lowered their voices and plunged into an animated private discussion . 
Gonzalo was disturbed . 
He kept casting glances at the door , hoping every minute to see Venturita return . 
Nevertheless , the time went on and the girl did not appear . 
His abstraction so notably increased that Cecilia had to ask him the same question three times . 
`` What is the matter ? 
Your thoughts seem to be wandering . '' 
`` It is so , '' he said , slightly coloring ; `` I recollect that I ought to write to London to-day on an important matter of business , and it is now about six o'clock . '' 
Whereupon he took leave of his betrothed , of Doña Paula , and the rest of the party , and left the house . 
Once in the passage he slackened his steps , and began looking round on all sides without seeing what he wished . 
Then , with bent head , he slowly and sadly descended the staircase and was about to raise the latch of the door when he thought the string by which it was pulled from upstairs shook . 
He stood a moment motionless . 
He again raised his hand to the latch , and again noticed the vibration of the cord . 
Then he turned back , looked up the staircase , and there above a pretty little face was smiling at him . 
`` Is it you ? '' 
he asked in a falsetto voice , his countenance suffused with joy . 
`` Yes , it is I , '' replied Venturita in the same tone . 
`` Do you want me to come up ? '' 
`` No , '' returned the girl , as much as to say , `` Why do you ask , sir ? '' 
Gonzalo mounted the staircase on the tips of his toes . 
`` We must not stay here ; we shall be seen , '' said Venturita , taking his hand and leading him along the passage to the dining-room . 
There Gonzalo took a seat without leaving hold of her hand . 
`` I thought I was not going to see you again to-day . 
What a temper you have , child ! '' 
he said , smiling . 
Venturita 's face clouded . 
`` If they did not irritate me every minute , I should not have one . '' 
`` But recollect , it was your mother who reprimanded you , '' he replied with a smile . 
`` What ? '' 
she exclaimed passionately . 
`` Why is my mother to annoy me every hour and every minute ? 
If she thinks I am going to stand it she is greatly mistaken . 
She does not mind what that boor does ; she will do anything for him . 
There is nothing but spoiling for him ! 
Look here , Gonzalo , if you want us to be friends , do n't interfere with me . '' 
