Good-by , '' said the Señor de las Cuevas sadly , and turning his steps shoreward , he was gradually lost in the gloom . 
Gonzalo remained where he was , with his eyes fixed on the wall of the mole , against which the sea was quietly washing . 
The waves after breaking against the stone wall with a soft , hollow murmur , receded with a sharp sound like that of curtain rings being drawn . 
The phosphoric brilliance of the foam proved the presence of the millions of beings existing as comfortably in the watery depths as we do on the dry land in spite of their wild career through space . 
The monster slept under the dark mantle of night quietly and peacefully , as a child undisturbed by bad dreams . 
The soft sough of its respiration was hardly audible in the hollows of the rocks . 
The black outline of Cape San Lorenzo stretched far out to sea on the west where the revolving white , green , and red lights of the lighthouse at the point were visible . 
The stars were shining in the firmament with wondrous power . 
Jupiter blazed in the heavens like the god of night piercing the darkness with its golden rays . 
Suddenly a change came over the scene . 
The pale crescent of the moon raised its horn in the east over the tranquil water , and irradiated it with a track of light . 
Lucifer paled before the serene splendor of the goddess , whose slow and majestic ascent eclipsed the brilliance of the starry orbs of every size about her . 
She rose in a radiant splendid atmosphere emitting , diffusing , and disseminating the ambient soft influence of her wondrous presence . 
And the ocean , ebbing and flowing since the beginning of the world under this same influence , now kindles like a flame of fire ; its vast shining bosom trembles , and it dashes its waters over the rocks of Santa Maria like enormous stratæ of mercury , which in their retreat mingle with the incoming waves . 
Sublime silence reigned , and a sense of ineffable peace pervaded the scene so old , and yet so new . 
Nature herself seemed to stop and listen to the eternal harmony of the heavens . 
The waves softly kissed each other without daring to interrupt the august serenity of the night with any louder sounds . 
In spite of the great uneasiness which the conversation with his uncle had caused him , Gonzalo felt the fascination of the sea , the sky , and the moon , and his uneasiness changed to sadness . 
The severe words of the old sailor had suddenly awakened his conscience , and the struggle between his good and bad angel recommenced . 
For one moment his good angel nearly conquered . 
The young man thought he would go to the Belinchons ' house , speak to Doña Paula and beg her to say nothing to Cecilia , but hurry on the marriage . 
However , at that moment Venturita 's image came before his mind , and he felt it would be impossible to live near her without suffering horribly . 
Then , as it nearly always happens in these struggles , there came a sense of the unendurable . 
`` The best thing to do , '' he said , `` will be to go at once . 
I will return to France or England , and not marry either . 
Then there will be no treachery . 
The injury I have done Cecilia will soon be forgotten . 
She will find a more worthy husband than I , and when I return at the expiration of a few years I shall probably find her happy , and surrounded with children . 
But -- but to leave Ventura ! 
to leave that being , radiant with happiness ! 
No more to hear that voice that fills my soul with delight ! 
nor to feel the sweet touch of her hand , fresh and soft as a rosebud ! 
To leave her shining eyes and magnetic smile ! 
-- oh , no ! '' 
Drops of perspiration stood upon his forehead . 
Mortal anguish filled him at the thought of separation , and to overcome the sense of it being definitely settled he said to himself : `` We 'll see , we 'll see . 
It would be very difficult to go back now -- almost impossible . 
The mother knows about it now . 
Don Rosendo too , and probably Cecilia also by this time . '' 
The good angel loosened his hold and let go his hands as , spent and defeated , he gave up the struggle . 
If not with the eyes of the body , Gonzalo could see with those of the spirit , the white form of the good angel passing through the serene atmosphere , and vanishing on the glistening waters . 
Then overwhelmed with a strange sadness , he wept . 
This kind of struggle can never take place in the human soul without upsetting it for some time . 
To win happiness he had to wound the heart of an innocent girl , break a promise , and be a traitor . 
The words of his uncle still echoed in his ears : `` God can not help the man who breaks his word . '' 
And , in fact , he felt himself unworthy of help . 
A cruel indefinite presentiment of misery , death , and sadness overwhelmed him ; and in one moment the awfulness of life without virtue or peace was revealed to him , as to the youth of the legend who embraced a beautiful young woman , and when the light oscillated with the wind , he saw that she was transformed into a hideous , hag-like , bony being . 
The waves softly washed the wall at his feet , and with his eyes fixed upon them he abstractedly followed their undulating motion . 
The seaweed growing in the depths moved with the motion of the water like the hair of a dead person . 
How quietly he could sleep down there ! 
What peace in those transparent depths ! 
What magic light below ! 
Gonzalo gave ear for the first time in his life to the eloquent voice of Nature inviting him to repose in her maternal bosom -- the siren voice sweet with irresistible charm , audible to unhappy creatures , even in their dreams , and so often leading them to place the cold muzzle of a pistol to their temples . 
It was for one minute , not more . 
His cheerful and sanguine temperament rebelled against this depression ; his vitality , exuberant in his healthy constitution , indignantly repudiated the passing thought of death . 
An insignificant incident , the appearance of a little green light in the distant horizon , sufficed to divert his attention from these gloomy ideas . 
`` A ship coming in , '' he said . 
`` What time is it ? '' 
-LRB- He drew out his watch . -RRB- 
`` Half past ten , already ! 
If it were a little earlier I would stop . 
I 'll go and see if there 's anybody at the café , for I should like a game of chapo . '' 
He then took out a fine Havana cigar from his case , and smoking it with gusto he repaired to the Café de la Marina . 
Almost at the same time a sad scene was being enacted in the Belinchon household . 
Doña Paula had remained all that day in bed , a prey to a dreadful pain in the left side , which caused her great difficulty in breathing . 
With the plebeian 's invincible antipathy , nay terror , of science , she did not like to have a doctor , but she prescribed for herself some of the numerous remedies recommended by the many medicine women who came daily to her house to extort money from her with their vile , exaggerated adulations . 
So there was no end of embrocations of meat fat , cups of herb concoctions , the inside of fowls , etc. , etc. . 
At last , by dint of these formidable therapeutics , the good lady improved in the evening enough to wish to get up ; but Cecilia and Pablito would not hear of it . 
Both of them had sat with her for some time at her bedside ; Cecilia especially had only left her long enough to make the embrocations and tisanes . 
Pablito made frequent excursions into the corridors , where , curiously enough , he nearly always met Nieves , from whom he extorted toll tax . 
Sometimes their suppressed laughter reached the room of the invalid , and she would smile kindly , and say to Cecilia : `` What silly creatures ! '' 
For it never occurred to her that her adored son could be up to anything but hide-and-seek . 
As the pain gradually left her , her mind was oppressed with the thought of telling her daughter the sad news which had made her so ill . 
She could only cast long and melancholy glances at the girl as she drew deep sighs of distress . 
She said several times : `` Cecilia , listen . '' 
And each time she stopped , and merely asked for some trifle . 
Night closed in . 
Venturita lighted the shaded lamp , and then withdrew . 
Pablo , finding his mother better , and seeing no further opportunity of exercising his seignioral rights in the passage , withdrew to the café . 
Mother and daughter remained in the bedroom , the former in bed and seemingly tranquil , the latter seated near her . 
After a long silence , during which the Señora de Belinchon turned over in her head a thousand ways of opening a conversation which might lead naturally to the confidence she was obliged to make , she said : `` Have the girls worked well to-day ? '' 
`` I do n't know , I have scarcely seen them , '' returned Cecilia . 
`` I think that if they go on at this rate they will finish too soon . '' 
`` Perhaps so . '' 
Doña Paula was at a loss to know how to proceed , and remained silent . 
At the end of some minutes she took up the thread afresh . 
`` The trousseau will be completely finished in this month of August , and I do not think you will be married for some months . '' 
`` Some months ? '' 
`` I think so . 
I believe Gonzalo does not wish the day to be so soon , '' said the señora with a trembling voice . 
`` Has he told you so ? '' 
`` Yes , he has told me so -- I mean -- no , he has not told me so -- but I have guessed it from certain things -- from some indirect remarks . '' 
Doña Paula was here overpowered with a feeling of suffocation . 
Fortunately Cecilia could not see the flaming color of her cheeks . 
`` I should like to know what those remarks were , '' returned the girl in a firm voice . 
`` Do n't ask me , child of my soul ! '' 
exclaimed the señora , bursting into tears . 
Cecilia turned deadly pale , and let her mother kiss the hand she held in hers , astonished at this emotion . 
`` What has happened , mama ? 
-- speak . '' 
`` A terrible thing -- my heart -- an infamous , infamous thing -- I would rather die this moment than see the ruin and the misery of one of my daughters . '' 
`` Calm yourself , mama ; you are ill , and you will do yourself great harm if you allow yourself to become so excited . '' 
`` What does it matter ! 
I tell you I would rather die -- I would give my life for you not to love Gonzalo -- You do love him , dear heart ? 
You love him deeply ? '' 
Cecilia did not reply . 
`` Tell me , for God 's sake , that you do not love him . '' 
Cecilia was still silent ; at the end of some minutes , trying in vain to give a firm tone to her voice , she said : `` Gonzalo declines to marry me , is that it ? '' 
Doña Paula was now silent in her turn , and hid her weeping face in her hands . 
Some minutes went by . 
`` Has he anything against me ? '' 
`` What could he have ? 
Who could have anything against you , my lamb ? '' 
`` Then , if I do not please him , or he does not love me , what is to be done ? 
It is better to be undeceived in time . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
cried Doña Paula , breaking into fresh sobs , for under the apparent resignation of her daughter she detected a profound grief which she strove in vain to hide . 
`` What is to be done , mama ? 
Is it not better for him to say so now than after we are married ? 
Do I not know what a wretched life he would lead united to a woman he did not love ? 
The pain that he causes me now , great as it is , is nothing to what I should feel if my husband did not love me . 
The pain would get worse and worse until I died , while now it may go , or at least be alleviated -- Perhaps when he has gone away and I have not seen him for some time I shall gradually forget him -- '' `` But he is not going , '' returned the señora in confusion . 
`` If he does not go , patience -- I will try not to go out , and I shall not see him . '' 
`` But , child of my soul , your misfortune is much greater ! 
Gonzalo is in love with your sister . '' 
Cecilia turned still paler , her face became livid , and she was silent . 
Her mother again kissed her hand with effusion , and then drew her to her , and covered her face with kisses . 
`` Forgive me for torturing you like this . 
Much as you suffer , I suffer more . 
Yesterday evening your sister came and told me . 
Imagine my distress and grief . 
My first impulse was to kill her , for I was sure that she was most to blame . 
She gave me proof that they have been carrying on for some time , and showed me letters which made Gonzalo 's faithlessness very clear to me . 
When I was convinced of his treachery I said that I would have nobody make a laughing-stock of my daughter , and Gonzalo should not set foot again in this house , that he was as bad as she ; in short , I said all that came into my head . 
But this morning , this morning -- I learned something still worse . 
I learned that your sister has gone farther than I can , or wish to , say . 
There is nothing for them but marriage , and that as soon as possible . 
Now you know why I have had this pain , which all but kills me , and would that it did so ! 
Your father and I are both trapped -- our hands are tied . 
If it were not so I would sooner be cut into little pieces than consent to this marriage . 
The infamous way this man has treated you will make me hate him all my life . 
Yes , all my life ! '' 
she added in an angry tone . 
Cecilia did not answer . 
She sat with her hands clasped in her lap , her head hanging on her bosom and her horror-struck eyes fixed on the ground . 
Neither the vehement broken utterances of her mother nor the sobs which succeeded them made her change her position . 
She remained thus for some time , motionless , and white as a statue . 
In those large , limpid eyes there at last trembled a tear ; it grew , it moved , then overflowing , it left a wet track upon her wan cheek , and fell like a drop of fire upon her hand , and there remained . 
A little later it evaporated . 
An angel had gathered it up and taken it to God in protest for her who had shed it . 
A new bright day dawned upon Sarrio after the recent heavy gloom . 
By the mercy and grace of God the beautiful town was now , when least expected , provided with a press organ , which was to be biweekly , or as the illustrious organizer expressed it , `` hepdomenal . '' 
Grave obstacles and perilous difficulties were at first opposed to the realization of the undertaking , but the genius of the wonderful man who undertook it overcame them all . 
The first difficulty was that of money . 
Fifty shares of a thousand ducats each were issued for the support of the periodical . 
The friends of Don Rosendo only took up nine . 
Don Rudesindo had five allotted to him , Don Feliciano two , and Don Pedro Miranda , in spite of his large income , only another two -- no more . 
Alvaro Peña , Don Rufo , Navarro , et al. , excused themselves for want of funds , and that with reason ; besides , they gave the business the benefit of their brains , which no doubt was a great thing . 
So Don Rosendo , with a generosity which greatly impressed the rest of the company , was the holder of the remaining forty-one shares . 
Messengers were despatched to Lancia in search of a printing press , but the negotiations proving fruitless , the press organizer went himself to the town . 
At the end of some days he was fortunate enough to find a printer who had been ruined for some years , and no purchaser had been forthcoming for his broken-down , rotting apparatus which lay covered with dust in a dark cellar . 
When Don Rosendo proceeded to examine it with its owner , he could not help feeling respectful emotion , and grave thoughts filled his mind as he contemplated it . 
`` Here , '' he said , `` is lying in idleness the most influential instrument of human progress , and this not from any fault of the owner , but through the desertion of mankind . 
How much information , how much spiritual food might it not have produced during these barren dumb years ! 
While barbarism and ignorance are rampant in the greater part of our country , that printing apparatus , the only agent of their dispersion , stands motionless for the want of a hand to work it and to bring forth from it the secrets of science and politics . '' 
He almost kissed and fondled the machine in his enthusiasm . 
The printer , seeing his visitor so well disposed in its favor , could not be outdone , and he declared himself so devotedly attached to the very skeleton of his machine that he would not part with it for any money , for it had always been the faithful companion by which he had earned his bread -LRB- and according to report , his wine too -RRB- . 
He descanted upon its perfections with as much enthusiasm as if he were its offspring and indebted to it for his life 's breath ; and he moreover made the solemn statement that it printed better and cleaner than all the printing presses of the day . 
Hearing these facts Don Rosendo fully concurred in the exordium on the machine , and tried to prove to him that he ought to part with it to prevent its wondrous qualities being lost to the world . 
But the more eloquent the merchant grew , the more tender and clinging became the printer . 
Finally , seeing there was no persuading the man to part with his treasure , and he had not the heart to enforce it , he arranged for him to go to Sarrio with it , and settle down there . 
He was to take a few compositors with him , who were to teach the trade to some of the lads in the town , and he was to be furnished with all necessary materials for the establishment of a printing office . 
Folgueras , the ruined printer , was thus to be the director and master of the concern , and his salary was to be drawn from the journal , and according to our calculations this proved to be twice as much as what is given in the best printing office in Madrid . 
However , it is not much if we consider the merit of the machine and the deep love professed for it by the owner . 
The title of the newspaper was one of the points in which the inventive , superior mind of Don Rosendo particularly distinguished itself . 
It was called `` The Light of Sarrio , '' a name extremely impressive and well-sounding , and moreover testifying to its mission , which its founder wished to be that of enlightening and dignifying the town of Sarrio . 
He secretly ordered from Madrid an engraving for the head of the paper , and on its arrival a few days later it caused rapturous delight among the shareholders and all those who had the good fortune to see it . 
It represented a seaport , like Sarrio , in the dark hours of the night -- to judge by the black hue of the sky and sea ; on the left towered the heights of an ideal mountain , upon which was seen a man , bearing a distant resemblance to Don Rosendo , turning the rays of an enormous lantern upon the town ; round about him were the heads of several people , and the shareholders believed in good faith that they represented themselves , and so they felt deeply indebted to the designer . 
The printing press was to be set up in a storehouse of Don Rudesindo 's , to whom , of course , a rent was to be paid ; and at the printing office there was to be another room , but these plans required some consideration before they could be carried out . 
The printing press was finally set up , but not without heavy , unexpected expenses , for Folgueras , who pretended he was furnished with all that was necessary , had nothing at all , and they had to send to Madrid for sets of type , have type galleys made , buy tables , etc. , etc. . 
At last everything was in order . 
Don Rosendo worked like a slave , and busied himself with the smallest details , and his talent as organizer was more shown than ever on this occasion . 
He made Sinforoso Suarez chief editor with a salary of twenty-five crowns a month , and he made Don Rufo 's eldest son manager . 
But the paper for printing had not come . 
They had telegraphed to Madrid for a supply and it had not arrived . 
The impatience of Belinchon knew no bounds . 
Telegrams went and came by the electric wires . 
They said it was detained at Lancia -- a telegram to Lancia asking for it . 
Then they heard it had not left Valladolid -- telegram to Valladolid . 
Then that it had not left Madrid -- telegram to Madrid . 
Don Rosendo swore he would have no more paper from Madrid , but that he would order it henceforth from Belgium . 
But disappointment changed into delight , as it often does , when the news came that several bales had arrived at Lancia , and were there awaiting a cart to take them to their destination . 
As the copy for the first number had been ready for some days , the printing was immediately proceeded with , and it had to be done on an extensive scale , for Don Rosendo intended to circulate it through the provinces , to send it all over Spain , and even to introduce it into foreign countries . 
Both he and his partners took a personal interest in seeing the printing press started , and they never wearied of admiring its complicated machinery , the wonderful precision of its movement , and the marvelous velocity with which it worked , for it cast off no fewer than two hundred copies in one hour . 
Its illustrious founder could not restrain the press ardor which consumed him ; he tore off his coat in the presence of everybody , and literally put his shoulder to the wheel until the sweat poured copiously from his manly brow . 
A striking instance of enthusiasm and love of civilization to which we like to draw the attention of the rising generation ! 
At last `` The Light of Sarrio '' appeared in great style , for its founder had seen that the paper was good , and it was fairly well printed . 
The only faulty feature was the engraving on the front page , for the majority of the people thought that the individual holding a lantern in his hand was a negro , instead of the respectable individual we have mentioned . 
It contained a leading article in large type called `` Our Objects . '' 
Although it was signed by the staff , it emanated entirely from the pen of Don Rosendo . 
The purport of the appearance of `` The Light '' in the press was chiefly to defend cap-a-pie the moral and material interests of Sarrio , to combat ignorance in all its forms , and in the fierce battles of the press to fight unweariedly for the triumph of the reforms that the progress of the times requires . 
`` The Light '' maintained that the hour had struck for breaking with the doctrines of the past . 
Sarrio earnestly desired to emancipate itself from the thraldom of pettiness and conventionality ; it wished to break the bonds which had hitherto restrained it , and enter into full possession of its own conscience and rights . 
`` We trust , '' said the writer , `` that a period of moral and material activity will date from the appearance of our publication , and that we shall assist at one of those social reformations which mark an epoch in the annals of the town . 
If our voice is successful in awakening the town of Sarrio from its long sleep and apathy and we soon see the dawn of an era of labor and study befitting the reform movement that we hope to inaugurate , we shall feel amply repaid for our efforts and sacrifices . '' 
The language could not have been more noble and patriotic , and modesty , as usual , tempered the tone of the authoritative eloquence . 
`` We do not aspire , '' he said , `` to being the vanguard in this great battle of thought about to take place in the town of Sarrio , but we do aspire to fighting like common soldiers , for we do expect a place in the rear-guard . 
There we shall fight like good men , and if we finally fall vanquished , we will envelop ourselves in the sacred banner of progress . '' 
The military allegorical style was very effective in the town , and it contributed not a little to the enthusiastic reception accorded to the paper . 
In short , the article was so rich in expression , so replete with deep remarks , and the style was so concise , that the public was at a loss to attribute it to any one but the illustrious director -- and in this it was right . 
Then the periodical contained a long article by Sinforoso on `` Woman . '' 
It consisted of two close columns of poetic prose , embroidered with all the flowers of rhetoric , describing the sweet influence of this half of the human race . 
He maintained , in fervent language , that civilization can not exist apart from matrimony ; conjugal love is its only basis . 
Everything is holy , everything is beautiful , everything is happy in the intimate union of a young married couple . 
The man , rendered happy by his companion , feels his faculties increase , and is capable of carrying out enterprises otherwise impossible to him . 
The influence of the woman presses him onward to virtue and glory ; it is the sweetest and at the same time the most powerful of social forces . 
Sinforoso queried with surprise , `` How could some beings consider woman inferior to man ? 
She with her beauty , delicacy , grace , sweetness , perspicacity , and patience is the highest work of creation . 
But the mission of woman is to be a wife and mother . 
Without being these she is not fully evolved , she fades like a flower without perfume . '' 
The writer concluded by advising woman to bear this in mind , and for no earthly consideration to consent to be voluntarily deprived of the two conditions of her honor and glory . 
This exordium on matrimony , although addressed to the fair sex in general , was written for the special edification of a certain pretty cigarette-maker of the Calle de Caborana , whom Sinforoso had courted in vain for some years . 
The public thought that the girl would end by accepting him , partly by reason of the poetic terms in which he made his case clear , and partly because of the fifty reales a month which the suitor now received for his work on the staff . 
Then followed a contribution from the professor , Don Jeronimo de la Fuente ; it was a serious , violent attack on Kepler 's three great laws of the motions of the planetary bodies , or rather on two of them , for he preserved silence on the first , which treats of the elliptical orbit of the planets . 
He fiercely opposed the second , maintaining and demonstrating by means of a most brilliant calculation that the areas described by the radius vector are not in any degree equal to the time employed in making them , but they concord with the attractive or repulsive force of the celestial bodies . 
But the chief object of his attack was the third law , for Don Jeronimo rejected as antiquated and absurd the idea that the time taken for the revolutions of planets was proportionate to the cubic feet of their distances from each other ; for he showed not merely by empty words , but by figures , that there was no ground for such a calculation . 
He announced another article for the next number , which was to establish a new basis for the celestial mechanism which would quite smash up the old one . 
In it he maintained that the stars were attracted by one pole and repelled by another like electric bodies , and upon this great principle he satisfactorily explained the movements of the celestial bodies , their disturbances , and many problems which had hitherto been deemed insoluble . 
Thanks to the telescope in the window of his house , Don Jeronimo had made a series of prodigious discoveries which set at naught all the existing knowledge of astronomy . 
It was not astonishing that the learned professor , filled with legitimate pride , exclaimed at the end of his article : `` Down with Kepler , Newton , Laplace , and Galileo from the pedestal upon which man 's ignorance has placed them and all colossal standard-bearers of false science ! 
All their calculations have vanished like smoke , and their magnificent systems are like dry leaves , fallen from the tree of science to rot and decay . '' 
Some verses by Periquito , the son of Don Pedro Miranda , were also inserted that confided to a certain mysterious `` G '' that he was a worm , and she a star ; he a branch , and she a tree ; she a rose , and he a caterpillar ; she a light , and he the shadow ; she the snow , and he the mud , etc. . 
There were reasons for suspecting that this `` G '' was a certain Gumersinda , the wife of a corn merchant , a woman remarkable for her stout figure , which caused her some difficulty in walking . 
Periquito had a particular fancy for ladies who were plump and married . 
When both these qualities were combined in one being his passion knew no bounds . 
And such was the present case . 
One must not think by this that the young man was a vicious creature . 
The husbands of Sarrio were not disturbed about him . 
Periquito was always in love , sometimes with one , sometimes with another lady , but he never dared to address them or send a love letter . 
Such courses were not in his line , which consisted chiefly in fascinating them by his gaze . 
Therefore , whenever he came across one of these fair creatures at church , or in the theatre , he first managed to take a seat at a convenient distance , and once he had taken up his position , he directed the magnetic power of his eyes straight at the passive object of his experiment until she occasionally glanced at him with an expression of surprise . 
The respectable matron , often not considering herself worthy of such particular attention , would look round and ask those with her if she had a spot on her face , or if her hair were out of order . 
Periquito was indefatigable , and went through all these performances with the gravity they deserved . 
Sometimes he spent an hour or more with his eyes fixed on one person , and often when the hour had elapsed , and the enamored youth thought his soul must have filtered through the pores of the obese lady to the affection of all her faculties and feelings , this same lady would say in an undertone to her companions : `` Goodness , how that fellow Don Pedro does stare ! '' 
How far the poet was from supposing that the star of his dreams held him in such small account ! 
Sometimes , but very seldom , Periquito got a little farther . 
When he was quite sure that the husband was not at home , nor even about the town , he sent the mysterious lady a bunch of flowers which was really a passionate eloquent letter , if the lady had only been as well versed as he was in the language of flowers . 
Unfortunately , the supine ignorance of the fair sex in Sarrio made these ingenious modes of communication null and void . 
The same can be said of certain other delicate attentions to which Periquito resorted to show his devotion . 
If he saw the lady wear a blue dress , he donned a cravat of the same color , a blue striped shirt and a blue flower in his buttonhole ; and if the lady continued wearing the same dress , he went as far as to adopt blue trousers ; and if the color were green , brown , or gray , he also followed suit . 
If the unhappy lady were of a religious turn of mind , Periquito voluntarily imposed on himself the terrible ordeal of rising early , and attending the mass to which she went ; and if on Saturday , Monday , or Thursday she approached the sacred table to communicate , he also received the spiritual food from the priest on the same days . 
If the lady had plants in her window , Periquito promptly ascertained her hour of watering them , and took care to pass by at that time , when he was in the seventh heaven if perchance a few drops fell from the watering-pot on his hat . 
In the small hours of the night he wandered about the house , making invocations to the moon , and praying it might watch over the dreams of his love . 
On one occasion , when he was in love with the wife of a lieutenant of the carbineers who was ordered to Burgos , he nearly died of grief . 
His mad passion inspired him with the idea of going off to get a glimpse of her , so after writing a letter of farewell to his father and taking twenty dollars of his savings he started for the City of the Cid ; but in Venta de Bañas he unfortunately came across a married lady of the Civil Guard who attracted him to Palencia ; there he saw another lady who took him farther , and so on , until he came back to Sarrio . 
This was not his only escapade . 
On another occasion he went fifteen miles on foot merely to cast an amatory glance at a certain lady as she sat at the window , and this lady was married to a second husband . 
As the final touch to this description we must add that Periquito , to use his father 's expression , ate like Heliogabulus , and yet he never grew fat . 
`` The Light of Sarrio '' was for our impressionable young man an admirable means of airing the vague fancies , anxieties , joys , and distresses which consumed his soul , and declaring himself in mysterious acrostics to all the matrons , more or less stout , who paraded their plump forms in the streets of the flourishing town . 
Finally came the columns of `` Intelligence '' under different headings . 
The genius of Sinforoso and the rest of the staff of `` The Light '' shone in this portion of the paper . 
The paragraph called `` Going and Coming '' referred to the visitors who had come to Sarrio in view of the approaching festivities . 
Another , headed `` Sarriensians out Walking , '' maintained in a graceful , sparkling style that the weather was delicious , and that the people of Sarrio could not do better in the evening than take a turn in the pretty , leafy environs of the town . 
Another , `` The Mayor to the Fore , '' was an appeal to Don Roque to have gutters put to several houses . 
Later on this section dropped the title of `` Intelligence '' for that of `` News to Hand , '' which Don Rosendo put in in imitation of '' Nouvelle à la Main '' of the `` Figaro . '' 
The journal ended with a charade in verse . 
The fiction was Don Rufo 's department , and as he had been studying French on the Ollendorf system for a year and a half , he decided to translate for the paper the six volumes of the `` Mysteries of Paris . '' 
It is unnecessary to say that although `` The Light of Sarrio '' lived for some years , it never got as far as the third volume . 
Don Rufo was a wonderful translator . 
If he had a defect it was that of translating too literally . 
Once he wrote : `` The carriage went off at a quick trot , inside a lady fair and frail . '' 
In another passage , he said that Monsieur Rudolph passed his youth in the perusal of the chief works of antiquity . 
Finally , he represented the Countess as taking hold of the button -LRB- instead of buttonholing -RRB- of the secretary , and this provoked so much derision from ignorant folk that Don Rufo lost his temper and resigned the work , which then was undertaken by a pilot who for several years had made the run to Bayonne . 
The success of the first number , as was expected , was prodigious : the article by Sinforoso , the learned dissertation by La Fuente , the `` Intelligence , '' and even Periquito 's verses , were all read with due appreciation by the public . 
But Don Rosendo 's article headed `` Our Objects '' made the profoundest impression on people of a serious turn of mind . 
The well-turned phrases , so full of spirit and fire , the noble thoughts , the enthusiasm for the interests of Sarrio , the frankness and modesty that characterized it , filled their hearts with joy , and made them feel as if an era of prosperity and well-being had dawned . 
That night the band , conducted by Señor Anselmo , with his great shining key , serenaded the staff . 
The front of the publishing office was illuminated with Venetian lamps , and , as usual , the pretty light-hearted artisans of Sarrio took the opportunity of dancing country dances and mazurkas on the hard stones of the street . 
The worthy individuals who gave voice to their admiration and enthusiasm for the staff of `` The Light '' in the language of music were inspired thereto by De Rueda 's wine and cigars . 
Joy reigned in every heart , and overflowed in embraces as hearty as they were spontaneous . 
Don Rosendo embraced Navarro , Alvaro Peña , Don Rudesindo , Don Rufo , Sinforoso , and Don Pedro Miranda , the printer Folgueras . 
The musicians embraced each other , and they all embraced their conductor , Señor Anselmo . 
Outside the printing office , Pablito , also in commemoration of the auspicious day , embraced the fair Nieves under the shadow of a doorway , and several other lads , following his example , openly distributed their commemorative kisses among the happy girls . 
The only thing that disturbed the general happiness was the peculiar sadness that came over Folgueras after he had imbibed several litres of wine . 
The recollection of Lancia , his natal town , suddenly occurred to him and threw him into a state of depression difficult to describe . 
Just when cheerfulness and gaiety had reached their height he called Don Rosendo aside , and with tears assured him that life away from his adored town was an unsupportable burden to him ; better to die than lose sight of the humble dwelling which saw his birth and the streets trodden by his baby feet . 
The same week , please God , he hoped to leave Sarrio and return to Lancia with his belongings . 
On hearing this sudden news Don Rosendo turned pale . 
`` But , man , the next number of ` The Light . ' '' 
`` Don Rosendo , you will have to excuse me . 
You are a gentleman -- a gentleman knows how to appreciate the feelings of another gentleman . 
One 's country before everything . 
Guzman the Good flung his poniard to the enemy to kill his own son . 
You know that well enough , eh ? 
What do you think of that ? 
Riego died on a scaffold . 
Well ! 
What do you think of that ? 
If I were in the workhouse , with not a shirt to stand up in , there would be no need for any one to tell me anything . 
Do you think you will keep me all tied like a dog to the wheel ? 
But all sentiment dies out in a man -- the man lives , the man works , the man occasionally shows his true self -- and because he drinks a quartern , or two , or three , is he to forget his country ? 
Eh ? 
What do you think of that ? '' 
Don Rosendo called Don Rudesindo to his assistance , and they succeeded in dissuading the printer from his course by the force of their strong reasons , the most potent of these being a fresh bottle of Rueda wine . 
After this was imbibed , the patriotic feelings of Folgueras calmed down . 
Then he took another bottle , drank it , was ill , and slept . 
Thoughts of glory , vague desires for undying fame , filled the mind of the illustrious founder of `` The Light of Sarrio '' by the time he retired to rest . 
After extinguishing the light , they recurred over and over again until they took some definite form . 
Don Rosendo was moved at the thought of the possibility of his memory being perpetuated by a tablet put up in the Consistorial buildings . 
This ambitious thought made him tremble with joy and delight between the sheets . 
Being a modest , sensible , magnanimous man , he tried to expel the idea , but it returned to his mind with additional clearness . 
He saw the white marble , he saw the gold letters , he clearly deciphered the graven lines : `` Tribute of gratitude from the town of Sarrio to her enlightened son , Don Rosendo Belinchon , indefatigable champion of her moral and material progress . '' 
His mind , filled with these brilliant forecasts , could not easily succumb to Morpheus ; nevertheless , he finally slept with a smile on his lips . 
A progressive angel , ready for these emergencies , beat his wings over his brow through the night watches and gave him pleasant dreams . 
The next morning found him in the cheerful frame of mind befitting a man who has seen his efforts crowned with enviable success . 
He performed his toilet to the humming of scraps of song , he took chocolate with his family , gave a glance at the national and foreign newspapers , and without cutting his usual bundle of toothpicks , he went out to ascertain what effect the first number of `` The Light '' had produced upon the town . 
He was received at Graell 's shop with effusion , he was congratulated on his article , which he modestly tried to disclaim , and the talk about the paper was long and eager . 
What most excited the enthusiasm of the frequenters of the café was to think that Nieva had not yet arrived , nor would it arrive for some time , at a similar state of advancement . 
And Don Rosendo , not a little elated with these eulogies , promised to take active measures in favor of all that was asked of him . 
One requested that the deep ruts of the Calle de Atras should be mentioned ; another that a lamp should be put outside his house ; another that some pills should be recommended ; another , that serenades should not disturb the hours of sleep , etc. , etc. . 
Don Rosendo assented to all , knitted his brows and extended his open hand in a valedictory fashion . 
The journal would settle it all . 
Woe to him who ran counter to the reforms of the press ! 
He had often held forth on toothpicks to the assembly of respected matrons of the town generally gathered in Doña Raffaelo 's shop , but `` The Light '' was the subject of his discourse to-day . 
The fiction portion seemed to have met with the most favor from the fair sex ; Don Rosendo told them the next number would be much more interesting , and then he withdrew . 
A party of sailors by the port were loud in their congratulations , and they hinted that the harbor was very dirty and required dragging . 
`` It shall be done -- it shall be done , '' said Don Rosendo , and he went off full of a solemn sense of his omnipotence , and , seeing the large curling waves in the distance , he even asked himself if it would not be a good thing to ask them , by means of the press , to moderate their uncalled-for excitement . 
At the approach of the dinner hour he directed his steps homeward , meditating on the grave responsibility he would incur before God and man if he did not use his great power for the prosperity and improvement of his native town . 
On arriving at the Rua Nueva , he met Gabino Maza . 
The choleric ex-officer greeted him very politely , asked after his family , and made the kindest inquiries after the health of each member ; then he talked for some time on the possibility of the cold northeast wind soon changing into a warm , southwesterly one , asked when the next ships would start for America ; he then complained of the dust on the roads , which made walking unpleasant , spoke of the price of codfish , and the news of the Newfoundland cod fisheries , but Rosendo naturally expected him to mention the paper . 
Nothing of the sort . 
Maza did not make the slightest allusion to it . 
This began to upset our friend and made his position painful . 
The conversation passed from one subject to another without bearing at all upon the press . 
At last Don Rosendo , showing his gleaming teeth , said somewhat abruptly : `` Have you not received ` The Light ? ' 
One of the first copies was sent to you . '' 
`` Dear me ! 
I think it did come to the house yesterday , but I have not opened it yet , '' returned Maza with affected indifference . 
`` Don Rosendo , will you come and dine with me ? 
Good-by , till then . '' 
Don Rosendo stood for an instant rooted to the ground , feeling as if a bucket of cold water had been thrown over him . 
The blood rushed violently to his face , and he almost staggered home . 
The unexpectedness of the blow made him feel it much more keenly . 
When the shock had passed off , he fell into a violent passion against that -- he could not resist calling him anything less than a malicious and despicable creature . 
He arrived home in a deplorable state of agitation , and although he took his seat at the table and made violent efforts to calm himself , his digestion was so thoroughly upset that he recoiled from all food . 
He was gloomy and silent during the meal ; a sarcastic smile occasionally wreathed his lips , and he murmured : `` The villain ! '' 
Finally his wife , who was upset on her own account , ventured to say : `` What is the matter , Rosendo ? '' 
`` Nothing , Paulina ; but envy causes a lot of wickedness in the world , '' was the short , bitter reply . 
Having given utterance to this profound remark , he remained in a state of comparative repose , leaning back in an armchair to collect his thoughts ; and after the expiration of half an hour he once more sallied forth in the direction of the Club . 
On entering the café Gabino 's voice fell upon his ears , shouting as usual upstairs . 
From the staircase he thought he heard him talking of the periodical and calling it `` a solemn farce . '' 
His heart jumped , and he entered the room agitated and upset . 
At the sight of him Maza , who was gesticulating in the centre of a group of men , put on his hat with a sudden gesture , and took a seat upon the sofa . 
Don Lorenzo and Don Feliciano Gomez greeted the newcomer with a certain embarrassment , and with some shamefacedness , all of which confirmed Don Rosendo in his suspicion . 
He hid his feelings as much as possible , and striving to assume a cheerful demeanor he began talking of the current news . 
Conversation then took its natural course , and confidence was restored . 
But the engineer Delaunay , as artful as he was malignant , turned the conversation upon the newspaper , and in the lisping tone that he affected , said , with an ironical smile , to the founder : `` What little contributions are you preparing for the next number , Don Rosendo ? '' 
`` You will see when it comes out , '' returned the chief editor , who knew there was a joke underlying the question . 
`` Here , in Don Feliciano , '' continued the engineer with the same smile , `` you have a stanch defender . '' 
`` If he defends me it is because somebody has attacked me , '' returned Rosendo with increased asperity . 
Nobody said a word . 
Silence reigned for some time , until it was broken by Belinchon making a casual remark to Don Jaime , and the conversation was resumed . 
But the blow had only been momentarily averted ; thunder was in the air and soon became audible . 
Maza was consumed with the desire to tell Don Rosendo that the paper was a humbug , and the latter was not less anxious to tell Maza that he was a malignant fellow . 
Thus both took advantage of the first opportunity of communicating these polite remarks . 
The dispute lasted more than two hours . 
Maza tried to restrain himself because of Don Rosendo 's superior position , and besides , he owed him fifteen thousand reales . 
The founder of `` The Light '' also considered it prudent not to give full expression to his thoughts . 
Nevertheless , for better or for worse , all came out for the edification of the notabilities who ranged themselves on one side or the other of the contending parties . 
It must be confessed that the minority was on Maza 's side . 
The West Indians , neutral , as usual in these disputes , occasionally appeared , cue in hand , at the door of the billiard-room to listen to the arguments of the disputants and gain some light on the subject . 
For those discussions were very improving , as they taught them many terms and phrases unknown to them ; and thus they were less shut out from even a superficial interest in the many problems of life . 
It was unfortunate that their devotion to billiards prevented their always listening . 
The state of agitation and anger in which Don Rosendo left the Club can not be exaggerated . 
His noble , magnanimous soul was wounded to the quick by the ingratitude and baseness of his false friends . 
It must be horrible to live and die in obscurity and to have Heaven-born gifts wasted in boredom and inaction when one is meant to shine in the higher spheres of human society . 
But it is still more painful to see the deprecation of one 's noble mental efforts and magnanimous endeavors for the triumph of goodness and truth . 
Such was the case with Socrates , Solon , Giordano Bruno , and also with our hero . 
The first sting of malignity caused him the acute pain which great benefactors of the human race can not but feel , and his spirit failed him . 
It was only for a minute , however , a mere passing weakness which bore witness to his sensitive disposition . 
Nevertheless , that night he could eat no supper , and it was a long time before he could manage to sleep . 
To how many depressing thoughts had this incident given rise . 
While the common herd of the townsfolk of Sarrio , destitute of genius , perspicacity , and intellect , slept soundly , the philanthropic man lay tossing on his couch as if it were a bed of thorns , robbed of the enjoyment of refreshing sleep . 
He rose the next morning somewhat pale and hollow-eyed , but firm in his determination to continue his work of regeneration . 
The sleepless night , instead of weakening his intention and making him relax in his efforts , had only strengthened him in his course , and roused him to fresh efforts . 
Fire consumes and turns straw to ashes , but it purifies gold . 
Therefore he proceeded enthusiastically in the organization of his plan for the second number , which was to appear the following Thursday , and as usual success brought many offers of assistance . 
Many were the contributions sent for the second number , but the majority was below the mark , and want of space obliged him to reject several that were good . 
This gave rise to a great deal of grumbling and bad feeling -- second difficulty in the course of his patriotic enterprise . 
But on the publication of the fifth number there was a much more serious trouble , which caused a great sensation in the town and gave rise to a perfect storm . 
It happened that Alvaro Peña , being quite convinced , as we know , that all the miseries and drawbacks suffered by the human race are exclusively due to the clerical influence , thought he would use the press as a field of an active campaign against it . 
This he opened by sending as skirmishers several paragraphs , asking about the funds of a certain sisterhood of the Rosary which were not forthcoming , speaking in disrespectful terms of the Daughters of Mary , and making irreverent remarks on the special prayers and confessions , and also ridiculing the scapularies worn by the young religious sisters in the town . 
But the shots were particularly aimed at Don Benigno the curate , the director of the female consciences of Sarrio and the instigator of all those revolts against sin . 
The rector was an old apathetic man who passed his life in a little house near the town , and willingly left to his curate the care of the souls of his flock . 
And Don Benigno fulfilled his duty as an active , vigilant , and most zealous pastor , keeping watch over the flock by day and night , so that no wolf should take off any sheep , and giving most careful personal attention to those he purposed offering to the Heavenly Bridegroom . 
Nothing could exceed the ardor with which he procured brides for the Most High . 
As soon as a young girl knelt at his feet for confession he thought that he was in a position to insinuate that the world was corrupt , its pleasures were transitory and often damnatory , earthly love was corrupt , affection as a daughter and sister was despicable , the time of working out salvation was very short , therefore the best thing to be done was to leave this earthly world -LRB- Don Benigno was very fond of this adjective -RRB- , surrender all to Christ , and repair to that delightful retreat spoken of by San Juan de la Cruz , and there remain oblivious of all cares . 
He knew just such a happy retreat , a real little piece of Heaven , where one could enjoy in anticipation the delights reserved by God for his faithful servants . 
This retreat was a Carmelite convent , just founded in the outskirts of the town , and the curate was its great patron and supporter . 
Certainly this had caused a slight coolness between him and Don Segis , the chaplain of the Augustinians , but the latter did not dare to show his resentment because it would not have served his purpose to quarrel with his coadjutor . 
