He was very thoughtful . 
A man of his stamp , an enemy of existing conditions , who had no property to defend , was going to war -- to death , perhaps -- because of a generous and distant ideal , in order that future generations might never know the actual horrors of war ! 
To do this , he was not hesitating at the sacrifice of his former cherished beliefs , all that he had held sacred till now ... . 
And he who belonged to the privileged class , who possessed so many tempting things , requiring defense , had given himself up to doubt and criticism ! 
... Hours after , he again saw the carpenter , near the Arc de Triomphe . 
He was one of a group of workmen looking much as he did , and this group was joining others and still others that represented every social class -- well-dressed citizens , stylish and anaemic young men , graduate students with worn jackets , pale faces and thick glasses , and youthful priests who were smiling rather shamefacedly as though they had been caught at some ridiculous escapade . 
At the head of this human herd was a sergeant , and as a rear guard , various soldiers with guns on their shoulders . 
Forward march , Reservists ! 
... And a musical cry , a solemn harmony like a Greek chant , menacing and monotonous , surged up from this mass with open mouths , swinging arms , and legs that were opening and shutting like compasses . 
Robert was singing the martial chorus with such great energy that his eyes and Gallic moustachios were fairly trembling . 
In spite of his corduroy suit and his bulging linen hand bag , he had the same grand and heroic aspect as the figures by Rude in the Arc de Triomphe . 
The `` affinity '' and the boy were trudging along the sidewalk so as to accompany him to the station . 
For a moment he took his eyes from them to speak with a companion in the line , shaven and serious-looking , undoubtedly the priest whom he had met the day before . 
Now they were talking confidentially , intimately , with that brotherliness which contact with death inspires in mankind . 
The millionaire followed the carpenter with a look of respect , immeasurably increased since he had taken his part in this human avalanche . 
And this respect had in it something of envy , the envy that springs from an uneasy conscience . 
Whenever Don Marcelo passed a bad night , suffering from nightmare , a certain terrible thing -- always the same -- would torment his imagination . 
Rarely did he dream of mortal peril to his family or self . 
The frightful vision was always that certain notes bearing his signature were presented for collection which he , Marcelo Desnoyers , the man always faithful to his bond , with a past of immaculate probity , was not able to pay . 
Such a possibility made him tremble , and long after waking his heart would be oppressed with terror . 
To his imagination this was the greatest disgrace that a man could suffer . 
Now that war was overturning his existence with its agitations , the same agonies were reappearing . 
Completely awake , with full powers of reasoning , he was suffering exactly the same distress as when in his horrible dreams he saw his dishonored signature on a protested document . 
All his past was looming up before his eyes with such extraordinary clearness that it seemed as though until then his mind must have been in hopeless confusion . 
The threatened land of France was his native country . 
Fifteen centuries of history had been working for him , in order that his opening eyes might survey progress and comforts that his ancestors did not even know . 
Many generations of Desnoyers had prepared for his advent into life by struggling with the land and defending it that he might be born into a free family and fireside ... . 
And when his turn had come for continuing this effort , when his time had arrived in the rosary of generations -- he had fled like a debtor evading payment ! 
... On coming into his fatherland he had contracted obligations with the human group to whom he owed his existence . 
This obligation should be paid with his arms , with any sacrifice that would repel danger ... and he had eluded the acknowledgment of his signature , fleeing his country and betraying his trust to his forefathers ! 
Ah , miserable coward ! 
The material success of his life , the riches acquired in a remote country , were comparatively of no importance . 
There are failures that millions can not blot out . 
The uneasiness of his conscience was proving it now . 
Proof , too , was in the envy and respect inspired by this poor mechanic marching to meet his death with others equally humble , all kindled with the satisfaction of duty fulfilled , of sacrifice accepted . 
The memory of Madariaga came to his memory . 
`` Where we make our riches , and found a family -- there is our country . '' 
No , the statement of the centaur was not correct . 
In normal times , perhaps . 
Far from one 's native land when it is not exposed to danger , one may forget it for a few years . 
But he was living now in France , and France was being obliged to defend herself against enemies wishing to overpower her . 
The sight of all her people rising en masse was becoming an increasingly shameful torture for Desnoyers , making him think all the time of what he should have done in his youth , of what he had dodged . 
The veterans of '70 were passing through the streets , with the green and black ribbon in their lapel , souvenirs of the privations of the Siege of Paris , and of heroic and disastrous campaigns . 
The sight of these men , satisfied with their past , made him turn pale . 
Nobody was recalling his , but he knew it , and that was enough . 
In vain his reason would try to lull this interior tempest ... . 
Those times were different ; then there was none of the present unanimity ; the Empire was unpopular ... everything was lost ... . 
But the recollection of a celebrated sentence was fixing itself in his mind as an obsession -- `` France still remained ! '' 
Many had thought as he did in his youth , but they had not , therefore , evaded military service . 
They had stood by their country in a last and desperate resistance . 
Useless was his excuse-making reasoning . 
Nobler thoughts showed him the fallacy of this beating around the bush . 
Explanations and demonstrations are unnecessary to the understanding of patriotic and religious ideals ; true patriotism does not need them . 
One 's country ... is one 's country . 
And the laboring man , skeptical and jesting , the self-centred farmer , the solitary pastor , all had sprung to action at the sound of this conjuring word , comprehending it instantly , without previous instruction . 
`` It is necessary to pay , '' Don Marcelo kept repeating mentally . 
`` I ought to pay my debt . '' 
As in his dreams , he was constantly feeling the anguish of an upright and desperate man who wishes to meet his obligations . 
Pay ! 
... and how ? 
It was now very late . 
For a moment the heroic resolution came into his head of offering himself as a volunteer , of marching with his bag at his side in some one of the groups of future combatants , the same as the carpenter . 
But the uselessness of the sacrifice came immediately into his mind . 
Of what use would it be ? 
... He looked robust and was well-preserved for his age , but he was over seventy , and only the young make good soldiers . 
Combat is but one incident in the struggle . 
Equally necessary are the hardship and self-denial in the form of interminable marches , extremes of temperature , nights in the open air , shoveling earth , digging trenches , loading carts , suffering hunger ... . 
No ; it was too late . 
He could not even leave an illustrious name that might serve as an example . 
Instinctively he glanced behind . 
He was not alone in the world ; he had a son who could assume his father 's debt ... but that hope only lasted a minute . 
His son was not French ; he belonged to another people ; half of his blood was from another source . 
Besides , how could the boy be expected to feel as he did ? 
Would he even understand if his father should explain it to him ? 
... It was useless to expect anything from this lady-killing , dancing clown , from this fellow of senseless bravado , who was constantly exposing his life in duels in order to satisfy a silly sense of honor . 
Oh , the meekness of the bluff Senor Desnoyers after these reflections ! 
... His family felt alarmed at seeing the humility and gentleness with which he moved around the house . 
The two men-servants had gone to join their regiments , and to them the most surprising result of the declaration of war was the sudden kindness of their master , the lavishness of his farewell gifts , the paternal care with which he supervised their preparations for departure . 
The terrible Don Marcelo embraced them with moist eyes , and the two had to exert themselves to prevent his accompanying them to the station . 
Outside of his home he was slipping about humbly as though mutely asking pardon of the many people around him . 
To him they all appeared his superiors . 
It was a period of economic crisis ; for the time being , the rich also were experiencing what it was to be poor and worried ; the banks had suspended operations and were paying only a small part of their deposits . 
For some weeks the millionaire was deprived of his wealth , and felt restless before the uncertain future . 
How long would it be before they could send him money from South America ? 
Was war going to take away fortunes as well as lives ? 
... And yet Desnoyers had never appreciated money less , nor disposed of it with greater generosity . 
Numberless mobilized men of the lower classes who were going alone toward the station met a gentleman who would timidly stop them , put his hand in his pocket and leave in their right hand a bill of twenty francs , fleeing immediately before their astonished eyes . 
The working-women who were returning weeping from saying good-bye to their husbands saw this same gentleman smiling at the children who were with them , patting their cheeks and hastening away , leaving a five-franc piece in their hands . 
Don Marcelo , who had never smoked , was now frequenting the tobacco shops , coming out with hands and pockets filled in order that he might , with lavish generosity , press the packages upon the first soldier he met . 
At times the recipient , smiling courteously , would thank him with a few words , revealing his superior breeding -- afterwards passing the gift on to others clad in cloaks as coarse and badly cut as his own . 
The mobilization , universally obligatory , often caused him to make these mistakes . 
The rough hands pressing his with a grateful clasp , left him satisfied for a few moments . 
Ah , if he could only do more ! 
... The Government in mobilizing its vehicles had appropriated three of his monumental automobiles , and Desnoyers felt very sorry that they were not also taking the fourth mastodon . 
Of what use were they to him ? 
The shepherds of this monstrous herd , the chauffeur and his assistants , were now in the army . 
Everybody was marching away . 
Finally he and his son would be the only ones left -- two useless creatures . 
He roared with wrath on learning of the enemy 's entrance into Belgium , considering this the most unheard-of treason in history . 
He suffered agonies of shame at remembering that at first he had held the exalted patriots of his country responsible for the war ... . 
What perfidy , methodically carried out after long years of preparation ! 
The accounts of the sackings , fires and butcheries made him turn pale and gnash his teeth . 
To him , to Marcelo Desnoyers , might happen the very same thing that Belgium was enduring , if the barbarians should invade France . 
He had a home in the city , a castle in the country , and a family . 
Through association of ideas , the women assaulted by the soldiery , made him think of Chichi and the dear Dona Luisa . 
The mansions in flames called to his mind the rare and costly furnishings accumulated in his expensive dwellings -- the armorial bearings of his social elevation . 
The old folk that were shot , the women foully mutilated , the children with their hands cut off , all the horrors of a war of terror , aroused the violence of his character . 
And such things could happen with impunity in this day and generation ! 
... In order to convince himself that punishment was near , that vengeance was overtaking the guilty ones , he felt the necessity of mingling daily with the people crowding around the Gare de l'Est . 
Although the greater part of the troops were operating on the frontiers , that was not diminishing the activity in Paris . 
Entire battalions were no longer going off , but day and night soldiers were coming to the station singly or in groups . 
These were Reserves without uniform on their way to enroll themselves with their companies , officials who until then had been busy with the work of the mobilization , platoons in arms destined to fill the great gaps opened by death . 
The multitude , pressed against the railing , was greeting those who were going off , following them with their eyes while they were crossing the large square . 
The latest editions of the daily papers were announced with hoarse yells , and instantly the dark throng would be spotted with white , all reading with avidity the printed sheets . 
Good news : `` Vive la France ! '' 
A doubtful despatch , foreshadowing calamity : `` No matter ! 
We must press on at all costs ! 
The Russians will close in behind them ! '' 
And while these dialogues , inspired by the latest news were taking place , many young girls were going among the groups offering little flags and tricolored cockades -- and passing through the patio , men and still more men were disappearing behind the glass doors , on their way to the war . 
A sub-lieutenant of the Reserves , with his bag on his shoulder , was accompanied by his father toward the file of policemen keeping the crowds back . 
Desnoyers saw in the young officer a certain resemblance to his son . 
The father was wearing in his lapel the black and green ribbon of 1870 -- a decoration which always filled Desnoyers with remorse . 
He was tall and gaunt , but was still trying to hold himself erect , with a heavy frown . 
He wanted to show himself fierce , inhuman , in order to hide his emotion . 
`` Good-bye , my boy ! 
Do your best . '' 
`` Good-bye , father . '' 
They did not clasp hands , and each was avoiding looking at the other . 
The official was smiling like an automaton . 
The father turned his back brusquely , and threading his way through the throng , entered a cafe , where for some time he needed the most retired seat in the darkest earner to hide his emotion . 
AND DON MARCELO ENVIED HIS GRIEF . 
Some of the Reservists came along singing , preceded by a flag . 
They were joking and jostling each other , betraying in excited actions , long halts at all the taverns along the way . 
One of them , without interrupting his song , was pressing the hand of an old woman marching beside him , cheerful and dry-eyed . 
The mother was concentrating all her strength in order , with feigned happiness , to accompany this strapping lad to the last minute . 
Others were coming along singly , separated from their companies , but not on that account alone . 
The gun was hanging from the shoulder , the back overlaid by the hump of the knapsack , the red legs shooting in and out of the turned-back folds of the blue cloak , and the smoke of a pipe under the visor of the kepis . 
In front of one of these men , four children were walking along , lined up according to size . 
They kept turning their heads to admire their father , suddenly glorified by his military trappings . 
At his side was marching his wife , affable and resigned , feeling in her simple soul a revival of love , an ephemeral Spring , born of the contact with danger . 
The man , a laborer of Paris , who a few months before was singing La Internacional , demanding the abolishment of armies and the brotherhood of all mankind , was now going in quest of death . 
His wife , choking back her sobs , was admiring him greatly . 
Affection and commiseration made her insist upon giving him a few last counsels . 
In his knapsack she had put his best handkerchiefs , the few provisions in the house and all the money . 
Her man was not to be uneasy about her and the children ; they would get along all right . 
The government and kind neighbors would look after them . 
The soldier in reply was jesting over the somewhat misshapen figure of his wife , saluting the coming citizen , and prophesying that he would be born in a time of great victory . 
A kiss to the wife , an affectionate hair-pull for his offspring , and then he had joined his comrades ... . 
No tears . 
Courage ! 
... Vive la France ! 
The final injunctions of the departing were now heard . 
Nobody was crying . 
But as the last red pantaloons disappeared , many hands grasped the iron railing convulsively , many handkerchiefs were bitten with gnashing teeth , many faces were hidden in the arms with sobs of anguish . 
AND DON MARCELO ENVIED THESE TEARS . 
The old woman , on losing the warm contact of her son 's hand from her withered one , turned in the direction which she believed to be that of the hostile country , waving her arms with threatening fury . 
`` Ah , the assassin ! 
... the bandit ! '' 
In her wrathful imagination she was again seeing the countenance so often displayed in the illustrated pages of the periodicals -- moustaches insolently aggressive , a mouth with the jaw and teeth of a wolf , that laughed ... and laughed as men must have laughed in the time of the cave-men . 
AND DON MARCELO ENVIED THIS WRATH ! 
When Marguerite was able to return to the studio in the rue de la Pompe , Julio , who had been living in a perpetual bad humor , seeing everything in the blackest colors , suddenly felt a return of his old optimism . 
The war was not going to be so cruel as they all had at first imagined . 
The days had passed by , and the movements of the troops were beginning to be less noticeable . 
As the number of men diminished in the streets , the feminine population seemed to have increased . 
Although there was great scarcity of money , the banks still remaining closed , the necessity for it was increasingly great , in order to secure provisions . 
Memories of the famine of the siege of '70 tormented the imagination . 
Since war had broken out with the same enemy , it seemed but logical to everybody to expect a repetition of the same happenings . 
The storehouses were besieged by women who were securing stale food at exorbitant prices in order to store it in their homes . 
Future hunger was producing more terror than immediate dangers . 
For young Desnoyers these were about all the transformations that war was creating around him . 
People would finally become accustomed to the new existence . 
Humanity has a certain reserve force of adaptation which enables it to mould itself to circumstances and continue existing . 
He was hoping to continue his life as though nothing had happened . 
It was enough for him that Marguerite should continue faithful to their past . 
Together they would see events slipping by them with the cruel luxuriousness of those who , from an inaccessible height , contemplate a flood without the slightest risk to themselves . 
This selfish attitude had also become habitual to Argensola . 
`` Let us be neutral , '' the Bohemian would say . 
`` Neutrality does not necessarily mean indifference . 
Let us enjoy the great spectacle , since nothing like it will ever happen again in our lifetime . '' 
It was unfortunate that war should happen to come when they had so little money . 
Argensola was hating the banks even more than the Central Powers , distinguishing with special antipathy the trust company which was delaying payment of Julio 's check . 
How lovely it would have been with this sum available , to have forestalled events by laying in every class of commodity ! 
In order to supplement the domestic scrimping , he again had to solicit the aid of Dona Luisa . 
War had lessened Don Marcelo 's precautions , and the family was now living in generous unconcern . 
The mother , like other house mistresses , had stored up provisions for months and months to come , buying whatever eatables she was able to lay hands on . 
Argensola took advantage of this abundance , repeating his visits to the home in the avenue Victor Hugo , descending its service stairway with great packages which were swelling the supplies in the studio . 
He felt all the joys of a good housekeeper in surveying the treasures piled up in the kitchen -- great tins of canned meat , pyramids of butter crocks , and bags of dried vegetables . 
He had accumulated enough there to maintain a large family . 
The war had now offered a new pretext for him to visit Don Marcelo 's wine-vaults . 
`` Let them come ! '' 
he would say with a heroic gesture as he took stock of his treasure trove . 
`` Let them come when they will ! 
We are ready for them ! '' 
The care and increase of his provisions , and the investigation of news were the two functions of his existence . 
It seemed necessary to procure ten , twelve , fifteen papers a day ; some because they were reactionary , and the novelty of seeing all the French united filled him with enthusiasm ; others because they were radical and must be better informed of the news received from the government . 
They generally appeared at midday , at three , at four and at five in the afternoon . 
An half hour 's delay in the publication of the sheet raised great hopes in the public , on the qui vive for stupendous news . 
All the last supplements were snatched up ; everybody had his pockets stuffed with papers , waiting anxiously the issue of extras in order to buy them , too . 
Yet all the sheets were saying approximately the same thing . 
Argensola was developing a credulous , enthusiastic soul , capable of admitting many improbable things . 
He presumed that this same spirit was probably animating everybody around him . 
At times , his old critical attitude would threaten to rebel , but doubt was repulsed as something dishonorable . 
He was living in a new world , and it was but natural that extraordinary things should occur that could be neither measured nor explained by the old processes of reasoning . 
So he commented with infantile joy on the marvellous accounts in the daily papers -- of combats between a single Belgian platoon and entire regiments of enemies , putting them to disorderly flight ; of the German fear of the bayonet that made them run like hares the instant that the charge sounded ; of the inefficiency of the German artillery whose projectiles always missed fire . 
It was logical and natural that little Belgium should conquer gigantic Germany -- a repetition of David and Goliath -- with all the metaphors and images that this unequal contest had inspired across so many centuries . 
Like the greater part of the nation , he had the mentality of a reader of tales of chivalry who feels himself defrauded if the hero , single-handed , fails to cleave a thousand enemies with one fell stroke . 
He purposely chose the most sensational papers , those which published many stories of single encounters , of individual deeds about which nobody could know with any degree of certainty . 
The intervention of England on the seas made him imagine a frightful famine , coming providentially like a thunder-clap to torture the enemy . 
He honestly believed that ten days of this maritime blockade would convert Germany into a group of shipwrecked sailors floating on a raft . 
This vision made him repeat his visits to the kitchen to gloat over his packages of provisions . 
`` Ah , what they would give in Berlin for my treasures ! '' 
... Never had Argensola eaten with greater avidity . 
Consideration of the great privations suffered by the adversary was sharpening his appetite to a monstrous capacity . 
White bread , golden brown and crusty , was stimulating him to an almost religious ecstasy . 
`` If friend William could only get his claws on this ! '' 
he would chuckle to his companion . 
So he chewed and swallowed with increasing relish ; solids and liquids on passing through his mouth seemed to be acquiring a new flavor , rare and divine . 
Distant hunger for him was a stimulant , a sauce of endless delight . 
While France was inspiring his enthusiasm , he was conceding greater credit to Russia . 
`` Ah , those Cossacks ! '' 
... He was accustomed to speak of them as intimate friends . 
He loved to describe the unbridled gallop of the wild horsemen , impalpable as phantoms , and so terrible in their wrath that the enemy could not look them in the face . 
The concierge and the stay-at-homes used to listen to him with all the respect due to a foreign gentleman , knowing much of the great outside world with which they were not familiar . 
`` The Cossacks will adjust the accounts of these bandits ! '' 
he would conclude with absolute assurance . 
`` Within a month they will have entered Berlin . '' 
And his public composed of women -- wives and mothers of those who had gone to war -- would modestly agree with him , with that irresistible desire which we all feel of placing our hopes on something distant and mysterious . 
The French would defend the country , reconquering , besides the lost territories , but the Cossacks -- of whom so many were speaking but so few had seen -- were going to give the death blow . 
The only person who knew them at first hand was Tchernoff , and to Argensola 's astonishment , he listened to his words without showing any enthusiasm . 
The Cossacks were for him simply one body of the Russian army -- good enough soldiers , but incapable of working the miracles that everybody was expecting from them . 
`` That Tchernoff ! '' 
exclaimed Argensola . 
`` Since he hates the Czar , he thinks the entire country mad . 
He is a revolutionary fanatic ... . 
And I am opposed to all fanaticisms . '' 
Julio was listening absent-mindedly to the news brought by his companion , the vibrating statements recited in declamatory tones , the plans of the campaign traced out on an enormous map fastened to the wall of the studio and bristling with tiny flags that marked the camps of the belligerent armies . 
Every issue of the papers obliged the Spaniard to arrange a new dance of the pins on the map , followed by his comments of bomb-proof optimism . 
`` We have entered into Alsace ; very good ! 
... It appears now that we abandon Alsace . 
Splendid ! 
I suspect the cause . 
It is in order to enter again in a better place , getting at the enemy from behind ... . 
They say that Liege has fallen . 
What a lie ! 
... And if it does fall , it does n't matter . 
Just an incident , nothing more ! 
The others remain ... the others ! 
... that are advancing on the Eastern side , and are going to enter Berlin . '' 
The news from the Russian front was his favorite , but obliged him to remain in suspense every time that he tried to find on the map the obscure names of the places where the admired Cossacks were exhibiting their wonderful exploits . 
Meanwhile Julio was continuing the course of his own reflections . 
Marguerite ! 
... She had come back at last , and yet each time seemed to be drifting further away from him ... . 
In the first days of the mobilization , he had haunted her neighborhood , trying to appease his longing by this illusory proximity . 
Marguerite had written to him , urging patience . 
How fortunate it was that he was a foreigner and would not have to endure the hardship of war ! 
Her brother , an officer in the artillery Reserves , was going at almost any minute . 
Her mother , who made her home with this bachelor son , had kept an astonishing serenity up to the last minute , although she had wept much while the war was still but a possibility . 
She herself had prepared the soldier 's outfit so that the small valise might contain all that was indispensable for campaign life . 
But Marguerite had divined her poor mother 's secret struggles not to reveal her despair , in moist eyes and trembling hands . 
It was impossible to leave her alone at such a time . 
... Then had come the farewell . 
`` God be with you , my son ! 
Do your duty , but be prudent . '' 
Not a tear nor a sign of weakness . 
All her family had advised her not to accompany her son to the railway station , so his sister had gone with him . 
And upon returning home , Marguerite had found her mother rigid in her arm chair , with a set face , avoiding all mention of her son , speaking of the friends who also had sent their boys to the war , as if they only could comprehend her torture . 
`` Poor Mama ! 
I ought to be with her now more than ever ... . 
To-morrow , if I can , I shall come to see you . '' 
When at last she returned to the rue de la Pompe , her first care was to explain to Julio the conservatism of her tailored suit , the absence of jewels in the adornment of her person . 
`` The war , my dear ! 
Now it is the chic thing to adapt oneself to the depressing conditions , to be frugal and inconspicuous like soldiers . 
Who knows what we may expect ! '' 
Her infatuation with dress still accompanied her in every moment of her life . 
Julio noticed a persistent absent-mindedness about her . 
It seemed as though her spirit , abandoning her body , was wandering to far-away places . 
Her eyes were looking at him , but she seldom saw him . 
She would speak very slowly , as though wishing to weigh every word , fearful of betraying some secret . 
This spiritual alienation did not , however , prevent her slipping bodily along the smooth path of custom , although afterwards she would seem to feel a vague remorse . 
`` I wonder if it is right to do this ! 
... Is it not wrong to live like this when so many sorrows are falling on the world ? '' 
Julio hushed her scruples with : `` But if we are going to marry as soon as possible ! 
... If we are already the same as husband and wife ! '' 
She replied with a gesture of strangeness and dismay . 
To marry ! 
... Ten days ago she had had no other wish . 
Now the possibility of marriage was recurring less and less in her thoughts . 
Why think about such remote and uncertain events ? 
More immediate things were occupying her mind . 
The farewell to her brother in the station was a scene which had fixed itself ineradicably in her memory . 
Upon going to the studio she had planned not to speak about it , foreseeing that she might annoy her lover with this account ; but alas , she had only to vow not to mention a thing , to feel an irresistible impulse to talk about it . 
She had never suspected that she could love her brother so dearly . 
Her former affection for him had been mingled with a silent sentiment of jealousy because her mother had preferred the older child . 
Besides , he was the one who had introduced Laurier to his home ; the two held diplomas as industrial engineers and had been close friends from their school days ... . 
But upon seeing the boy ready to depart , Marguerite suddenly discovered that this brother , who had always been of secondary interest to her , was now occupying a pre-eminent place in her affections . 
`` He was so handsome , so interesting in his lieutenant 's uniform ! 
... He looked like another person . 
I will admit to you that I was very proud to walk beside him , leaning on his arm . 
People thought that we were married . 
Seeing me weep , some poor women tried to console me saying , ` Courage , Madame ... . 
Your man will come back . ' 
He just laughed at hearing these mistakes . 
The only thing that was really saddening him was thinking about our mother . '' 
They had separated at the door of the station . 
The sentries would not let her go any further , so she had handed over his sword that she had wished to carry till the last moment . 
`` It is lovely to be a man ! '' 
she exclaimed enthusiastically . 
`` I would love to wear a uniform , to go to war , to be of some real use ! '' 
She tried not to say more about it , as though she suddenly realized the inopportuneness of her last words . 
Perhaps she noticed the scowl on Julio 's face . 
She was , however , so wrought up by the memory of that farewell that , after a long pause , she was unable to resist the temptation of again putting her thought into words . 
At the station entrance , while she was kissing her brother for the last time , she had an encounter , a great surprise . 
`` He '' had approached , also clad as an artillery officer , but alone , having to entrust his valise to a good-natured man from the crowd . 
Julio shot her a questioning look . 
Who was `` he '' ? 
He suspected , but feigned ignorance , as though fearing to learn the truth . 
`` Laurier , '' she replied laconically , `` my former husband . '' 
The lover displayed a cruel irony . 
It was a cowardly thing to ridicule this man who had responded to the call of duty . 
He recognized his vileness , but a malign and irresistible instinct made him keep on with his sneers in order to discredit the man before Marguerite . 
Laurier a soldier ! 
-- He must cut a pretty figure dressed in uniform ! 
`` Laurier , the warrior ! '' 
he continued in a voice so sarcastic and strange that it seemed to be coming from somebody else ... `` Poor creature ! '' 
She hesitated in her response , not wishing to exasperate Desnoyers any further . 
But the truth was uppermost in her mind , and she said simply : `` No ... no , he did n't look so bad . 
Quite the contrary . 
Perhaps it was the uniform , perhaps it was his sadness at going away alone , completely alone , without a single hand to clasp his . 
I did n't recognize him at first . 
Seeing my brother , he started toward us ; but then when he saw me , he went his own way ... Poor man ! 
I feel sorry for him ! '' 
Her feminine instinct must have told her that she was talking too much , and she cut her chatter suddenly short . 
The same instinct warned her that Julio 's countenance was growing more and more saturnine , and his mouth taking a very bitter curve . 
She wanted to console him and added : `` What luck that you are a foreigner and will not have to go to the war ! 
How horrible it would be for me to lose you ! '' 
... She said it sincerely ... . 
A few moments before she had been envying men , admiring the gallantry with which they were exposing their lives , and now she was trembling before the idea that her lover might have been one of these . 
This did not please his amorous egoism -- to be placed apart from the rest as a delicate and fragile being only fit for feminine adoration . 
He preferred to inspire the envy that she had felt on beholding her brother decked out in his warlike accoutrement . 
It seemed to him that something was coming between him and Marguerite that would never disappear , that would go on expanding , repelling them in contrary directions ... far ... very far , even to the point of not recognizing each other when their glances met . 
He continued to be conscious of this impalpable obstacle in their following interviews . 
Marguerite was extremely affectionate in her speech , and would look at him with moist and loving eyes . 
But her caressing hands appeared more like those of a mother than a lover , and her tenderness was accompanied with a certain disinterestedness and extraordinary modesty . 
She seemed to prefer remaining obstinately in the studio , declining to go into the other rooms . 
`` We are so comfortable here ... . 
I would rather not ... . 
It is not worth while . 
I should feel remorse afterwards ... . 
Why think of such things in these anxious times ! '' 
The world around her seemed saturated with love , but it was a new love -- a love for the man who is suffering , desire for abnegation , for sacrifice . 
This love called forth visions of white caps , of tremulous hands healing shell-riddled and bleeding flesh . 
Every advance on Julio 's part but aroused in Marguerite a vehement and modest protest as though they were meeting for the first time . 
`` It is impossible , '' she protested . 
`` I keep thinking of my brother , and of so many that I know that may be dying at this very minute . '' 
News of battles were beginning to arrive , and blood was beginning to flow in great quantities . 
`` No , no , I can not , '' she kept repeating . 
And when Julio finally triumphed , he found that her thoughts were still following independently the same line of mental stress . 
One afternoon , Marguerite announced that henceforth she would see him less frequently . 
She was attending classes now , and had only two free days . 
Desnoyers listened , dumbfounded . 
Classes ? 
... What were her studies ? 
... She seemed a little irritated at his mocking expression ... . 
Yes , she was studying ; for the past week she had been attending classes . 
Now the lessons were going to be more regular ; the course of instruction had been fully organized , and there were many more instructors . 
`` I wish to be a trained nurse . 
I am distressed over my uselessness . 
... Of what good have I ever been till now ? '' 
... She was silent for a few moments as though reviewing her past . 
`` At times I almost think , '' she mused , `` that war , with all its horrors , still has some good in it . 
It helps to make us useful to our fellowmen . 
We look at life more seriously ; trouble makes us realize that we have come into the world for some purpose ... . 
I believe that we must not love life only for the pleasures that it brings us . 
We ought to find satisfaction in sacrifice , in dedicating ourselves to others , and this satisfaction -- I do n't know just why , perhaps because it is new -- appears to me superior to all other things . '' 
Julio looked at her in surprise , trying to imagine what was going on in that idolized and frivolous head . 
What ideas were forming back of that thoughtful forehead which until then had merely reflected the slightest shadow of thoughts as swift and flitting as birds ? 
... But the former Marguerite was still alive . 
He saw her constantly reappearing in a funny way among the sombre preoccupations with which war was overshadowing all lives . 
`` We have to study very hard in order to earn our diplomas as nurses . 
Have you noticed our uniform ? 
... It is most distinctive , and the white is so becoming both to blondes and brunettes . 
Then the cap which allows little curls over the ears -- the fashionable coiffure -- and the blue cape over the white suit , make a splendid contrast . 
With this outfit , a woman well shod , and with few jewels , may present a truly chic appearance . 
It is a mixture of nun and great lady which is vastly becoming . '' 
She was going to study with a regular fury in order to become really useful ... and sooner to wear the admired uniform . 
Poor Desnoyers ! 
... The longing to see her , and the lack of occupation in these interminable afternoons which hitherto had been employed so delightfully , compelled him to haunt the neighborhood of the unoccupied palace where the government had just established the training school for nurses . 
Stationing himself at the corner , watching the fluttering skirts and quick steps of the feminine feet on the sidewalk , he imagined that the course of time must have turned backward , and that he was still but eighteen -- the same as when he used to hang around the establishments of some celebrated modiste . 
The groups of women that at certain hours came out of the palace suggested these former days . 
They were dressed extremely quietly , the aspect of many of them as humble as that of the seamstresses . 
But they were ladies of the well-to-do class , some even coming in automobiles driven by chauffeurs in military uniform , because they were ministerial vehicles . 
These long waits often brought him unexpected encounters with the elegant students who were going and coming . 
`` Desnoyers ! '' 
some feminine voices would exclaim behind him . 
`` Is n't it Desnoyers ? '' 
And he would find himself obliged to relieve their doubts , saluting the ladies who were looking at him as though he were a ghost . 
They were friends of a remote epoch , of six months ago -- ladies who had admired and pursued him , trusting sweetly to his masterly wisdom to guide them through the seven circles of the science of the tango . 
They were now scrutinizing him as if between their last encounter and the present moment had occurred a great cataclysm , transforming all the laws of existence -- as if he were the sole survivor of a vanished race . 
Eventually they all asked the same questions -- `` Are you not going to the war ? 
... How is it that you are not wearing a uniform ? '' 
