`` Patron , here he is ... . 
It is better for him to grow to manhood by your side than in any other place . '' 
And she presented him with the little hybrid . 
One more , and offered with such simplicity ! 
... `` Lack of religion and good habits ! '' 
Then with sudden modesty , he doubted the woman 's veracity . 
Why must it necessarily be his ? 
... But his wavering was generally short-lived . 
`` If it 's mine , put it with the others . '' 
The mother went away tranquilly , seeing the youngster 's future assured , because this man so lavish in violence was equally so in generosity . 
In time there would be a bit of land and a good flock of sheep for the urchin . 
These adoptions at first aroused in Misia Petrona a little rebellion -- the only ones of her life ; but the centaur soon reduced her to terrified silence . 
`` And you dare to complain of me , you weak cow ! 
... A woman who has only given me daughters . 
You ought to be ashamed of yourself . '' 
The same hand that negligently extracted from his pocket a wad of bills rolled into a ball , giving them away capriciously without knowing just how much , also wore a lash hanging from the wrist . 
It was supposed to be for his horse , but it was used with equal facility when any of his peons incurred his wrath . 
`` I strike because I can , '' he would say to pacify himself . 
One day , the man receiving the blow , took a step backward , hunting for the knife in his belt . 
`` You are not going to beat me , Patron . 
I was not born in these parts . 
... I come from Corrientes . '' 
The Patron remained with upraised thong . 
`` Is it true that you were not born here ? 
... Then you are right ; I can not beat you . 
Here are five dollars for you . '' 
When Desnoyers came on the place , Madariaga was beginning to lose count of those who were under his dominion in the old Latin sense , and could take his blows . 
There were so many that confusion often reigned . 
The Frenchman admired the Patron 's expert eye for his business . 
It was enough for him to contemplate for a few moments a herd of cattle , to know its exact number . 
He would go galloping along with an indifferent air , around an immense group of horned and stamping beasts , and then would suddenly begin to separate the different animals . 
He had discovered that they were sick . 
With a buyer like Madariaga , all the tricks and sharp practice of the drovers came to naught . 
His serenity before trouble was also admirable . 
A drought suddenly strewed his plains with dead cattle , making the land seem like an abandoned battlefield . 
Everywhere great black hulks . 
In the air , great spirals of crows coming from leagues away . 
At other times , it was the cold ; an unexpected drop in the thermometer would cover the ground with dead bodies . 
Ten thousand animals , fifteen thousand , perhaps more , all perished ! 
`` WHAT a knock-out ! '' 
Madariaga would exclaim with resignation . 
`` Without such troubles , this earth would be a paradise ... . 
Now , the thing to do is to save the skins ! '' 
And he would rail against the false pride of the emigrants , against the new customs among the poor which prevented his securing enough hands to strip the victims quickly , so that thousands of hides had to be lost . 
Their bones whitened the earth like heaps of snow . 
The peoncitos -LRB- little peons -RRB- went around putting the skulls of cows with crumpled horns on the posts of the wire fences -- a rustic decoration which suggested a procession of Grecian lyres . 
`` It is lucky that the land is left , anyway ! '' 
added the ranchman . 
He loved to race around his immense fields when they were beginning to turn green in the late rains . 
He had been among the first to convert these virgin wastes into rich meadow-lands , supplementing the natural pasturage with alfalfa . 
Where one beast had found sustenance before , he now had three . 
`` The table is set , '' he would chuckle , `` we must now go in search of the guests . '' 
And he kept on buying , at ridiculous prices , herds dying of hunger in others ' uncultivated fields , constantly increasing his opulent lands and stock . 
One morning Desnoyers saved his life . 
The old ranchman had raised his lash against a recently arrived peon who returned the attack , knife in hand . 
Madariaga was defending himself as best he could , convinced from one minute to another that he was going to receive the deadly knife-thrust -- when Desnoyers arrived and , drawing his revolver , overcame and disarmed the adversary . 
`` Thanks , Frenchy , '' said the ranchman , much touched . 
`` You are an all-round man , and I am going to reward you . 
From this day I shall speak to you as I do to my family . '' 
Desnoyers did not know just what this familiar talk might amount to , for his employer was so peculiar . 
Certain personal favors , nevertheless , immediately began to improve his position . 
He was no longer allowed to eat in the administration building , the proprietor insisting imperiously that henceforth Desnoyers should sit at his own table , and thus he was admitted into the intimate life of the Madariaga family . 
The wife was always silent when her husband was present . 
She was used to rising in the middle of the night in order to oversee the breakfasts of the peons , the distribution of biscuit , and the boiling of the great black kettles of coffee or shrub tea . 
She looked after the chattering and lazy maids who so easily managed to get lost in the nearby groves . 
In the kitchen , too , she made her authority felt like a regular house-mistress , but the minute that she heard her husband 's voice she shrank into a respectful and timorous silence . 
Upon sitting down at table , the China would look at him with devoted submission , her great , round eyes fixed on him , like an owl 's . 
Desnoyers felt that in this mute admiration was mingled great astonishment at the energy with which the ranchman , already over seventy , was continuing to bring new occupants to live on his demesne . 
The two daughters , Luisa and Elena , accepted with enthusiasm the new arrival who came to enliven the monotonous conversations in the dining room , so often cut short by their father 's wrathful outbursts . 
Besides , he was from Paris . 
`` Paris ! '' 
sighed Elena , the younger one , rolling her eyes . 
And Desnoyers was henceforth consulted in all matters of style every time they ordered any `` confections '' from the shops of Buenos Aires . 
The interior of the house reflected the different tastes of the two generations . 
The girls had a parlor with a few handsome pieces of furniture placed against the cracked walls , and some showy lamps that were never lighted . 
The father , with his boorishness , often invaded this room so cherished and admired by the two sisters , making the carpets look shabby and faded under his muddy boot-tracks . 
Upon the gilt centre-table , he loved to lay his lash . 
Samples of maize scattered its grains over a silk sofa which the young ladies tried to keep very choice , as though they feared it might break . 
Near the entrance to the dining room was a weighing machine , and Madariaga became furious when his daughters asked him to remove it to the offices . 
He was not going to trouble himself to go outside every time that he wanted to know the weight of a leather skin ! 
... A piano came into the ranch , and Elena passed the hours practising exercises with desperate good will . 
`` Heavens and earth ! 
She might at least play the Jota or the Perican , or some other lively Spanish dance ! '' 
And the irate father , at the hour of siesta , betook himself to the nearby eucalyptus trees , to sleep upon his poncho . 
This younger daughter whom he dubbed La Romantica , was the special victim of his wrath and ridicule . 
Where had she picked up so many tastes which he and his good China never had had ? 
Music books were piled on the piano . 
In a corner of the absurd parlor were some wooden boxes that had held preserves , which the ranch carpenter had been made to press into service as a bookcase . 
`` Look here , Frenchy , '' scoffed Madariaga . 
`` All these are novels and poems ! 
Pure lies ! 
... Hot air ! '' 
He had his private library , vastly more important and glorious , and occupying less space . 
In his desk , adorned with guns , thongs , and chaps studded with silver , was a little compartment containing deeds and various legal documents which the ranchman surveyed with great pride . 
`` Pay attention , now and hear marvellous things , '' announced the master to Desnoyers , as he took out one of his memorandum books . 
This volume contained the pedigree of the famous animals which had improved his breeds of stock , the genealogical trees , the patents of nobility of his aristocratic beasts . 
He would have to read its contents to him since he did not permit even his family to touch these records . 
And with his spectacles on the end of his nose , he would spell out the credentials of each animal celebrity . 
`` Diamond III , grandson of Diamond I , owned by the King of England , son of Diamond II , winner in the races . '' 
His Diamond had cost him many thousands , but the finest horses on the ranch , those which brought the most marvellous prices , were his descendants . 
`` That horse had more sense than most people . 
He only lacked the power to talk . 
He 's the one that 's stuffed , near the door of the parlor . 
The girls wanted him thrown out ... . 
Just let them dare to touch him ! 
I 'd chuck them out first ! '' 
Then he would continue reading the history of a dynasty of bulls with distinctive names and a succession of Roman numbers , the same as kings -- animals acquired by the stubborn ranchman in the great cattle fairs of England . 
He had never been there , but he had used the cable in order to compete in pounds sterling with the British owners who wished to keep such valuable stock in their own country . 
Thanks to these blue-blooded sires that had crossed the ocean with all the luxury of millionaire passengers , he had been able to exhibit in the concourses of Buenos Aires animals which were veritable towers of meat , edible elephants with their sides as fit and sleek as a table . 
`` That book amounts to something ! 
Do n't you think so , Frenchy ? 
It is worth more than all those pictures of moons , lakes , lovers and other gewgaws that my Romantica puts on the walls to catch the dust . '' 
And he would point out , in contrast , the precious diplomas which were adorning his desk , the metal vases and other trophies won in the fairs by the descendants of his blooded stock . 
Luisa , the elder daughter , called Chicha , in the South American fashion , was much more respected by her father . 
`` She is my poor China right over again , '' he said , `` the same good nature , and the same faculty for work , but more of a lady . '' 
Desnoyers entirely agreed with him , and yet the father 's description seemed to him weak and incomplete . 
He could not admit that the pale , modest girl with the great black eyes and smile of childish mischief bore the slightest resemblance to the respectable matron who had brought her into existence . 
The great fiesta for Chicha was the Sunday mass . 
It represented a journey of three leagues to the nearest village , a weekly contact with people unlike those of the ranch . 
A carriage drawn by four horses took the senora and the two senoritas in the latest suits and hats arrived , via Buenos Aires , from Europe . 
At the suggestion of Chicha , Desnoyers accompanied them in the capacity of driver . 
The father remained at home , taking advantage of this opportunity to survey his fields in their Sunday solitude , thus keeping a closer oversight on the shiftlessness of his hands . 
He was very religious -- `` Religion and good manners , you know . '' 
But had he not given thousands of dollars toward building the neighboring church ? 
A man of his fortune should not be submitted to the same obligations as ragamuffins ! 
During the Sunday lunch the young ladies were apt to make comments upon the persons and merits of the young men of the village and neighboring ranches , who had lingered at the church door in order to chat with them . 
`` Do n't fool yourselves , girls ! '' 
observed the father shrewdly . 
`` You believe that they want you for your elegance , do n't you ? 
... What those shameless fellows really want are the dollars of old Madariaga , and once they had them , they would probably give you a daily beating . '' 
For a while the ranch received numerous visitors . 
Some were young men of the neighborhood who arrived on spirited steeds , performing all kinds of tricks of fancy horsemanship . 
They wanted to see Don Julio on the most absurd pretexts , and at the same time improved the opportunity to chat with Chicha and Luisa . 
At other times they were youths from Buenos Aires asking for a lodging at the ranch , as they were just passing by . 
Don Madariaga would growl -- `` Another good-for-nothing scamp who comes in search of the Spanish ranchman ! 
If he does n't move on soon ... I 'll kick him out ! '' 
But the suitor did not stand long on the order of his going , intimidated by the ominous silence of the Patron . 
This silence , of late , had persisted in an alarming manner , in spite of the fact that the ranch was no longer receiving visitors . 
Madariaga appeared abstracted , and all the family , including Desnoyers , respected and feared this taciturnity . 
He ate , scowling , with lowered head . 
Suddenly he would raise his eyes , looking at Chicha , then at Desnoyers , finally fixing them upon his wife as though asking her to give an account of things . 
His Romantica simply did not exist for him . 
The only notice that he ever took of her was to give an ironical snort when he happened to see her leaning at sunset against the doorway , looking at the reddening glow -- one elbow on the door frame and her cheek in her hand , in imitation of the posture of a certain white lady that she had seen in a chromo , awaiting the knight of her dreams . 
Desnoyers had been five years in the house when one day he entered his master 's private office with the brusque air of a timid person who has suddenly reached a decision . 
`` Don Julio , I am going to leave and I would like our accounts settled . '' 
Madariaga looked at him slyly . 
`` Going to leave , eh ? 
... What for ? '' 
But in vain he repeated his questions . 
The Frenchman was floundering through a series of incoherent explanations -- `` I 'm going ; I 've got to go . '' 
`` Ah , you thief , you false prophet ! '' 
shouted the ranchman in stentorian tones . 
But Desnoyers did not quail before the insults . 
He had often heard his Patron use these same words when holding somebody up to ridicule , or haggling with certain cattle drovers . 
`` Ah , you thief , you false prophet ! 
Do you suppose that I do not know why you are going ? 
Do you suppose old Madariaga has not seen your languishing looks and those of my dead fly of a daughter , clasping each others ' hands in the presence of poor China who is blinded in her judgment ? 
... It 's not such a bad stroke , Frenchy . 
By it , you would be able to get possession of half of the old Spaniard 's dollars , and then say that you had made it in America . '' 
And while he was storming , or rather howling , all this , he had grasped his lash and with the butt end kept poking his manager in the stomach with such insistence that it might be construed in an affectionate or hostile way . 
`` For this reason I have come to bid you good-bye , '' said Desnoyers haughtily . 
`` I know that my love is absurd , and I wish to leave . '' 
`` The gentleman would go away , '' the ranchman continued spluttering . 
`` The gentleman believes that here one can do what one pleases ! 
No , siree ! 
Here nobody commands but old Madariaga , and I order you to stay ... . 
Ah , these women ! 
They only serve to antagonize men . 
And yet we ca n't live without them ! '' 
... He took several turns up and down the room , as though his last words were making him think of something very different from what he had just been saying . 
Desnoyers looked uneasily at the thong which was still hanging from his wrist . 
Suppose he should attempt to whip him as he did the peons ? 
... He was still undecided whether to hold his own against a man who had always treated him with benevolence or , while his back was turned , to take refuge in discreet flight , when the ranchman planted himself before him . 
`` You really love her , really ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Are you sure that she loves you ? 
Be careful what you say , for love is blind and deceitful . 
I , too , when I married my China was crazy about her . 
Do you love her , honestly and truly ? 
... Well then , take her , you devilish Frenchy . 
Somebody has to take her , and may she not turn out a weak cow like her mother ! 
... Let us have the ranch full of grandchildren ! '' 
In voicing this stock-raiser 's wish , again appeared the great breeder of beasts and men . 
And as though he considered it necessary to explain his concession , he added -- `` I do all this because I like you ; and I like you because you are serious . '' 
Again the Frenchman was plunged in doubt , not knowing in just what this greatly appreciated seriousness consisted . 
At his wedding , Desnoyers thought much of his mother . 
If only the poor old woman could witness this extraordinary stroke of good fortune ! 
But she had died the year before , believing her son enormously rich because he had been sending her sixty dollars every month , taken from the wages that he had earned on the ranch . 
Desnoyers ' entrance into the family made his father-in-law pay less attention to business . 
City life , with all its untried enchantments and snares , now attracted Madariaga , and he began to speak with contempt of country women , poorly groomed and inspiring him with disgust . 
He had given up his cowboy attire , and was displaying with childish satisfaction , the new suits in which a tailor of the Capital was trying to disguise him . 
When Elena wished to accompany him to Buenos Aires , he would wriggle out of it , trumping up some absorbing business . 
`` No ; you go with your mother . '' 
The fate of his fields and flocks gave him no uneasiness . 
His fortune , managed by Desnoyers , was in good hands . 
`` He is very serious , '' again affirmed the old Spaniard to his family assembled in the dining roam -- `` as serious as I am ... . 
Nobody can make a fool of him ! '' 
And finally the Frenchman concluded that when his father-in-law spoke of seriousness he was referring to his strength of character . 
According to the spontaneous declaration of Madariaga , he had , from the very first day that he had dealings with Desnoyers , perceived in him a nature like his own , more hard and firm perhaps , but without splurges of eccentricities . 
On this account he had treated him with such extraordinary circumspection , foreseeing that a clash between the two could never be adjusted . 
Their only disagreements were about the expenses established by Madariaga during his regime . 
Since the son-in-law was managing the ranches , the work was costing less , and the people working more diligently ; -- and that , too , without yells , and without strong words and deeds , with only his presence and brief orders . 
The old man was the only one defending the capricious system of a blow followed by a gift . 
He revolted against a minute and mechanical administration , always the same , without any arbitrary extravagance or good-natured tyranny . 
Very frequently some of the half-breed peons whom a malicious public supposed to be closely related to the ranchman , would present themselves before Desnoyers with , `` Senor Manager , the old Patron say that you are to give me five dollars . '' 
The Senor Manager would refuse , and soon after Madariaga would rush in in a furious temper , but measuring his words , nevertheless , remembering that his son-in-law 's disposition was as serious as his own . 
`` I like you very much , my son , but here no one overrules me ... . 
Ah , Frenchy , you are like all the rest of your countrymen ! 
Once you get your claws on a penny , it goes into your stocking , and nevermore sees the light of day , even though they crucify you ... ! 
Did I say five dollars ? 
Give him ten . 
I command it and that is enough . '' 
The Frenchman paid , shrugging his shoulders , whilst his father-in-law , satisfied with his triumph , fled to Buenos Aires . 
It was a good thing to have it well understood that the ranch still belonged to Madariaga , the Spaniard . 
From one of these trips , he returned with a companion , a young German who , according to him , knew everything and could do everything . 
His son-in-law was working too hard . 
This Karl Hartrott would assist him in the bookkeeping . 
Desnoyers accepted the situation , and in a few days felt increasing esteem for the new incumbent . 
Although they belonged to two unfriendly nations , it did n't matter . 
There are good people everywhere , and this Karl was a subordinate worth considering . 
He kept his distance from his equals , and was hard and inflexible toward his inferiors . 
All his faculties seemed concentrated in service and admiration for those above him . 
Scarcely would Madariaga open his lips before the German 's head began nodding in agreement , anticipating his words . 
If he said anything funny , his clerk 's laugh would break forth in scandalous roars . 
With Desnoyers he appeared more taciturn , working without stopping for hours at a time . 
As soon as he saw the manager entering the office he would leap from his seat , holding himself erect with military precision . 
He was always ready to do anything whatever . 
Unasked , he spied on the workmen , reporting their carelessness and mistakes . 
This last service did not especially please his superior officer , but he appreciated it as a sign of interest in the establishment . 
The old man bragged triumphantly of the new acquisition , urging his son-in-law also to rejoice . 
`` A very useful fellow , is n't he ? 
... These gringoes from Germany work well , know a good many things and cost little . 
Then , too , so disciplined ! 
so servile ! 
... I am sorry to praise him so to you because you are a Frenchy , and your nation has in them a very powerful enemy . 
His people are a hard-shelled race . '' 
Desnoyers replied with a shrug of indifference . 
His country was far away , and so was Germany . 
Who knew if they would ever return ! 
... They were both Argentinians now , and ought to interest themselves in present affairs and not bother about the past . 
`` And how little pride they have ! '' 
sneered Madariaga in an ironical tone . 
`` Every one of these gringoes when he is a clerk at the Capital sweeps the shop , prepares the meals , keeps the books , sells to the customers , works the typewriter , translates four or five languages , and dances attendance on the proprietor 's lady friend , as though she were a grand senora ... all for twenty-five dollars a month . 
Who can compete with such people ! 
You , Frenchy , you are like me , very serious , and would die of hunger before passing through certain things . 
But , mark my words , on this very account they are going to become a terrible people ! '' 
After brief reflection , the ranchman added : `` Perhaps they are not so good as they seem . 
Just see how they treat those under them ! 
It may be that they affect this simplicity without having it , and when they grin at receiving a kick , they are saying inside , ` Just wait till my turn comes , and I 'll give you three ! ' '' 
Then he suddenly seemed to repent of his suspicions . 
`` At any rate , this Karl is a poor fellow , a mealy-mouthed simpleton who the minute I say anything opens his jaws like a fly-catcher . 
He insists that he comes of a great family , but who knows anything about these gringoes ? 
... All of us , dead with hunger when we reach America , claim to be sons of princes . '' 
Madariaga had placed himself on a familiar footing with his Teutonic treasure , not through gratitude as with Desnoyers , but in order to make him feel his inferiority . 
He had also introduced him on an equal footing in his home , but only that he might give piano lessons to his younger daughter . 
The Romantica was no longer framing herself in the doorway -- in the gloaming watching the sunset reflections . 
When Karl had finished his work in the office , he was now coming to the house and seating himself beside Elena , who was tinkling away with a persistence worthy of a better fate . 
At the end of the hour the German , accompanying himself on the piano , would sing fragments from Wagner in such a way that it put Madariaga to sleep in his armchair with his great Paraguay cigar sticking out of his mouth . 
Elena meanwhile was contemplating with increasing interest the singing gringo . 
He was not the knight of her dreams awaited by the fair lady . 
He was almost a servant , a blond immigrant with reddish hair , fat , heavy , and with bovine eyes that reflected an eternal fear of disagreeing with his chiefs . 
But day by day , she was finding in him something which rather modified these impressions -- his feminine fairness , except where he was burned by the sun , the increasingly martial aspect of his moustachios , the agility with which he mounted his horse , his air of a troubadour , intoning with a rather weak tenor voluptuous romances whose words she did not understand . 
One night , just before supper , the impressionable girl announced with a feverish excitement which she could no longer repress that she had made a grand discovery . 
`` Papa , Karl is of noble birth ! 
He belongs to a great family . '' 
The plainsman made a gesture of indifference . 
Other things were vexing him in those days . 
But during the evening , feeling the necessity of venting on somebody the wrath which had been gnawing at his vitals since his last trip to Buenos Aires , he interrupted the singer . 
`` See here , gringo , what is all this nonsense about nobility which you have been telling my girl ? '' 
Karl left the piano that he might draw himself up to the approved military position before responding . 
Under the influence of his recent song , his pose suggested Lohengrin about to reveal the secret of his life . 
His father had been General von Hartrott , one of the commanders in the war of ' 70 . 
The Emperor had rewarded his services by giving him a title . 
One of his uncles was an intimate councillor of the King of Prussia . 
His older brothers were conspicuous in the most select regiments . 
He had carried a sword as a lieutenant . 
Bored with all this grandeur , Madariaga interrupted him . 
`` Lies ... nonsense ... hot air ! '' 
The very idea of a gringo talking to him about nobility ! 
... He had left Europe when very young in order to cast in his lot with the revolting democracies of America , and although nobility now seemed to him something out-of-date and incomprehensible , still he stoutly maintained that the only true nobility was that of his own country . 
He would yield first place to the gringoes for the invention of machinery and ships , and for breeding priceless animals , but all the Counts and Marquises of Gringo-land appeared to him to be fictitious characters . 
`` All tomfoolery ! '' 
he blustered . 
`` There is n't any nobility in your country , nor have you five dollars all told to rub against each other . 
If you had , you would n't come over here to play the gallant to women who are ... you know what they are as well as I do . '' 
To the astonishment of Desnoyers , the German received this onslaught with much humility , nodding his head in agreement with the Patron 's last words . 
`` If there 's any truth in all this twaddle about titles , '' continued Madariaga implacably , `` swords and uniforms , what did you come here for ? 
What in the devil did you do in your own country that you had to leave it ? '' 
Now Karl hung his head , confused and stuttering . 
`` Papa , papa , '' pleaded Elena . 
`` The poor little fellow ! 
How can you humiliate him so just because he is poor ? '' 
And she felt a deep gratitude toward her brother-in-law when he broke through his usual reserve in order to come to the rescue of the German . 
`` Oh , yes , of course , he 's a good-enough fellow , '' said Madariaga , excusing himself . 
`` But he comes from a land that I detest . '' 
When Desnoyers made a trip to Buenos Aires a few days afterward , the cause of the old man 's wrath was explained . 
It appeared that for some months past Madariaga had been the financial guarantor and devoted swain of a German prima donna stranded in South America with an Italian opera company . 
It was she who had recommended Karl -- an unfortunate countryman , who after wandering through many parts of the continent , was now living with her as a sort of gentlemanly singer . 
Madariaga had joyously expended upon this courtesan many thousands of dollars . 
A childish enthusiasm had accompanied him in this novel existence midst urban dissipations until he happened to discover that his Fraulein was leading another life during his absence , laughing at him with the parasites of her retinue ; whereupon he arose in his wrath and bade her farewell to the accompaniment of blows and broken furniture . 
The last adventure of his life ! 
... Desnoyers suspected his abdication upon hearing him admit his age , for the first time . 
He did not intend to return to the capital . 
It was all false glitter . 
Existence in the country , surrounded by all his family and doing good to the poor was the only sure thing . 
And the terrible centaur expressed himself with the idyllic tenderness and firm virtue of seventy-five years , already insensible to temptation . 
After his scene with Karl , he had increased the German 's salary , trying as usual , to counteract the effects of his violent outbreaks with generosity . 
That which he could not forget was his dependent 's nobility , constantly making it the subject of new jests . 
That glorious boast had brought to his mind the genealogical trees of the illustrious ancestry of his prize cattle . 
The German was a pedigreed fellow , and thenceforth he called him by that nickname . 
Seated on summer nights under the awning , he surveyed his family around him with a sort of patriarchal ecstasy . 
In the evening hush could be heard the buzzing of insects and the croaking of the frogs . 
From the distant ranches floated the songs of the peons as they prepared their suppers . 
It was harvest time , and great bands of immigrants were encamped in the fields for the extra work . 
Madariaga had known many of the hard old days of wars and violence . 
Upon his arrival in South America , he had witnessed the last years of the tyranny of Rosas . 
He loved to enumerate the different provincial and national revolutions in which he had taken part . 
But all this had disappeared and would never return . 
These were the times of peace , work and abundance . 
`` Just think of it , Frenchy , '' he said , driving away the mosquitoes with the puffs of his cigar . 
`` I am Spanish , you French , Karl German , my daughters Argentinians , the cook Russian , his assistant Greek , the stable boy English , the kitchen servants Chinas -LRB- natives -RRB- , Galicians or Italians , and among the peons there are many castes and laws ... . 
And yet we all live in peace . 
In Europe , we would have probably been in a grand fight by this time , but here we are all friends . '' 
He took much pleasure in listening to the music of the laborers -- laments from Italian songs to the accompaniment of the accordion , Spanish guitars and Creole choruses , wild voices chanting of love and death . 
`` This is a regular Noah 's ark , '' exulted the vainglorious patriarch . 
`` He means the tower of Babel , '' thought Desnoyers to himself , `` but it 's all the same thing to the old man . '' 
`` I believe , '' he rambled on , `` that we live thus because in this part of the world there are no kings and a very small army -- and mankind is thinking only of enjoying itself as much as possible , thanks to its work . 
But I also believe that we live so peacefully because there is such abundance that everyone gets his share ... . 
How quickly we would spring to arms if the rations were less than the people ! '' 
Again he fell into reflective silence , shortly after announcing the result of his meditations . 
`` Be that as it may be , we must recognize that here life is more tranquil than in the other world . 
Men are taken for what they are worth , and mingle together without thinking whether they came from one country or another . 
Over here , fellows do not come in droves to kill other fellows whom they do not know and whose only crime is that they were born in an unfriendly country ... . 
Man is a bad beast everywhere , I know that ; but here he eats , owns more land than he needs so that he can stretch himself , and he is good with the goodness of a well-fed dog . 
Over there , there are too many ; they live in heaps getting in each other 's way , and easily run amuck . 
Hurrah for Peace , Frenchy , and the simple life ! 
Where a man can live comfortably and runs no danger of being killed for things he does n't understand -- there is his real homeland ! '' 
And as though an echo of the rustic 's reflections , Karl seated at the piano , began chanting in a low voice one of Beethoven 's hymns -- `` We sing the joy of life , We sing of liberty , We 'll ne'er betray our fellow-man , Though great the guerdon be . '' 
Peace ! 
... A few days afterward Desnoyers recalled bitterly the old man 's illusion , for war -- domestic war -- broke loose in this idyllic stage-setting of ranch life . 
`` Run , Senor Manager , the old Patron has unsheathed his knife and is going to kill the German ! '' 
And Desnoyers had hurried from his office , warned by the peon 's summons . 
Madariaga was chasing Karl , knife in hand , stumbling over everything that blocked his way . 
Only his son-in-law dared to stop him and disarm him . 
`` That shameless pedigreed fellow ! '' 
bellowed the livid old man as he writhed in Desnoyers ' firm clutch . 
`` Half famished , all he thinks he has to do is to come to my house and take away my daughters and dollars . 
... Let me go , I tell you ! 
Let me loose that I may kill him . '' 
And in order to free himself from Desnoyers , he tried further to explain the difficulty . 
He had accepted the Frenchman as a husband for his daughter because he was to his liking , modest , honest ... and serious . 
But this singing Pedigreed Fellow , with all his airs ! 
... He was a man that he had gotten from ... well , he did n't wish to say just where ! 
And the Frenchman , though knowing perfectly well what his introduction to Karl had been , pretended not to understand him . 
As the German had , by this time , made good his escape , the ranchman consented to being pushed toward his house , talking all the time about giving a beating to the Romantica and another to the China for not having informed him of the courtship . 
He had surprised his daughter and the Gringo holding hands and exchanging kisses in a grove near the house . 
`` He 's after my dollars , '' howled the irate father . 
`` He wants America to enrich him quickly at the expense of the old Spaniard , and that is the reason for so much truckling , so much psalm-singing and so much nobility ! 
Imposter ! 
... Musician ! '' 
And he repeated the word `` musician '' with contempt , as though it were the sum and substance of everything vile . 
Very firmly and with few words , Desnoyers brought the wrangling to an end . 
While her brother-in-law protected her retreat , the Romantica , clinging to her mother , had taken refuge in the top of the house , sobbing and moaning , `` Oh , the poor little fellow ! 
Everybody against him ! '' 
Her sister meanwhile was exerting all the powers of a discreet daughter with the rampageous old man in the office , and Desnoyers had gone in search of Karl . 
Finding that he had not yet recovered from the shock of his terrible surprise , he gave him a horse , advising him to betake himself as quickly as possible to the nearest railway station . 
Although the German was soon far from the ranch , he did not long remain alone . 
In a few days , the Romantica followed him ... . 
Iseult of the white hands went in search of Tristan , the knight . 
This event did not cause Madariaga 's desperation to break out as violently as his son-in-law had expected . 
For the first time , he saw him weep . 
His gay and robust old age had suddenly fallen from him , the news having clapped ten years on to his four score . 
Like a child , whimpering and tremulous , he threw his arms around Desnoyers , moistening his neck with tears . 
`` He has taken her away ! 
That son of a great flea ... has taken her away ! '' 
This time he did not lay all the blame on his China . 
He wept with her , and as if trying to console her by a public confession , kept saying over and over : `` It is my fault ... . 
It has all been because of my very , very great sins . '' 
Now began for Desnoyers a period of difficulties and conflicts . 
The fugitives , on one of his visits to the Capital , threw themselves on his mercy , imploring his protection . 
The Romantica wept , declaring that only her brother-in-law , `` the most knightly man in the world , '' could save her . 
Karl gazed at him like a faithful hound trusting in his master . 
These trying interviews were repeated on all his trips . 
Then , on returning to the ranch , he would find the old man ill-humored , moody , looking fixedly ahead of him as though seeing invisible power and wailing , `` It is my punishment -- the punishment for my sins . '' 
The memory of the discreditable circumstances under which he had made Karl 's acquaintance , before bringing him into his home , tormented the old centaur with remorse . 
Some afternoons , he would have a horse saddled , going full gallop toward the neighboring village . 
But he was no longer hunting hospitable ranches . 
He needed to pass some time in the church , speaking alone with the images that were there only for him -- since he had footed the bills for them ... `` Through my sin , through my very great sin ! '' 
But in spite of his self-reproach , Desnoyers had to work very hard to get any kind of a settlement out of the old penitent . 
Whenever he suggested legalizing the situation and making the necessary arrangements for their marriage , the old tyrant would not let him go on . 
`` Do what you think best , but do n't say anything to me about it . '' 
Several months passed by . 
One day the Frenchman approached him with a certain air of mystery . 
`` Elena has a son and has named him ` Julio ' after you . '' 
`` And you , you great useless hulk , '' stormed the ranchman , `` and that weak cow of a wife of yours , you dare to live tranquilly on without giving me a grandson ! 
... Ah , Frenchy , that is why the Germans will finally overwhelm you . 
You see it , right here . 
That bandit has a son , while you , after four years of marriage ... nothing . 
I want a grandson ! 
-- do you understand THAT ? '' 
