Sarrio , the well-known town on the Cantabrian coast , boasted some years ago of a theatre neither bright , light , nor commodious , but quite good enough to afford entertainment to the pacific , industrious residents during the long winter evenings . 
It was built , as such places usually are , in the form of a horseshoe , and it consisted of two floors besides the ground floor . 
On the first were the boxes -- goodness knows why they were so called , for they were nothing but a few benches stuffed with goat 's hair and upholstered with scarlet flannel , placed behind a balustrade . 
To take one of these places , a push had to be given to the back , which raised the seat with a spring , and once the person was in it readjusted itself , and he was as comfortable as a human being can be on an instrument of torture . 
On the second floor all the rabble vociferated , scuffled , and pushed , irrespective of social distinctions between the well-to-do seaman , the poor mussel-picker from the rocks and pier , and Amalia , the respected dealer , and the sellers in the streets . 
This part of the house was called the gallery . 
The stage-boxes were of the same wretched style as the others , and the upholstering seemed to be the same , as far as one could see . 
Beyond them came the `` front rows , '' reserved , according to the old-fashioned way , for certain handicraftsmen , who , from their calling , their position as employers , or for any reason , were averse to going up into the gallery and mixing with the common herd . 
From the roof hung a prismatic cut-glass chandelier , lighted with fish oil , which was subsequently replaced by petroleum ; but that reform I never saw . 
Under the staircase leading to the boxes there was an alcove , enclosed by a curtain , which went by the name of `` Don Mateo 's box . '' 
Of this Don Mateo more anon . 
Then you must know that in this provincial theatre the same dramas and comedies were played as in the capital , and the same operas given as at La Scala in Milan . 
Incredible as it seems , it is perfectly true . 
There the narrator of this story heard for the first time the famous lines : `` When you hearken to a story of shipwreck , All on earth , e ` en to love , is forgotten . '' 
They certainly struck him as splendid , and the theatre a marvel of luxury and good taste . 
Everything in the world depends on imagination . 
Would that mine were as fresh and vivid as it was in those days , so as to be able to give you a few hours ' pleasant amusement ! 
There it was I saw `` Don Juan Tenorio , '' with its flour-whitened corpses , its commander gliding away on a door pulled with cords , its infernal regions made of lighted spirits of wine ; and its apotheosis of paper , stuffing , and packing-cases made such an impression on me that I never slept that night . 
In the auditorium the same things went on more or less as in the grandest houses of the capital . 
However , more attention was given to the performance here than in Court theatres , because we had not arrived at that high state of culture in which behavior is in direct contradiction to the place -- swearing and chattering in playhouses , laughing and giggling in church , and silence and sedateness at the promenade , after the delightful fashion in Madrid . 
Even now I do not know if they have attained to this state of culture in Sarrio . 
But it must not be thought that there were not some enlightened spirits who were sufficiently advanced to give a sample of correct manners at the theatre . 
Pablito de Belinchon was one of these . 
With three or four kindred spirits he had a season ticket for one of the stage-boxes , and from thence they spoke across to other gentlemen , older men , who subscribed to the opposite stage-box . 
They cracked jokes , they turned the soprano or bass into ridicule , and they threw sweets and pellets of paper . 
The people in the gallery , not yet conversant with this advanced stage of refinement , loudly insisted on silence . 
The families of importance arriving , as usual , after the curtain had risen , came in with as much fuss as if they were passing into the dress-circle of the Royal Theatre , and , be it said , with much more noise , for it is impossible to imagine the horrible sounds with which the backs of the boxes were pushed back , and the seats dropped , as if on purpose to attract attention . 
The party now making its pompous entry into one of these boxes remains standing until all wraps are removed , while the eyes of the audience are instantly turned from the stage and fixed upon the newcomers until they are seated . 
They are the Belinchons . 
The head of the family is a tall , spare gentleman , with bent shoulders , bald head , small sharp eyes , a large mouth , wreathed with a Mephistophelian smile , disclosing two long even rows of teeth , the masterpiece of a certain dentist , recently established in Sarrio ; he has whiskers and mustache , and his age is about sixty . 
He is reported to be the richest merchant in the town , being one of the chief importers of codfish on the Biscayan coast . 
For many years he had the entire monopoly of the wholesale trade of this commodity , not only in the town , but in the provinces , and had thus amassed a considerable fortune . 
His wife , Doña Paula -- but why does her arrival excite so much talk in the theatre ? 
The good lady , hearing it , trembles , looks confused , and , being unable to collect herself sufficiently to take off her cloak by herself , she is relieved of it by her daughter , who says in her ear : `` Sit down , mama . '' 
Doña Paula sits down , or , to speak more correctly , she drops into a seat , and casts an anxious look at the audience , while her cheeks are suffused with crimson . 
In vain she tries to collect and calm herself , but the more she tries to keep the blood from rushing to her face the more it mounts to that prominent position . 
`` Mama , how red you are ! '' 
said Venturita , her younger daughter , trying not to laugh . 
The mother looked at her with a pained expression . 
`` Hush , Ventura , hush , '' said Cecilia . 
Doña Paula then murmured : `` The child delights in upsetting me , '' and nearly burst into tears . 
At last the audience , wearied of tormenting her with their glances , smiles , and whispers , turned their attention to the stage . 
Doña Paula 's distress gradually diminished , but the traces remained for the rest of the evening . 
The cause of the excitement was the velvet mantle , trimmed with fur , that the good lady had donned . 
It was always like this whenever she appeared for the first time in any fine article of apparel . 
And this for no other reason than because Doña Paula was not a lady by birth . 
She had belonged to the cigarette-maker class . 
Don Rosendo had made love to her when she was quite a young girl , and then came the birth of Pablito . 
However , Don Rosendo let five or six years elapse without marrying , not wishing to hear of matrimony , but continuing to pay court to her and assisting her with money , until finally , vanquished more by the love of the boy than the mother , and more than all by the admonitions of his friends , he decided to offer his hand to Paulina . 
The town knew nothing of the marriage until it had taken place , secrecy being considered the safest course . 
From thenceforth the life of the cigarette-maker can be divided into different epochs . 
The first , which lasted for a year , dated from the time of her marriage until the `` mantilla appeared . '' 
During this epoch she did not go out much , nor was she often seen in public . 
On Sundays she attended early mass , and the rest of the time she was shut up in the house . 
When she decided to don the aforementioned mantilla and attend eleven o'clock mass she was the cynosure of all eyes , in church as well as on her way through the streets ; and the event was talked about for eight days afterward . 
The second epoch , which lasted three years , was from the `` mantilla episode '' to that of `` the gloves . '' 
The sight of such an adornment on the large dark hands of the ex-cigarette-maker produced an indescribable sensation in the feminine element of the neighborhood ; in the streets , in church , and on visits , the ladies met each other with the question : `` Have you seen ? '' 
`` Yes , yes ; I have seen . '' 
And then the tongues were loosed in cruel remarks . 
Then came the third epoch , which lasted four years , and ended with the silk dress , which gave almost as much cause of complaint as the gloves , and produced universal indignation in Sarrio . 
`` Do you really mean to say so , Doña Dolores ? '' 
`` Who would have thought it ? '' 
Doña Dolores lowered her eyes with a despairing gesture . 
Finally the last epoch , the longest of all , for it lasted six years , terminated -LRB- oh horror ! -RRB- 
with `` the hat . '' 
The shudder of disgust that went through the town of Sarrio when Doña Paula appeared one holiday afternoon at the Promenade with a little hat on her head beggars description . 
It caused quite a sensation : the women of the place made the sign of the cross , as they saw her pass , and remarks were uttered in loud tones so as to reach the person concerned . 
`` Look , girl , do for goodness ' sake , look at the Serena , and see what she has got on her head . '' 
Mention must be made that Doña Paula 's mother , grandmother , and great-grandmother had all gone by the name of Serena . 
It is needless to add that even when the cigarette-maker attained to the dignity of señora , she was never by any chance given her proper name . 
When the ladies of Sarrio met each other in the street the following day there were no words to express their horror ; they could only raise their eyes to heaven , make convulsive gesticulations , and utter , with a groan , the word `` Hat ! '' 
So at that deed of daring , only comparable to those of heroes of antiquity , like Hannibal , Cæsar , and Genghis Khan , the town remained crushed and dumfounded for some months . 
Nevertheless , whenever Doña Paula appeared in public with the abhorred hat upon her head , or with any other departure from her old attire , she was always greeted with a murmur of disapproval . 
The fault of the matter lay in her never having resented , in public or in private , or even in the sanctum of her own feelings , this malignant treatment of her fellow-townsfolk . 
She considered it natural and reasonable , and it never occurred to her that it ought not to have been ; her ideas of conventionality had never prompted her to rebel against the tyranny of public opinion . 
She believed in all good faith that in adopting the gloves , the mantilla , or the hat , she had committed a breach of laws both human and divine , and that the murmurs and mocking glances were the just retribution for the infraction . 
Hence her terror and dismay every time she appeared at the theatre or promenade overwhelmed her with confusion . 
`` Why , then , '' it will be said , `` did Doña Paula dress herself thus ? '' 
Those who ask such questions are not well versed in the mysteries of the human heart ; Doña Paula put on the mantilla , gloves , and hat with the full knowledge of the retribution to come , just as a boy stuffs himself from the sideboard , knowing that he will be punished for the act . 
Those who have not been brought up in a little town can never know how ardently the hat is desired by the artisan . 
It was so with Doña Paula , old , faded , and withered as she was . 
As a young girl , she had been pretty , but years , her secluded life , to which she could never accustom herself , and , above all , her struggle against public opinion in the adoption of appropriate attire , had prematurely aged her ; but she still had beautiful black eyes set in regular and pleasing features . 
The first act was nearly over . 
A fantastic melodrama , the name I do not remember , was being performed , and the company had brought into play all the scenic apparatus at its disposal . 
The audience was impressed , and received every change of scene with enthusiastic applause . 
Pablito , who had spent a month in Madrid the previous year , made light of the performance and winked knowingly at his friend in the front row of the stalls . 
Then , to show how boring he found it all , he ended by turning his back on the stage , and leveling his opera-glass at the local beauties . 
Every time that the Russian-leather lorgnette was turned on one of the fair sex the girl trembled slightly , changed her position , and raised her hand , which slightly shook , to adjust her hair , smiled meaninglessly at her mama or sister , settled herself afresh , and fixed her eyes on the stage with insistence and decision , but a quick shy glance was soon raised to those round , bright glasses directed at her , and she ended by blushing . 
Then Pablito , having carried his point , turned his attention to another beauty . 
He knew them all as well as if they were his sisters , he thee 'd and thou 'd the majority of them , and to several he had even been engaged ; but he was as light and inconsistent in his love affairs as a feather in the air ; the girls had all had to undergo the painful process of disillusion , and finally , wearied of courting his neighbors , he proceeded to exercise his charms on some of the visitors to Sarrio , only , of course , to throw them over , if they imprudently stayed more than a month or two in the town . 
There were weighty reasons for Pablito 's power to thus make havoc at his own sweet will in the hearts of all the girls of the place , as well as of those from other parts . 
He was a very aristocratic-looking young fellow of four or five and twenty , of a handsome , manly countenance , and slight well-formed figure . 
Then , he rode splendidly , and drove a tilbury or drag and four with an ease only seen in Sarrio among coachmen . 
When wide trousers were worn , Pablito 's looked like skirts , and when tight ones were the fashion his legs looked as slender as a stork 's . 
When high collars were in vogue , Pablito went about half-strangled with his tongue hanging out , and when low ones came in , he had them cut down to his breastbone . 
These and other striking characteristics made him irresistible . 
Perhaps some people will not quite credit the universal admiration he excited , but I am certain that the girls of the province who read this story will testify to the truth of the fact . 
When the curtain fell , a bent old man with spectacles and a long white beard crept , rather than walked , to the Belinchons ' box . 
`` Don Mateo ! 
You never miss a performance , '' exclaimed Doña Paula . 
`` Well , what would you have me do at home , Papulina ? '' 
`` Tell your beads and go to bed , '' said Venturita . 
Don Mateo smiled benignantly and answered the pert remark by giving the girl an affectionate tap on her cheek . 
`` It is true I ought to do so , my child -- but what is to be done ? 
If I go to bed early I do not sleep -- and then I can not resist the temptation of seeing you pretty little dears . '' 
Venturita 's coquettish expression betrayed her satisfaction at seeing herself admired . 
`` Now , if you were a handsome young man ! '' 
`` I have been one . '' 
`` In what year was that ? '' 
`` How naughty ! 
how naughty the child is ! '' 
exclaimed Don Mateo , laughing ; but he was here interrupted by a fit of coughing which lasted for some minutes . 
Don Mateo , an old man , and decrepit not only with age , but with infirmities brought on by a dissipated life , was the delight of the town of Sarrio . 
No festivity and no public or private entertainment could take place without him . 
He had been president of the Lyceum , a dancing club , for many years , and nobody thought of having him supplanted . 
He was also president of an academy of music , of which he was the founder ; he was treasurer of the artisans ' club ; the rebuilding of the theatre now mentioned was due to him ; and as an acknowledgment of the time and money he spent on it , the company permitted him to have the box , already alluded to , in the alcove under the staircase , enclosed with curtains . 
He lived on his pension as colonel ; he was married , and had a daughter over thirty years of age , who still went by the name of `` the child . '' 
It must not be thought by this that Don Mateo was a skittish old man . 
If he had been , the weaker sex would not have been so profuse in their sympathy and respect for him . 
His sole pleasure was to see other people amused and happy about him , and he spared himself neither trouble nor efforts in getting up any fresh entertainment . 
Once his mind was set upon a new idea , his energy never flagged . 
Sometimes he organized a country ball ; another time he had a stage put up in the large room of the Lyceum , and got up a play ; and he occasionally chartered a mountebank or musical company . 
If a week went by without Sarrio having some entertainment or other , Don Mateo was in a great state of mind , and had no rest until he had started something . 
Thanks to him , we can safely say that at this period there was no place in Spain where life was rendered so easy and pleasant as at Sarrio , for a constant round of simple amusements engenders union and friendliness among the townsfolk . 
Moreover , Don Mateo was a professional peace-maker , for he made a point of smoothing away all the bad feelings and misunderstandings that always crop up in a town . 
Unlike bad persons who delight in fanning the flame of dissension , he found delight in repeating to people all the pleasant things he heard of them . 
`` Pepita , do you know what Doña Rosario said just now about the dress you have on ? 
-- that it is most elegant , exquisite , and tasteful . '' 
Whereupon Pepita , filled with pride as she sat in her box , cast quite an affectionate glance at Doña Rosario , little as she liked her . 
Then , again , `` How well you managed Villamor 's chocolate business for the widow and children , friend Eugenio -- you did , indeed . 
Don Rosendo was just telling me he let the business slip through his fingers like a fool . '' 
As Don Rosendo was the best man of business in the town , Don Eugenio could not help feeling flattered at these words . 
After chatting for some little time with the Belinchon family , Don Mateo took leave , to prosecute , as usual , his visits to the other boxes ; but before going he turned to Cecilia , and said : `` When does he arrive ? '' 
The young girl flushed slightly , and replied : `` I can not tell you , Don Mateo . '' 
Then Doña Paula , smiling mischievously , came to her daughter 's rescue , by saying : `` He ought to arrive in the ` Bella Paula , ' which sailed from Liverpool . '' 
`` Oh ! 
then we shall be having him here to-morrow or next day . 
You have prayed a good deal to the Virgin de las Tormentas -- the Virgin of the Storms -- eh ? '' 
`` She has actually had a nones -- six candles have been burning for days before the image , '' said Venturita . 
Cecilia 's blush deepened , and she smiled . 
She was a young woman of twenty years of age , neither beautiful in face nor graceful in figure ; the harmony of her features was spoiled by her nose being too aquiline . 
Without this drawback she would not have been plain , for her eyes were extremely good -- so soft and expressive that few beauties could rival them . 
She was neither tall nor short , but rather thin , and her shoulders slightly bent . 
Her sister Venturita was sixteen years of age , and as full of grace and beauty as a lovely flower . 
Her oval cheeks seemed made of roses and pinks ; she was somewhat small , but so perfectly made that she looked like a wax model . 
Her jasmine-like hands and her fairy-like feet were the talk of Sarrio . 
The softness and smoothness of her skin were like mother-of-pearl and alabaster ; her creamy forehead , high and narrow as that of a Greek Venus , was shaded by fair curls ; and rich , abundant golden tresses covered her shoulders and fell below her waist . 
`` You may laugh at your sister , little one ; but it will not be long before you do the same ! '' 
said Don Mateo . 
`` I pray for a man ! 
You are getting imbecile , señor . '' 
`` It wo n't be long before I hear of it , '' returned the old man , as he passed on to another box to greet the Señores de Maza . 
At that moment Pablito joined his family , accompanied by his faithful friend , who merits special notice . 
He was the son of the picador , the famous bull slayer , of the place , and the cast of the lad 's features was such as would have been the delight of the spectators at a circus . 
His face would have required no addition in the way of powder , rouge , or dye to convert him into a clown . 
The nose , highly colored by nature , the narrow slits of eyes , the lack of any mustache or whiskers , the thick lips , the excessive width of his shoulders , the bow of his legs , and , above all , the facial contortions which accompanied every word he uttered , were provocative of mirth without the aid of paint or wig . 
Piscis , for so he was called , was aware of this peculiarity , and resented it so intensely that he resolved to counteract the ludicrous cast of his features by determining never to laugh , and he religiously kept to his decision . 
Moreover , he , for the same reason , interspersed his remarks with the sharpest , strongest interjections of the vernacular , varied by those of his own invention . 
But this , instead of producing the desired effect , only added to the amusement he provoked among his acquaintances . 
The only person who ever took him seriously -- up to a certain point -- was Pablito . 
Piscis and Pablito were born to inspire each other with mutual love and admiration . 
The point of union between the two kindred spirits was `` the cult of the horse-god . '' 
Piscis , through his father , was an adept in that line from a child ; and as the best mount in Sarrio , he was the object of Pablito 's warmest admiration , and the son of Don Rosendo being the richest young fellow of the place , there was , according to Piscis , no person in the world more deserving of respect and admiration . 
Nobody knew when this friendship had begun ; Pablito and Piscis had always been inseparable from the time they were children , and the difference of their social positions did not separate them as they grew up to manhood . 
Don Rosendo 's stable was their constant place of meeting ; from thence , after a long and erudite conference , partly theoretical , partly practical on the horses , they proceeded to betake their presence and their profound knowledge to the town , where they took a few turns , sometimes on high-spirited horses , and at other times in a smart trap , with Pablito driving , and Piscis absorbed in affectionate contemplation of the backs of the animals . 
On some occasions , however , they gave the town a lesson of humility by perambulating on their own legs . 
Pablito now came up to his family party convulsed with laughter . 
`` What has come over you ? '' 
asked Doña Paula , smiling in sympathy . 
`` We just followed Periquito to the gallery , and there we found him hand in hand with Ramona , '' whispered the young man into his sister Venturita 's ear . 
`` Well , what did he say ? '' 
she asked with great curiosity . 
`` He said '' -- and here a burst of laughter interrupted him for some minutes -- `` he said , ` Ramona , I love you . ' '' 
`` Ave Maria ! 
and an anchovy seller , too ! '' 
exclaimed the girl , joining in the laugh , and making the sign of the cross . 
`` If you could have heard the trembling voice in which he said it , and the way in which he turned up the whites of his eyes -- Ah ! 
here is Piscis , who was also witness of it . '' 
Piscis gave vent to a corroborative grunt . 
At that moment Periquito , a pallid , lean lad , with blue eyes and a little , thin red beard , appeared in one of the stage boxes ; the eyes of the whole Belinchon family were at once turned on him with mocking and smiling glances , Pablito and Venturita evincing particular delight at the sight of the young man . 
Periquito raised his head and saluted them , and the Belinchon family responded to the greeting without ceasing laughing . 
He raised his eyes two or three times , but those continual mocking glances so confused him that he at last retired into the narrow foyer . 
The curtain then rose again : the scene now represented caverns in the infernal regions , although it was not impossible for them to be mistaken for the hold of a ship . 
The act opened with a prelude by the orchestra , worthily conducted by Señor Anselmo , the cabinet-maker of the town . 
Señor Matias , the sacristan , and Señor Manola , the barber , took part in the performance as bassoon-players . 
Don Juan , the `` old salt , '' as he was nicknamed , and Prospero , the carpenter , played the clarinets ; the trumpet-players were Mechacan , the shoemaker , and Señor Romualdo , the undertaker ; Pepe de la Esquila , the lawyer 's clerk , and Maroto , `` the watchman , '' were the cornet-players ; and the fiddle was played by Señor Benito , the violinist of the church and a clerk in a business house ; while the minor accompanists consisted of four or five apprentice youths of the town . 
Instead of a bâton , Señor Anselmo held in his hand an enormous bright key , which was that of his shop , and served to conduct the music . 
The prelude was very sad and mournful , suggestive of a fitting state of mind for the infernal regions . 
The audience preserved absolute silence , and in anxious expectation of what was to come all eyes were fixed on the open trap-doors in the stage floor . 
A discordant note suddenly broke in upon the soft , mysterious music . 
Señor Anselmo turned and cast a reproachful look at the offending musician , who colored up to his eyes ; and there came a loud , prolonged murmur of disapproval from the audience , while from the gallery a voice cried : `` It was Pepe de la Esquila ! '' 
All eyes were then directed to the delinquent , who , drawing the mouthpiece from his cornet , shook it with assumed indifference while his face became redder and redder . 
`` Those who can not play should go to bed , '' cried the same voice . 
Then the abashed and ashamed Pepe de la Esquila was fraught with fury . 
He threw his instrument upon the floor , rose from his seat with his eyes aflame with rage , shook his fist at the gallery , and cried : `` I 'll settle you when we get out , see if I do n't . '' 
`` Sh ! 
sh ! 
Silence , silence ! '' 
exclaimed the audience in a breath . 
`` What is there to settle , man ? 
Get on and play the cornet better . '' 
`` Silence , silence ! 
Shame ! '' 
cried the audience again , and all eyes were then turned to the mayor 's box . 
He was a man of sixty or seventy years of age , short of stature and very high-colored ; his hair was still thick and quite white , his cheeks were shaven , his nose Roman , his eyes large , round , and prominent . 
He looked like a courtier of the time of Louis XV , or a coachman of some grand house . 
Don Roque , for such was his name , turned round in his seat , and called out in a stentorian voice : `` Marcones . '' 
Whereupon an octogenarian official approached the door of the box with his shiny , peaked , blue cloth cap in his hand . 
The mayor conferred with him for some minutes ; and then Marcones ascended the gallery , and reappeared holding a young man in sailor dress by the arm . 
They both approached the mayor 's box , and then Don Roque proceeded to rebuke the offender in a voice which he only partially succeeded in modulating , for , from time to time , one overheard such remarks as : `` Disturber of the peace ! 
Have you no manners whatsoever ! 
You are a belligerent animal ! 
Do you think you are in a tavern ? '' 
The sailor received the reprimand with his eyes on the ground . 
A voice cried from the pit : `` Let him be taken to prison . '' 
Then another voice from the gallery immediately returned : `` Let Pepe de la Esquila be taken too . '' 
`` Silence ! 
Silence ! '' 
The mayor , after having sharply rebuked Percebe , let him return to his seat , to the great delight of the gallery , who received him back with hurrahs and applause . 
The orchestra , silenced for a time , now resumed the prelude to the infernal regions , and before it was finished a dozen devils were seen emerging through the trap-doors on to the stage with masks , enormous tow wigs , the inevitable tails , and with lighted torches in their hands . 
Then , when they were all assembled on the boarded floor and the trap-doors were conveniently closed , they began the fantastic dance befitting the occasion . 
But it is known of old that four demons can not join together in a dance without getting excited . 
The spectators followed their swift , measured movements with extreme interest . 
A child began to cry , and the audience made its mother withdraw him from the house . 
But , lo and behold ! 
with so much passing to and fro of Beelzebub 's ministers in that not very spacious place , a torch ignited the tow wig of one of the party . 
The poor devil , in ignorance of the fact , continued the dance with most diabolical energy ; the audience went into fits of laughter awaiting the issue of the accident . 
Eventually , when he felt his head grow hot , he promptly tore off the wig and mask , and disclosed the countenance of Levita , distorted with terror . 
`` Levita ! '' 
cried the delighted audience . 
The owner of this nickname , deprived of his demoniacal disguise , retired from the scene , covered with confusion . 
In a short time another wig was set on fire . 
Fresh cries of excitement at the approaching metamorphosis of the demon . 
There was not long to wait , for in a few minutes the wig and the mask flew through the air like a flaming comet . 
`` Matalaosa ! '' 
was the universal cry , and a shout of laughter rang through the theatre . 
`` Matala , do n't be afraid that you will catch cold , '' said a voice from the gallery . 
Matalaosa retired , discomfited , like his companion Levita . 
Two or three more wigs were set on fire , exposing to shame as many more well-known faces of townfolk who acted as supers at the theatre . 
The dance finally terminated without further mishap . 
The demons who had escaped any catastrophe being once more relegated to the infernal regions , there appeared on the scene a fine young fellow , who , to judge from the skin which hung from his shoulder , was evidently a shepherd , with a pretty young girl of the same profession , and , according to the old rule which obliges every shepherd to be in love , and every shepherdess to be coquettish , the dialogue began , in which the affectionate entreaties and tender reproaches of the man contrasted strongly with the light laughter and jokes of the girl . 
Everybody was pleased and delighted , the gallery as well as the pit , with the touching scene enacted , when a loud voice was heard at the theatre door saying : `` Don Rosendo , the ` Bella Paula , ' is coming in . '' 
The effect that this unexpected news produced was indescribable , for not only did Don Rosendo jump up , as if he were pulled by a spring , and hasten to put on his cloak with a trembling hand , but such excitement pervaded the whole gathering that the pastoral dialogue was all but interrupted . 
The patrons of the `` front rows '' rushed with one accord into the street , all the sailors made their exit from the gallery with a great clatter , and many people also left the stalls and boxes . 
In a few minutes there was hardly anybody in the theatre but women . 
Cecilia remained motionless and pale , with her eyes fixed on the stage . 
Her mother and sister looked at her with a smile on their faces . 
`` Why do you look at me like that ? '' 
she exclaimed , turning round suddenly and blushing violently , whereupon Doña Paula and Venturita burst out laughing . 
The crowd of people ran through the streets in the direction of the port . 
Foremost , accompanied by six or eight sailors , his son Pablo and several friends , came Don Rosendo , silent and preoccupied as he listened to his companions ' remarks , uttered in voices panting from exertion . 
`` Don Domingo is in luck to get in at nearly high tide , '' said a sailor , alluding to the captain of the `` Bella Paula . '' 
`` How do you know he is coming in ? 
He may have cast anchor this afternoon , '' remarked another . 
`` Where ? '' 
`` You ask ` where ? ' 
you fool ! 
Why , in the Bay , of course , '' replied the other in a rage . 
`` If so , we should see her , Uncle Miguel . '' 
`` How could we see her , you idiot ? 
Why should n't she have dropped anchor behind the Corvera Rock ? '' 
`` The flag of the ` Bella Paula ' would float higher than the rock , Uncle Miguel . '' 
`` Whatever do you know about it ? '' 
`` What cargo does she carry ? '' 
asked a bystander of the owner . 
`` Four thousand hundredweight . '' 
`` From Scotland ? '' 
`` No , all from Norway . '' 
`` Is the Señorita de las Cuevas on board ? '' 
Don Rosendo did not reply ; but after a few more quick steps he turned round , saying : `` Don Melchor must be told that the ` Bella Paula ' is coming in . '' 
`` I 'll go , '' said a sailor , detaching himself from the crowd , and turning back to the town . 
They arrived at the mole . 
The night was starless , the wind had sunk , the sea was calm . 
They passed the little old mole , and directed their steps to the end of the new mole , which had been recently built , and stretched some little distance out to sea . 
Lights from the moored boats shone here and there in the darkness ; the thick network of riggings was scarcely discernible , and the hulks looked like formless black masses . 
The newcomers did not at first perceive another group of people at the end of the mole until they came upon them . 
They were all silent , with their eyes fixed on the sea , trying to make out the lines of the ship in the mist . 
The waves breaking monotonously against the rocks near by occasionally shimmered in the darkness . 
`` Where is she ? '' 
asked several of the comers from the theatre , as they cast their eyes around . 
`` There ! '' 
`` Where ? '' 
`` Do n't you see a little green light there to the left ? 
Follow my hand . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Yes , now I see . '' 
Don Rosendo went on to the second stage of the mole , and there ran against Don Melchor de las Cuevas . 
He was an old , very tall , wiry man ; he wore his beard sailor fashion , that is to say , he let it hang round his neck like a bag . 
He had a stronger reason for doing this than the majority of the people of Sarrio who do so , for he belonged to the honored profession of the navy , although he was now on the retired list . 
But in seaport towns , and particularly when the place is small like that of which we are speaking , the maritime element preponderates , and so permeates the place that the inhabitants , unintentionally , and in spite of themselves , adopt certain sailor customs , words , and fashions . 
The Señor de las Cuevas had been a gallant , fine fellow when he was young , and now at seventy-four he was still a vigorous , active man , with bright , penetrating eyes , aquiline nose , a fine , open countenance , and a bearing full of energy and decision . 
He was standing on one of the seats fixed against the wall of the mole , with an enormous telescope turned toward the little green light which shone intermittently in the distance . 
He was by far the tallest figure in the group of spectators . 
`` Don Melchor , you here already ! 
I have just sent a messenger to your house . '' 
`` I have been here for an hour , '' returned the Señor de las Cuevas , taking his glass from his eye . 
`` I saw the ship from the observatory a little after sunset . '' 
`` Who would have thought it ? 
How is it that nothing at sea escapes your observation ? '' 
`` I have better sight than when I was a lad of twenty , '' said Don Melchor in a loud , decided voice for all to hear . 
`` I believe it , I believe it , Don Melchor . '' 
`` I can see a little launch tack twenty miles off . '' 
`` I believe it , I believe it , Don Melchor . '' 
`` And if I were put to it , '' continued the old officer , in a louder tone , `` I could count the masts of the frigates that pass the Ferrol . '' 
`` Draw it mild , Don Melchor , '' said a voice . 
There was a round of suppressed laughter in the dark , for Señor de las Cuevas inspired all the sea-folk with profound respect . 
The old sailor turned his head angrily in the direction of the jeering remark , and , after silently trying to pierce the gloom , he said in a severe tone : `` If I knew who that was who said that I would chuck him into the sea . '' 
Nobody dared say a word , nor was a sign of a smile seen , for it was well known in Sarrio that the Señor de las Cuevas was quite equal to fulfilling his threat . 
He had served more than forty years in the navy , and had won the reputation of being a brave , punctilious officer ; but his severity bordered on cruelty . 
When no commander of a ship exercised the old maritime laws , Don Melchor still strove to keep them in practise . 
It was told with horror in the town that a sailor was drowned through his making him pass three times under the keel according to the old punishment for certain transgressions ; and more than a hundred men had been crippled by his blows , or had had the skin taken off their backs by his use of the rope . 
However , there was no pilot or sailor who could be compared with him in his knowledge of all pertaining to the sea , the weather , ships , and all the secrets of navigation . 
The little green light continued its slow approach until the form of the `` Bella Paula '' was visible to the naked eye , and , moreover , two or three black spots could be seen hovering around her from different sides . 
They were the pilot 's launch and the auxiliary boats , ready to tow the ship when necessary . 
Sail was crowded on the ship , as there was scarcely any wind . 
However , it was too near the breakwater not to be dangerous . 
At least Don Melchor thought so , for he began to swear under his breath , and to seem uneasy . 
At last , no longer able to restrain himself , although he knew he was not within earshot , he cried out : `` Furl the maintopsail , Domingo ! 
What are you waiting for ? '' 
He had scarcely uttered these words when the almost imperceptible forms of the sailors were seen on the mastheads . 
`` We shall be all right now , '' exclaimed Don Melchor . 
`` Don Domingo would snap his finger at you , '' murmured the sailor who had incurred the old officer 's wrath , under his breath . 
The hulk of the ship , painted black , with a line of white on the upper decks , now stood out clearly from the dark background . 
The eyes of the spectators , grown accustomed to the gloom , could discern perfectly all that was passing on board . 
Two figures were on the quarter-deck , the captain and the coasting pilot , and at the bow stood the ship pilot . 
`` And the gaff-sail ? '' 
shouted Don Melchor again . 
The sail of the mizzen-mast fell , as if in obedience to his voice . 
The wind was insufficient to fill the lower sails , and the canvas hung from the mast , limp and dilapidated as a draggled ball-dress . 
Soon all sails were furled and the ship was motionless until it slowly made way when taken in tow by the two boats . 
The figures of the rowers moved measuredly on the benches and the voices of the coxswains singing out , `` Pull ahead ; pull ahead ! '' 
broke the silence of the night . 
But the rowers were so feeble in comparison to the bulk in tow that the ship made but slow way . 
When at the end of a quarter of an hour she managed to get some thirty lengths off the head of the mole , a rope was thrown from one of the boats on to the sea wall to help tack the ship . 
`` Captain , captain ! '' 
cried a stentorian voice from the crowd . 
`` What is it ? '' 
they replied from the ship . 
`` Is the Señorita de las Cuevas on board ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Then as long as the Señorita de las Cuevas is all right , all the rest may go to the devil . '' 
The joke provoked much merriment in the crowd , until silence again reigned . 
The ship now began to tack , being dragged ashore by the rope , which creaked with the tension of the hold ; the people on the mole began talking with those on board , but they were silent and taciturn , being more concerned with the management of the ship than the questions directed to them . 
Then came a fresh ebullition of the jocose spirit of the sailors of the place , and fun was poked at those on board , more especially at a certain fellow who looked like a heap of skins , and whom they nicknamed Bruin , as he moved from one side to another with the awkwardness of a bear , handling the ropes and casting grunts of scorn at the crowd . 
`` I say , Bruin , you will be glad to have a dish of fish , eh ? '' 
`` Rejoice , O Bruin , for there is cider in Llandone 's cellar . '' 
`` Is it hot in Norway ? '' 
`` Too hot for a rogue like you , '' growled Bruin , as he furled a sail . 
This remark was received by the sailors with shouts of laughter . 
`` Keep clear , '' called the pilot from the quarter-deck . 
`` Hold there , on board ! '' 
returned the sailor who held the slack end of the rope . 
The rope fell into the sea and dashed against the side of the ship . 
She was now close to the breakwater . 
The tide was not high enough to anchor by the old mole . 
The captain called out to the pilot : `` Sound . '' 
The pilot said to the sailor at his side : `` Drop anchor . '' 
The anchor fell into the sea with a strident sound of chains . 
Then the windlass was heard at work . 
`` Are you going to moor the ship , Domingo ? '' 
asked Don Melchor . 
`` Yes , señor , '' returned the captain . 
`` It is not necessary ; you can warp ahead with two anchors . 
In an hour you will be able to get in . '' 
`` One way is as good as another for me , '' said the officer in a low voice , shrugging his shoulders , and then , in a loud tone , he added : `` Drop a second anchor , '' whereupon a second anchor fell into the sea with the same harsh sound as the first . 
`` How are you , uncle ? '' 
cried a clear boyish voice from the ship . 
`` Hello , Gonzalito ! 
arrived all right , my boy ? '' 
`` Perfectly ; here I come . '' 
And with great agility the young fellow swung himself down by a rope into the boat . 
`` Let us go and meet him , '' said Don Rosendo , taking a step or two forward . 
But Señor de las Cuevas caught the merchant by the arm and held him like a vise . 
`` Where are you going ? '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked the cod-merchant , in alarm . 
`` Ah ! 
it is true I did not recollect that this was the lower stage , the darkness -- such a long time here , the dizziness from keeping one 's eyes on the ship . 
My God ! 
what would have become of me if you had not caught hold of me ? '' 
`` Nothing , you would only have been stunned on the stones below . '' 
`` Holy Virgin ! '' 
exclaimed Don Rosendo , turning dreadfully pale , while a cold sweat bathed his brow , and his legs trembled . 
`` Do n't be alarmed at what is past and gone , but let us go down and meet Gonzalito ! '' 
So they went to the end of the mole , where a manly , tall , red-haired , fine young fellow had just landed , dressed in a cloak which nearly reached down to his heels . 
`` Uncle ! '' 
`` Gonzalo ! '' 
The two tall men then fell into each other 's arms . 
Don Rosendo also received the young man with effusion . 
But he was so taken up with the narrow escape he had just had from losing his life , that he soon relapsed into his gloomy and melancholy mood , and he could hardly reply to the dock-yard master 's questions as to the disposition of the captain 's cargo . 
They then started off to Don Melchor 's house , which was situated in the highest part of the town , commanding an extensive view of the sea . 
During the walk Gonzalo left his uncle to go on in front , while he diffidently asked Don Rosendo a few questions about his family . 
`` How is Doña Paula ? 
Is she as smiling as ever ? 
And Pablo ? 
Is he still as fond of horses ? 
And Venturita ? 
I suppose she has grown a big girl now ? '' 
Pause . 
`` And Cecilia , is she well ? '' 
