Every time that he turned , he looked hungrily at the entrances of the garden . 
And then it happened as in all their meetings . 
She suddenly appeared as if she had fallen from the sky or risen up from the ground , like an apparition . 
A cough , a slight rustling of footsteps , and as he turned , Julio almost collided with her . 
`` Marguerite ! 
Oh , Marguerite ! '' 
... It was she , and yet he was slow to recognize her . 
He felt a certain strangeness in seeing in full reality the countenance which had occupied his imagination for three months , each time more spirituelle and shadowy with the idealism of absence . 
But his doubts were of short duration . 
Then it seemed as though time and space were eliminated , that he had not made any voyage , and but a few hours had intervened since their last interview . 
Marguerite divined the expansion which might follow Julio 's exclamations , the vehement hand-clasp , perhaps something more , so she kept herself calm and serene . 
`` No ; not here , '' she said with a grimace of repugnance . 
`` What a ridiculous idea for us to have met here ! '' 
They were about to seat themselves on the iron chairs , in the shadow of some shrubbery , when she rose suddenly . 
Those who were passing along the boulevard might see them by merely casting their eyes toward the garden . 
At this time , many of her friends might be passing through the neighborhood because of its proximity to the big shops ... . 
They , therefore , sought refuge at a corner of the monument , placing themselves between it and the rue des Mathurins . 
Desnoyers brought two chairs near the hedge , so that when seated they were invisible to those passing on the other side of the railing . 
But this was not solitude . 
A few steps away , a fat , nearsighted man was reading his paper , and a group of women were chatting and embroidering . 
A woman with a red wig and two dogs -- some housekeeper who had come down into the garden in order to give her pets an airing -- passed several times near the amorous pair , smiling discreetly . 
`` How annoying ! '' 
groaned Marguerite . 
`` Why did we ever come to this place ! '' 
The two scrutinized each other carefully , wishing to see exactly what transformation Time had wrought . 
`` You are darker than ever , '' she said . 
`` You look like a man of the sea . '' 
Julio was finding her even lovelier than before , and felt sure that possessing her was well worth all the contrarieties which had brought about his trip to South America . 
She was taller than he , with an elegantly proportioned slenderness . 
`` She has the musical step , '' Desnoyers had told himself , when seeing her in his imagination ; and now , on beholding her again , the first thing that he admired was her rhythmic tread , light and graceful as she passed through the garden seeking another seat . 
Her features were not regular but they had a piquant fascination -- a true Parisian face . 
Everything that had been invented for the embellishment of feminine charm was used about her person with the most exquisite fastidiousness . 
She had always lived for herself . 
Only a few months before had she abdicated a part of this sweet selfishness , sacrificing reunions , teas , and calls in order to give Desnoyers some of the afternoon hours . 
Stylish and painted like a priceless doll , with no loftier ambition than to be a model , interpreting with personal elegance the latest confections of the modistes , she was at last experiencing the same preoccupations and joys as other women , creating for herself an inner life . 
The nucleus of this new life , hidden under her former frivolity , was Desnoyers . 
Just as she was imagining that she had reorganized her existence -- adjusting the satisfactions of worldly elegance to the delights of love in intimate secrecy -- a fulminating catastrophe -LRB- the intervention of her husband whose possible appearance she seemed to have overlooked -RRB- had disturbed her thoughtless happiness . 
She who was accustomed to think herself the centre of the universe , imagining that events ought to revolve around her desires and tastes , had suffered this cruel surprise with more astonishment than grief . 
`` And you , how do you think I look ? '' 
Marguerite queried . 
`` I must tell you that the fashion has changed . 
The sheath skirt has passed away . 
Now it is worn short and with more fullness . '' 
Desnoyers had to interest himself in her apparel with the same devotion , mixing his appreciation of the latest freak of the fashion-monger with his eulogies of Marguerite 's beauty . 
`` Have you thought much about me ? '' 
she continued . 
`` You have not been unfaithful to me a single time ? 
Not even once ? 
... Tell me the truth ; you know I can always tell when you are lying . '' 
`` I have always thought of you , '' he said putting his hand on his heart , as if he were swearing before a judge . 
And he said it roundly , with an accent of truth , since in his infidelities -- now completely forgotten -- the memory of Marguerite had always been present . 
`` But let us talk about you ! '' 
added Julio . 
`` What have you been doing all the time ? '' 
He had brought his chair nearer to hers , and their knees touched . 
He took one of her hands , patting it and putting his finger in the glove opening . 
Oh , that accursed garden which would not permit greater intimacy and obliged them to speak in a low tone , after three months ' absence ! 
... In spite of his discretion , the man who was reading his paper raised his head and looked irritably at them over his spectacles as though a fly were distracting him with its buzzing ... . 
The very idea of talking love-nonsense in a public garden when all Europe was threatened with calamity ! 
Repelling the audacious hand , Marguerite spoke tranquilly of her existence during the last months . 
`` I have passed my life the best I could , but I have been greatly bored . 
You know that I am now living with mama , and mama is a lady of the old regime who does not understand our tastes . 
I have been to the theatres with my brother . 
I have made many calls on the lawyer in order to learn the progress of my divorce and hurry it along ... and nothing else . '' 
`` And your husband ? '' 
`` Do n't let 's talk about him . 
Do you want to ? 
I pity the poor man ! 
So good ... so correct . 
The lawyer assures me that he agrees to everything and will not impose any obstacles . 
They tell me that he does not come to Paris , that he lives in his factory . 
Our old home is closed . 
There are times when I feel remorseful over the way I have treated him . '' 
`` And I ? '' 
queried Julio , withdrawing his hand . 
`` You are right , '' she returned smiling . 
`` You are Life . 
It is cruel but it is human . 
We have to live our lives without taking others into consideration . 
It is necessary to be selfish in order to be happy . '' 
The two remained silent . 
The remembrance of the husband had swept across them like a glacial blast . 
Julio was the first to brighten up . 
`` And you have not danced in all this time ? '' 
`` No , how could I ? 
The very idea , a woman in divorce proceedings ! 
... I have not been to a single chic party since you went away . 
I wanted to preserve a certain decorous mourning fiesta . 
How horrible it was ! 
... It needed you , the Master ! '' 
They had again clasped hands and were smiling . 
Memories of the previous months were passing before their eyes , visions of their life from five to seven in the afternoon , dancing in the hotels of the Champs Elysees where the tango had been inexorably associated with a cup of tea . 
She appeared to tear herself away from these recollections , impelled by a tenacious obsession which had slipped from her mind in the first moments of their meeting . 
`` Do you know much about what 's happening ? 
Tell me all . 
People talk so much ... . 
Do you really believe that there will be war ? 
Do n't you think that it will all end in some kind of settlement ? '' 
Desnoyers comforted her with his optimism . 
He did not believe in the possibility of a war . 
That was ridiculous . 
`` I say so , too ! 
Ours is not the epoch of savages . 
I have known some Germans , chic and well-educated persons who surely must think exactly as we do . 
An old professor who comes to the house was explaining yesterday to mama that wars are no longer possible in these progressive times . 
In two months ' time , there would scarcely be any men left , in three , the world would find itself without money to continue the struggle . 
I do not recall exactly how it was , but he explained it all very clearly , in a manner most delightful to hear . '' 
She reflected in silence , trying to co-ordinate her confused recollections , but dismayed by the effort required , added on her own account . 
`` Just imagine what war would mean -- how horrible ! 
Society life paralyzed . 
No more parties , nor clothes , nor theatres ! 
Why , it is even possible that they might not design any more fashions ! 
All the women in mourning . 
Can you imagine it ? 
... And Paris deserted ... . 
How beautiful it seemed as I came to meet you this afternoon ! 
... No , no , it can not be ! 
Next month , you know , we go to Vichy . 
Mama needs the waters . 
Then to Biarritz . 
After that , I shall go to a castle on the Loire . 
And besides there are our affairs , my divorce , our marriage which may take place the next year ... . 
And is war to hinder and cut short all this ! 
No , no , it is not possible . 
My brother and others like him are foolish enough to dream of danger from Germany . 
I am sure that my husband , too , who is only interested in serious and bothersome matters , is among those who believe that war is imminent and prepare to take part in it . 
What nonsense ! 
Tell me that it is all nonsense . 
I need to hear you say it . '' 
Tranquilized by the affirmations of her lover , she then changed the trend of the conversation . 
The possibility of their approaching marriage brought to mind the object of the voyage which Desnoyers had just made . 
There had not been time for them to write to each other during their brief separation . 
`` Did you succeed in getting the money ? 
The joy of seeing you made me forget all about such things ... '' Adopting the air of a business expert , he replied that he had brought back less than he expected , for he had found the country in the throes of one of its periodical panics ; but still he had managed to get together about four hundred thousand francs . 
In his purse he had a check for that amount . 
Later on , they would send him further remittances . 
A ranchman in Argentina , a sort of relative , was looking after his affairs . 
Marguerite appeared satisfied , and in spite of her frivolity , adopted the air of a serious woman . 
`` Money , money ! '' 
she exclaimed sententiously . 
`` And yet there is no happiness without it ! 
With your four hundred thousand and what I have , we shall be able to get along ... . 
I told you that my husband wishes to give me back my dowry . 
He has told my brother so . 
But the state of his business , and the increased size of his factory do not permit him to return it as quickly as he would like . 
I ca n't help but feel sorry for the poor man ... so honorable and so upright in every way . 
If he only were not so commonplace ! 
... '' Again Marguerite seemed to regret these tardy spontaneous eulogies which were chilling their interview . 
So again she changed the trend of her chatter . 
`` And your family ? 
Have you seen them ? '' 
... Desnoyers had been to his father 's home before starting for the Chapelle Expiatoire . 
A stealthy entrance into the great house on the avenue Victor Hugo , and then up to the first floor like a tradesman . 
Then he had slipt into the kitchen like a soldier sweetheart of the maids . 
His mother had come there to embrace him , poor Dona Luisa , weeping and kissing him frantically as though she had feared to lose him forever . 
Close behind her mother had come Luisita , nicknamed Chichi , who always surveyed him with sympathetic curiosity as if she wished to know better a brother so bad and adorable who had led decent women from the paths of virtue , and committed all kinds of follies . 
Then Desnoyers had been greatly surprised to see entering the kitchen with the air of a tragedy queen , a noble mother of the drama , his Aunt Elena , the one who had married a German and was living in Berlin surrounded with innumerable children . 
`` She has been in Paris a month . 
She is going to make a little visit to our castle . 
And it appears that her eldest son -- my cousin , ` The Sage , ' whom I have not seen for years -- is also coming here . '' 
The home interview had several times been interrupted by fear . 
`` Your father is at home , be careful , '' his mother had said to him each time that he had spoken above a whisper . 
And his Aunt Elena had stationed herself at the door with a dramatic air , like a stage heroine resolved to plunge a dagger into the tyrant who should dare to cross the threshold . 
The entire family was accustomed to submit to the rigid authority of Don Marcelo Desnoyers . 
`` Oh , that old man ! '' 
exclaimed Julio , referring to his father . 
`` He may live many years yet , but how he weighs upon us all ! '' 
His mother , who had never wearied of looking at him , finally had to bring the interview to an end , frightened by certain approaching sounds . 
`` Go , he might surprise us , and he would be furious . '' 
So Julio had fled the paternal home , caressed by the tears of the two ladies and the admiring glances of Chichi , by turns ashamed and proud of a brother who had caused such enthusiasm and scandal among her friends . 
Marguerite also spoke of Senor Desnoyers . 
A terrible tyrant of the old school with whom they could never come to an understanding . 
The two remained silent , looking fixedly at each other . 
Now that they had said the things of greatest urgency , present interests became more absorbing . 
More immediate things , unspoken , seemed to well up in their timid and vacillating eyes , before escaping in the form of words . 
They did not dare to talk like lovers here . 
Every minute the cloud of witnesses seemed increasing around them . 
The woman with the dogs and the red wig was passing with greater frequency , shortening her turns through the square in order to greet them with a smile of complicity . 
The reader of the daily paper was now exchanging views with a friend on a neighboring bench regarding the possibilities of war . 
The garden had become a thoroughfare . 
The modistes upon going out from their establishments , and the ladies returning from shopping , were crossing through the square in order to shorten their walk . 
The little avenue was a popular short-cut . 
All the pedestrians were casting curious glances at the elegant lady and her companion seated in the shadow of the shrubbery with the timid yet would-be natural look of those who desire to hide themselves , yet at the same time feign a casual air . 
`` How exasperating ! '' 
sighed Marguerite . 
`` They are going to find us out ! '' 
A girl looked at her so searchingly that she thought she recognized in her an employee of a celebrated modiste . 
Besides , some of her personal friends who had met her in the crowded shops but an hour ago might be returning home by way of the garden . 
`` Let us go , '' she said rising hurriedly . 
`` If they should spy us here together , just think what they might say ! 
... and just when they are becoming a little forgetful ! '' 
Desnoyers protested crossly . 
Go away ? 
... Paris had become a shrunken place for them nowadays because Marguerite refused to go to a single place where there was a possibility of their being surprised . 
In another square , in a restaurant , wherever they might go -- they would run the same risk of being recognized . 
She would only consider meetings in public places , and yet at the same time , dreaded the curiosity of the people . 
If Marguerite would like to go to his studio of such sweet memories ! 
... `` To your home ? 
No ! 
no indeed ! '' 
she replied emphatically `` I can not forget the last time I was there . '' 
But Julio insisted , foreseeing a break in that firm negative . 
Where could they be more comfortable ? 
Besides , were n't they going to marry as soon as possible ? 
... `` I tell you no , '' she repeated . 
`` Who knows but my husband may be watching me ! 
What a complication for my divorce if he should surprise us in your house ! '' 
Now it was he who eulogized the husband , insisting that such watchfulness was incompatible with his character . 
The engineer had accepted the facts , considering them irreparable and was now thinking only of reconstructing his life . 
`` No , it is better for us to separate , '' she continued . 
`` Tomorrow we shall see each other again . 
You will hunt a more favorable place . 
Think it over , and you will find a solution for it all . '' 
But he wished an immediate solution . 
They had abandoned their seats , going slowly toward the rue des Mathurins . 
Julio was speaking with a trembling and persuasive eloquence . 
To-morrow ? 
No , now . 
They had only to call a taxicab . 
It would be only a matter of a few minutes , and then the isolation , the mystery , the return to a sweet past -- to that intimacy in the studio where they had passed their happiest hours . 
They would believe that no time had elapsed since their first meetings . 
`` No , '' she faltered with a weakening accent , seeking a last resistance . 
`` Besides , your secretary might be there , that Spaniard who lives with you . 
How ashamed I would be to meet him again ! '' 
Julio laughed ... . 
Argensola ! 
How could that comrade who knew all about their past be an obstacle ? 
If they should happen to meet him in the house , he would be sure to leave immediately . 
More than once , he had had to go out so as not to be in the way . 
His discretion was such that he had foreseen events . 
Probably he had already left , conjecturing that a near visit would be the most logical thing . 
His chum would simply go wandering through the streets in search of news . 
Marguerite was silent , as though yielding on seeing her pretexts exhausted . 
Desnoyers was silent , too , construing her stillness as assent . 
They had left the garden and she was looking around uneasily , terrified to find herself in the open street beside her lover , and seeking a hiding-place . 
Suddenly she saw before her the little red door of an automobile , opened by the hand of her adorer . 
`` Get in , '' ordered Julio . 
And she climbed in hastily , anxious to hide herself as soon as possible . 
The vehicle started at great speed . 
Marguerite immediately pulled down the shade of the window on her side , but , before she had finished and could turn her head , she felt a hungry mouth kissing the nape of her neck . 
`` No , not here , '' she said in a pleading tone . 
`` Let us be sensible ! '' 
And while he , rebellious at these exhortations , persisted in his advances , the voice of Marguerite again sounded above the noise of the rattling machinery of the automobile as it bounded over the pavement . 
`` Do you really believe that there will be no war ? 
Do you believe that we will be able to marry ? 
... Tell me again . 
I want you to encourage me ... I need to hear it from your lips . '' 
In 1870 Marcelo Desnoyers was nineteen years old . 
He was born in the suburbs of Paris , an only child ; his father , interested in little building speculations , maintained his family in modest comfort . 
The mason wished to make an architect of his son , and Marcelo was in the midst of his preparatory studies when his father suddenly died , leaving his affairs greatly involved . 
In a few months , he and his mother descended the slopes of ruin , and were obliged to give up their snug , middle-class quarters and live like laborers . 
When the fourteen-year-old boy had to choose a trade , he learned wood carving . 
This craft was an art related to the tastes awakened in Marcelo by his abandoned studies . 
His mother retired to the country , living with some relatives while the lad advanced rapidly in the shops , aiding his master in all the important orders which he received from the provinces . 
The first news of the war with Prussia surprised him in Marseilles , working on the decorations of a theatre . 
Marcelo was opposed to the Empire like all the youths of his generation . 
He was also much influenced by the older workmen who had taken part in the Republic of ' 48 , and who still retained vivid recollections of the Coup d'Etat of the second of December . 
One day he saw in the streets of Marseilles a popular manifestation in favor of peace which was practically a protest against the government . 
The old republicans in their implacable struggle with the Emperor , the companies of the International which had just been organized , and a great number of Italians and Spaniards who had fled their countries on account of recent insurrections , composed the procession . 
A long-haired , consumptive student was carrying the flag . 
`` It is peace that we want -- a peace which may unite all mankind , '' chanted the paraders . 
But on this earth , the noblest propositions are seldom heard , since Destiny amuses herself in perverting them and turning them aside . 
Scarcely had the friends of peace entered the rue Cannebiere with their hymn and standard , when war came to meet them , obliging them to resort to fist and club . 
The day before , some battalions of Zouaves from Algiers had disembarked in order to reinforce the army on the frontier , and these veterans , accustomed to colonial existence and undiscriminating as to the cause of disturbances , seized the opportunity to intervene in this manifestation , some with bayonets and others with ungirded belts . 
`` Hurrah for War ! '' 
and a rain of lashes and blows fell upon the unarmed singers . 
Marcelo saw the innocent student , the standard-bearer of peace , knocked down wrapped in his flag , by the merry kicks of the Zouaves . 
Then he knew no more , since he had received various blows with a leather strap , and a knife thrust in his shoulder ; he had to run the same as the others . 
That day developed for the first time , his fiery , stubborn character , irritable before contradiction , even to the point of adopting the most extreme resolution . 
`` Down with War ! '' 
Since it was not possible for him to protest in any other way , he would leave the country . 
The Emperor might arrange his affairs as best he could . 
The struggle was going to be long and disastrous , according to the enemies of the Empire . 
If he stayed , he would in a few months be drawn for the soldiery . 
Desnoyers renounced the honor of serving the Emperor . 
He hesitated a little when he thought of his mother . 
But his country relatives would not turn her out , and he planned to work very hard and send her money . 
Who knew what riches might be waiting for him , on the other side of the sea ! 
... Good-bye , France ! 
Thanks to his savings , a harbor official found it to his interest to offer him the choice of three boats . 
One was sailing to Egypt , another to Australia , another to Montevideo and Buenos Aires , which made the strongest appeal to him ? 
... Desnoyers , remembering his readings , wished to consult the wind and follow the course that it indicated , as he had seen various heroes of novels do . 
But that day the wind blew from the sea toward France . 
He also wished to toss up a coin in order to test his fate . 
Finally he decided upon the vessel sailing first . 
Not until , with his scanty baggage , he was actually on the deck of the next boat to anchor , did he take any interest in its course -- `` For the Rio de la Plata . '' 
... And he accepted these words with a fatalistic shrug . 
`` Very well , let it be South America ! '' 
The country was not distasteful to him , since he knew it by certain travel publications whose illustrations represented herds of cattle at liberty , half-naked , plumed Indians , and hairy cowboys whirling over their heads serpentine lassos tipped with balls . 
The millionaire Desnoyers never forgot that trip to America -- forty-three days navigating in a little worn-out steamer that rattled like a heap of old iron , groaned in all its joints at the slightest roughness of the sea , and had to stop four times for repairs , at the mercy of the winds and waves . 
In Montevideo , he learned of the reverses suffered by his country and that the French Empire no longer existed . 
He felt a little ashamed when he heard that the nation was now self-governing , defending itself gallantly behind the walls of Paris . 
And he had fled ! 
... Months afterwards , the events of the Commune consoled him for his flight . 
If he had remained , wrath at the national downfall , his relations with his co-laborers , the air in which he lived -- everything would surely have dragged him along to revolt . 
In that case , he would have been shot or consigned to a colonial prison like so many of his former comrades . 
So his determination crystallized , and he stopped thinking about the affairs of his mother-country . 
The necessities of existence in a foreign land whose language he was beginning to pick up made him think only of himself . 
The turbulent and adventurous life of these new nations compelled him to most absurd expedients and varied occupations . 
Yet he felt himself strong with an audacity and self-reliance which he never had in the old world . 
`` I am equal to everything , '' he said , `` if they only give me time to prove it ! '' 
Although he had fled from his country in order not to take up arms , he even led a soldier 's life for a brief period in his adopted land , receiving a wound in one of the many hostilities between the whites and reds in the unsettled districts . 
In Buenos Aires , he again worked as a woodcarver . 
The city was beginning to expand , breaking its shell as a large village . 
Desnoyers spent many years ornamenting salons and facades . 
It was a laborious existence , sedentary and remunerative . 
But one day he became tired of this slow saving which could only bring him a mediocre fortune after a long time . 
He had gone to the new world to become rich like so many others . 
And at twenty-seven , he started forth again , a full-fledged adventurer , avoiding the cities , wishing to snatch money from untapped , natural sources . 
He worked farms in the forests of the North , but the locusts obliterated his crops in a few hours . 
He was a cattle-driver , with the aid of only two peons , driving a herd of oxen and mules over the snowy solitudes of the Andes to Bolivia and Chile . 
In this life , making journeys of many months ' duration , across interminable plains , he lost exact account of time and space . 
Just as he thought himself on the verge of winning a fortune , he lost it all by an unfortunate speculation . 
And in a moment of failure and despair , being now thirty years old , he became an employee of Julio Madariaga . 
He knew of this rustic millionaire through his purchases of flocks -- a Spaniard who had come to the country when very young , adapting himself very easily to its customs , and living like a cowboy after he had acquired enormous properties . 
The country folk , wishing to put a title of respect before his name , called him Don Madariaga . 
`` Comrade , '' he said to Desnoyers one day when he happened to be in a good humor -- a very rare thing for him -- `` you must have passed through many ups and downs . 
Your lack of silver may be smelled a long ways off . 
Why lead such a dog 's life ? 
Trust in me , Frenchy , and remain here ! 
I am growing old , and I need a man . '' 
After the Frenchman had arranged to stay with Madariaga , every landed proprietor living within fifteen or twenty leagues of the ranch , stopped the new employee on the road to prophesy all sorts of misfortune . 
`` You will not stay long . 
Nobody can get along with Don Madariaga . 
We have lost count of his overseers . 
He is a man who must be killed or deserted . 
Soon you will go , too ! '' 
Desnoyers did not doubt but that there was some truth in all this . 
Madariaga was an impossible character , but feeling a certain sympathy with the Frenchman , had tried not to annoy him with his irritability . 
`` He 's a regular pearl , this Frenchy , '' said the plainsman as though trying to excuse himself for his considerate treatment of his latest acquisition . 
`` I like him because he is very serious ... . 
That is the way I like a man . '' 
Desnoyers did not know exactly what this much-admired seriousness could be , but he felt a secret pride in seeing him aggressive with everybody else , even his family , whilst he took with him a tone of paternal bluffness . 
The family consisted of his wife Misia Petrona -LRB- whom he always called the China -RRB- and two grown daughters who had gone to school in Buenos Aires , but on returning to the ranch had reverted somewhat to their original rusticity . 
Madariaga 's fortune was enormous . 
He had lived in the field since his arrival in America , when the white race had not dared to settle outside the towns for fear of the Indians . 
He had gained his first money as a fearless trader , taking merchandise in a cart from fort to fort . 
He had killed Indians , was twice wounded by them , and for a while had lived as a captive with an Indian chief whom he finally succeeded in making his staunch friend . 
With his earnings , he had bought land , much land , almost worthless because of its insecurity , devoting it to the raising of cattle that he had to defend , gun in hand , from the pirates of the plains . 
Then he had married his China , a young half-breed who was running around barefoot , but owned many of her forefathers ' fields . 
They had lived in an almost savage poverty on their property which would have taken many a day 's journey to go around . 
Afterwards , when the government was pushing the Indians towards the frontiers , and offering the abandoned lands for sale , considering it a patriotic sacrifice on the part of any one wishing to acquire them , Madariaga bought and bought at the lowest figure and longest terms . 
To get possession of vast tracts and populate it with blooded stock became the mission of his life . 
At times , galloping with Desnoyers through his boundless fields , he was not able to repress his pride . 
`` Tell me something , Frenchy ! 
They say that further up the country , there are some nations about the size of my ranches . 
Is that so ? '' 
... The Frenchman agreed ... . 
The lands of Madariaga were indeed greater than many principalities . 
This put the old plainsman in rare good humor and he exclaimed in the cowboy vernacular which had become second nature to him -- `` Then it would n't be absurd to proclaim myself king some day ? 
Just imagine it , Frenchy ; -- Don Madariaga , the First ... . 
The worst of it all is that I would also be the last , for the China will not give me a son ... . 
She is a weak cow ! '' 
The fame of his vast territories and his wealth in stock reached even to Buenos Aires . 
Every one knew of Madariaga by name , although very few had seen him . 
When he went to the Capital , he passed unnoticed because of his country aspect -- the same leggings that he was used to wearing in the fields , his poncho wrapped around him like a muffler above which rose the aggressive points of a necktie , a tormenting ornament imposed by his daughters , who in vain arranged it with loving hands that he might look a little more respectable . 
One day he entered the office of the richest merchant of the capital . 
`` Sir , I know that you need some young bulls for the European market , and I have come to sell you a few . '' 
The man of affairs looked haughtily at the poor cowboy . 
He might explain his errand to one of the employees , he could not waste his time on such small matters . 
But the malicious grin on the rustic 's face awoke his curiosity . 
`` And how many are you able to sell , my good man ? '' 
`` About thirty thousand , sir . '' 
It was not necessary to hear more . 
The supercilious merchant sprang from his desk , and obsequiously offered him a seat . 
`` You can be no other than Don Madariaga . '' 
`` At the service of God and yourself , sir , '' he responded in the manner of a Spanish countryman . 
That was the most glorious moment of his existence . 
In the outer office of the Directors of the Bank , the clerks offered him a seat until the personage the other side of the door should deign to receive him . 
But scarcely was his name announced than that same director ran to admit him , and the employee was stupefied to hear the ranchman say , by way of greeting , `` I have come to draw out three hundred thousand dollars . 
I have abundant pasturage , and I wish to buy a ranch or two in order to stock them . '' 
His arbitrary and contradictory character weighed upon the inhabitants of his lands with both cruel and good-natured tyranny . 
No vagabond ever passed by the ranch without being rudely assailed by its owner from the outset . 
`` Do n't tell me any of your hard-luck stories , friend , '' he would yell as if he were going to beat him . 
`` Under the shed is a skinned beast ; cut and eat as much as you wish and so help yourself to continue your journey ... . 
But no more of your yarns ! '' 
And he would turn his back upon the tramp , after giving him a few dollars . 
One day he became infuriated because a peon was nailing the wire fencing too deliberately on the posts . 
Everybody was robbing him ! 
The following day he spoke of a large sum of money that he would have to pay for having endorsed the note of an acquaintance , completely bankrupt . 
`` Poor fellow ! 
His luck is worse than mine ! '' 
Upon finding in the road the skeleton of a recently killed sheep , he was beside himself with indignation . 
It was not because of the loss of the meat . 
`` Hunger knows no law , and God has made meat for mankind to eat . 
But they might at least have left the skin ! '' 
... And he would rage against such wickedness , always repeating , `` Lack of religion and good habits ! '' 
The next time , the bandits stripped the flesh off of three cows , leaving the skins in full view , and the ranchman said , smiling , `` That is the way I like people , honorable and doing no wrong . '' 
His vigor as a tireless centaur had helped him powerfully in his task of populating his lands . 
He was capricious , despotic and with the same paternal instincts as his compatriots who , centuries before when conquering the new world , had clarified its native blood . 
Like the Castilian conquistadors , he had a fancy for copper-colored beauty with oblique eyes and straight hair . 
When Desnoyers saw him going off on some sudden pretext , putting his horse at full gallop toward a neighboring ranch , he would say to himself , smilingly , `` He is going in search of a new peon who will help work his land fifteen years from now . '' 
The personnel of the ranch often used to comment on the resemblance of certain youths laboring here the same as the others , galloping from the first streak of dawn over the fields , attending to the various duties of pasturing . 
The overseer , Celedonio , a half-breed thirty years old , generally detested for his hard and avaricious character , also bore a distant resemblance to the patron . 
Almost every year , some woman from a great distance , dirty and bad-faced , presented herself at the ranch , leading by the hand a little mongrel with eyes like live coals . 
She would ask to speak with the proprietor alone , and upon being confronted with her , he usually recalled a trip made ten or twelve years before in order to buy a herd of cattle . 
`` You remember , Patron , that you passed the night on my ranch because the river had risen ? '' 
The Patron did not remember anything about it . 
But a vague instinct warned him that the woman was probably telling the truth . 
`` Well , what of it ? '' 
