Gourville bit his lips to check his tears , out of respect for the king . 
La Fontaine buried his face in his handkerchief , and the only signs of life he gave were the convulsive motions of his shoulders , raised by his sobs . 
The king preserved his dignity . 
His countenance was impassible . 
He even maintained the frown which appeared when D'Artagnan announced his enemies . 
He made a gesture which signified , `` Speak ; '' and he remained standing , with his eyes fixed searchingly on these desponding men . 
Pelisson bowed to the ground , and La Fontaine knelt as people do in churches . 
This dismal silence , disturbed only by sighs and groans , began to excite in the king , not compassion , but impatience . 
`` Monsieur Pelisson , '' said he , in a sharp , dry tone . 
`` Monsieur Gourville , and you , Monsieur - '' and he did not name La Fontaine , `` I can not , without sensible displeasure , see you come to plead for one of the greatest criminals it is the duty of justice to punish . 
A king does not allow himself to soften save at the tears of the innocent , the remorse of the guilty . 
I have no faith either in the remorse of M. Fouquet or the tears of his friends , because the one is tainted to the very heart , and the others ought to dread offending me in my own palace . 
For these reasons , I beg you , Monsieur Pelisson , Monsieur Gourville , and you , Monsieur - , to say nothing that will not plainly proclaim the respect you have for my will . '' 
`` Sire , '' replied Pelisson , trembling at these words , `` we are come to say nothing to your majesty that is not the most profound expression of the most sincere respect and love that are due to a king from all his subjects . 
Your majesty 's justice is redoubtable ; every one must yield to the sentences it pronounces . 
We respectfully bow before it . 
Far from us the idea of coming to defend him who has had the misfortune to offend your majesty . 
He who has incurred your displeasure may be a friend of ours , but he is an enemy to the state . 
We abandon him , but with tears , to the severity of the king . '' 
`` Besides , '' interrupted the king , calmed by that supplicating voice , and those persuasive words , `` my parliament will decide . 
I do not strike without first having weighed the crime ; my justice does not wield the sword without employing first a pair of scales . '' 
`` Therefore we have every confidence in that impartiality of the king , and hope to make our feeble voices heard , with the consent of your majesty , when the hour for defending an accused friend strikes . '' 
`` In that case , messieurs , what do you ask of me ? '' 
said the king , with his most imposing air . 
`` Sire , '' continued Pelisson , `` the accused has a wife and family . 
The little property he had was scarcely sufficient to pay his debts , and Madame Fouquet , since her husband 's captivity , is abandoned by everybody . 
The hand of your majesty strikes like the hand of God . 
When the Lord sends the curse of leprosy or pestilence into a family , every one flies and shuns the abode of the leprous or plague-stricken . 
Sometimes , but very rarely , a generous physician alone ventures to approach the ill-reputed threshold , passes it with courage , and risks his life to combat death . 
He is the last resource of the dying , the chosen instrument of heavenly mercy . 
Sire , we supplicate you , with clasped hands and bended knees , as a divinity is supplicated ! 
Madame Fouquet has no longer any friends , no longer any means of support ; she weeps in her deserted home , abandoned by all those who besieged its doors in the hour of prosperity ; she has neither credit nor hope left . 
At least , the unhappy wretch upon whom your anger falls receives from you , however culpable he may be , his daily bread though moistened by his tears . 
As much afflicted , more destitute than her husband , Madame Fouquet - the lady who had the honor to receive your majesty at her table - Madame Fouquet , the wife of the ancient superintendent of your majesty 's finances , Madame Fouquet has no longer bread . '' 
Here the mortal silence which had chained the breath of Pelisson 's two friends was broken by an outburst of sobs ; and D'Artagnan , whose chest heaved at hearing this humble prayer , turned round towards the angle of the cabinet to bite his mustache and conceal a groan . 
The king had preserved his eye dry and his countenance severe ; but the blood had mounted to his cheeks , and the firmness of his look was visibly diminished . 
`` What do you wish ? '' 
said he , in an agitated voice . 
`` We come humbly to ask your majesty , '' replied Pelisson , upon whom emotion was fast gaining , `` to permit us , without incurring the displeasure of your majesty , to lend to Madame Fouquet two thousand pistoles collected among the old friends of her husband , in order that the widow may not stand in need of the necessaries of life . '' 
At the word widow , pronounced by Pelisson whilst Fouquet was still alive , the king turned very pale ; - his pride disappeared ; pity rose from his heart to his lips ; he cast a softened look upon the men who knelt sobbing at his feet . 
`` God forbid , '' said he , `` that I should confound the innocent with the guilty . 
They know me but ill who doubt my mercy towards the weak . 
I strike none but the arrogant . 
Do , messieurs , do all that your hearts counsel you to assuage the grief of Madame Fouquet . 
Go , messieurs - go ! '' 
The three now rose in silence with dry eyes . 
The tears had been scorched away by contact with their burning cheeks and eyelids . 
They had not the strength to address their thanks to the king , who himself cut short their solemn reverences by entrenching himself suddenly behind the fauteuil . 
D'Artagnan remained alone with the king . 
`` Well , '' said he , approaching the young prince , who interrogated him with his look . 
