`` Alone ? '' 
said Grimaud , addressing Athos and pointing to Raoul in a tone of reproach , which showed to what an extent the old man was troubled . 
`` Oh ! 
you are right ! '' 
cried the comte . 
`` No , Raoul shall not go alone ; no , he shall not be left alone in a strange land without some friendly hand to support him , some friendly heart to recall to him all he loved ! '' 
`` I ? '' 
said Grimaud . 
`` You , yes , you ! '' 
cried Raoul , touched to the inmost heart . 
`` Alas ! '' 
said Athos , `` you are very old , my good Grimaud . '' 
`` So much the better , '' replied the latter , with an inexpressible depth of feeling and intelligence . 
`` But the embarkation is begun , '' said Raoul , `` and you are not prepared . '' 
`` Yes , '' said Grimaud , showing the keys of his trunks , mixed with those of his young master . 
`` But , '' again objected Raoul , `` you can not leave monsieur le comte thus alone ; monsieur le comte , whom you have never quitted ? '' 
Grimaud turned his diamond eyes upon Athos and Raoul , as if to measure the strength of both . 
The comte uttered not a word . 
`` Monsieur le comte prefers my going , '' said Grimaud . 
`` I do , '' said Athos , by an inclination of the head . 
At that moment the drums suddenly rolled , and the clarions filled the air with their inspiring notes . 
The regiments destined for the expedition began to debouch from the city . 
They advanced to the number of five , each composed of forty companies . 
Royals marched first , distinguished by their white uniform , faced with blue . 
The ordonnance colors , quartered cross-wise , violet and dead leaf , with a sprinkling of golden fleurs-de - lis , left the white-colored flag , with its fleur-de-lised cross , to dominate the whole . 
Musketeers at the wings , with their forked sticks and their muskets on their shoulders ; pikemen in the center , with their lances , fourteen feet in length , marched gayly towards the transports , which carried them in detail to the ships . 
The regiments of Picardy , Navarre , Normandy , and Royal Vaisseau , followed after . 
M. de Beaufort had known well how to select his troops . 
He himself was seen closing the march with his staff - it would take a full hour before he could reach the sea . 
Raoul with Athos turned his steps slowly towards the beach , in order to take his place when the prince embarked . 
Grimaud , boiling with the ardor of a young man , superintended the embarkation of Raoul 's baggage in the admiral 's vessel . 
Athos , with his arm passed through that of the son he was about to lose , absorbed in melancholy meditation , was deaf to every noise around him . 
An officer came quickly towards them to inform Raoul that M. de Beaufort was anxious to have him by his side . 
`` Have the kindness to tell the prince , '' said Raoul , `` that I request he will allow me this hour to enjoy the company of my father . '' 
`` No , no , '' said Athos , `` an aide-de-camp ought not thus to quit his general . 
Please to tell the prince , monsieur , that the vicomte will join him immediately . '' 
The officer set off at a gallop . 
`` Whether we part here or part there , '' added the comte , `` it is no less a separation . '' 
He carefully brushed the dust from his son 's coat , and passed his hand over his hair as they walked along . 
`` But , Raoul , '' said he , `` you want money . 
M. de Beaufort 's train will be splendid , and I am certain it will be agreeable to you to purchase horses and arms , which are very dear things in Africa . 
Now , as you are not actually in the service of the king or M. de Beaufort , and are simply a volunteer , you must not reckon upon either pay or largesse . 
But I should not like you to want for anything at Gigelli . 
Here are two hundred pistoles ; if you would please me , Raoul , spend them . '' 
Raoul pressed the hand of his father , and , at the turning of a street , they saw M. de Beaufort , mounted on a magnificent white genet , which responded by graceful curvets to the applause of the women of the city . 
The duke called Raoul , and held out his hand to the comte . 
He spoke to him for some time , with such a kindly expression that the heart of the poor father even felt a little comforted . 
It was , however , evident to both father and son that their walk amounted to nothing less than a punishment . 
There was a terrible moment - that at which , on quitting the sands of the shore , the soldiers and sailors exchanged the last kisses with their families and friends ; a supreme moment , in which , notwithstanding the clearness of the heavens , the warmth of the sun , of the perfumes of the air , and the rich life that was circulating in their veins , everything appeared black , everything bitter , everything created doubts of Providence , nay , at the most , of God . 
It was customary for the admiral and his suite to embark last ; the cannon waited to announce , with its formidable voice , that the leader had placed his foot on board his vessel . 
