`` And if M. de Gesvres should question you ? '' 
`` Question me , sire ! 
Is it likely that M. de Gesvres should question me ? '' 
And the musketeer , turning cavalierly on his heel , disappeared . 
`` To Nantes ! '' 
said he to himself , as he descended from the stairs . 
`` Why did he not dare to say , from thence to Belle-Isle ? '' 
As he reached the great gates , one of M. Brienne 's clerks came running after him , exclaiming , `` Monsieur d'Artagnan ! 
I beg your pardon - '' `` What is the matter , Monsieur Ariste ? '' 
`` The king has desired me to give you this order . '' 
`` Upon your cash-box ? '' 
asked the musketeer . 
`` No , monsieur ; on that of M. Fouquet . '' 
D'Artagnan was surprised , but he took the order , which was in the king 's own writing , and was for two hundred pistoles . 
`` What ! '' 
thought he , after having politely thanked M. Brienne 's clerk , `` M. Fouquet is to pay for the journey , then ! 
Mordioux ! 
that is a bit of pure Louis XI . 
Why was not this order on the chest of M. Colbert ? 
He would have paid it with such joy . '' 
And D'Artagnan , faithful to his principle of never letting an order at sight get cold , went straight to the house of M. Fouquet , to receive his two hundred pistoles . 
: The Last Supper . 
The superintendent had no doubt received advice of the approaching departure , for he was giving a farewell dinner to his friends . 
From the bottom to the top of the house , the hurry of the servants bearing dishes , and the diligence of the registres , denoted an approaching change in offices and kitchen . 
D'Artagnan , with his order in his hand , presented himself at the offices , when he was told it was too late to pay cash , the chest was closed . 
He only replied : `` On the king 's service . '' 
The clerk , a little put out by the serious air of the captain , replied , that `` that was a very respectable reason , but that the customs of the house were respectable likewise ; and that , in consequence , he begged the bearer to call again next day . '' 
D'Artagnan asked if he could not see M. Fouquet . 
The clerk replied that M. le surintendant did not interfere with such details , and rudely closed the outer door in the captain 's face . 
But the latter had foreseen this stroke , and placed his boot between the door and the door-case , so that the lock did not catch , and the clerk was still nose to nose with his interlocutor . 
This made him change his tone , and say , with terrified politeness , `` If monsieur wishes to speak to M. le surintendant , he must go to the ante-chambers ; these are the offices , where monseigneur never comes . '' 
`` Oh ! 
very well ! 
Where are they ? '' 
replied D'Artagnan . 
`` On the other side of the court , '' said the clerk , delighted to be free . 
D'Artagnan crossed the court , and fell in with a crowd of servants . 
`` Monseigneur sees nobody at this hour , '' he was answered by a fellow carrying a vermeil dish , in which were three pheasants and twelve quails . 
`` Tell him , '' said the captain , laying hold of the servant by the end of his dish , `` that I am M. d'Artagnan , captain of his majesty 's musketeers . '' 
The fellow uttered a cry of surprise , and disappeared ; D'Artagnan following him slowly . 
He arrived just in time to meet M. Pelisson in the ante-chamber : the latter , a little pale , came hastily out of the dining - room to learn what was the matter . 
D'Artagnan smiled . 
`` There is nothing unpleasant , Monsieur Pelisson ; only a little order to receive the money for . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fouquet 's friend , breathing more freely ; and he took the captain by the hand , and , dragging him behind him , led him into the dining-room , where a number of friends surrounded the surintendant , placed in the center , and buried in the cushions of a fauteuil . 
There were assembled all the Epicureans who so lately at Vaux had done the honors of the mansion of wit and money in aid of M. Fouquet . 
Joyous friends , for the most part faithful , they had not fled their protector at the approach of the storm , and , in spite of the threatening heavens , in spite of the trembling earth , they remained there , smiling , cheerful , as devoted in misfortune as they had been in prosperity . 
On the left of the surintendant sat Madame de Belliere ; on his right was Madame Fouquet ; as if braving the laws of the world , and putting all vulgar reasons of propriety to silence , the two protecting angels of this man united to offer , at the moment of the crisis , the support of their twined arms . 
Madame de Belliere was pale , trembling , and full of respectful attentions for madame la surintendante , who , with one hand on her husband 's , was looking anxiously towards the door by which Pelisson had gone out to bring D'Artagnan . 
The captain entered at first full of courtesy , and afterwards of admiration , when , with his infallible glance , he had divined as well as taken in the expression of every face . 
