`` He ! 
it is not at all likely . 
Defend himself when such extreme harshness as you are going to practice makes the man a very martyr ! 
Nay , I am sure that if he has a million of francs left , which I very much doubt , he would be willing enough to give it in order to have such a termination as this . 
But what does that matter ? 
it shall be done at once . '' 
`` Stay , '' said the king ; `` do not make his arrest a public affair . '' 
`` That will be more difficult . '' 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` Because nothing is easier than to go up to M. Fouquet in the midst of a thousand enthusiastic guests who surround him , and say , ` In the king 's name , I arrest you . ' 
But to go up to him , to turn him first one way and then another , to drive him up into one of the corners of the chess-board , in such a way that he can not escape ; to take him away from his guests , and keep him a prisoner for you , without one of them , alas ! 
having heard anything about it ; that , indeed , is a genuine difficulty , the greatest of all , in truth ; and I hardly see how it is to be done . '' 
`` You had better say it is impossible , and you will have finished much sooner . 
Heaven help me , but I seem to be surrounded by people who prevent me doing what I wish . '' 
`` I do not prevent your doing anything . 
Have you indeed decided ? '' 
`` Take care of M. Fouquet , until I shall have made up my mind by to-morrow morning . '' 
`` That shall be done , sire . '' 
`` And return , when I rise in the morning , for further orders ; and now leave me to myself . '' 
`` You do not even want M. Colbert , then ? '' 
said the musketeer , firing his last shot as he was leaving the room . 
The king started . 
With his whole mind fixed on the thought of revenge , he had forgotten the cause and substance of the offense . 
`` No , no one , '' he said ; `` no one here ! 
Leave me . '' 
D'Artagnan quitted the room . 
The king closed the door with his own hands , and began to walk up and down his apartment at a furious pace , like a wounded bull in an arena , trailing from his horn the colored streamers and the iron darts . 
At last he began to take comfort in the expression of his violent feelings . 
`` Miserable wretch that he is ! 
not only does he squander my finances , but with his ill-gotten plunder he corrupts secretaries , friends , generals , artists , and all , and tries to rob me of the one to whom I am most attached . 
This is the reason that perfidious girl so boldly took his part ! 
Gratitude ! 
and who can tell whether it was not a stronger feeling - love itself ? '' 
He gave himself up for a moment to the bitterest reflections . 
`` A satyr ! '' 
he thought , with that abhorrent hate with which young men regard those more advanced in life , who still think of love . 
`` A man who has never found opposition or resistance in any one , who lavishes his gold and jewels in every direction , and who retains his staff of painters in order to take the portraits of his mistresses in the costume of goddesses . '' 
The king trembled with passion as he continued , `` He pollutes and profanes everything that belongs to me ! 
He destroys everything that is mine . 
He will be my death at last , I know . 
That man is too much for me ; he is my mortal enemy , but he shall forthwith fall ! 
I hate him - I hate him - I hate him ! '' 
and as he pronounced these words , he struck the arm of the chair in which he was sitting violently , over and over again , and then rose like one in an epileptic fit . 
`` To-morrow ! 
to-morrow ! 
oh , happy day ! '' 
he murmured , `` when the sun rises , no other rival shall that brilliant king of space possess but me . 
That man shall fall so low that when people look at the abject ruin my anger shall have wrought , they will be forced to confess at last and at least that I am indeed greater than he . '' 
The king , who was incapable of mastering his emotions any longer , knocked over with a blow of his fist a small table placed close to his bedside , and in the very bitterness of anger , almost weeping , and half-suffocated , he threw himself on his bed , dressed as he was , and bit the sheets in his extremity of passion , trying to find repose of body at least there . 
The bed creaked beneath his weight , and with the exception of a few broken sounds , emerging , or , one might say , exploding , from his overburdened chest , absolute silence soon reigned in the chamber of Morpheus . 
