`` Neither strangle anybody nor smash anything , Porthos ; I will manage it all ; put on one of your thirty-six suits , and come with me to a tailor . '' 
`` Pooh ! 
my agent has seen them all this morning . '' 
`` Even M. Percerin ? '' 
`` Who is M. Percerin ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
only the king 's tailor ! '' 
`` Oh , ah , yes , '' said Porthos , who wished to appear to know the king 's tailor , but now heard his name mentioned for the first time ; `` to M. Percerin 's , by Jove ! 
I was afraid he would be too busy . '' 
`` Doubtless he will be ; but be at ease , Porthos ; he will do for me what he would n't do for another . 
Only you must allow yourself to be measured ! '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Porthos , with a sigh , '' 't is vexatious , but what would you have me do ? '' 
`` Do ? 
As others do ; as the king does . '' 
`` What ! 
do they measure the king , too ? 
does he put up with it ? '' 
`` The king is a beau , my good friend , and so are you , too , whatever you may say about it . '' 
Porthos smiled triumphantly . 
`` Let us go to the king 's tailor , '' he said ; `` and since he measures the king , I think , by my faith , I may do worse than allow him to measure me ! '' 
: Who Messire Jean Percerin Was . 
The king 's tailor , Messire Jean Percerin , occupied a rather large house in the Rue St. Honore , near the Rue de l'Arbre Sec . 
He was a man of great taste in elegant stuffs , embroideries , and velvets , being hereditary tailor to the king . 
The preferment of his house reached as far back as the time of Charles IX. ; from whose reign dated , as we know , fancy in bravery difficult enough to gratify . 
The Percerin of that period was a Huguenot , like Ambrose Pare , and had been spared by the Queen of Navarre , the beautiful Margot , as they used to write and say , too , in those days ; because , in sooth , he was the only one who could make for her those wonderful riding-habits which she so loved to wear , seeing that they were marvelously well suited to hide certain anatomical defects , which the Queen of Navarre used very studiously to conceal . 
Percerin being saved , made , out of gratitude , some beautiful black bodices , very inexpensively indeed , for Queen Catherine , who ended by being pleased at the preservation of a Huguenot people , on whom she had long looked with detestation . 
But Percerin was a very prudent man ; and having heard it said that there was no more dangerous sign for a Protestant than to be smiled up on by Catherine , and having observed that her smiles were more frequent than usual , he speedily turned Catholic with all his family ; and having thus become irreproachable , attained the lofty position of master tailor to the Crown of France . 
Under Henry III. , gay king as he was , this position was a grand as the height of one of the loftiest peaks of the Cordilleras . 
Now Percerin had been a clever man all his life , and by way of keeping up his reputation beyond the grave , took very good care not to make a bad death of it , and so contrived to die very skillfully ; and that at the very moment he felt his powers of invention declining . 
He left a son and a daughter , both worthy of the name they were called upon to bear ; the son , a cutter as unerring and exact as the square rule ; the daughter , apt at embroidery , and at designing ornaments . 
The marriage of Henry IV . 
and Marie de Medici , and the exquisite court-mourning for the afore-mentioned queen , together with a few words let fall by M. de Bassompiere , king of the beaux of the period , made the fortune of the second generation of Percerins . 
M. Concino Concini , and his wife Galligai , who subsequently shone at the French court , sought to Italianize the fashion , and introduced some Florentine tailors ; but Percerin , touched to the quick in his patriotism and his self-esteem , entirely defeated these foreigners , and that so well that Concino was the first to give up his compatriots , and held the French tailor in such esteem that he would never employ any other , and thus wore a doublet of his on the very day that Vitry blew out his brains with a pistol at the Pont du Louvre . 
And so it was a doublet issuing from M. Percerin 's workshop , which the Parisians rejoiced in hacking into so many pieces with the living human body it contained . 
Notwithstanding the favor Concino Concini had shown Percerin , the king , Louis XIII. , had the generosity to bear no malice to his tailor , and to retain him in his service . 
At the time that Louis the Just afforded this great example of equity , Percerin had brought up two sons , one of whom made his debut at the marriage of Anne of Austria , invented that admirable Spanish costume , in which Richelieu danced a saraband , made the costumes for the tragedy of `` Mirame , '' and stitched on to Buckingham 's mantle those famous pearls which were destined to be scattered about the pavements of the Louvre . 
A man becomes easily notable who has made the dresses of a Duke of Buckingham , a M. de Cinq - Mars , a Mademoiselle Ninon , a M. de Beaufort , and a Marion de Lorme . 
And thus Percerin the third had attained the summit of his glory when his father died . 
This same Percerin III. , old , famous and wealthy , yet further dressed Louis XIV. ; and having no son , which was a great cause of sorrow to him , seeing that with himself his dynasty would end , he had brought up several hopeful pupils . 
He possessed a carriage , a country house , men-servants the tallest in Paris ; and by special authority from Louis XIV. , a pack of hounds . 
He worked for MM . 
de Lyonne and Letellier , under a sort of patronage ; but politic man as he was , and versed in state secrets , he never succeeded in fitting M. Colbert . 
This is beyond explanation ; it is a matter for guessing or for intuition . 
Great geniuses of every kind live on unseen , intangible ideas ; they act without themselves knowing why . 
The great Percerin -LRB- for , contrary to the rule of dynasties , it was , above all , the last of the Percerins who deserved the name of Great -RRB- , the great Percerin was inspired when he cut a robe for the queen , or a coat for the king ; he could mount a mantle for Monsieur , the clock of a stocking for Madame ; but , in spite of his supreme talent , he could never hit off anything approaching a creditable fit for M. Colbert . 
`` That man , '' he used often to say , `` is beyond my art ; my needle can never dot him down . '' 
We need scarcely say that Percerin was M. Fouquet 's tailor , and that the superintendent highly esteemed him . 
M. Percerin was nearly eighty years old , nevertheless still fresh , and at the same time so dry , the courtiers used to say , that he was positively brittle . 
His renown and his fortune were great enough for M. le Prince , that king of fops , to take his arm when talking over the fashions ; and for those least eager to pay never to dare to leave their accounts in arrear with him ; for Master Percerin would for the first time make clothes upon credit , but the second never , unless paid for the former order . 
