Baisemeaux obeyed . 
He summoned his lieutenant , and gave him an order , which the latter passed on , without disturbing himself about it , to the next whom it concerned . 
Half an hour afterwards they heard a gate shut in the court ; it was the door to the dungeon , which had just rendered up its prey to the free air . 
Aramis blew out all the candles which lighted the room but one , which he left burning behind the door . 
This flickering glare prevented the sight from resting steadily on any object . 
It multiplied tenfold the changing forms and shadows of the place , by its wavering uncertainty . 
Steps drew near . 
`` Go and meet your men , '' said Aramis to Baisemeaux . 
The governor obeyed . 
The sergeant and turnkeys disappeared . 
Baisemeaux re-entered , followed by a prisoner . 
Aramis had placed himself in the shade ; he saw without being seen . 
Baisemeaux , in an agitated tone of voice , made the young man acquainted with the order which set him at liberty . 
The prisoner listened , without making a single gesture or saying a word . '' 
`` You will swear -LRB- 't is the regulation that requires it -RRB- , '' added the governor , `` never to reveal anything that you have seen or heard in the Bastile . '' 
The prisoner perceived a crucifix ; he stretched out his hands and swore with his lips . 
`` And now , monsieur , you are free . 
Whither do you intend going ? '' 
The prisoner turned his head , as if looking behind him for some protection , on which he ought to rely . 
Then was it that Aramis came out of the shade : `` I am here , '' he said , `` to render the gentleman whatever service he may please to ask . '' 
The prisoner slightly reddened , and , without hesitation , passed his arm through that of Aramis . 
`` God have you in his holy keeping , '' he said , in a voice the firmness of which made the governor tremble as much as the form of the blessing astonished him . 
Aramis , on shaking hands with Baisemeaux , said to him ; `` Does my order trouble you ? 
Do you fear their finding it here , should they come to search ? '' 
`` I desire to keep it , monseigneur , '' said Baisemeaux . 
`` If they found it here , it would be a certain indication I should be lost , and in that case you would be a powerful and a last auxiliary for me . '' 
`` Being your accomplice , you mean ? '' 
answered Aramis , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` Adieu , Baisemeaux , '' said he . 
The horses were in waiting , making each rusty spring reverberate the carriage again with their impatience . 
Baisemeaux accompanied the bishop to the bottom of the steps . 
Aramis caused his companion to mount before him , then followed , and without giving the driver any further order , `` Go on , '' said he . 
The carriage rattled over the pavement of the courtyard . 
An officer with a torch went before the horses , and gave orders at every post to let them pass . 
During the time taken in opening all the barriers , Aramis barely breathed , and you might have heard his `` sealed heart knock against his ribs . '' 
The prisoner , buried in a corner of the carriage , made no more sign of life than his companion . 
At length , a jolt more sever than the others announced to them that they had cleared the last watercourse . 
Behind the carriage closed the last gate , that in the Rue St. Antoine . 
No more walls either on the right or the left ; heaven everywhere , liberty everywhere , and life everywhere . 
The horses , kept in check by a vigorous hand , went quietly as far as the middle of the faubourg . 
There they began to trot . 
Little by little , whether they were warming to their work , or whether they were urged , they gained in swiftness , and once past Bercy , the carriage seemed to fly , so great was the ardor of the coursers . 
The horses galloped thus as far as Villeneuve St. George 's , where relays were waiting . 
Then four instead of two whirled the carriage away in the direction of Melun , and pulled up for a moment in the middle of the forest of Senart . 
No doubt the order had been given the postilion beforehand , for Aramis had no occasion even to make a sign . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked the prisoner , as if waking from a long dream . 
`` The matter is , monseigneur , '' said Aramis , `` that before going further , it is necessary your royal highness and I should converse . '' 
`` I will await an opportunity , monsieur , '' answered the young prince . 
`` We could not have a better , monseigneur . 
