: The Angel of Death . 
Athos was at this part of his marvelous vision , when the charm was suddenly broken by a great noise rising from the outer gates . 
A horse was heard galloping over the hard gravel of the great alley , and the sound of noisy and animated conversations ascended to the chamber in which the comte was dreaming . 
Athos did not stir from the place he occupied ; he scarcely turned his head towards the door to ascertain the sooner what these noises could be . 
A heavy step ascended the stairs ; the horse , which had recently galloped , departed slowly towards the stables . 
Great hesitation appeared in the steps , which by degrees approached the chamber . 
A door was opened , and Athos , turning a little towards the part of the room the noise came from , cried , in a weak voice : `` It is a courier from Africa , is it not ? '' 
`` No , monsieur le comte , '' replied a voice which made the father of Raoul start upright in his bed . 
`` Grimaud ! '' 
murmured he . 
And the sweat began to pour down his face . 
Grimaud appeared in the doorway . 
It was no longer the Grimaud we have seen , still young with courage and devotion , when he jumped the first into the boat destined to convey Raoul de Bragelonne to the vessels of the royal fleet . 
'T was now a stern and pale old man , his clothes covered with dust , and hair whitened by old age . 
He trembled whilst leaning against the door-frame , and was near falling on seeing , by the light of the lamps , the countenance of his master . 
These two men who had lived so long together in a community of intelligence , and whose eyes , accustomed to economize expressions , knew how to say so many things silently - these two old friends , one as noble as the other in heart , if they were unequal in fortune and birth , remained tongue-tied whilst looking at each other . 
By the exchange of a single glance they had just read to the bottom of each other 's hearts . 
The old servitor bore upon his countenance the impression of a grief already old , the outward token of a grim familiarity with woe . 
He appeared to have no longer in use more than a single version of his thoughts . 
As formerly he was accustomed not to speak much , he was now accustomed not to smile at all . 
Athos read at a glance all these shades upon the visage of his faithful servant , and in the same tone he would have employed to speak to Raoul in his dream : `` Grimaud , '' said he , `` Raoul is dead . 
Is it not so ? '' 
Behind Grimaud the other servants listened breathlessly , with their eyes fixed upon the bed of their sick master . 
They heard the terrible question , and a heart-breaking silence followed . 
`` Yes , '' replied the old man , heaving the monosyllable from his chest with a hoarse , broken sigh . 
Then arose voices of lamentation , which groaned without measure , and filled with regrets and prayers the chamber where the agonized father sought with his eyes the portrait of his son . 
This was for Athos like the transition which led to his dream . 
Without uttering a cry , without shedding a tear , patient , mild , resigned as a martyr , he raised his eyes towards Heaven , in order there to see again , rising above the mountain of Gigelli , the beloved shade that was leaving him at the moment of Grimaud 's arrival . 
Without doubt , while looking towards the heavens , resuming his marvelous dream , he repassed by the same road by which the vision , at once so terrible and sweet , had led him before ; for after having gently closed his eyes , he reopened them and began to smile : he had just seen Raoul , who had smiled upon him . 
With his hands joined upon his breast , his face turned towards the window , bathed by the fresh air of night , which brought upon its wings the aroma of the flowers and the woods , Athos entered , never again to come out of it , into the contemplation of that paradise which the living never see . 
God willed , no doubt , to open to this elect the treasures of eternal beatitude , at this hour when other men tremble with the idea of being severely received by the Lord , and cling to this life they know , in the dread of the other life of which they get but merest glimpses by the dismal murky torch of death . 
Athos was spirit-guided by the pure serene soul of his son , which aspired to be like the paternal soul . 
Everything for this just man was melody and perfume in the rough road souls take to return to the celestial country . 
After an hour of this ecstasy , Athos softly raised his hands as white as wax ; the smile did not quit his lips , and he murmured low , so low as scarcely to be audible , these three words addressed to God or to Raoul : `` HERE I AM ! '' 
And his hands fell slowly , as though he himself had laid them on the bed . 
Death had been kind and mild to this noble creature . 
It had spared him the tortures of the agony , convulsions of the last departure ; had opened with an indulgent finger the gates of eternity to that noble soul . 
God had no doubt ordered it thus that the pious remembrance of this death should remain in the hearts of those present , and in the memory of other men - a death which caused to be loved the passage from this life to the other by those whose existence upon this earth leads them not to dread the last judgment . 
Athos preserved , even in the eternal sleep , that placid and sincere smile - an ornament which was to accompany him to the tomb . 
The quietude and calm of his fine features made his servants for a long time doubt whether he had really quitted life . 
The comte 's people wished to remove Grimaud , who , from a distance , devoured the face now quickly growing marble-pale , and did not approach , from pious fear of bringing to him the breath of death . 
But Grimaud , fatigued as he was , refused to leave the room . 
He sat himself down upon the threshold , watching his master with the vigilance of a sentinel , jealous to receive either his first waking look or his last dying sigh . 
The noises all were quiet in the house - every one respected the slumber of their lord . 
But Grimaud , by anxiously listening , perceived that the comte no longer breathed . 
He raised himself with his hands leaning on the ground , looked to see if there did not appear some motion in the body of his master . 
Nothing ! 
Fear seized him ; he rose completely up , and , at the very moment , heard some one coming up the stairs . 
A noise of spurs knocking against a sword - a warlike sound familiar to his ears - stopped him as he was going towards the bed of Athos . 
A voice more sonorous than brass or steel resounded within three paces of him . 
