`` No , monsieur , such a ride is worth no more than a crown ; that is what M. Grimaud , the comte 's intendant , always pays me when he makes use of that carriage ; and I should not wish the Comte de la Fere to have to reproach me with having imposed on one of his friends . '' 
`` As you please , '' said Aramis , `` particularly as regards disobliging the Comte de la Fere ; only I think I have a right to give you a louis for your idea . '' 
`` Oh ! 
doubtless , '' replied the postmaster with delight . 
And he himself harnessed the ancient horse to the creaking carriage . 
In the meantime Porthos was curious to behold . 
He imagined he had discovered a clew to the secret , and he felt pleased , because a visit to Athos , in the first place , promised him much satisfaction , and , in the next , gave him the hope of finding at the same time a good bed and good supper . 
The master , having got the carriage ready , ordered one of his men to drive the strangers to La Fere . 
Porthos took his seat by the side of Aramis , whispering in his ear , `` I understand . '' 
`` Aha ! '' 
said Aramis , `` and what do you understand , my friend ? '' 
`` We are going , on the part of the king , to make some great proposal to Athos . '' 
`` Pooh ! '' 
said Aramis . 
`` You need tell me nothing about it , '' added the worthy Porthos , endeavoring to reseat himself so as to avoid the jolting , `` you need tell me nothing , I shall guess . '' 
`` Well ! 
do , my friend ; guess away . '' 
They arrived at Athos 's dwelling about nine o'clock in the evening , favored by a splendid moon . 
This cheerful light rejoiced Porthos beyond expression ; but Aramis appeared annoyed by it in an equal degree . 
He could not help showing something of this to Porthos , who replied - `` Ay ! 
ay ! 
I guess how it is ! 
the mission is a secret one . '' 
These were his last words in the carriage . 
The driver interrupted him by saying , `` Gentlemen , we have arrived . '' 
Porthos and his companion alighted before the gate of the little chateau , where we are about to meet again our old acquaintances Athos and Bragelonne , the latter of whom had disappeared since the discovery of the infidelity of La Valliere . 
If there be one saying truer than another , it is this : great griefs contain within themselves the germ of consolation . 
This painful wound , inflicted upon Raoul , had drawn him nearer to his father again ; and God knows how sweet were the consolations which flowed from the eloquent mouth and generous heart of Athos . 
The wound was not cicatrized , but Athos , by dint of conversing with his son and mixing a little more of his life with that of the young man , had brought him to understand that this pang of a first infidelity is necessary to every human existence ; and that no one has loved without encountering it . 
Raoul listened , again and again , but never understood . 
Nothing replaces in the deeply afflicted heart the remembrance and thought of the beloved object . 
Raoul then replied to the reasoning of his father : `` Monsieur , all that you tell me is true ; I believe that no one has suffered in the affections of the heart so much as you have ; but you are a man too great by reason of intelligence , and too severely tried by adverse fortune not to allow for the weakness of the soldier who suffers for the first time . 
I am paying a tribute that will not be paid a second time ; permit me to plunge myself so deeply in my grief that I may forget myself in it , that I may drown even my reason in it . '' 
`` Raoul ! 
Raoul ! '' 
`` Listen , monsieur . 
Never shall I accustom myself to the idea that Louise , the chastest and most innocent of women , has been able to so basely deceive a man so honest and so true a lover as myself . 
Never can I persuade myself that I see that sweet and noble mask change into a hypocritical lascivious face . 
Louise lost ! 
Louise infamous ! 
Ah ! 
monseigneur , that idea is much more cruel to me than Raoul abandoned -- Raoul unhappy ! '' 
Athos then employed the heroic remedy . 
He defended Louise against Raoul , and justified her perfidy by her love . 
`` A woman who would have yielded to a king because he is a king , '' said he , `` would deserve to be styled infamous ; but Louise loves Louis . 
Young , both , they have forgotten , he his rank , she her vows . 
Love absolves everything , Raoul . 
The two young people love each other with sincerity . '' 
And when he had dealt this severe poniard-thrust , Athos , with a sigh , saw Raoul bound away beneath the rankling wound , and fly to the thickest recesses of the wood , or the solitude of his chamber , whence , an hour after , he would return , pale , trembling , but subdued . 
Then , coming up to Athos with a smile , he would kiss his hand , like the dog who , having been beaten , caresses a respected master , to redeem his fault . 
