thanks ! 
thou keepest thy promise , thou warnest me ! '' 
And Athos , seized with a mortal sweat , fainted in his bed , without any other cause than weakness . 
: Athos 's Vision . 
When this fainting of Athos had ceased , the comte , almost ashamed of having given way before this superior natural event , dressed himself and ordered his horse , determined to ride to Blois , to open more certain correspondences with either Africa , D'Artagnan , or Aramis . 
In fact , this letter from Aramis informed the Comte de la Fere of the bad success of the expedition of Belle-Isle . 
It gave him sufficient details of the death of Porthos to move the tender and devoted heart of Athos to its innermost fibers . 
Athos wished to go and pay his friend Porthos a last visit . 
To render this honor to his companion in arms , he meant to send to D'Artagnan , to prevail upon him to recommence the painful voyage to Belle-Isle , to accomplish in his company that sad pilgrimage to the tomb of the giant he had so much loved , then to return to his dwelling to obey that secret influence which was conducting him to eternity by a mysterious road . 
But scarcely had his joyous servants dressed their master , whom they saw with pleasure preparing for a journey which might dissipate his melancholy ; scarcely had the comte 's gentlest horse been saddled and brought to the door , when the father of Raoul felt his head become confused , his legs give way , and he clearly perceived the impossibility of going one step further . 
He ordered himself to be carried into the sun ; they laid him upon his bed of moss where he passed a full hour before he could recover his spirits . 
Nothing could be more natural than this weakness after then inert repose of the latter days . 
Athos took a bouillon , to give him strength , and bathed his dried lips in a glassful of the wine he loved the best - that old Anjou wine mentioned by Porthos in his admirable will . 
Then , refreshed , free in mind , he had his horse brought again ; but only with the aid of his servants was he able painfully to climb into the saddle . 
He did not go a hundred paces ; a shivering seized him again at the turning of the road . 
`` This is very strange ! '' 
said he to his valet de chambre , who accompanied him . 
`` Let us stop , monsieur - I conjure you ! '' 
replied the faithful servant ; `` how pale you are getting ! '' 
`` That will not prevent my pursuing my route , now I have once started , '' replied the comte . 
And he gave his horse his head again . 
But suddenly , the animal , instead of obeying the thought of his master , stopped . 
A movement , of which Athos was unconscious , had checked the bit . 
`` Something , '' said Athos , `` wills that I should go no further . 
Support me , '' added he , stretching out his arms ; `` quick ! 
come closer ! 
I feel my muscles relax - I shall fall from my horse . '' 
The valet had seen the movement made by his master at the moment he received the order . 
He went up to him quickly , received the comte in his arms , and as they were not yet sufficiently distant from the house for the servants , who had remained at the door to watch their master 's departure , not to perceive the disorder in the usually regular proceeding of the comte , the valet called his comrades by gestures and voice , and all hastened to his assistance . 
Athos had gone but a few steps on his return , when he felt himself better again . 
His strength seemed to revive and with it the desire to go to Blois . 
He made his horse turn round : but , at the animal 's first steps , he sunk again into a state of torpor and anguish . 
`` Well ! 
decidedly , '' said he , `` it is willed that I should stay at home . '' 
His people flocked around him ; they lifted him from his horse , and carried him as quickly as possible into the house . 
Everything was prepared in his chamber , and they put him to bed . 
`` You will be sure to remember , '' said he , disposing himself to sleep , `` that I expect letters from Africa this very day . '' 
`` Monsieur will no doubt hear with pleasure that Blaisois 's son is gone on horseback , to gain an hour over the courier of Blois , '' replied his valet de chambre . 
`` Thank you , '' replied Athos , with his placid smile . 
The comte fell asleep , but his disturbed slumber resembled torture rather than repose . 
The servant who watched him saw several times the expression of internal suffering shadowed on his features . 
Perhaps Athos was dreaming . 
The day passed away . 
Blaisois 's son returned ; the courier had brought no news . 
The comte reckoned the minutes with despair ; he shuddered when those minutes made an hour . 
The idea that he was forgotten seized him once , and brought on a fearful pang of the heart . 
Everybody in the house had given up all hopes of the courier - his hour had long passed . 
Four times the express sent to Blois had repeated his journey , and there was nothing to the address of the comte . 
Athos knew that the courier only arrived once a week . 
Here , then , was a delay of eight mortal days to be endured . 
