`` That is just , '' said Philippe , with resignation ; `` I am ready . '' 
`` Aramis was right , '' said Fouquet , in a low voice , to the musketeer , `` this one is every whit as much a king as the other . '' 
`` More so ! '' 
replied D'Artagnan . 
`` He wanted only you and me . '' 
: In Which Porthos Thinks He Is Pursuing a Duchy . 
Aramis and Porthos , having profited by the time granted them by Fouquet , did honor to the French cavalry by their speed . 
Porthos did not clearly understand on what kind of mission he was forced to display so much velocity ; but as he saw Aramis spurring on furiously , he , Porthos , spurred on in the same way . 
They had soon , in this manner , placed twelve leagues between them and Vaux ; they were then obliged to change horses , and organize a sort of post arrangement . 
It was during a relay that Porthos ventured to interrogate Aramis discreetly . 
`` Hush ! '' 
replied the latter , `` know only that our fortune depends on our speed . '' 
As if Porthos had still been the musketeer , without a sou or a maille of 1626 , he pushed forward . 
That magic word `` fortune '' always means something in the human ear . 
It means enough for those who have nothing ; it means too much for those who have enough . 
`` I shall be made a duke ! '' 
said Porthos , aloud . 
He was speaking to himself . 
`` That is possible , '' replied Aramis , smiling after his own fashion , as Porthos 's horse passed him . 
Aramis felt , notwithstanding , as though his brain were on fire ; the activity of the body had not yet succeeded in subduing that of the mind . 
All there is of raging passion , mental toothache or mortal threat , raged , gnawed and grumbled in the thoughts of the unhappy prelate . 
His countenance exhibited visible traces of this rude combat . 
Free on the highway to abandon himself to every impression of the moment , Aramis did not fail to swear at every start of his horse , at every inequality in the road . 
Pale , at times inundated with boiling sweats , then again dry and icy , he flogged his horses till the blood streamed from their sides . 
Porthos , whose dominant fault was not sensibility , groaned at this . 
Thus traveled they on for eight long hours , and then arrived at Orleans . 
It was four o'clock in the afternoon . 
Aramis , on observing this , judged that nothing showed pursuit to be a possibility . 
It would be without example that a troop capable of taking him and Porthos should be furnished with relays sufficient to perform forty leagues in eight hours . 
Thus , admitting pursuit , which was not at all manifest , the fugitives were five hours in advance of their pursuers . 
Aramis thought that there might be no imprudence in taking a little rest , but that to continue would make the matter more certain . 
Twenty leagues more , performed with the same rapidity , twenty more leagues devoured , and no one , not even D'Artagnan , could overtake the enemies of the king . 
Aramis felt obliged , therefore , to inflict upon Porthos the pain of mounting on horseback again . 
They rode on till seven o'clock in the evening , and had only one post more between them and Blois . 
But here a diabolical accident alarmed Aramis greatly . 
There were no horses at the post . 
The prelate asked himself by what infernal machination his enemies had succeeded in depriving him of the means of going further , - he who never recognized chance as a deity , who found a cause for every accident , preferred believing that the refusal of the postmaster , at such an hour , in such a country , was the consequence of an order emanating from above : an order given with a view of stopping short the king-maker in the midst of his flight . 
But at the moment he was about to fly into a passion , so as to procure either a horse or an explanation , he was struck with the recollection that the Comte de la Fere lived in the neighborhood . 
`` I am not traveling , '' said he ; `` I do not want horses for a whole stage . 
Find me two horses to go and pay a visit to a nobleman of my acquaintance who resides near this place . '' 
`` What nobleman ? '' 
asked the postmaster . 
`` M. le Comte de la Fere . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
replied the postmaster , uncovering with respect , `` a very worthy nobleman . 
But , whatever may be my desire to make myself agreeable to him , I can not furnish you with horses , for all mine are engaged by M. le Duc de Beaufort . '' 
`` Indeed ! '' 
said Aramis , much disappointed . 
`` Only , '' continued the postmaster , `` if you will put up with a little carriage I have , I will harness an old blind horse who has still his legs left , and peradventure will draw you to the house of M. le Comte de la Fere . '' 
`` It is worth a louis , '' said Aramis . 
