That same day they set out for Sainte-Marguerite 's , on board a chasse - maree come from Toulon under orders . 
The impression they experienced on landing was a singularly pleasing one . 
The island seemed loaded with flowers and fruits . 
In its cultivated part it served as a garden for the governor . 
Orange , pomegranate , and fig trees bent beneath the weight of their golden or purple fruits . 
All round this garden , in the uncultivated parts , red partridges ran about in conveys among the brambles and tufts of junipers , and at every step of the comte and Raoul a terrified rabbit quitted his thyme and heath to scuttle away to the burrow . 
In fact , this fortunate isle was uninhabited . 
Flat , offering nothing but a tiny bay for the convenience of embarkation , and under the protection of the governor , who went shares with them , smugglers made use of it as a provisional entrepot , at the expense of not killing the game or devastating the garden . 
With this compromise , the governor was in a situation to be satisfied with a garrison of eight men to guard his fortress , in which twelve cannons accumulated coats of moldy green . 
The governor was a sort of happy farmer , harvesting wines , figs , oil , and oranges , preserving his citrons and cedrates in the sun of his casemates . 
The fortress , encircled by a deep ditch , its only guardian , arose like three heads upon turrets connected with each other by terraces covered with moss . 
Athos and Raoul wandered for some time round the fences of the garden without finding any one to introduce them to the governor . 
They ended by making their own way into the garden . 
It was at the hottest time of the day . 
Each living thing sought its shelter under grass or stone . 
The heavens spread their fiery veils as if to stifle all noises , to envelop all existences ; the rabbit under the broom , the fly under the leaf , slept as the wave did beneath the heavens . 
Athos saw nothing living but a soldier , upon the terrace beneath the second and third court , who was carrying a basket of provisions on his head . 
This man returned almost immediately without his basket , and disappeared in the shade of his sentry-box . 
Athos supposed he must have been carrying dinner to some one , and , after having done so , returned to dine himself . 
All at once they heard some one call out , and raising their heads , perceived in the frame of the bars of the window something of a white color , like a hand that was waved backwards and forwards - something shining , like a polished weapon struck by the rays of the sun . 
And before they were able to ascertain what it was , a luminous train , accompanied by a hissing sound in the air , called their attention from the donjon to the ground . 
A second dull noise was heard from the ditch , and Raoul ran to pick up a silver plate which was rolling along the dry sand . 
The hand that had thrown this plate made a sign to the two gentlemen , and then disappeared . 
Athos and Raoul , approaching each other , commenced an attentive examination of the dusty plate , and they discovered , in characters traced upon the bottom of it with the point of a knife , this inscription : `` I am the brother of the king of France - a prisoner to-day - a madman to-morrow . 
French gentlemen and Christians , pray to God for the soul and the reason of the son of your old rulers . '' 
The plate fell from the hands of Athos whilst Raoul was endeavoring to make out the meaning of these dismal words . 
At the same moment they heard a cry from the top of the donjon . 
Quick as lightning Raoul bent down his head , and forced down that of his father likewise . 
A musket - barrel glittered from the crest of the wall . 
A white smoke floated like a plume from the mouth of the musket , and a ball was flattened against a stone within six inches of the two gentlemen . 
`` Cordieu ! '' 
cried Athos . 
`` What , are people assassinated here ? 
Come down , cowards as you are ! '' 
`` Yes , come down ! '' 
cried Raoul , furiously shaking his fist at the castle . 
One of the assailants - he who was about to fire - replied to these cries by an exclamation of surprise ; and , as his companion , who wished to continue the attack , had re-seized his loaded musket , he who had cried out threw up the weapon , and the ball flew into the air . 
Athos and Raoul , seeing them disappear from the platform , expected they would come down to them , and waited with a firm demeanor . 
Five minutes had not elapsed , when a stroke upon a drum called the eight soldiers of the garrison to arms , and they showed themselves on the other side of the ditch with their muskets in hand . 
At the head of these men was an officer , whom Athos and Raoul recognized as the one who had fired the first musket . 
The man ordered the soldiers to `` make ready . '' 
`` We are going to be shot ! '' 
cried Raoul ; `` but , sword in hand , at least , let us leap the ditch ! 
We shall kill at least two of these scoundrels , when their muskets are empty . '' 
And , suiting the action to the word , Raoul was springing forward , followed by Athos , when a well-known voice resounded behind them , `` Athos ! 
Raoul ! '' 
`` D'Artagnan ! '' 
replied the two gentlemen . 
`` Recover arms ! 
Mordioux ! '' 
