returned Fouquet , with a gloomy look . 
`` To my own apartment , in order to change my costume , monseigneur . '' 
`` Whereabouts are you lodging , D'Herblay ? '' 
`` In the blue room on the second story . '' 
`` The room immediately over the king 's room ? '' 
`` Precisely . '' 
`` You will be subject to very great restraint there . 
What an idea to condemn yourself to a room where you can not stir or move about ! '' 
`` During the night , monseigneur , I sleep or read in my bed . '' 
`` And your servants ? '' 
`` I have but one attendant with me . 
I find my reader quite sufficient . 
Adieu , monseigneur ; do not overfatigue yourself ; keep yourself fresh for the arrival of the king . '' 
`` We shall see you by and by , I suppose , and shall see your friend Du Vallon also ? '' 
`` He is lodging next to me , and is at this moment dressing . '' 
And Fouquet , bowing , with a smile , passed on like a commander-in-chief who pays the different outposts a visit after the enemy has been signaled in sight . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- : The Wine of Melun . 
The king had , in point of fact , entered Melun with the intention of merely passing through the city . 
The youthful monarch was most eagerly anxious for amusements ; only twice during the journey had he been able to catch a glimpse of La Valliere , and , suspecting that his only opportunity of speaking to her would be after nightfall , in the gardens , and after the ceremonial of reception had been gone through , he had been very desirous to arrive at Vaux as early as possible . 
But he reckoned without his captain of the musketeers , and without M. Colbert . 
Like Calypso , who could not be consoled at the departure of Ulysses , our Gascon could not console himself for not having guessed why Aramis had asked Percerin to show him the king 's new costumes . 
`` There is not a doubt , '' he said to himself , `` that my friend the bishop of Vannes had some motive in that ; '' and then he began to rack his brains most uselessly . 
D'Artagnan , so intimately acquainted with all the court intrigues , who knew the position of Fouquet better than even Fouquet himself did , had conceived the strangest fancies and suspicions at the announcement of the fete , which would have ruined a wealthy man , and which became impossible , utter madness even , for a man so poor as he was . 
And then , the presence of Aramis , who had returned from Belle-Isle , and been nominated by Monsieur Fouquet inspector-general of all the arrangements ; his perseverance in mixing himself up with all the surintendant 's affairs ; his visits to Baisemeaux ; all this suspicious singularity of conduct had excessively troubled and tormented D'Artagnan during the last two weeks . 
`` With men of Aramis 's stamp , '' he said , `` one is never the stronger except sword in hand . 
So long as Aramis continued a soldier , there was hope of getting the better of him ; but since he has covered his cuirass with a stole , we are lost . 
But what can Aramis 's object possibly be ? '' 
And D'Artagnan plunged again into deep thought . 
`` What does it matter to me , after all , '' he continued , `` if his only object is to overthrow M. Colbert ? 
And what else can he be after ? '' 
And D'Artagnan rubbed his forehead - that fertile land , whence the plowshare of his nails had turned up so many and such admirable ideas in his time . 
He , at first , thought of talking the matter over with Colbert , but his friendship for Aramis , the oath of earlier days , bound him too strictly . 
He revolted at the bare idea of such a thing , and , besides , he hated the financier too cordially . 
Then , again , he wished to unburden his mind to the king ; but yet the king would not be able to understand the suspicions which had not even a shadow of reality at their base . 
He resolved to address himself to Aramis , direct , the first time he met him . 
`` I will get him , '' said the musketeer , `` between a couple of candles , suddenly , and when he least expects it , I will place my hand upon his heart , and he will tell me - What will he tell me ? 
Yes , he will tell me something , for mordioux ! 
there is something in it , I know . '' 
Somewhat calmer , D'Artagnan made every preparation for the journey , and took the greatest care that the military household of the king , as yet very inconsiderable in numbers , should be well officered and well disciplined in its meager and limited proportions . 
The result was that , through the captain 's arrangements , the king , on arriving at Melun , saw himself at the head of both the musketeers and Swiss guards , as well as a picket of the French guards . 
It might almost have been called a small army . 
M. Colbert looked at the troops with great delight : he even wished they had been a third more in number . 
`` But why ? '' 
said the king . 
`` In order to show greater honor to M. Fouquet , '' replied Colbert . 
`` In order to ruin him the sooner , '' thought D'Artagnan . 
When this little army appeared before Melun , the chief magistrates came out to meet the king , and to present him with the keys of the city , and invited him to enter the Hotel de Ville , in order to partake of the wine of honor . 
The king , who expected to pass through the city and to proceed to Vaux without delay , became quite red in the face from vexation . 
`` Who was fool enough to occasion this delay ? '' 
muttered the king , between his teeth , as the chief magistrate was in the middle of a long address . 
