`` Heaven is right , '' he said ; `` Heaven acts wisely . 
It would be cowardly to pray to Heaven for that which I have so often refused my own fellow - creatures . '' 
He had reached this stage of his reflections , that is , of his agony of mind , when a similar noise was again heard behind his door , followed this time by the sound of the key in the lock , and of the bolts being withdrawn from their staples . 
The king bounded forward to be nearer to the person who was about to enter , but , suddenly reflecting that it was a movement unworthy of a sovereign , he paused , assumed a noble and calm expression , which for him was easy enough , and waited with his back turned towards the window , in order , to some extent , to conceal his agitation from the eyes of the person who was about to enter . 
It was only a jailer with a basket of provisions . 
The king looked at the man with restless anxiety , and waited until he spoke . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the latter , `` you have broken your chair . 
I said you had done so ! 
Why , you have gone quite mad . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said the king , `` be careful what you say ; it will be a very serious affair for you . '' 
The jailer placed the basket on the table , and looked at his prisoner steadily . 
`` What do you say ? '' 
he said . 
`` Desire the governor to come to me , '' added the king , in accents full of calm and dignity . 
`` Come , my boy , '' said the turnkey , `` you have always been very quiet and reasonable , but you are getting vicious , it seems , and I wish you to know it in time . 
You have broken your chair , and made a great disturbance ; that is an offense punishable by imprisonment in one of the lower dungeons . 
Promise me not to begin over again , and I will not say a word about it to the governor . '' 
`` I wish to see the governor , '' replied the king , still governing his passions . 
`` He will send you off to one of the dungeons , I tell you ; so take care . '' 
`` I insist upon it , do you hear ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
ah ! 
your eyes are becoming wild again . 
Very good ! 
I shall take away your knife . '' 
And the jailer did what he said , quitted the prisoner , and closed the door , leaving the king more astounded , more wretched , more isolated than ever . 
It was useless , though he tried it , to make the same noise again on his door , and equally useless that he threw the plates and dishes out of the window ; not a single sound was heard in recognition . 
Two hours afterwards he could not be recognized as a king , a gentleman , a man , a human being ; he might rather be called a madman , tearing the door with his nails , trying to tear up the flooring of his cell , and uttering such wild and fearful cries that the old Bastile seemed to tremble to its very foundations for having revolted against its master . 
As for the governor , the jailer did not even think of disturbing him ; the turnkeys and the sentinels had reported the occurrence to him , but what was the good of it ? 
Were not these madmen common enough in such a prison ? 
and were not the walls still stronger ? 
M. de Baisemeaux , thoroughly impressed with what Aramis had told him , and in perfect conformity with the king 's order , hoped only that one thing might happen ; namely , that the madman Marchiali might be mad enough to hang himself to the canopy of his bed , or to one of the bars of the window . 
In fact , the prisoner was anything but a profitable investment for M. Baisemeaux , and became more annoying than agreeable to him . 
These complications of Seldon and Marchiali - the complications first of setting at liberty and then imprisoning again , the complications arising from the strong likeness in question - had at last found a very proper denouement . 
Baisemeaux even thought he had remarked that D'Herblay himself was not altogether dissatisfied with the result . 
`` And then , really , '' said Baisemeaux to his next in command , `` an ordinary prisoner is already unhappy enough in being a prisoner ; he suffers quite enough , indeed , to induce one to hope , charitably enough , that his death may not be far distant . 
With still greater reason , accordingly , when the prisoner has gone mad , and might bite and make a terrible disturbance in the Bastile ; why , in such a case , it is not simply an act of mere charity to wish him dead ; it would be almost a good and even commendable action , quietly to have him put out of his misery . '' 
And the good-natured governor thereupon sat down to his late breakfast . 
: The Shadow of M. Fouquet . 
D'Artagnan , still confused and oppressed by the conversation he had just had with the king , could not resist asking himself if he were really in possession of his senses , if he were really and truly at Vaux ; if he , D'Artagnan , were really the captain of the musketeers , and M. Fouquet the owner of the chateau in which Louis XIV . 
was at that moment partaking of his hospitality . 
These reflections were not those of a drunken man , although everything was in prodigal profusion at Vaux , and the surintendant 's wines had met with a distinguished reception at the fete . 
The Gascon , however , was a man of calm self-possession ; and no sooner did he touch his bright steel blade , than he knew how to adopt morally the cold , keen weapon as his guide of action . 
`` Well , '' he said , as he quitted the royal apartment , `` I seem now to be mixed up historically with the destinies of the king and of the minister ; it will be written , that M. d'Artagnan , a younger son of a Gascon family , placed his hand on the shoulder of M. Nicolas Fouquet , the surintendant of the finances of France . 
My descendants , if I have any , will flatter themselves with the distinction which this arrest will confer , just as the members of the De Luynes family have done with regard to the estates of the poor Marechal d'Ancre . 
But the thing is , how best to execute the king 's directions in a proper manner . 
Any man would know how to say to M. Fouquet , ` Your sword , monsieur . ' 
But it is not every one who would be able to take care of M. Fouquet without others knowing anything about it . 
How am I to manage , then , so that M. le surintendant pass from the height of favor to the direst disgrace ; that Vaux be turned into a dungeon for him ; that after having been steeped to his lips , as it were , in all the perfumes and incense of Ahasuerus , he is transferred to the gallows of Haman ; in other words , of Enguerrand de Marigny ? '' 
