`` Which leads - ? '' 
`` Will you be good enough to follow us ? '' 
`` I shall not stir from hence ! '' 
cried the king . 
`` If you are obstinate , my dear young friend , '' replied the taller of the two , `` I will lift you up in my arms , and roll you up in your own cloak , and if you should happen to be stifled , why - so much the worse for you . '' 
As he said this , he disengaged from beneath his cloak a hand of which Milo of Crotona would have envied him the possession , on the day when he had that unhappy idea of rending his last oak . 
The king dreaded violence , for he could well believe that the two men into whose power he had fallen had not gone so far with any idea of drawing back , and that they would consequently be ready to proceed to extremities , if necessary . 
He shook his head and said : `` It seems I have fallen into the hands of a couple of assassins . 
Move on , then . '' 
Neither of the men answered a word to this remark . 
The one who carried the lantern walked first , the king followed him , while the second masked figure closed the procession . 
In this manner they passed along a winding gallery of some length , with as many staircases leading out of it as are to be found in the mysterious and gloomy palaces of Ann Radcliffe 's creation . 
All these windings and turnings , during which the king heard the sound of running water over his head , ended at last in a long corridor closed by an iron door . 
The figure with the lamp opened the door with one of the keys he wore suspended at his girdle , where , during the whole of the brief journey , the king had heard them rattle . 
As soon as the door was opened and admitted the air , Louis recognized the balmy odors that trees exhale in hot summer nights . 
He paused , hesitatingly , for a moment or two ; but the huge sentinel who followed him thrust him out of the subterranean passage . 
`` Another blow , '' said the king , turning towards the one who had just had the audacity to touch his sovereign ; `` what do you intend to do with the king of France ? '' 
`` Try to forget that word , '' replied the man with the lamp , in a tone which as little admitted of a reply as one of the famous decrees of Minos . 
`` You deserve to be broken on the wheel for the words that you have just made use of , '' said the giant , as he extinguished the lamp his companion handed to him ; `` but the king is too kind-hearted . '' 
Louis , at that threat , made so sudden a movement that it seemed as if he meditated flight ; but the giant 's hand was in a moment placed on his shoulder , and fixed him motionless where he stood . 
`` But tell me , at least , where we are going , '' said the king . 
`` Come , '' replied the former of the two men , with a kind of respect in his manner , and leading his prisoner towards a carriage which seemed to be in waiting . 
The carriage was completely concealed amid the trees . 
Two horses , with their feet fettered , were fastened by a halter to the lower branches of a large oak . 
`` Get in , '' said the same man , opening the carriage-door and letting down the step . 
The king obeyed , seated himself at the back of the carriage , the padded door of which was shut and locked immediately upon him and his guide . 
As for the giant , he cut the fastenings by which the horses were bound , harnessed them himself , and mounted on the box of the carriage , which was unoccupied . 
The carriage set off immediately at a quick trot , turned into the road to Paris , and in the forest of Senart found a relay of horses fastened to the trees in the same manner the first horses had been , and without a postilion . 
The man on the box changed the horses , and continued to follow the road towards Paris with the same rapidity , so that they entered the city about three o'clock in the morning . 
They carriage proceeded along the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , and , after having called out to the sentinel , `` By the king 's order , '' the driver conducted the horses into the circular inclosure of the Bastile , looking out upon the courtyard , called La Cour du Gouvernement . 
There the horses drew up , reeking with sweat , at the flight of steps , and a sergeant of the guard ran forward . 
`` Go and wake the governor , '' said the coachman in a voice of thunder . 
With the exception of this voice , which might have been heard at the entrance of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , everything remained as calm in the carriage as in the prison . 
Ten minutes afterwards , M. de Baisemeaux appeared in his dressing-gown on the threshold of the door . 
`` What is the matter now ? '' 
he asked ; `` and whom have you brought me there ? '' 
The man with the lantern opened the carriage-door , and said two or three words to the one who acted as driver , who immediately got down from his seat , took up a short musket which he kept under his feet , and placed its muzzle on his prisoner 's chest . 
`` And fire at once if he speaks ! '' 
added aloud the man who alighted from the carriage . 
`` Very good , '' replied his companion , without another remark . 
With this recommendation , the person who had accompanied the king in the carriage ascended the flight of steps , at the top of which the governor was awaiting him . 
`` Monsieur d'Herblay ! '' 
said the latter . 
`` Hush ! '' 
said Aramis . 
`` Let us go into your room . '' 
`` Good heavens ! 
what brings you here at this hour ? '' 
`` A mistake , my dear Monsieur de Baisemeaux , '' Aramis replied , quietly . 
`` It appears that you were quite right the other day . '' 
