Strongly impressed with this idea , he gave certain sealed orders on his route , while fresh horses were being harnessed to his carriage . 
These orders were addressed to M. d'Artagnan and to certain others whose fidelity to the king was far above suspicion . 
`` In this way , '' said Fouquet to himself , `` prisoner or not , I shall have performed the duty that I owe my honor . 
The orders will not reach them until after my return , if I should return free , and consequently they will not have been unsealed . 
I shall take them back again . 
If I am delayed ; it will be because some misfortune will have befallen me ; and in that case assistance will be sent for me as well as for the king . '' 
Prepared in this manner , the superintendent arrived at the Bastile ; he had traveled at the rate of five leagues and a half the hour . 
Every circumstance of delay which Aramis had escaped in his visit to the Bastile befell Fouquet . 
It was useless giving his name , equally useless his being recognized ; he could not succeed in obtaining an entrance . 
By dint of entreaties , threats , commands , he succeeded in inducing a sentinel to speak to one of the subalterns , who went and told the major . 
As for the governor they did not even dare disturb him . 
Fouquet sat in his carriage , at the outer gate of the fortress , chafing with rage and impatience , awaiting the return of the officers , who at last re-appeared with a sufficiently sulky air . 
`` Well , '' said Fouquet , impatiently , `` what did the major say ? '' 
`` Well , monsieur , '' replied the soldier , `` the major laughed in my face . 
He told me that M. Fouquet was at Vaux , and that even were he at Paris , M. Fouquet would not get up at so early an hour as the present . '' 
`` Mordieu ! 
you are an absolute set of fools , '' cried the minister , darting out of the carriage ; and before the subaltern had time to shut the gate , Fouquet sprang through it , and ran forward in spite of the soldier , who cried out for assistance . 
Fouquet gained ground , regardless of the cries of the man , who , however , having at last come up with Fouquet , called out to the sentinel of the second gate , `` Look out , look out , sentinel ! '' 
The man crossed his pike before the minister ; but the latter , robust and active , and hurried away , too , by his passion , wrested the pike from the soldier and struck him a violent blow on the shoulder with it . 
The subaltern , who approached too closely , received a share of the blows as well . 
Both of them uttered loud and furious cries , at the sound of which the whole of the first body of the advanced guard poured out of the guardhouse . 
Among them there was one , however , who recognized the superintendent , and who called , `` Monseigneur , ah ! 
monseigneur . 
Stop , stop , you fellows ! '' 
And he effectually checked the soldiers , who were on the point of revenging their companions . 
Fouquet desired them to open the gate , but they refused to do so without the countersign ; he desired them to inform the governor of his presence ; but the latter had already heard the disturbance at the gate . 
He ran forward , followed by his major , and accompanied by a picket of twenty men , persuaded that an attack was being made on the Bastile . 
Baisemeaux also recognized Fouquet immediately , and dropped the sword he bravely had been brandishing . 
`` Ah ! 
monseigneur , '' he stammered , `` how can I excuse - '' `` Monsieur , '' said the superintendent , flushed with anger , and heated by his exertions , `` I congratulate you . 
Your watch and ward are admirably kept . '' 
Baisemeaux turned pale , thinking that this remark was made ironically , and portended a furious burst of anger . 
But Fouquet had recovered his breath , and , beckoning the sentinel and the subaltern , who were rubbing their shoulders , towards him , he said , `` There are twenty pistoles for the sentinel , and fifty for the officer . 
Pray receive my compliments , gentlemen . 
I will not fail to speak to his majesty about you . 
And now , M. Baisemeaux , a word with you . '' 
And he followed the governor to his official residence , accompanied by a murmur of general satisfaction . 
Baisemeaux was already trembling with shame and uneasiness . 
Aramis 's early visit , from that moment , seemed to possess consequences , which a functionary such as he -LRB- Baisemeaux -RRB- was , was perfectly justified in apprehending . 
It was quite another thing , however , when Fouquet in a sharp tone of voice , and with an imperious look , said , `` You have seen M. d'Herblay this morning ? '' 
`` Yes , monseigneur . '' 
`` And are you not horrified at the crime of which you have made yourself an accomplice ? '' 
`` Well , '' thought Baisemeaux , `` good so far ; '' and then he added , aloud , `` But what crime , monseigneur , do you allude to ? '' 
`` That for which you can be quartered alive , monsieur - do not forget that ! 
But this is not a time to show anger . 
Conduct me immediately to the prisoner . '' 
`` To what prisoner ? '' 
said Baisemeaux , trembling . 
`` You pretend to be ignorant ? 
Very good - it is the best plan for you , perhaps ; for if , in fact , you were to admit your participation in such a crime , it would be all over with you . 
