Do you suppose I should contend against the most valiant sword in the kingdom ? '' 
`` It is not that , at all , monseigneur ; but that I am going to look for M. d'Herblay , and , consequently , to leave you alone . '' 
Fouquet uttered a cry of delight and surprise . 
`` To look for M. d'Herblay ! 
to leave me alone ! '' 
he exclaimed , clasping his hands together . 
`` Which is M. d'Herblay 's room ? 
The blue room is it not ? '' 
`` Yes , my friend , yes . '' 
`` Your friend ! 
thank you for that word , monseigneur ; you confer it upon me to-day , at least , if you have never done so before . '' 
`` Ah ! 
you have saved me . '' 
`` It will take a good ten minutes to go from hence to the blue room , and to return ? '' 
said D'Artagnan . 
`` Nearly so . '' 
`` And then to wake Aramis , who sleeps very soundly , when he is asleep , I put that down at another five minutes ; making a total of fifteen minutes ' absence . 
And now , monseigneur , give me your word that you will not in any way attempt to make your escape , and that when I return I shall find you here again . '' 
`` I give it , monsieur , '' replied Fouquet , with an expression of the warmest and deepest gratitude . 
D'Artagnan disappeared . 
Fouquet looked at him as he quitted the room , waited with a feverish impatience until the door was closed behind him , and as soon as it was shut , flew to his keys , opened two or three secret doors concealed in various articles of furniture in the room , looked vainly for certain papers , which doubtless he had left at Saint-Mande , and which he seemed to regret not having found in them ; then hurriedly seizing hold of letters , contracts , papers , writings , he heaped them up into a pile , which he burnt in the extremest haste upon the marble hearth of the fireplace , not even taking time to draw from the interior of it the vases and pots of flowers with which it was filled . 
As soon as he had finished , like a man who has just escaped an imminent danger , and whose strength abandons him as soon as the danger is past , he sank down , completely overcome , on a couch . 
When D'Artagnan returned , he found Fouquet in the same position ; the worthy musketeer had not the slightest doubt that Fouquet , having given his word , would not even think of failing to keep it , but he had thought it most likely that Fouquet would turn his -LRB- D'Artagnan 's -RRB- absence to the best advantage in getting rid of all the papers , memorandums , and contracts , which might possibly render his position , which was even now serious enough , more dangerous than ever . 
And so , lifting up his head like a dog who has regained the scent , he perceived an odor resembling smoke he had relied on finding in the atmosphere , and having found it , made a movement of his head in token of satisfaction . 
As D'Artagnan entered , Fouquet , on his side , raised his head , and not one of D'Artagnan 's movements escaped him . 
And then the looks of the two men met , and they both saw that they had understood each other without exchanging a syllable . 
`` Well ! '' 
asked Fouquet , the first to speak , `` and M. d'Herblay ? '' 
`` Upon my word , monseigneur , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` M. d'Herblay must be desperately fond of walking out at night , and composing verses by moonlight in the park of Vaux , with some of your poets , in all probability , for he is not in his own room . '' 
`` What ! 
not in his own room ? '' 
cried Fouquet , whose last hope thus escaped him ; for unless he could ascertain in what way the bishop of Vannes could assist him , he perfectly well knew that he could expect assistance from no other quarter . 
`` Or , indeed , '' continued D'Artagnan , `` if he is in his own room , he has very good reasons for not answering . '' 
`` But surely you did not call him in such a manner that he could have heard you ? '' 
`` You can hardly suppose , monseigneur , that having already exceeded my orders , which forbade me leaving you a single moment - you can hardly suppose , I say , that I should have been mad enough to rouse the whole house and allow myself to be seen in the corridor of the bishop of Vannes , in order that M. Colbert might state with positive certainty that I gave you time to burn your papers . '' 
`` My papers ? '' 
`` Of course ; at least that is what I should have done in your place . 
When any one opens a door for me I always avail myself of it . '' 
`` Yes , yes , and I thank you , for I have availed myself of it . '' 
`` And you have done perfectly right . 
Every man has his own peculiar secrets with which others have nothing to do . 
But let us return to Aramis , monseigneur . '' 
`` Well , then , I tell you , you could not have called loud enough , or Aramis would have heard you . '' 
`` However softly any one may call Aramis , monseigneur , Aramis always hears when he has an interest in hearing . 
I repeat what I said before - Aramis was not in his own room , or Aramis had certain reasons for not recognizing my voice , of which I am ignorant , and of which you may be even ignorant yourself , notwithstanding your liege-man is His Greatness the Lord Bishop of Vannes . '' 
Fouquet drew a deep sigh , rose from his seat , took three or four turns in his room , and finished by seating himself , with an expression of extreme dejection , upon his magnificent bed with velvet hangings , and costliest lace . 
D'Artagnan looked at Fouquet with feelings of the deepest and sincerest pity . 
`` I have seen a good many men arrested in my life , '' said the musketeer , sadly ; `` I have seen both M. de Cinq-Mars and M. de Chalais arrested , though I was very young then . 
I have seen M. de Conde arrested with the princes ; I have seen M. de Retz arrested ; I have seen M. Broussel arrested . 
Stay a moment , monseigneur , it is disagreeable to have to say , but the very one of all those whom you most resemble at this moment was that poor fellow Broussel . 
