If I listened to your advice , monsieur , I should be a dishonored man ; and by dishonoring myself I should dishonor the army . 
Forward , my men ! '' 
And he marched first as far as the opening of the grotto . 
There he halted . 
The object of this halt was to give Biscarrat and his companions time to describe to him the interior of the grotto . 
Then , when he believed he had a sufficient acquaintance with the place , he divided his company into three bodies , which were to enter successively , keeping up a sustained fire in all directions . 
No doubt , in this attack they would lose five more , perhaps ten ; but , certainly , they must end by taking the rebels , since there was no issue ; and , at any rate , two men could not kill eighty . 
`` Captain , '' said Biscarrat , `` I beg to be allowed to march at the head of the first platoon . '' 
`` So be it , '' replied the captain ; `` you have all the honor . 
I make you a present of it . '' 
`` Thanks ! '' 
replied the young man , with all the firmness of his race . 
`` Take your sword , then . '' 
`` I shall go as I am , captain , '' said Biscarrat , `` for I do not go to kill , I go to be killed . '' 
And placing himself at the head of the first platoon , with head uncovered and arms crossed , - `` March , gentlemen , '' said he . 
: An Homeric Song . 
It is time to pass to the other camp , and to describe at once the combatants and the field of battle . 
Aramis and Porthos had gone to the grotto of Locmaria with the expectation of finding there their canoe ready armed , as well as the three Bretons , their assistants ; and they at first hoped to make the bark pass through the little issue of the cavern , concealing in that fashion both their labors and their flight . 
The arrival of the fox and dogs obliged them to remain concealed . 
The grotto extended the space of about a hundred toises , to that little slope dominating a creek . 
Formerly a temple of the Celtic divinities , when Belle-Isle was still called Kalonese , this grotto had beheld more than one human sacrifice accomplished in its mystic depths . 
The first entrance to the cavern was by a moderate descent , above which distorted rocks formed a weird arcade ; the interior , very uneven and dangerous from the inequalities of the vault , was subdivided into several compartments , which communicated with each other by means of rough and jagged steps , fixed right and left , in uncouth natural pillars . 
At the third compartment the vault was so low , the passage so narrow , that the bark would scarcely have passed without touching the side ; nevertheless , in moments of despair , wood softens and stone grows flexible beneath the human will . 
Such was the thought of Aramis , when , after having fought the fight , he decided upon flight - a flight most dangerous , since all the assailants were not dead ; and that , admitting the possibility of putting the bark to sea , they would have to fly in open day , before the conquered , so interested on recognizing their small number , in pursuing their conquerors . 
When the two discharges had killed ten men , Aramis , familiar with the windings of the cavern , went to reconnoiter them one by one , and counted them , for the smoke prevented seeing outside ; and he immediately commanded that the canoe should be rolled as far as the great stone , the closure of the liberating issue . 
Porthos collected all his strength , took the canoe in his arms , and raised it up , whilst the Bretons made it run rapidly along the rollers . 
They had descended into the third compartment ; they had arrived at the stone which walled the outlet . 
Porthos seized this gigantic stone at its base , applied his robust shoulder , and gave a heave which made the wall crack . 
A cloud of dust fell from the vault , with the ashes of ten thousand generations of sea birds , whose nests stuck like cement to the rock . 
At the third shock the stone gave way , and oscillated for a minute . 
Porthos , placing his back against the neighboring rock , made an arch with his foot , which drove the block out of the calcareous masses which served for hinges and cramps . 
The stone fell , and daylight was visible , brilliant , radiant , flooding the cavern through the opening , and the blue sea appeared to the delighted Bretons . 
They began to lift the bark over the barricade . 
Twenty more toises , and it would glide into the ocean . 
It was during this time that the company arrived , was drawn up by the captain , and disposed for either an escalade or an assault . 
Aramis watched over everything , to favor the labors of his friends . 
He saw the reinforcements , counted the men , and convinced himself at a single glance of the insurmountable peril to which fresh combat would expose them . 
To escape by sea , at the moment the cavern was about to be invaded , was impossible . 
In fact , the daylight which had just been admitted to the last compartments had exposed to the soldiers the bark being rolled towards the sea , the two rebels within musket-shot ; and one of their discharges would riddle the boat if it did not kill the navigators . 
Besides , allowing everything , - if the bark escaped with the men on board of it , how could the alarm be suppressed - how could notice to the royal lighters be prevented ? 
What could hinder the poor canoe , followed by sea and watched from the shore , from succumbing before the end of the day ? 
Aramis , digging his hands into his gray hair with rage , invoked the assistance of God and the assistance of the demons . 
Calling to Porthos , who was doing more work than all the rollers - whether of flesh or wood - `` My friend , '' said he , `` our adversaries have just received a reinforcement . '' 
`` Ah , ah ! '' 
said Porthos , quietly , `` what is to be done , then ? '' 
`` To recommence the combat , '' said Aramis , `` is hazardous . '' 
`` Yes , '' said Porthos , `` for it is difficult to suppose that out of two , one should not be killed ; and certainly , if one of us was killed , the other would get himself killed also . '' 
Porthos spoke these words with that heroic nature which , with him , grew grander with necessity . 
Aramis felt it like a spur to his heart . 
`` We shall neither of us be killed if you do what I tell you , friend Porthos . '' 
