But your brother , a captive , forgotten , and in bonds , will not long endure the calamity ; and Heaven will resume his soul at the appointed time - that is to say , soon . '' 
At this point in Aramis 's gloomy analysis , a bird of night uttered from the depths of the forest that prolonged and plaintive cry which makes every creature tremble . 
`` I will exile the deposed king , '' said Philippe , shuddering ; '' ` twill be more human . '' 
`` The king 's good pleasure will decide the point , '' said Aramis . 
`` But has the problem been well put ? 
Have I brought out of the solution according to the wishes or the foresight of your royal highness ? '' 
`` Yes , monsieur , yes ; you have forgotten nothing - except , indeed , two things . '' 
`` The first ? '' 
`` Let us speak of it at once , with the same frankness we have already conversed in . 
Let us speak of the causes which may bring about the ruin of all the hopes we have conceived . 
Let us speak of the risks we are running . '' 
`` They would be immense , infinite , terrific , insurmountable , if , as I have said , all things did not concur to render them of absolutely no account . 
There is no danger either for you or for me , if the constancy and intrepidity of your royal highness are equal to that perfection of resemblance to your brother which nature has bestowed upon you . 
I repeat it , there are no dangers , only obstacles ; a word , indeed , which I find in all languages , but have always ill-understood , and , were I king , would have obliterated as useless and absurd . '' 
`` Yes , indeed , monsieur ; there is a very serious obstacle , an insurmountable danger , which you are forgetting . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Aramis . 
`` There is conscience , which cries aloud ; remorse , that never dies . '' 
`` True , true , '' said the bishop ; `` there is a weakness of heart of which you remind me . 
You are right , too , for that , indeed , is an immense obstacle . 
The horse afraid of the ditch , leaps into the middle of it , and is killed ! 
The man who trembling crosses his sword with that of another leaves loopholes whereby his enemy has him in his power . '' 
`` Have you a brother ? '' 
said the young man to Aramis . 
`` I am alone in the world , '' said the latter , with a hard , dry voice . 
`` But , surely , there is some one in the world whom you love ? '' 
added Philippe . 
`` No one ! 
- Yes , I love you . '' 
The young man sank into so profound a silence , that the mere sound of his respiration seemed like a roaring tumult for Aramis . 
`` Monseigneur , '' he resumed , `` I have not said all I had to say to your royal highness ; I have not offered you all the salutary counsels and useful resources which I have at my disposal . 
It is useless to flash bright visions before the eyes of one who seeks and loves darkness : useless , too , is it to let the magnificence of the cannon 's roar make itself heard in the ears of one who loves repose and the quiet of the country . 
Monseigneur , I have your happiness spread out before me in my thoughts ; listen to my words ; precious they indeed are , in their import and their sense , for you who look with such tender regard upon the bright heavens , the verdant meadows , the pure air . 
I know a country instinct with delights of every kind , an unknown paradise , a secluded corner of the world - where alone , unfettered and unknown , in the thick covert of the woods , amidst flowers , and streams of rippling water , you will forget all the misery that human folly has so recently allotted you . 
Oh ! 
listen to me , my prince . 
I do not jest . 
I have a heart , and mind , and soul , and can read your own , - aye , even to its depths . 
I will not take you unready for your task , in order to cast you into the crucible of my own desires , of my caprice , or my ambition . 
Let it be all or nothing . 
You are chilled and galled , sick at heart , overcome by excess of the emotions which but one hour 's liberty has produced in you . 
For me , that is a certain and unmistakable sign that you do not wish to continue at liberty . 
Would you prefer a more humble life , a life more suited to your strength ? 
Heaven is my witness , that I wish your happiness to be the result of the trial to which I have exposed you . '' 
`` Speak , speak , '' said the prince , with a vivacity which did not escape Aramis . 
`` I know , '' resumed the prelate , `` in the Bas-Poitou , a canton , of which no one in France suspects the existence . 
Twenty leagues of country is immense , is it not ? 
Twenty leagues , monseigneur , all covered with water and herbage , and reeds of the most luxuriant nature ; the whole studded with islands covered with woods of the densest foliage . 
These large marshes , covered with reeds as with a thick mantle , sleep silently and calmly beneath the sun 's soft and genial rays . 
A few fishermen with their families indolently pass their lives away there , with their great living-rafts of poplar and alder , the flooring formed of reeds , and the roof woven out of thick rushes . 
