Evidently neither of them had anything to ask of his contemporaries . 
They had only to pay a visit to M. de Beaufort , and arrange with him the particulars of departure . 
The duke was lodged magnificently in Paris . 
He had one of those superb establishments pertaining to great fortunes , the like of which certain old men remembered to have seen in all their glory in the times of wasteful liberality of Henry III . 
's reign . 
Then , really , several great nobles were richer than the king . 
They knew it , used it , and never deprived themselves of the pleasure of humiliating his royal majesty when they had an opportunity . 
It was this egotistical aristocracy Richelieu had constrained to contribute , with its blood , its purse , and its duties , to what was from his time styled the king 's service . 
From Louis XI . 
- that terrible mower-down of the great - to Richelieu , how many families had raised their heads ! 
How many , from Richelieu to Louis XIV. , had bowed their heads , never to raise them again ! 
But M. de Beaufort was born a prince , and of a blood which is not shed upon scaffolds , unless by the decree of peoples , - a prince who had kept up a grand style of living . 
How did he maintain his horses , his people , and his table ? 
Nobody knew ; himself less than others . 
Only there were then privileges for the sons of kings , to whom nobody refused to become a creditor , whether from respect or the persuasion that they would some day be paid . 
Athos and Raoul found the mansion of the duke in as much confusion as that of Planchet . 
The duke , likewise , was making his inventory ; that is to say , he was distributing to his friends everything of value he had in his house . 
Owing nearly two millions - an enormous amount in those days - M. de Beaufort had calculated that he could not set out for Africa without a good round sum , and , in order to find that sum , he was distributing to his old creditors plate , arms , jewels , and furniture , which was more magnificent in selling it , and brought him back double . 
In fact , how could a man to whom ten thousand livres were owing , refuse to carry away a present worth six thousand , enhanced in estimation from having belonged to a descendant of Henry IV . ? 
And how , after having carried away that present , could he refuse ten thousand livres more to this generous noble ? 
This , then , was what had happened . 
The duke had no longer a dwelling-house - that had become useless to an admiral whose place of residence is his ship ; he had no longer need of superfluous arms , when he was placed amidst his cannons ; no more jewels , which the sea might rob him of ; but he had three or four hundred thousand crowns fresh in his coffers . 
And throughout the house there was a joyous movement of people who believed they were plundering monseigneur . 
The prince had , in a supreme degree , the art of making happy the creditors most to be pitied . 
Every distressed man , every empty purse , found in him patience and sympathy for his position . 
To some he said , `` I wish I had what you have ; I would give it you . '' 
And to others , `` I have but this silver ewer ; it is worth at least five hundred livres , - take it . '' 
The effect of which was - so truly is courtesy a current payment - that the prince constantly found means to renew his creditors . 
This time he used no ceremony ; it might be called a general pillage . 
He gave up everything . 
The Oriental fable of the poor Arab who carried away from the pillage of palace a kettle at the bottom of which was concealed a bag of gold , and whom everybody allowed to pass without jealousy , - this fable had become a truth in the prince 's mansion . 
Many contractors paid themselves upon the offices of the duke . 
Thus , the provision department , who plundered the clothes-presses and the harness-rooms , attached very little value to things which tailors and saddlers set great store by . 
Anxious to carry home to their wives presents given them by monseigneur , many were seen bounding joyously along , under the weight of earthen jars and bottles , gloriously stamped with the arms of the prince . 
M. de Beaufort finished by giving away his horses and the hay from his lofts . 
He made more than thirty happy with kitchen utensils ; and thirty more with the contents of his cellar . 
Still further ; all these people went away with the conviction that M. de Beaufort only acted in this manner to prepare for a new fortune concealed beneath the Arabs ' tents . 
They repeated to each other , while pillaging his hotel , that he was sent to Gigelli by the king to reconstruct his lost fortunes ; that the treasures of Africa would be equally divided between the admiral and the king of France ; that these treasures consisted in mines of diamonds , or other fabulous stones ; the gold and silver mines of Mount Atlas did not even obtain the honor of being named . 
In addition to the mines to be worked -- which could not be begun till after the campaign - there would be the booty made by the army . 
M. de Beaufort would lay his hands on all the riches pirates had robbed Christendom of since the battle of Lepanto . 
The number of millions from these sources defied calculation . 
Why , then , should he , who was going in quest of such treasure , set any store by the poor utensils of his past life ? 
And reciprocally , why should they spare the property of him who spared it so little himself ? 
Such was the position of affairs . 
Athos , with his piercing practiced glance , saw what was going on at once . 
He found the admiral of France a little exalted , for he was rising from a table of fifty covers , at which the guests had drunk long and deeply to the prosperity of the expedition ; at the conclusion of which repast , the remains , with the dessert , had been given to the servants , and the empty dishes and plates to the curious . 
The prince was intoxicated with his ruin and his popularity at one and the same time . 
He had drunk his old wine to the health of his wine of the future . 
When he saw Athos and Raoul : `` There is my aide-de-camp being brought to me ! '' 
he cried . 
