With monseigneur were the oldest captains and his aides-de-camp . 
M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne had received orders not to leave his highness . 
In the meantime the enemy 's cannon , which at first thundered with little success against the masses , began to regulate their fire , and the balls , better directed , killed several men near the prince . 
The regiments formed in column , and , advancing against the ramparts , were rather roughly handled . 
There was a sort of hesitation in our troops , who found themselves ill-seconded by the artillery . 
In fact , the batteries which had been established the evening before had but a weak and uncertain aim , on account of their position . 
The upward direction of the aim lessened the justness of the shots as well as their range . 
`` Monseigneur , comprehending the bad effect of this position on the siege artillery , commanded the frigates moored in the little road to commence a regular fire against the place . 
M. de Bragelonne offered himself at once to carry this order . 
But monseigneur refused to acquiesce in the vicomte 's request . 
Monseigneur was right , for he loved and wished to spare the young nobleman . 
He was quite right , and the event took upon itself to justify his foresight and refusal ; for scarcely had the sergeant charged with the message solicited by M. de Bragelonne gained the seashore , when two shots from long carbines issued from the enemy 's ranks and laid him low . 
The sergeant fell , dyeing the sand with his blood ; observing which , M. de Bragelonne smiled at monseigneur , who said to him , ` You see , vicomte , I have saved your life . 
Report that , some day , to M. le Comte de la Fere , in order that , learning it from you , he may thank me . ' 
The young nobleman smiled sadly , and replied to the duke , ` It is true , monseigneur , that but for your kindness I should have been killed , where the poor sergeant has fallen , and should be at rest . ' 
M. de Bragelonne made this reply in such a tone that monseigneur answered him warmly , ` Vrai Dieu ! 
Young man , one would say that your mouth waters for death ; but , by the soul of Henry IV. , I have promised your father to bring you back alive ; and , please the Lord , I mean to keep my word . ' 
`` Monseigneur de Bragelonne colored , and replied , in a lower voice , ` Monseigneur , pardon me , I beseech you . 
I have always had a desire to meet good opportunities ; and it is so delightful to distinguish ourselves before our general , particularly when that general is M. le Duc de Beaufort . ' 
`` Monseigneur was a little softened by this ; and , turning to the officers who surrounded him , gave different orders . 
The grenadiers of the two regiments got near enough to the ditches and intrenchments to launch their grenades , which had but small effect . 
In the meanwhile , M. d'Estrees , who commanded the fleet , having seen the attempt of the sergeant to approach the vessels , understood that he must act without orders , and opened fire . 
Then the Arabs , finding themselves seriously injured by the balls from the fleet , and beholding the destruction and the ruin of their walls , uttered the most fearful cries . 
Their horsemen descended the mountain at a gallop , bent over their saddles , and rushed full tilt upon the columns of infantry , which , crossing their pikes , stopped this mad assault . 
Repulsed by the firm attitude of the battalion , the Arabs threw themselves with fury towards the etat-major , which was not on its guard at that moment . 
`` The danger was great ; monseigneur drew his sword ; his secretaries and people imitated him ; the officers of the suite engaged in combat with the furious Arabs . 
It was then M. de Bragelonne was able to satisfy the inclination he had so clearly shown from the commencement of the action . 
He fought near the prince with the valor of a Roman , and killed three Arabs with his small sword . 
But it was evident that his bravery did not arise from that sentiment of pride so natural to all who fight . 
It was impetuous , affected , even forced ; he sought to glut , intoxicate himself with strife and carnage . 
He excited himself to such a degree that monseigneur called to him to stop . 
He must have heard the voice of monseigneur , because we who were close to him heard it . 
He did not , however , stop , but continued his course to the intrenchments . 
As M. de Bragelonne was a well-disciplined officer , this disobedience to the orders of monseigneur very much surprised everybody , and M. de Beaufort redoubled his earnestness , crying , ` Stop , Bragelonne ! 
Where are you going ? 
Stop , ' repeated monseigneur , ' I command you ! ' 
`` We all , imitating the gesture of M. le duc , we all raised our hands . 
We expected that the cavalier would turn bridle ; but M. de Bragelonne continued to ride towards the palisades . '' 
` Stop , Bragelonne ! ' 
repeated the prince , in a very loud voice , ` stop ! 
in the name of your father ! ' 
`` At these words M. de Bragelonne turned round ; his countenance expressed a lively grief , but he did not stop ; we then concluded that his horse must have run away with him . 
When M. le duc saw cause to conclude that the vicomte was no longer master of his horse , and had watched him precede the first grenadiers , his highness cried , ` Musketeers , kill his horse ! 
A hundred pistoles for the man who kills his horse ! ' 
But who could expect to hit the beast without at least wounding his rider ? 
No one dared the attempt . 
At length one presented himself ; he was a sharp - shooter of the regiment of Picardy , named Luzerne , who took aim at the animal , fired , and hit him in the quarters , for we saw the blood redden the hair of the horse . 
Instead of falling , the cursed jennet was irritated , and carried him on more furiously than ever . 
Every Picard who saw this unfortunate young man rushing on to meet certain death , shouted in the loudest manner , ` Throw yourself off , monsieur le vicomte ! 
- off ! 
