The king , D'Artagnan was told , behaved in the kindest manner to M. Fouquet , and did not allow him to be ever out of his sight ; but the surintendant , touched to the heart , like one of those fine trees a worm has punctured , was declining daily , in spite of the royal smile , that sun of court trees . 
D'Artagnan learned that Mademoiselle de la Valliere had become indispensable to the king ; that the king , during his sporting excursions , if he did not take her with him , wrote to her frequently , no longer verses , but , which was much worse , prose , and that whole pages at a time . 
Thus , as the political Pleiad of the day said , the first king in the world was seen descending from his horse with an ardor beyond compare , and on the crown of his hat scrawling bombastic phrases , which M. de Saint-Aignan , aide-de-camp in perpetuity , carried to La Valliere at the risk of foundering his horses . 
During this time , deer and pheasants were left to the free enjoyment of their nature , hunted so lazily that , it was said , the art of venery ran great risk of degenerating at the court of France . 
D'Artagnan then thought of the wishes of poor Raoul , of that desponding letter destined for a woman who passed her life in hoping , and as D'Artagnan loved to philosophize a little occasionally , he resolved to profit by the absence of the king to have a minute 's talk with Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
This was a very easy affair ; while the king was hunting , Louise was walking with some other ladies in one of the galleries of the Palais Royal , exactly where the captain of the musketeers had some guards to inspect . 
D'Artagnan did not doubt that , if he could but open the conversation on Raoul , Louise might give him grounds for writing a consolatory letter to the poor exile ; and hope , or at least consolation for Raoul , in the state of heart in which he had left him , was the sun , was life to two men , who were very dear to our captain . 
He directed his course , therefore , to the spot where he knew he should find Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
D'Artagnan found La Valliere the center of the circle . 
In her apparent solitude , the king 's favorite received , like a queen , more , perhaps , than the queen , a homage of which Madame had been so proud , when all the king 's looks were directed to her and commanded the looks of the courtiers . 
D'Artagnan , although no squire of dames , received , nevertheless , civilities and attentions from the ladies ; he was polite , as a brave man always is , and his terrible reputation had conciliated as much friendship among the men as admiration among the women . 
On seeing him enter , therefore , they immediately accosted him ; and , as is not unfrequently the case with fair ladies , opened the attack by questions . 
`` Where had he been ? 
What had become of him so long ? 
Why had they not seen him as usual make his fine horse curvet in such beautiful style , to the delight and astonishment of the curious from the king 's balcony ? '' 
He replied that he had just come from the land of oranges . 
This set all the ladies laughing . 
Those were times in which everybody traveled , but in which , notwithstanding , a journey of a hundred leagues was a problem often solved by death . 
`` From the land of oranges ? '' 
cried Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente . 
`` From Spain ? '' 
`` Eh ! 
eh ! '' 
said the musketeer . 
`` From Malta ? '' 
echoed Montalais . 
`` Ma foi ! 
You are coming very near , ladies . '' 
`` Is it an island ? '' 
asked La Valliere . 
`` Mademoiselle , '' said D'Artagnan ; `` I will not give you the trouble of seeking any further ; I come from the country where M. de Beaufort is , at this moment , embarking for Algiers . '' 
`` Have you seen the army ? '' 
asked several warlike fair ones . 
`` As plainly as I see you , '' replied D'Artagnan . 
`` And the fleet ? '' 
`` Yes , I saw everything . '' 
`` Have we any of us any friends there ? '' 
said Mademoiselle de Tonnay - Charente , coldly , but in a manner to attract attention to a question that was not without its calculated aim . 
`` Why , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` yes ; there were M. de la Guillotiere , M. de Manchy , M. de Bragelonne - '' La Valliere became pale . 
`` M. de Bragelonne ! '' 
cried the perfidious Athenais . 
`` Eh , what ! 
- is he gone to the wars ? 
- he ! '' 
Montalais trod on her toe , but all in vain . 
`` Do you know what my opinion is ? '' 
continued she , addressing D'Artagnan . 
`` No , mademoiselle ; but I should like very much to know it . '' 
`` My opinion is , then , that all the men who go to this war are desperate , desponding men , whom love has treated ill ; and who go to try if they can not find jet-complexioned women more kind than fair ones have been . '' 
Some of the ladies laughed ; La Valliere was evidently confused ; Montalais coughed loud enough to waken the dead . 
