He had then time to study the direction of the road , and his position with regard to Fouquet . 
The superintendent had completely winded his horse by crossing the soft ground . 
He felt the necessity of gaining a firmer footing , and turned towards the road by the shortest secant line . 
D'Artagnan , on his part , had nothing to do but to ride straight on , concealed by the sloping shore ; so that he would cut his quarry off the road when he came up with him . 
Then the real race would begin , - then the struggle would be in earnest . 
D'Artagnan gave his horse good breathing-time . 
He observed that the superintendent had relaxed into a trot , which was to say , he , too , was favoring his horse . 
But both of them were too much pressed for time to allow them to continue long at that pace . 
The white horse sprang off like an arrow the moment his feet touched firm ground . 
D'Artagnan dropped his head , and his black horse broke into a gallop . 
Both followed the same route ; the quadruple echoes of this new race-course were confounded . 
Fouquet had not yet perceived D'Artagnan . 
But on issuing from the slope , a single echo struck the air ; it was that of the steps of D'Artagnan 's horse , which rolled along like thunder . 
Fouquet turned round , and saw behind him , within a hundred paces , his enemy bent over the neck of his horse . 
There could be no doubt - the shining baldrick , the red cassock - it was a musketeer . 
Fouquet slackened his hand likewise , and the white horse placed twenty feet more between his adversary and himself . 
`` Oh , but , '' thought D'Artagnan , becoming very anxious , `` that is not a common horse M. Fouquet is upon - let us see ! '' 
And he attentively examined with his infallible eye the shape and capabilities of the courser . 
Round full quarters - a thin long tail - large hocks - thin legs , as dry as bars of steel - hoofs hard as marble . 
He spurred his own , but the distance between the two remained the same . 
D'Artagnan listened attentively ; not a breath of the horse reached him , and yet he seemed to cut the air . 
The black horse , on the contrary , began to puff like any blacksmith 's bellows . 
`` I must overtake him , if I kill my horse , '' thought the musketeer ; and he began to saw the mouth of the poor animal , whilst he buried the rowels of his merciless spurs into his sides . 
The maddened horse gained twenty toises , and came up within pistol-shot of Fouquet . 
`` Courage ! '' 
said the musketeer to himself , `` courage ! 
the white horse will perhaps grow weaker , and if the horse does not fall , the master must pull up at last . '' 
But horse and rider remained upright together , gaining ground by difficult degrees . 
D'Artagnan uttered a wild cry , which made Fouquet turn round , and added speed to the white horse . 
`` A famous horse ! 
a mad rider ! '' 
growled the captain . 
`` Hola ! 
mordioux ! 
Monsieur Fouquet ! 
stop ! 
in the king 's name ! '' 
Fouquet made no reply . 
`` Do you hear me ? '' 
shouted D'Artagnan , whose horse had just stumbled . 
`` Pardieu ! '' 
replied Fouquet , laconically ; and rode on faster . 
D'Artagnan was nearly mad ; the blood rushed boiling to his temples and his eyes . 
`` In the king 's name ! '' 
cried he again , `` stop , or I will bring you down with a pistol-shot ! '' 
`` Do ! '' 
replied Fouquet , without relaxing his speed . 
D'Artagnan seized a pistol and cocked it , hoping that the double click of the spring would stop his enemy . 
`` You have pistols likewise , '' said he , `` turn and defend yourself . '' 
Fouquet did turn round at the noise , and looking D'Artagnan full in the face , opened , with his right hand , the part of his dress which concealed his body , but he did not even touch his holsters . 
