`` The respect you owe the king , '' cried D'Artagnan , his eyes flashing fire , `` consists , in the first place , in making his authority respected , and his person beloved . 
Every agent of a power without control represents that power , and when people curse the hand which strikes them , it is the royal hand that God reproaches , do you hear ? 
Must a soldier , hardened by forty years of wounds and blood , give you this lesson , monsieur ? 
Must mercy be on my side , and ferocity on yours ? 
You have caused the innocent to be arrested , bound , and imprisoned ! '' 
`` Accomplices , perhaps , of M. Fouquet , '' said Colbert . 
`` Who told you M. Fouquet had accomplices , or even that he was guilty ? 
The king alone knows that ; his justice is not blind ! 
When he says , ` Arrest and imprison ' such and such a man , he is obeyed . 
Do not talk to me , then , any more of the respect you owe the king , and be careful of your words , that they may not chance to convey the slightest menace ; for the king will not allow those to be threatened who do him service by others who do him disservice ; and if in case I should have , which God forbid ! 
a master so ungrateful , I would make myself respected . '' 
Thus saying , D'Artagnan took his station haughtily in the king 's cabinet , his eyes flashing , his hand on his sword , his lips trembling , affecting much more anger than he really felt . 
Colbert , humiliated and devoured with rage , bowed to the king as if to ask his permission to leave the room . 
The king , thwarted alike in pride and in curiosity , knew not which part to take . 
D'Artagnan saw him hesitate . 
To remain longer would have been a mistake : it was necessary to score a triumph over Colbert , and the only method was to touch the king so near the quick , that his majesty would have no other means of extrication but choosing between the two antagonists . 
D'Artagnan bowed as Colbert had done ; but the king , who , in preference to everything else , was anxious to have all the exact details of the arrest of the surintendant of the finances from him who had made him tremble for a moment , - the king , perceiving that the ill-humor of D'Artagnan would put off for half an hour at least the details he was burning to be acquainted with , - Louis , we say , forgot Colbert , who had nothing new to tell him , and recalled his captain of the musketeers . 
`` In the first place , '' said he , `` let me see the result of your commission , monsieur ; you may rest yourself hereafter . '' 
D'Artagnan , who was just passing through the doorway , stopped at the voice of the king , retraced his steps , and Colbert was forced to leave the closet . 
His countenance assumed almost a purple hue , his black and threatening eyes shone with a dark fire beneath their thick brows ; he stepped out , bowed before the king , half drew himself up in passing D'Artagnan , and went away with death in his heart . 
D'Artagnan , on being left alone with the king , softened immediately , and composing his countenance : `` Sire , '' said he , `` you are a young king . 
It is by the dawn that people judge whether the day will be fine or dull . 
How , sire , will the people , whom the hand of God has placed under your law , argue of your reign , if between them and you , you allow angry and violent ministers to interpose their mischief ? 
But let us speak of myself , sire , let us leave a discussion that may appear idle , and perhaps inconvenient to you . 
Let us speak of myself . 
I have arrested M. Fouquet . '' 
`` You took plenty of time about it , '' said the king , sharply . 
D'Artagnan looked at the king . 
`` I perceive that I have expressed myself badly . 
I announced to your majesty that I had arrested Monsieur Fouquet . '' 
`` You did ; and what then ? '' 
`` Well ! 
I ought to have told your majesty that M. Fouquet had arrested me ; that would have been more just . 
I re-establish the truth , then ; I have been arrested by M. Fouquet . '' 
It was now the turn of Louis XIV . 
to be surprised . 
His majesty was astonished in his turn . 
D'Artagnan , with his quick glance , appreciated what was passing in the heart of his master . 
He did not allow him time to put any questions . 
He related , with that poetry , that picturesqueness , which perhaps he alone possessed at that period , the escape of Fouquet , the pursuit , the furious race , and , lastly , the inimitable generosity of the surintendant , who might have fled ten times over , who might have killed the adversary in the pursuit , but who had preferred imprisonment , perhaps worse , to the humiliation of one who wished to rob him of his liberty . 
In proportion as the tale advanced , the king became agitated , devouring the narrator 's words , and drumming with his finger-nails upon the table . 
`` It results from all this , sire , in my eyes , at least , that the man who conducts himself thus is a gallant man , and can not be an enemy to the king . 
That is my opinion , and I repeat it to your majesty . 
I know what the king will say to me , and I bow to it , - reasons of state . 
So be it ! 
To my ears that sounds highly respectable . 
But I am a soldier , and I have received my orders , my orders are executed - very unwillingly on my part , it is true , but they are executed . 
I say no more . '' 
`` Where is M. Fouquet at this moment ? '' 
asked Louis , after a short silence . 
