So let us be off . '' 
And the carriage , lightened of a prisoner , who might well be - as he in fact was - very heavy in the sight of Aramis , passed across the drawbridge of the Bastile , which was raised again immediately behind it . 
: A Night at the Bastile . 
Pain , anguish , and suffering in human life are always in proportion to the strength with which a man is endowed . 
We will not pretend to say that Heaven always apportions to a man 's capability of endurance the anguish with which he afflicts him ; for that , indeed , would not be true , since Heaven permits the existence of death , which is , sometimes , the only refuge open to those who are too closely pressed - too bitterly afflicted , as far as the body is concerned . 
Suffering is in proportion to the strength which has been accorded ; in other words , the weak suffer more , where the trial is the same , than the strong . 
And what are the elementary principles , we may ask , that compose human strength ? 
Is it not - more than anything else - exercise , habit , experience ? 
We shall not even take the trouble to demonstrate this , for it is an axiom in morals , as in physics . 
When the young king , stupefied and crushed in every sense and feeling , found himself led to a cell in the Bastile , he fancied death itself is but a sleep ; that it , too , has its dreams as well ; that the bed had broken through the flooring of his room at Vaux ; that death had resulted from the occurrence ; and that , still carrying out his dream , the king , Louis XIV. , now no longer living , was dreaming one of those horrors , impossible to realize in life , which is termed dethronement , imprisonment , and insult towards a sovereign who formerly wielded unlimited power . 
To be present at - an actual witness , too - of this bitterness of death ; to float , indecisively , in an incomprehensible mystery , between resemblance and reality ; to hear everything , to see everything , without interfering in a single detail of agonizing suffering , was - so the king thought within himself - a torture far more terrible , since it might last forever . 
`` Is this what is termed eternity - hell ? '' 
he murmured , at the moment the door was closed upon him , which we remember Baisemeaux had shut with his own hands . 
He did not even look round him ; and in the room , leaning with his back against the wall , he allowed himself to be carried away by the terrible supposition that he was already dead , as he closed his eyes , in order to avoid looking upon something even worse still . 
`` How can I have died ? '' 
he said to himself , sick with terror . 
`` The bed might have been let down by some artificial means ? 
But no ! 
I do not remember to have felt a bruise , nor any shock either . 
Would they not rather have poisoned me at my meals , or with the fumes of wax , as they did my ancestress , Jeanne d'Albret ? '' 
Suddenly , the chill of the dungeons seemed to fall like a wet cloak upon Louis 's shoulders . 
`` I have seen , '' he said , `` my father lying dead upon his funeral couch , in his regal robes . 
That pale face , so calm and worn ; those hands , once so skillful , lying nerveless by his side ; those limbs stiffened by the icy grasp of death ; nothing there betokened a sleep that was disturbed by dreams . 
And yet , how numerous were the dreams which Heaven might have sent that royal corpse - him whom so many others had preceded , hurried away by him into eternal death ! 
No , that king was still the king : he was enthroned still upon that funeral couch , as upon a velvet armchair ; he had not abdicated one title of his majesty . 
God , who had not punished him , can not , will not punish me , who have done nothing . '' 
A strange sound attracted the young man 's attention . 
He looked round him , and saw on the mantel-shelf , just below an enormous crucifix , coarsely painted in fresco on the wall , a rat of enormous size engaged in nibbling a piece of dry bread , but fixing all the time , an intelligent and inquiring look upon the new occupant of the cell . 
The king could not resist a sudden impulse of fear and disgust : he moved back towards the door , uttering a loud cry ; and as if he but needed this cry , which escaped from his breast almost unconsciously , to recognize himself , Louis knew that he was alive and in full possession of his natural senses . 
`` A prisoner ! '' 
he cried . 
`` I - I , a prisoner ! '' 
He looked round him for a bell to summon some one to him . 
`` There are no bells in the Bastile , '' he said , `` and it is in the Bastile I am imprisoned . 
In what way can I have been made a prisoner ? 
It must have been owing to a conspiracy of M. Fouquet . 
I have been drawn to Vaux , as to a snare . 
M. Fouquet can not be acting alone in this affair . 
His agent - That voice that I but just now heard was M. d'Herblay 's ; I recognized it . 
Colbert was right , then . 
But what is Fouquet 's object ? 
To reign in my place and stead ? 
- Impossible . 
Yet who knows ! '' 
thought the king , relapsing into gloom again . 
`` Perhaps my brother , the Duc d'Orleans , is doing that which my uncle wished to do during the whole of his life against my father . 
But the queen ? 
- My mother , too ? 
And La Valliere ? 
Oh ! 
