`` Now , let us conclude between us two the bargain I promised to make with you one day when you found me in a very strange predicament at Blois . 
Do me justice , monsieur , when you admit I do not make any one pay for the tears of shame that I then shed . 
Look around you ; lofty heads have bowed . 
Bow yours , or choose such exile as will suit you . 
Perhaps , when reflecting upon it , you will find your king has a generous heart , who reckons sufficiently upon your loyalty to allow you to leave him dissatisfied , when you possess a great state secret . 
You are a brave man ; I know you to be so . 
Why have you judged me prematurely ? 
Judge me from this day forward , D'Artagnan , and be as severe as you please . '' 
D'Artagnan remained bewildered , mute , undecided for the first time in his life . 
At last he had found an adversary worthy of him . 
This was no longer trick , it was calculation ; no longer violence , but strength ; no longer passion , but will ; no longer boasting , but council . 
This young man who had brought down a Fouquet , and could do without a D'Artagnan , deranged the somewhat headstrong calculations of the musketeer . 
`` Come , let us see what stops you ? '' 
said the king , kindly . 
`` You have given in your resignation ; shall I refuse to accept it ? 
I admit that it may be hard for such an old captain to recover lost good-humor . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
replied D'Artagnan , in a melancholy tone , `` that is not my most serious care . 
I hesitate to take back my resignation because I am old in comparison with you , and have habits difficult to abandon . 
Henceforward , you must have courtiers who know how to amuse you - madmen who will get themselves killed to carry out what you call your great works . 
Great they will be , I feel - but , if by chance I should not think them so ? 
I have seen war , sire , I have seen peace ; I have served Richelieu and Mazarin ; I have been scorched with your father , at the fire of Rochelle ; riddled with sword-thrusts like a sieve , having grown a new skin ten times , as serpents do . 
After affronts and injustices , I have a command which was formerly something , because it gave the bearer the right of speaking as he liked to his king . 
But your captain of the musketeers will henceforward be an officer guarding the outer doors . 
Truly , sire , if that is to be my employment from this time , seize the opportunity of our being on good terms , to take it from me . 
Do not imagine that I bear malice ; no , you have tamed me , as you say ; but it must be confessed that in taming me you have lowered me ; by bowing me you have convicted me of weakness . 
If you knew how well it suits me to carry my head high , and what a pitiful mien I shall have while scenting the dust of your carpets ! 
Oh ! 
sire , I regret sincerely , and you will regret as I do , the old days when the king of France saw in every vestibule those insolent gentlemen , lean , always swearing - cross-grained mastiffs , who could bite mortally in the hour of danger or of battle . 
These men were the best of courtiers to the hand which fed them - they would lick it ; but for the hand that struck them , oh ! 
the bite that followed ! 
A little gold on the lace of their cloaks , a slender stomach in their hauts-de-chausses , a little sparkling of gray in their dry hair , and you will behold the handsome dukes and peers , the haughty marechaux of France . 
But why should I tell you all this ? 
The king is master ; he wills that I should make verses , he wills that I should polish the mosaics of his ante - chambers with satin shoes . 
Mordioux ! 
that is difficult , but I have got over greater difficulties . 
I will do it . 
Why should I do it ? 
Because I love money ? 
- I have enough . 
Because I am ambitious ? 
- my career is almost at an end . 
Because I love the court ? 
No . 
I will remain here because I have been accustomed for thirty years to go and take the orderly word of the king , and to have said to me ` Good evening , D'Artagnan , ' with a smile I did not beg for . 
That smile I will beg for ! 
Are you content , sire ? '' 
And D'Artagnan bowed his silver head , upon which the smiling king placed his white hand with pride . 
`` Thanks , my old servant , my faithful friend , '' said he . 
`` As , reckoning from this day , I have no longer any enemies in France , it remains with me to send you to a foreign field to gather your marshal 's baton . 
