But Fouquet ! 
who shall paint his emotion and stupor in presence of this living portrait of his master ! 
Fouquet thought Aramis was right , that this newly-arrived was a king as pure in his race as the other , and that , for having repudiated all participation in this coup d'etat , so skillfully got up by the General of the Jesuits , he must be a mad enthusiast , unworthy of ever dipping his hands in political grand strategy work . 
And then it was the blood of Louis XIII . 
which Fouquet was sacrificing to the blood of Louis XIII. ; it was to a selfish ambition he was sacrificing a noble ambition ; to the right of keeping he sacrificed the right of having . 
The whole extent of his fault was revealed to him at simple sight of the pretender . 
All that passed in the mind of Fouquet was lost upon the persons present . 
He had five minutes to focus meditation on this point of conscience ; five minutes , that is to say five ages , during which the two kings and their family scarcely found energy to breathe after so terrible a shock . 
D'Artagnan , leaning against the wall , in front of Fouquet , with his hand to his brow , asked himself the cause of such a wonderful prodigy . 
He could not have said at once why he doubted , but he knew assuredly that he had reason to doubt , and that in this meeting of the two Louis XIV.s lay all the doubt and difficulty that during late days had rendered the conduct of Aramis so suspicious to the musketeer . 
These ideas were , however , enveloped in a haze , a veil of mystery . 
The actors in this assembly seemed to swim in the vapors of a confused waking . 
Suddenly Louis XIV. , more impatient and more accustomed to command , ran to one of the shutters , which he opened , tearing the curtains in his eagerness . 
A flood of living light entered the chamber , and made Philippe draw back to the alcove . 
Louis seized upon this movement with eagerness , and addressing himself to the queen : `` My mother , '' said he , `` do you not acknowledge your son , since every one here has forgotten his king ! '' 
Anne of Austria started , and raised her arms towards Heaven , without being able to articulate a single word . 
`` My mother , '' said Philippe , with a calm voice , `` do you not acknowledge your son ? '' 
And this time , in his turn , Louis drew back . 
As to Anne of Austria , struck suddenly in head and heart with fell remorse , she lost her equilibrium . 
No one aiding her , for all were petrified , she sank back in her fauteuil , breathing a weak , trembling sigh . 
Louis could not endure the spectacle and the affront . 
He bounded towards D'Artagnan , over whose brain a vertigo was stealing and who staggered as he caught at the door for support . 
`` A moi ! 
mousquetaire ! '' 
said he . 
`` Look us in the face and say which is the paler , he or I ! '' 
This cry roused D'Artagnan , and stirred in his heart the fibers of obedience . 
He shook his head , and , without more hesitation , he walked straight up to Philippe , on whose shoulder he laid his hand , saying , `` Monsieur , you are my prisoner ! '' 
Philippe did not raise his eyes towards Heaven , nor stir from the spot , where he seemed nailed to the floor , his eye intently fixed upon the king his brother . 
He reproached him with a sublime silence for all misfortunes past , all tortures to come . 
Against this language of the soul the king felt he had no power ; he cast down his eyes , dragging away precipitately his brother and sister , forgetting his mother , sitting motionless within three paces of the son whom she left a second time to be condemned to death . 
Philippe approached Anne of Austria , and said to her , in a soft and nobly agitated voice : `` If I were not your son , I should curse you , my mother , for having rendered me so unhappy . '' 
D'Artagnan felt a shudder pass through the marrow of his bones . 
He bowed respectfully to the young prince , and said as he bent , `` Excuse me , monseigneur , I am but a soldier , and my oaths are his who has just left the chamber . '' 
`` Thank you , M. d'Artagnan ... . 
What has become of M. d'Herblay ? '' 
`` M. d'Herblay is in safety , monseigneur , '' said a voice behind them ; `` and no one , while I live and am free , shall cause a hair to fall from his head . '' 
`` Monsieur Fouquet ! '' 
said the prince , smiling sadly . 
`` Pardon me , monseigneur , '' said Fouquet , kneeling , `` but he who is just gone out from hence was my guest . '' 
`` Here are , '' murmured Philippe , with a sigh , `` brave friends and good hearts . 
They make me regret the world . 
On , M. d'Artagnan , I follow you . '' 
At the moment the captain of the musketeers was about to leave the room with his prisoner , Colbert appeared , and , after remitting an order from the king to D'Artagnan , retired . 
D'Artagnan read the paper , and then crushed it in his hand with rage . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked the prince . 
`` Read , monseigneur , '' replied the musketeer . 
Philippe read the following words , hastily traced by the hand of the king : `` M. d'Artagnan will conduct the prisoner to the Ile Sainte-Marguerite . 
He will cover his face with an iron vizor , which the prisoner shall never raise except at peril of his life . '' 
