The Duc de Beaufort was everywhere , superintending the embarkation with the zeal and interest of a good captain . 
He encouraged the humblest of his companions ; he scolded his lieutenants , even those of the highest rank . 
Artillery , provisions , baggage , he insisted upon seeing all himself . 
He examined the equipment of every soldier ; assured himself of the health and soundness of every horse . 
It was plain that , light , boastful , egotistical , in his hotel , the gentleman became the soldier again - the high noble , a captain - in face of the responsibility he had accepted . 
And yet , it must be admitted that , whatever was the care with which he presided over the preparations for departure , it was easy to perceive careless precipitation , and the absence of all the precaution that make the French solider the first soldier in the world , because , in that world , he is the one most abandoned to his own physical and moral resources . 
All things having satisfied , or appearing to have satisfied , the admiral , he paid his compliments to Raoul , and gave the last orders for sailing , which was ordered the next morning at daybreak . 
He invited the comte had his son to dine with him ; but they , under a pretext of service , kept themselves apart . 
Gaining their hostelry , situated under the trees of the great Place , they took their repast in haste , and Athos led Raoul to the rocks which dominate the city , vast gray mountains , whence the view is infinite and embraces a liquid horizon which appears , so remote is it , on a level with the rocks themselves . 
The night was fine , as it always is in these happy climes . 
The moon , rising behind the rocks , unrolled a silver sheet on the cerulean carpet of the sea . 
In the roadsteads maneuvered silently the vessels which had just taken their rank to facilitate the embarkation . 
The sea , loaded with phosphoric light , opened beneath the hulls of the barks that transported the baggage and munitions ; every dip of the prow plowed up this gulf of white flames ; from every oar dropped liquid diamonds . 
The sailors , rejoicing in the largesses of the admiral , were heard murmuring their slow and artless songs . 
Sometimes the grinding of the chains was mixed with the dull noise of shot falling into the holds . 
Such harmonies , such a spectacle , oppress the heart like fear , and dilate it like hope . 
All this life speaks of death . 
Athos had seated himself with his son , upon the moss , among the brambles of the promontory . 
Around their heads passed and repassed large bats , carried along by the fearful whirl of their blind chase . 
The feet of Raoul were over the edge of the cliff , bathed in that void which is peopled by vertigo , and provokes to self-annihilation . 
When the moon had risen to its fullest height , caressing with light the neighboring peaks , when the watery mirror was illumined in its full extent , and the little red fires had made their openings in the black masses of every ship , Athos , collecting all his ideas and all his courage , said : `` God has made all these things that we see , Raoul ; He has made us also , - poor atoms mixed up with this monstrous universe . 
We shine like those fires and those stars ; we sigh like those waves ; we suffer like those great ships , which are worn out in plowing the waves , in obeying the wind that urges them towards an end , as the breath of God blows us towards a port . 
Everything likes to live , Raoul ; and everything seems beautiful to living things . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said Raoul , `` we have before us a beautiful spectacle ! '' 
`` How good D'Artagnan is ! '' 
interrupted Athos , suddenly , `` and what a rare good fortune it is to be supported during a whole life by such a friend as he is ! 
That is what you have missed , Raoul . '' 
`` A friend ! '' 
cried Raoul , `` I have wanted a friend ! '' 
`` M. de Guiche is an agreeable companion , '' resumed the comte , coldly , `` but I believe , in the times in which you live , men are more engaged in their own interests and their own pleasures than they were in ours . 
You have sought a secluded life ; that is a great happiness , but you have lost your strength thereby . 
We four , more weaned from those delicate abstractions that constitute your joy , furnished much more resistance when misfortune presented itself . '' 
`` I have not interrupted you , monsieur , to tell you that I had a friend , and that that friend is M. de Guiche . 
Certes , he is good and generous , and moreover he loves me . 
But I have lived under the guardianship of another friendship , monsieur , as precious and as strong as that of which you speak , since it is yours . '' 
`` I have not been a friend for you , Raoul , '' said Athos . 
`` Eh ! 
monsieur , and in what respect not ? '' 
`` Because I have given you reason to think that life has but one face , because , sad and severe , alas ! 
I have always cut off for you , without , God knows , wishing to do so , the joyous buds that spring incessantly from the fair tree of youth ; so that at this moment I repent of not having made of you a more expansive , dissipated , animated man . '' 
`` I know why you say that , monsieur . 
No , it is not you who have made me what I am ; it was love , which took me at the time when children only have inclinations ; it is the constancy natural to my character , which with other creatures is but habit . 
I believed that I should always be as I was ; I thought God had cast me in a path quite clear , quite straight , bordered with fruits and flowers . 
I had ever watching over me your vigilance and strength . 
I believed myself to be vigilant and strong . 
Nothing prepared me ; I fell once , and that once deprived me of courage for the whole of my life . 
It is quite true that I wrecked myself . 
Oh , no , monsieur ! 
you are nothing in my past but happiness - in my future but hope ! 
No , I have no reproach to make against life such as you made it for me ; I bless you , and I love you ardently . '' 
