La Valliere , she will have been abandoned to Madame . 
Dear , dear girl ! 
Yes , it is - it must be so . 
They have shut her up as they have me . 
We are separated forever ! '' 
And at this idea of separation the poor lover burst into a flood of tears and sobs and groans . 
`` There is a governor in this place , '' the king continued , in a fury of passion ; `` I will speak to him , I will summon him to me . '' 
He called - no voice replied to his . 
He seized hold of his chair , and hurled it against the massive oaken door . 
The wood resounded against the door , and awakened many a mournful echo in the profound depths of the staircase ; but from a human creature , none . 
This was a fresh proof for the king of the slight regard in which he was held at the Bastile . 
Therefore , when his first fit of anger had passed away , having remarked a barred window through which there passed a stream of light , lozenge-shaped , which must be , he knew , the bright orb of approaching day , Louis began to call out , at first gently enough , then louder and louder still ; but no one replied . 
Twenty other attempts which he made , one after another , obtained no other or better success . 
His blood began to boil within him , and mount to his head . 
His nature was such , that , accustomed to command , he trembled at the idea of disobedience . 
The prisoner broke the chair , which was too heavy for him to lift , and made use of it as a battering ram to strike against the door . 
He struck so loudly , and so repeatedly , that the perspiration soon began to pour down his face . 
The sound became tremendous and continuous ; certain stifled , smothered cries replied in different directions . 
This sound produced a strange effect upon the king . 
He paused to listen ; it was the voice of the prisoners , formerly his victims , now his companions . 
The voices ascended like vapors through the thick ceilings and the massive walls , and rose in accusations against the author of this noise , as doubtless their sighs and tears accused , in whispered tones , the author of their captivity . 
After having deprived so many people of their liberty , the king came among them to rob them of their rest . 
This idea almost drove him mad ; it redoubled his strength , or rather his well , bent upon obtaining some information , or a conclusion to the affair . 
With a portion of the broken chair he recommenced the noise . 
At the end of an hour , Louis heard something in the corridor , behind the door of his cell , and a violent blow , which was returned upon the door itself , made him cease his own . 
`` Are you mad ? '' 
said a rude , brutal voice . 
`` What is the matter with you this morning ? '' 
`` This morning ! '' 
thought the king ; but he said aloud , politely , `` Monsieur , are you the governor of the Bastile ? '' 
`` My good fellow , your head is out of sorts , '' replied the voice ; `` but that is no reason why you should make such a terrible disturbance . 
Be quiet ; mordioux ! '' 
`` Are you the governor ? '' 
the king inquired again . 
He heard a door on the corridor close ; the jailer had just left , not condescending to reply a single word . 
When the king had assured himself of his departure , his fury knew no longer any bounds . 
As agile as a tiger , he leaped from the table to the window , and struck the iron bars with all his might . 
He broke a pane of glass , the pieces of which fell clanking into the courtyard below . 
He shouted with increasing hoarseness , `` The governor , the governor ! '' 
This excess lasted fully an hour , during which time he was in a burning fever . 
With his hair in disorder and matted on his forehead , his dress torn and covered with dust and plaster , his linen in shreds , the king never rested until his strength was utterly exhausted , and it was not until then that he clearly understood the pitiless thickness of the walls , the impenetrable nature of the cement , invincible to every influence but that of time , and that he possessed no other weapon but despair . 
He leaned his forehead against the door , and let the feverish throbbings of his heart calm by degrees ; it had seemed as if one single additional pulsation would have made it burst . 
`` A moment will come when the food which is given to the prisoners will be brought to me . 
I shall then see some one , I shall speak to him , and get an answer . '' 
And the king tried to remember at what hour the first repast of the prisoners was served at the Bastile ; he was ignorant even of this detail . 
The feeling of remorse at this remembrance smote him like the thrust of a dagger , that he should have lived for five and twenty years a king , and in the enjoyment of every happiness , without having bestowed a moment 's thought on the misery of those who had been unjustly deprived of their liberty . 
The king blushed for very shame . 
He felt that Heaven , in permitting this fearful humiliation , did no more than render to the man the same torture as had been inflicted by that man upon so many others . 
Nothing could be more efficacious for reawakening his mind to religious influences than the prostration of his heart and mind and soul beneath the feeling of such acute wretchedness . 
But Louis dared not even kneel in prayer to God to entreat him to terminate his bitter trial . 
