`` Yes , '' added Aramis . 
Porthos alone said nothing , but merely bowed . 
D'Artagnan , having tenderly embraced his two old friends , left Belle-Isle with the inseparable companion with whom M. Colbert had saddled him . 
Thus , with the exception of the explanation with which the worthy Porthos had been willing to be satisfied , nothing had changed in appearance in the fate of one or the other , `` Only , '' said Aramis , `` there is D'Artagnan 's idea . '' 
D'Artagnan did not return on board without profoundly analyzing the idea he had discovered . 
Now , we know that whatever D'Artagnan did examine , according to custom , daylight was certain to illuminate . 
As to the officer , now grown mute again , he had full time for meditation . 
Therefore , on putting his foot on board his vessel , moored within cannon - shot of the island , the captain of the musketeers had already got together all his means , offensive and defensive . 
He immediately assembled his council , which consisted of the officers serving under his orders . 
These were eight in number ; a chief of the maritime forces ; a major directing the artillery ; an engineer , the officer we are acquainted with , and four lieutenants . 
Having assembled them , D'Artagnan arose , took of his hat , and addressed them thus : `` Gentlemen , I have been to reconnoiter Belle-Ile-en-Mer , and I have found in it a good and solid garrison ; moreover , preparations are made for a defense that may prove troublesome . 
I therefore intend to send for two of the principal officers of the place , that we may converse with them . 
Having separated them from their troops and cannon , we shall be better able to deal with them ; particularly by reasoning with them . 
Is not this your opinion , gentlemen ? '' 
The major of artillery rose . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , with respect , but firmness , `` I have heard you say that the place is preparing to make a troublesome defense . 
The place is then , as you know , determined on rebellion ? '' 
D'Artagnan was visibly put out by this reply ; but he was not the man to allow himself to be subdued by a trifle , and resumed : `` Monsieur , '' said he , `` your reply is just . 
But you are ignorant that Belle-Isle is a fief of M. Fouquet 's , and that former monarchs gave the right to the seigneurs of Belle-Isle to arm their people . '' 
The major made a movement . 
`` Oh ! 
do not interrupt me , '' continued D'Artagnan . 
`` You are going to tell me that that right to arm themselves against the English was not a right to arm themselves against their king . 
But it is not M. Fouquet , I suppose , who holds Belle-Isle at this moment , since I arrested M. Fouquet the day before yesterday . 
Now the inhabitants and defenders of Belle-Isle know nothing of this arrest . 
You would announce it to them in vain . 
It is a thing so unheard-of and extraordinary , so unexpected , that they would not believe you . 
A Breton serves his master , and not his masters ; he serves his master till he has seen him dead . 
Now the Bretons , as far as I know , have not seen the body of M. Fouquet . 
It is not , then , surprising they hold out against that which is neither M. Fouquet nor his signature . '' 
The major bowed in token of assent . 
`` That is why , '' continued D'Artagnan , `` I propose to cause two of the principal officers of the garrison to come on board my vessel . 
They will see you , gentlemen ; they will see the forces we have at our disposal ; they will consequently know to what they have to trust , and the fate that attends them , in case of rebellion . 
We will affirm to them , upon our honor , that M. Fouquet is a prisoner , and that all resistance can only be prejudicial to them . 
We will tell them that at the first cannon fired , there will be no further hope of mercy from the king . 
Then , or so at least I trust , they will resist no longer . 
They will yield up without fighting , and we shall have a place given up to us in a friendly way which it might cost prodigious efforts to subdue . '' 
The officer who had followed D'Artagnan to Belle-Isle was preparing to speak , but D'Artagnan interrupted him . 
`` Yes , I know what you are going to tell me , monsieur ; I know that there is an order of the king 's to prevent all secret communications with the defenders of Belle-Isle , and that is exactly why I do not offer to communicate except in presence of my staff . '' 
And D'Artagnan made an inclination of the head to his officers , who knew him well enough to attach a certain value to the condescension . 
The officers looked at each other as if to read each other 's opinions in their eyes , with the intention of evidently acting , should they agree , according to the desire of D'Artagnan . 
And already the latter saw with joy that the result of their consent would be sending a bark to Porthos and Aramis , when the king 's officer drew from a pocket a folded paper , which he placed in the hands of D'Artagnan . 
This paper bore upon its superscription the number 1 . 
`` What , more ! '' 
murmured the surprised captain . 
`` Read , monsieur , '' said the officer , with a courtesy that was not free from sadness . 
D'Artagnan , full of mistrust , unfolded the paper , and read these words : `` Prohibition to M. d'Artagnan to assemble any council whatever , or to deliberate in any way before Belle-Isle be surrendered and the prisoners shot . 
Signed - LOUIS . '' 
D'Artagnan repressed the quiver of impatience that ran through his whole body , and with a gracious smile : `` That is well , monsieur , '' said he ; `` the king 's orders shall be complied with . '' 
: Result of the Ideas of the King , and the Ideas of D'Artagnan . 
