no , no , aha , old fox ! 
- not yet , '' he said to himself . 
And while the king , protected from observation by the thick covert of an enormous lime , pressed La Valliere to his breast , with all the ardor of ineffable affection , Colbert tranquilly fumbled among the papers in his pocket-book and drew out of it a paper folded in the form of a letter , somewhat yellow , perhaps , but one that must have been most precious , since the intendant smiled as he looked at it ; he then bent a look , full of hatred , upon the charming group which the young girl and the king formed together - a group revealed but for a moment , as the light of the approaching torches shone upon it . 
Louis noticed the light reflected upon La Valliere 's white dress . 
`` Leave me , Louise , '' he said , `` for some one is coming . '' 
`` Mademoiselle , mademoiselle , some one is coming , '' cried Colbert , to expedite the young girl 's departure . 
Louise disappeared rapidly among the trees ; and then , as the king , who had been on his knees before the young girl , was rising from his humble posture , Colbert exclaimed , `` Ah ! 
Mademoiselle de la Valliere has let something fall . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
inquired the king . 
`` A paper - a letter - something white ; look there , sire . '' 
The king stooped down immediately and picked up the letter , crumpling it in his hand , as he did so ; and at the same moment the torches arrived , inundating the blackness of the scene with a flood of light as bight as day . 
: Jealousy . 
The torches we have just referred to , the eager attention every one displayed , and the new ovation paid to the king by Fouquet , arrived in time to suspend the effect of a resolution which La Valliere had already considerably shaken in Louis XIV . 
's heart . 
He looked at Fouquet with a feeling almost of gratitude for having given La Valliere an opportunity of showing herself so generously disposed , so powerful in the influence she exercised over his heart . 
The moment of the last and greatest display had arrived . 
Hardly had Fouquet conducted the king towards the chateau , when a mass of fire burst from the dome of Vaux , with a prodigious uproar , pouring a flood of dazzling cataracts of rays on every side , and illumining the remotest corners of the gardens . 
The fireworks began . 
Colbert , at twenty paces from the king , who was surrounded and feted by the owner of Vaux , seemed , by the obstinate persistence of his gloomy thoughts , to do his utmost to recall Louis 's attention , which the magnificence of the spectacle was already , in his opinion , too easily diverting . 
Suddenly , just as Louis was on the point of holding it out to Fouquet , he perceived in his hand the paper which , as he believed , La Valliere had dropped at his feet as she hurried away . 
The still stronger magnet of love drew the young prince 's attention towards the souvenir of his idol ; and , by the brilliant light , which increased momentarily in beauty , and drew from the neighboring villages loud cheers of admiration , the king read the letter , which he supposed was a loving and tender epistle La Valliere had destined for him . 
But as he read it , a death - like pallor stole over his face , and an expression of deep-seated wrath , illumined by the many-colored fire which gleamed so brightly , soaringly around the scene , produced a terrible spectacle , which every one would have shuddered at , could they only have read into his heart , now torn by the most stormy and most bitter passions . 
There was no truce for him now , influenced as he was by jealousy and mad passion . 
From the very moment when the dark truth was revealed to him , every gentler feeling seemed to disappear ; pity , kindness of consideration , the religion of hospitality , all were forgotten . 
In the bitter pang which wrung his heart , he , still too weak to hide his sufferings , was almost on the point of uttering a cry of alarm , and calling his guards to gather round him . 
This letter which Colbert had thrown down at the king 's feet , the reader has doubtlessly guessed , was the same that had disappeared with the porter Toby at Fontainebleau , after the attempt which Fouquet had made upon La Valliere 's heart . 
Fouquet saw the king 's pallor , and was far from guessing the evil ; Colbert saw the king 's anger , and rejoiced inwardly at the approach of the storm . 
Fouquet 's voice drew the young prince from his wrathful reverie . 
`` What is the matter , sire ? '' 
inquired the superintendent , with an expression of graceful interest . 
Louis made a violent effort over himself , as he replied , `` Nothing . '' 
`` I am afraid your majesty is suffering ? '' 
`` I am suffering , and have already told you so , monsieur ; but it is nothing . '' 
And the king , without waiting for the termination of the fireworks , turned towards the chateau . 
Fouquet accompanied him , and the whole court followed , leaving the remains of the fireworks consuming for their own amusement . 
The superintendent endeavored again to question Louis XIV. , but did not succeed in obtaining a reply . 
He imagined there had been some misunderstanding between Louis and La Valliere in the park , which had resulted in a slight quarrel ; and that the king , who was not ordinarily sulky by disposition , but completely absorbed by his passion for La Valliere , had taken a dislike to every one because his mistress had shown herself offended with him . 
This idea was sufficient to console him ; he had even a friendly and kindly smile for the young king , when the latter wished him good night . 
This , however , was not all the king had to submit to ; he was obliged to undergo the usual ceremony , which on that evening was marked by close adherence to the strictest etiquette . 
The next day was the one fixed for the departure ; it was but proper that the guests should thank their host , and show him a little attention in return for the expenditure of his twelve millions . 
The only remark , approaching to amiability , which the king could find to say to M. Fouquet , as he took leave of him , were in these words , `` M. Fouquet , you shall hear from me . 
Be good enough to desire M. d'Artagnan to come here . '' 
But the blood of Louis XIV. , who had so profoundly dissimulated his feelings , boiled in his veins ; and he was perfectly willing to order M. Fouquet to be put an end to with the same readiness , indeed , as his predecessor had caused the assassination of le Marechal d'Ancre ; and so he disguised the terrible resolution he had formed beneath one of those royal smiles which , like lightning-flashes , indicated coups d'etat . 
Fouquet took the king 's hand and kissed it ; Louis shuddered throughout his whole frame , but allowed M. Fouquet to touch his hand with his lips . 
Five minutes afterwards , D'Artagnan , to whom the royal order had been communicated , entered Louis XIV . 
's apartment . 
Aramis and Philippe were in theirs , still eagerly attentive , and still listening with all their ears . 
The king did not even give the captain of the musketeers time to approach his armchair , but ran forward to meet him . 
`` Take care , '' he exclaimed , `` that no one enters here . '' 
