Every tree in the neighborhood which presented a fair appearance of beauty or stature had been taken up by its roots and transplanted to the park . 
Fouquet could well afford to purchase trees to ornament his park , since he had bought up three villages and their appurtenances -LRB- to use a legal word -RRB- to increase its extent . 
M. de Scudery said of this palace , that , for the purpose of keeping the grounds and gardens well watered , M. Fouquet had divided a river into a thousand fountains , and gathered the waters of a thousand fountains into torrents . 
This same Monsieur de Scudery said a great many other things in his `` Clelie , '' about this palace of Valterre , the charms of which he describes most minutely . 
We should be far wiser to send our curious readers to Vaux to judge for themselves , than to refer them to `` Clelie ; '' and yet there are as many leagues from Paris to Vaux , as there are volumes of the `` Clelie . '' 
This magnificent palace had been got ready for the reception of the greatest reigning sovereign of the time . 
M. Fouquet 's friends had transported thither , some their actors and their dresses , others their troops of sculptors and artists ; not forgetting others with their ready - mended pens , - floods of impromptus were contemplated . 
The cascades , somewhat rebellious nymphs though they were , poured forth their waters brighter and clearer than crystal : they scattered over the bronze triton and nereids their waves of foam , which glistened like fire in the rays of the sun . 
An army of servants were hurrying to and fro in squadrons in the courtyard and corridors ; while Fouquet , who had only that morning arrived , walked all through the palace with a calm , observant glance , in order to give his last orders , after his intendants had inspected everything . 
It was , as we have said , the 15th of August . 
The sun poured down its burning rays upon the heathen deities of marble and bronze : it raised the temperature of the water in the conch shells , and ripened , on the walls , those magnificent peaches , of which the king , fifty years later , spoke so regretfully , when , at Marly , on an occasion of a scarcity of the finer sorts of peaches being complained of , in the beautiful gardens there - gardens which had cost France double the amount that had been expended on Vaux - the great king observed to some one : `` You are far too young to have eaten any of M. Fouquet 's peaches . '' 
Oh , fame ! 
Oh , blazon of renown ! 
Oh , glory of this earth ! 
That very man whose judgment was so sound and accurate where merit was concerned - he who had swept into his coffers the inheritance of Nicholas Fouquet , who had robbed him of Lenotre and Lebrun , and had sent him to rot for the remainder of his life in one of the state prisons - merely remembered the peaches of that vanquished , crushed , forgotten enemy ! 
It was to little purpose that Fouquet had squandered thirty millions of francs in the fountains of his gardens , in the crucibles of his sculptors , in the writing-desks of his literary friends , in the portfolios of his painters ; vainly had he fancied that thereby he might be remembered . 
A peach - a blushing , rich-flavored fruit , nestling in the trellis work on the garden - wall , hidden beneath its long , green leaves , - this little vegetable production , that a dormouse would nibble up without a thought , was sufficient to recall to the memory of this great monarch the mournful shade of the last surintendant of France . 
With a perfect reliance that Aramis had made arrangements fairly to distribute the vast number of guests throughout the palace , and that he had not omitted to attend to any of the internal regulations for their comfort , Fouquet devoted his entire attention to the ensemble alone . 
In one direction Gourville showed him the preparations which had been made for the fireworks ; in another , Moliere led him over the theater ; at last , after he had visited the chapel , the salons , and the galleries , and was again going downstairs , exhausted with fatigue , Fouquet saw Aramis on the staircase . 
The prelate beckoned to him . 
The surintendant joined his friend , and , with him , paused before a large picture scarcely finished . 
Applying himself , heart and soul , to his work , the painter Lebrun , covered with perspiration , stained with paint , pale from fatigue and the inspiration of genius , was putting the last finishing touches with his rapid brush . 
It was the portrait of the king , whom they were expecting , dressed in the court suit which Percerin had condescended to show beforehand to the bishop of Vannes . 
Fouquet placed himself before this portrait , which seemed to live , as one might say , in the cool freshness of its flesh , and in its warmth of color . 
He gazed upon it long and fixedly , estimated the prodigious labor that had been bestowed upon it , and , not being able to find any recompense sufficiently great for this Herculean effort , he passed his arm round the painter 's neck and embraced him . 
The surintendant , by this action , had utterly ruined a suit of clothes worth a thousand pistoles , but he had satisfied , more than satisfied , Lebrun . 
It was a happy moment for the artist ; it was an unhappy moment for M. Percerin , who was walking behind Fouquet , and was engaged in admiring , in Lebrun 's painting , the suit that he had made for his majesty , a perfect objet d'art , as he called it , which was not to be matched except in the wardrobe of the surintendant . 
His distress and his exclamations were interrupted by a signal which had been given from the summit of the mansion . 
In the direction of Melun , in the still empty , open plain , the sentinels of Vaux had just perceived the advancing procession of the king and the queens . 
His majesty was entering Melun with his long train of carriages and cavaliers . 
`` In an hour - '' said Aramis to Fouquet . 
`` In an hour ! '' 
replied the latter , sighing . 
`` And the people who ask one another what is the good of these royal fetes ! '' 
continued the bishop of Vannes , laughing , with his false smile . 
`` Alas ! 
I , too , who am not the people , ask myself the same thing . '' 
`` I will answer you in four and twenty hours , monseigneur . 
Assume a cheerful countenance , for it should be a day of true rejoicing . '' 
`` Well , believe me or not , as you like , D'Herblay , '' said the surintendant , with a swelling heart , pointing at the cortege of Louis , visible in the horizon , `` he certainly loves me but very little , and I do not care much more for him ; but I can not tell you how it is , that since he is approaching my house - '' `` Well , what ? '' 
`` Well , since I know he is on his way here , as my guest , he is more sacred than ever for me ; he is my acknowledged sovereign , and as such is very dear to me . '' 
`` Dear ? 
yes , '' said Aramis , playing upon the word , as the Abbe Terray did , at a later period , with Louis XV . 
`` Do not laugh , D'Herblay ; I feel that , if he really seemed to wish it , I could love that young man . '' 
`` You should not say that to me , '' returned Aramis , `` but rather to M. Colbert . '' 
`` To M. Colbert ! '' 
exclaimed Fouquet . 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` Because he would allow you a pension out of the king 's privy purse , as soon as he becomes surintendant , '' said Aramis , preparing to leave as soon as he had dealt this last blow . 
`` Where are you going ? '' 
