Father Ferapont had succeeded in getting himself installed in this same solitary cell seven years previously . 
It was simply a peasant 's hut , though it looked like a chapel , for it contained an extraordinary number of ikons with lamps perpetually burning before them - which men brought to the monastery as offerings to God . 
Father Ferapont had been appointed to look after them and keep the lamps burning . 
It was said -LRB- and indeed it was true -RRB- that he ate only two pounds of bread in three days . 
The beekeeper , who lived close by the apiary , used to bring him the bread every three days , and even to this man who waited upon him , Father Ferapont rarely uttered a word . 
The four pounds of bread , together with the sacrament bread , regularly sent him on Sundays after the late mass by the Father Superior , made up his weekly rations . 
The water in his jug was changed every day . 
He rarely appeared at mass . 
Visitors who came to do him homage saw him sometimes kneeling all day long at prayer without looking round . 
If he addressed them , he was brief , abrupt , strange , and almost always rude . 
On very rare occasions , however , he would talk to visitors , but for the most part he would utter some one strange saying which was a complete riddle , and no entreaties would induce him to pronounce a word in explanation . 
He was not a priest , but a simple monk . 
There was a strange belief , chiefly , however , among the most ignorant , that Father Ferapont had communication with heavenly spirits and would only converse with them , and so was silent with men . 
The monk from Obdorsk , having been directed to the apiary by the beekeeper , who was also a very silent and surly monk , went to the corner where Father Ferapont 's cell stood . 
`` Maybe he will speak as you are a stranger and maybe you 'll get nothing out of him , '' the beekeeper had warned him . 
The monk , as he related afterwards , approached in the utmost apprehension . 
It was rather late in the evening . 
Father Ferapont was sitting at the door of his cell on a low bench . 
A huge old elm was lightly rustling overhead . 
There was an evening freshness in the air . 
The monk from Obdorsk bowed down before the saint and asked his blessing . 
`` Do you want me to bow down to you , monk ? '' 
said Father Ferapont . 
`` Get up ! '' 
The monk got up . 
`` Blessing , be blessed ! 
Sit beside me . 
Where have you come from ? '' 
What most struck the poor monk was the fact that in spite of his strict fasting and great age , Father Ferapont still looked a vigorous old man . 
He was tall , held himself erect , and had a thin , but fresh and healthy face . 
There was no doubt he still had considerable strength . 
He was of athletic build . 
In spite of his great age he was not even quite grey , and still had very thick hair and a full beard , both of which had once been black . 
His eyes were grey , large and luminous , but strikingly prominent . 
He spoke with a broad accent . 
He was dressed in a peasant 's long reddish coat of coarse convict cloth -LRB- as it used to be called -RRB- and had a stout rope round his waist . 
His throat and chest were bare . 
Beneath his coat , his shirt of the coarsest linen showed almost black with dirt , not having been changed for months . 
They said that he wore irons weighing thirty pounds under his coat . 
His stockingless feet were thrust in old slippers almost dropping to pieces . 
`` From the little Obdorsk monastery , from St. Sylvester , '' the monk answered humbly , whilst his keen and inquisitive , but rather frightened little eyes kept watch on the hermit . 
`` I have been at your Sylvester 's . 
I used to stay there . 
Is Sylvester well ? '' 
The monk hesitated . 
`` You are a senseless lot ! 
How do you keep the fasts ? '' 
`` Our dietary is according to the ancient conventual rules . 
During Lent there are no meals provided for Monday , Wednesday , and Friday . 
For Tuesday and Thursday we have white bread , stewed fruit with honey , wild berries , or salt cabbage and whole meal stirabout . 
On Saturday white cabbage soup , noodles with peas , kasha , all with hemp oil . 
On weekdays we have dried fish and kasha with the cabbage soup . 
From Monday till Saturday evening , six whole days in Holy Week , nothing is cooked , and we have only bread and water , and that sparingly ; if possible not taking food every day , just the same as is ordered for first week in Lent . 
On Good Friday nothing is eaten . 
In the same way on the Saturday we have to fast till three o'clock , and then take a little bread and water and drink a single cup of wine . 
On Holy Thursday we drink wine and have something cooked without oil or not cooked at all , inasmuch as the Laodicean council lays down for Holy Thursday : `` It is unseemly by remitting the fast on the Holy Thursday to dishonour the whole of Lent ! '' 
This is how we keep the fast . 
But what is that compared with you , holy Father , '' added the monk , growing more confident , `` for all the year round , even at Easter , you take nothing but bread and water , and what we should eat in two days lasts you full seven . 
It 's truly marvellous - your great abstinence . '' 
`` And mushrooms ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , suddenly . 
`` Mushrooms ? '' 
repeated the surprised monk . 
`` Yes . 
I can give up their bread , not needing it at all , and go away into the forest and live there on the mushrooms or the berries , but they ca n't give up their bread here , wherefore they are in bondage to the devil . 
Nowadays the unclean deny that there is need of such fasting . 
Haughty and unclean is their judgment . '' 
`` Och , true , '' sighed the monk . 
`` And have you seen devils among them ? '' 
asked Ferapont . 
`` Among them ? 
Among whom ? '' 
asked the monk , timidly . 
`` I went to the Father Superior on Trinity Sunday last year , I have n't been since . 
I saw a devil sitting on one man 's chest hiding under his cassock , only his horns poked out ; another had one peeping out of his pocket with such sharp eyes , he was afraid of me ; another settled in the unclean belly of one , another was hanging round a man 's neck , and so he was carrying him about without seeing him . '' 
`` You - can see spirits ? '' 
the monk inquired . 
`` I tell you I can see , I can see through them . 
When I was coming out from the Superior 's I saw one hiding from me behind the door , and a big one , a yard and a half or more high , with a thick long grey tail , and the tip of his tail was in the crack of the door and I was quick and slammed the door , pinching his tail in it . 
He squealed and began to struggle , and I made the sign of the cross over him three times . 
And he died on the spot like a crushed spider . 
He must have rotted there in the corner and be stinking , but they do n't see , they do n't smell it . 
It 's a year since I have been there . 
I reveal it to you , as you are a stranger . '' 
`` Your words are terrible ! 
But , holy and blessed father , '' said the monk , growing bolder and bolder , `` is it true , as they noise abroad even to distant lands about you , that you are in continual communication with the Holy Ghost ? '' 
`` He does fly down at times . '' 
`` How does he fly down ? 
In what form ? '' 
`` As a bird . '' 
`` The Holy Ghost in the form of a dove ? '' 
`` There 's the Holy Ghost and there 's the Holy Spirit . 
The Holy Spirit can appear as other birds - sometimes as a swallow , sometimes a goldfinch and sometimes as a blue-tit . '' 
`` How do you know him from an ordinary tit ? '' 
`` He speaks . '' 
`` How does he speak , in what language ? '' 
`` Human language . '' 
`` And what does he tell you ? '' 
`` Why , to-day he told me that a fool would visit me and would ask me unseemly questions . 
You want to know too much , monk . '' 
`` Terrible are your words , most holy and blessed Father , '' the monk shook his head . 
But there was a doubtful look in his frightened little eyes . 
`` Do you see this tree ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , after a pause . 
`` I do , blessed Father . '' 
`` You think it 's an elm , but for me it has another shape . '' 
`` What sort of shape ? '' 
inquired the monk , after a pause of vain expectation . 
`` It happens at night . 
You see those two branches ? 
In the night it is Christ holding out His arms to me and seeking me with those arms , I see it clearly and tremble . 
It 's terrible , terrible ! '' 
`` What is there terrible if it 's Christ Himself ? '' 
`` Why , He 'll snatch me up and carry me away . '' 
`` Alive ? '' 
`` In the spirit and glory of Elijah , have n't you heard ? 
He will take me in His arms and bear me away . '' 
Though the monk returned to the cell he was sharing with one of the brothers , in considerable perplexity of mind , he still cherished at heart a greater reverence for Father Ferapont than for Father Zossima . 
He was strongly in favour of fasting , and it was not strange that one who kept so rigid a fast as Father Ferapont should `` see marvels . '' 
His words seemed certainly queer , but God only could tell what was hidden in those words , and were not worse words and acts commonly seen in those who have sacrificed their intellects for the glory of God ? 
The pinching of the devil 's tail he was ready and eager to believe , and not only in the figurative sense . 
Besides he had , before visiting the monastery , a strong prejudice against the institution of `` elders , '' which he only knew of by hearsay and believed to be a pernicious innovation . 
Before he had been long at the monastery , he had detected the secret murmurings of some shallow brothers who disliked the institution . 
He was , besides , a meddlesome , inquisitive man , who poked his nose into everything . 
This was why the news of the fresh `` miracle '' performed by Father Zossima reduced him to extreme perplexity . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards how their inquisitive guest from Obdorsk had been continually flitting to and fro from one group to another , listening and asking questions among the monks that were crowding within and without the elder 's cell . 
But he did not pay much attention to him at the time , and only recollected it afterwards . 
He had no thought to spare for it indeed , for when Father Zossima , feeling tired again , had gone back to bed , he thought of Alyosha as he was closing his eyes , and sent for him . 
Alyosha ran at once . 
There was no one else in the cell but Father Paissy , Father Iosif , and the novice Porfiry . 
The elder , opening his weary eyes and looking intently at Alyosha , asked him suddenly : `` Are your people expecting you , my son ? '' 
Alyosha hesitated . 
`` Have n't they need of you ? 
Did n't you promise someone yesterday to see them to-day ? '' 
`` I did promise - to my father - my brothers - others too . '' 
`` You see , you must go . 
Do n't grieve . 
Be sure I shall not die without your being by to hear my last word . 
To you I will say that word , my son , it will be my last gift to you . 
To you , dear son , because you love me . 
But now go to keep your promise . '' 
Alyosha immediately obeyed , though it was hard to go . 
But the promise that he should hear his last word on earth , that it should be the last gift to him , Alyosha , sent a thrill of rapture through his soul . 
He made haste that he might finish what he had to do in the town and return quickly . 
Father Paissy , too , uttered some words of exhortation which moved and surprised him greatly . 
He spoke as they left the cell together . 
`` Remember , young man , unceasingly , '' Father Paissy began , without preface , `` that the science of this world , which has become a great power , has , especially in the last century , analysed everything divine handed down to us in the holy books . 
After this cruel analysis the learned of this world have nothing left of all that was sacred of old . 
But they have only analysed the parts and overlooked the whole , and indeed their blindness is marvellous . 
Yet the whole still stands steadfast before their eyes , and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it . 
Has it not lasted nineteen centuries , is it not still a living , a moving power in the individual soul and in the masses of people ? 
It is still as strong and living even in the souls of atheists , who have destroyed everything ! 
For even those who have renounced Christianity and attack it , in their inmost being still follow the Christian ideal , for hitherto neither their subtlety nor the ardour of their hearts has been able to create a higher ideal of man and of virtue than the ideal given by Christ of old . 
When it has been attempted , the result has been only grotesque . 
Remember this especially , young man , since you are being sent into the world by your departing elder . 
Maybe , remembering this great day , you will not forget my words , uttered from the heart for your guidance , seeing you are young , and the temptations of the world are great and beyond your strength to endure . 
Well , now go , my orphan . '' 
With these words Father Paissy blessed him . 
As Alyosha left the monastery and thought them over , he suddenly realised that he had met a new and unexpected friend , a warmly loving teacher , in this austere monk who had hitherto treated him sternly . 
It was as though Father Zossima had bequeathed him to him at his death , and `` perhaps that 's just what had passed between them , '' Alyosha thought suddenly . 
The philosophic reflections he had just heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth of Father Paissy 's heart . 
He was in haste to arm the boy 's mind for conflict with temptation and to guard the young soul left in his charge with the strongest defence he could imagine . 
At His Father 's FIRST of all , Alyosha went to his father . 
On the way he remembered that his father had insisted the day before that he should come without his brother Ivan seeing him . 
`` Why so ? '' 
Alyosha wondered suddenly . 
`` Even if my father has something to say to me alone , why should I go in unseen ? 
Most likely in his excitement yesterday he meant to say something different , '' he decided . 
Yet he was very glad when Marfa Ignatyevna , who opened the garden gate to him -LRB- Grigory , it appeared , was ill in bed in the lodge -RRB- , told him in answer to his question that Ivan Fyodorovitch had gone out two hours ago . 
`` And my father ? '' 
`` He is up , taking his coffee , '' Marfa answered somewhat drily . 
Alyosha went in . 
The old man was sitting alone at the table wearing slippers and a little old overcoat . 
He was amusing himself by looking through some accounts , rather inattentively however . 
He was quite alone in the house , for Smerdyakov too had gone out marketing . 
Though he had got up early and was trying to put a bold face on it , he looked tired and weak . 
His forehead , upon which huge purple bruises had come out during the night , was bandaged with a red handkerchief ; his nose too was swollen terribly in the night , and some smaller bruises covered it in patches , giving his whole face a peculiarly spiteful and irritable look . 
The old man was aware of this , and turned a hostile glance on Alyosha as he came in . 
`` The coffee is cold , '' he cried harshly ; `` I wo n't offer you any . 
I 've ordered nothing but a Lenten fish soup to-day , and I do n't invite anyone to share it . 
Why have you come ? '' 
`` To find out how you are , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Yes . 
Besides , I told you to come yesterday . 
It 's all of no consequence . 
You need not have troubled . 
But I knew you 'd come poking in directly . '' 
He said this with almost hostile feeling . 
At the same time he got up and looked anxiously in the looking-glass -LRB- perhaps for the fortieth time that morning -RRB- at his nose . 
He began , too , binding his red handkerchief more becomingly on his forehead . 
`` Red 's better . 
It 's just like the hospital in a white one , '' he observed sententiously . 
`` Well , how are things over there ? 
How is your elder ? '' 
`` He is very bad ; he may die to-day , '' answered Alyosha . 
But his father had not listened , and had forgotten his own question at once . 
`` Ivan 's gone out , '' he said suddenly . 
`` He is doing his utmost to carry off Mitya 's betrothed . 
That 's what he is staying here for , '' he added maliciously , and , twisting his mouth , looked at Alyosha . 
`` Surely he did not tell you so ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , he did , long ago . 
Would you believe it , he told me three weeks ago ? 
You do n't suppose he too came to murder me , do you ? 
He must have had some object in coming . '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
Why do you say such things ? '' 
said Alyosha , troubled . 
`` He does n't ask for money , it 's true , but yet he wo n't get a farthing from me . 
I intend living as long as possible , you may as well know , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , and so I need every farthing , and the longer I live , the more I shall need it , '' he continued , pacing from one corner of the room to the other , keeping his hands in the pockets of his loose greasy overcoat made of yellow cotton material . 
`` I can still pass for a man at five and fifty , but I want to pass for one for another twenty years . 
As I get older , you know , I sha n't be a pretty object . 
The wenches wo n't come to me of their own accord , so I shall want my money . 
So I am saving up more and more , simply for myself , my dear son Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
You may as well know . 
For I mean to go on in my sins to the end , let me tell you . 
For sin is sweet ; all abuse it , but all men live in it , only others do it on the sly , and I openly . 
And so all the other sinners fall upon me for being so simple . 
And your paradise , Alexey Fyodorovitch , is not to my taste , let me tell you that ; and it 's not the proper place for a gentleman , your paradise , even if it exists . 
I believe that I fall asleep and do n't wake up again , and that 's all . 
You can pray for my soul if you like . 
And if you do n't want to , do n't , damn you ! 
That 's my philosophy . 
Ivan talked well here yesterday , though we were all drunk . 
Ivan is a conceited coxcomb , but he has no particular learning ... nor education either . 
He sits silent and smiles at one without speaking - that 's what pulls him through . '' 
Alyosha listened to him in silence . 
`` Why wo n't he talk to me ? 
If he does speak , he gives himself airs . 
Your Ivan is a scoundrel ! 
And I 'll marry Grushenka in a minute if I want to . 
For if you 've money , Alexey Fyodorovitch , you have only to want a thing and you can have it . 
That 's what Ivan is afraid of , he is on the watch to prevent me getting married and that 's why he is egging on Mitya to marry Grushenka himself . 
He hopes to keep me from Grushenka by that -LRB- as though I should leave him my money if I do n't marry her ! -RRB- . 
Besides if Mitya marries Grushenka , Ivan will carry off his rich betrothed , that 's what he 's reckoning on ! 
He is a scoundrel , your Ivan ! '' 
`` How cross you are ! 
It 's because of yesterday ; you had better lie down , '' said Alyosha . 
`` There ! 
you say that , '' the old man observed suddenly , as though it had struck him for the first time , `` and I am not angry with you . 
But if Ivan said it , I should be angry with him . 
It is only with you I have good moments , else you know I am an ill-natured man . '' 
`` You are not ill-natured , but distorted , '' said Alyosha with a smile . 
`` Listen . 
I meant this morning to get that ruffian Mitya locked up and I do n't know now what I shall decide about it . 
Of course in these fashionable days fathers and mothers are looked upon as a prejudice , but even now the law does not allow you to drag your old father about by the hair , to kick him in the face in his own house , and brag of murdering him outright - all in the presence of witnesses . 
If I liked , I could crush him and could have him locked up at once for what he did yesterday . '' 
`` Then you do n't mean to take proceedings ? '' 
`` Ivan has dissuaded me . 
I should n't care about Ivan , but there 's another thing . '' 
And bending down to Alyosha , he went on in a confidential half-whisper . 
`` If I send the ruffian to prison , she 'll hear of it and run to see him at once . 
But if she hears that he has beaten me , a weak old man , within an inch of my life , she may give him up and come to me ... For that 's her way , everything by contraries . 
I know her through and through ! 
Wo n't you have a drop of brandy ? 
Take some cold coffee and I 'll pour a quarter of a glass of brandy into it , it 's delicious , my boy . '' 
`` No , thank you . 
I 'll take that roll with me if I may , '' said Alyosha , and taking a halfpenny French roll he put it in the pocket of his cassock . 
`` And you 'd better not have brandy , either , '' he suggested apprehensively , looking into the old man 's face . 
`` You are quite right , it irritates my nerves instead of soothing them . 
Only one little glass . 
I 'll get it out of the cupboard . '' 
He unlocked the cupboard , poured out a glass , drank it , then locked the cupboard and put the key back in his pocket . 
`` That 's enough . 
One glass wo n't kill me . '' 
`` You see you are in a better humour now , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Um ! 
I love you even without the brandy , but with scoundrels I am a scoundrel . 
Ivan is not going to Tchermashnya - why is that ? 
He wants to spy how much I give Grushenka if she comes . 
They are all scoundrels ! 
But I do n't recognise Ivan , I do n't know him at all . 
Where does he come from ? 
He is not one of us in soul . 
As though I 'd leave him anything ! 
I sha n't leave a will at all , you may as well know . 
And I 'll crush Mitya like a beetle . 
I squash black-beetles at night with my slipper ; they squelch when you tread on them . 
And your Mitya will squelch too . 
Your Mitya , for you love him . 
Yes you love him and I am not afraid of your loving him . 
But if Ivan loved him I should be afraid for myself at his loving him . 
But Ivan loves nobody . 
Ivan is not one of us . 
People like Ivan are not our sort , my boy . 
They are like a cloud of dust . 
When the wind blows , the dust will be gone ... . 
I had a silly idea in my head when I told you to come to-day ; I wanted to find out from you about Mitya . 
If I were to hand him over a thousand or maybe two now , would the beggarly wretch agree to take himself off altogether for five years or , better still , thirty-five , and without Grushenka , and give her up once for all , eh ? '' 
`` I - I 'll ask him , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` If you would give him three thousand , perhaps he - '' `` That 's nonsense ! 
You need n't ask him now , no need ! 
I 've changed my mind . 
It was a nonsensical idea of mine . 
I wo n't give him anything , not a penny , I want my money myself , '' cried the old man , waving his hand . 
`` I 'll crush him like a beetle without it . 
Do n't say anything to him or else he will begin hoping . 
There 's nothing for you to do here , you need n't stay . 
Is that betrothed of his , Katerina Ivanovna , whom he has kept so carefully hidden from me all this time , going to marry him or not ? 
You went to see her yesterday , I believe ? '' 
`` Nothing will induce her to abandon him . '' 
`` There you see how dearly these fine young ladies love a rake and a scoundrel . 
They are poor creatures I tell you , those pale young ladies , very different from - Ah , if I had his youth and the looks I had then -LRB- for I was better-looking than he at eight and twenty -RRB- I 'd have been a conquering hero just as he is . 
He is a low cad ! 
But he sha n't have Grushenka , anyway , he sha n't ! 
I 'll crush him ! '' 
His anger had returned with the last words . 
`` You can go . 
There 's nothing for you to do here to-day , '' he snapped harshly . 
Alyosha went up to say good-bye to him , and kissed him on the shoulder . 
`` What 's that for ? '' 
The old man was a little surprised . 
`` We shall see each other again , or do you think we sha n't ? '' 
`` Not at all , I did n't mean anything . '' 
`` Nor did I , I did not mean anything , '' said the old man , looking at him . 
`` Listen , listen , '' he shouted after him , `` make haste and come again and I 'll have a fish soup for you , a fine one , not like to-day . 
Be sure to come ! 
Come to-morrow , do you hear , to-morrow ! '' 
And as soon as Alyosha had gone out of the door , he went to the cupboard again and poured out another half-glass . 
`` I wo n't have more ! '' 
he muttered , clearing his throat , and again he locked the cupboard and put the key in his pocket . 
Then he went into his bedroom , lay down on the bed , exhausted , and in one minute he was asleep . 
A Meeting with the Schoolboys `` THANK goodness he did not ask me about Grushenka , '' thought Alyosha , as he left his father 's house and turned towards Madame Hohlakov 's , `` or I might have had to tell him of my meeting with Grushenka yesterday . '' 
Alyosha felt painfully that since yesterday both combatants had renewed their energies , and that their hearts had grown hard again . 
`` Father is spiteful and angry , he 's made some plan and will stick to it . 
And what of Dmitri ? 
He too will be harder than yesterday , he too must be spiteful and angry , and he too , no doubt , has made some plan . 
Oh , I must succeed in finding him to-day , whatever happens . '' 
But Alyosha had not long to meditate . 
An incident occurred on the road , which , though apparently of little consequence , made a great impression on him . 
just after he had crossed the square and turned the corner coming out into Mihailovsky Street , which is divided by a small ditch from the High Street -LRB- our whole town is intersected by ditches -RRB- , he saw a group of schoolboys between the ages of nine and twelve , at the bridge . 
They were going home from school , some with their bags on their shoulders , others with leather satchels slung across them , some in short jackets , others in little overcoats . 
Some even had those high boots with creases round the ankles , such as little boys spoilt by rich fathers love to wear . 
The whole group was talking eagerly about something , apparently holding a council . 
Alyosha had never from his Moscow days been able to pass children without taking notice of them , and although he was particularly fond of children of three or thereabout , he liked schoolboys of ten and eleven too . 
And so , anxious as he was to-day , he wanted at once to turn aside to talk to them . 
He looked into their excited rosy faces , and noticed at once that all the boys had stones in their hands . 
Behind the ditch some thirty paces away , there was another schoolboy standing by a fence . 
He too had a satchel at his side . 
He was about ten years old , pale , delicate-looking and with sparkling black eyes . 
He kept an attentive and anxious watch on the other six , obviously his schoolfellows with whom he had just come out of school , but with whom he had evidently had a feud . 
Alyosha went up and , addressing a fair , curly-headed , rosy boy in a black jacket , observed : `` When I used to wear a satchel like yours , I always used to carry it on my left side , so as to have my right hand free , but you 've got yours on your right side . 
So it will be awkward for you to get at it . '' 
Alyosha had no art or premeditation in beginning with this practical remark . 
But it is the only way for a grown-up person to get at once into confidential relations with a child , or still more with a group of children . 
One must begin in a serious , businesslike way so as to be on a perfectly equal footing . 
Alyosha understood it by instinct . 
`` But he is left-handed , '' another , a fine healthy-looking boy of eleven , answered promptly . 
All the others stared at Alyosha . 
`` He even throws stones with his left hand , '' observed a third . 
At that instant a stone flew into the group , but only just grazed the left-handed boy , though it was well and vigorously thrown by the boy standing on the other side of the ditch . 
`` Give it him , hit him back , Smurov , '' they all shouted . 
But Smurov , the left-handed boy , needed no telling , and at once revenged himself ; he threw a stone , but it missed the boy and hit the ground . 
The boy on the other side of the ditch , the pocket of whose coat was visibly bulging with stones , flung another stone at the group ; this time it flew straight at Alyosha and hit him painfully on the shoulder . 
`` He aimed it at you , he meant it for you . 
You are Karamazov , Karamazov ! '' 
the boys shouted laughing , `` Come , all throw at him at once ! '' 
and six stones flew at the boy . 
One struck the boy on the head and he fell down , but at once leapt up and began ferociously returning their fire . 
Both sides threw stones incessantly . 
Many of the group had their pockets full too . 
`` What are you about ! 
Are n't you ashamed ? 
Six against one ! 
Why , you 'll kill him , '' cried Alyosha . 
He ran forward and met the flying stones to screen the solitary boy . 
Three or four ceased throwing for a minute . 
`` He began first ! '' 
cried a boy in a red shirt in an angry childish voice . 
`` He is a beast , he stabbed Krassotkin in class the other day with a penknife . 
It bled . 
Krassotkin would n't tell tales , but he must be thrashed . '' 
`` But what for ? 
I suppose you tease him . '' 
`` There , he sent a stone in your back again , he knows you , '' cried the children . 
`` It 's you he is throwing at now , not us . 
Come , all of you , at him again , do n't miss , Smurov ! '' 
and again a fire of stones , and a very vicious one , began . 
The boy on the other side of the ditch was hit in the chest ; he screamed , began to cry and ran away uphill towards Mihailovsky Street . 
They all shouted : `` Aha , he is funking , he is running away . 
Wisp of tow ! '' 
`` You do n't know what a beast he is , Karamazov , killing is too good for him , '' said the boy in the jacket , with flashing eyes . 
He seemed to be the eldest . 
`` What 's wrong with him ? '' 
asked Alyosha , `` Is he a tell-tale or what ? '' 
The boys looked at one another as though derisively . 
`` Are you going that way , to Mihailovsky ? '' 
the same boy went on . 
`` Catch him up ... . 
You see he 's stopped again , he is waiting and looking at you . '' 
`` He is looking at you , '' the other boys chimed in . 
`` You ask him , does he like a dishevelled wisp of tow . 
Do you hear , ask him that ! '' 
There was a general burst of laughter . 
Alyosha looked at them , and they at him . 
`` Do n't go near him , he 'll hurt you , '' cried Smurov in a warning voice . 
`` I sha n't ask him about the wisp of tow , for I expect you tease him with that question somehow . 
But I 'll find out from him why you hate him so . '' 
`` Find out then , find out , '' cried the boys laughing . 
Alyosha crossed the bridge and walked uphill by the fence , straight towards the boy . 
`` You 'd better look out , '' the boys called after him ; `` he wo n't be afraid of you . 
He will stab you in a minute , on the sly , as he did Krassotkin . '' 
The boy waited for him without budging . 
Coming up to him , Alyosha saw facing him a child of about nine years old . 
He was an undersized weakly boy with a thin pale face , with large dark eyes that gazed at him vindictively . 
He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat , which he had monstrously outgrown . 
His bare arms stuck out beyond his sleeves . 
There was a large patch on the right knee of his trousers , and in his right boot just at the toe there was a big hole in the leather , carefully blackened with ink . 
Both the pockets of his greatcoat were weighed down with stones . 
Alyosha stopped two steps in front of him , looking inquiringly at him , The boy , seeing at once from Alyosha 's eyes that he would n't beat him , became less defiant , and addressed him first . 
`` I am alone , and there are six of them . 
I 'll beat them all , alone ! '' 
he said suddenly , with flashing eyes . 
`` I think one of the stones must have hurt you badly , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` But I hit Smurov on the head ! '' 
cried the boy . 
`` They told me that you know me , and that you threw a stone at me on purpose , '' said Alyosha . 
The boy looked darkly at him . 
`` I do n't know you . 
Do you know me ? '' 
Alyosha continued . 
`` Let me alone ! '' 
the boy cried irritably ; but he did not move , as though he were expecting something , and again there was a vindictive light in his eyes . 
`` Very well , I am going , '' said Alyosha ; `` only I do n't know you and I do n't tease you . 
They told me how they tease you , but I do n't want to tease you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` Monk in silk trousers ! '' 
cried the boy , following Alyosha with the same vindictive and defiant expression , and he threw himself into an attitude of defence , feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him ; but Alyosha turned , looked at him , and walked away . 
He had not gone three steps before the biggest stone the boy had in his pocket hit him a painful blow in the back . 
`` So you 'll hit a man from behind ! 
They tell the truth , then , when they say that you attack on the sly , '' said Alyosha , turning round again . 
This time the boy threw a stone savagely right into Alyosha 's face ; but Alyosha just had time to guard himself , and the stone struck him on the elbow . 
`` Are n't you ashamed ? 
What have I done to you ? '' 
he cried . 
The boy waited in silent defiance , certain that now Alyosha would attack him . 
Seeing that even now he would not , his rage was like a little wild beast 's ; he flew at Alyosha himself , and before Alyosha had time to move , the spiteful child had seized his left hand with both of his and bit his middle finger . 
He fixed his teeth in it and it was ten seconds before he let go . 
Alyosha cried out with pain and pulled his finger away with all his might . 
The child let go at last and retreated to his former distance . 
Alyosha 's finger had been badly bitten to the bone , close to the nail ; it began to bleed . 
Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightly round his injured hand . 
He was a full minute bandaging it . 
The boy stood waiting all the time . 
At last Alyosha raised his gentle eyes and looked at him . 
`` Very well , '' he said , `` You see how badly you 've bitten me . 
That 's enough , is n't it ? 
Now tell me , what have I done to you ? '' 
The boy stared in amazement . 
`` Though I do n't know you and it 's the first time I 've seen you , '' Alyosha went on with the same serenity , `` yet I must have done something to you - you would n't have hurt me like this for nothing . 
So what have I done ? 
How have I wronged you , tell me ? '' 
Instead of answering , the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and ran away . 
Alyosha walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street , and for a long time he saw the child running in the distance as fast as ever , not turning his head and no doubt still keeping up his tearful wail . 
He made up his mind to find him out as soon as he had time , and to solve this mystery . 
just now he had not the time . 
At the Hohlakovs ' ALYOSHA soon reached Madame Hohlakov 's house , a handsome stone house of two stories , one of the finest in our town . 
Though Madame Hohlakov spent most of her time in another province where she had an estate , or in Moscow , where she had a house of her own , yet she had a house in our town too , inherited from her forefathers . 
The estate in our district was the largest of her three estates , yet she had been very little in our province before this time . 
She ran out to Alyosha in the hall . 
`` Did you get my letter about the new miracle ? '' 
She spoke rapidly and nervously . 
`` Yes '' `` Did you show it to everyone ? 
He restored the son to his mother ! '' 
`` He is dying to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` I have heard , I know , oh , how I long to talk to you , to you or someone , about all this . 
No , to you , to you ! 
And how sorry I am I ca n't see him ! 
The whole town is in excitement , they are all suspense . 
But now - do you know Katerina Ivanovna is here now ? '' 
`` Ah , that 's lucky , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` Then I shall see her here . 
She told me yesterday to be sure to come and see her to-day . '' 
`` I know , I know all . 
I 've heard exactly what happened yesterday - and the atrocious behaviour of that - creature . 
C'est tragique , and if I 'd been in her place I do n't know what I should have done . 
And your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , what do you think of him ? 
- my goodness ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I am forgetting , only fancy ; your brother is in there with her , not that dreadful brother who was so shocking yesterday , but the other , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he is sitting with her talking ; they are having a serious conversation . 
If you could only imagine what 's passing between them now - it 's awful , I tell you it 's lacerating , it 's like some incredible tale of horror . 
They are ruining their lives for no reason anyone can see . 
They both recognise it and revel in it . 
I 've been watching for you ! 
I 've been thirsting for you ! 
It 's too much for me . 
that 's the worst of it . 
I 'll tell you all about it presently , but now I must speak of something else , the most important thing - I had quite forgotten what 's most important . 
Tell me , why has Lise been in hysterics ? 
As soon as she heard you were here , she began to be hysterical ! '' 
`` Maman , it 's you who are hysterical now , not I , '' Lise 's voice carolled through a tiny crack of the door at the side . 
Her voice sounded as though she wanted to laugh , but was doing her utmost to control it . 
Alyosha at once noticed the crack , and no doubt Lise was peeping through it , but that he could not see . 
`` And no wonder , Lise , no wonder ... your caprices will make me hysterical too . 
But she is so ill , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she has been so ill all night , feverish and moaning ! 
I could hardly wait for the morning and for Herzenstube to come . 
He says that he can make nothing of it , that we must wait . 
Herzenstube always comes and says that he can make nothing of it . 
As soon as you approached the house , she screamed , fell into hysterics , and insisted on being wheeled back into this room here . '' 
`` Mamma , I did n't know he had come . 
It was n't on his account I wanted to be wheeled into this room . '' 
