`` That 's just it . 
I have no proof . 
That cur Smerdyakov wo n't send you proofs from the other world ... in an envelope . 
You think of nothing but envelopes - one is enough . 
I 've no witnesses ... except one , perhaps , '' he smiled thoughtfully . 
`` Who is your witness ? '' 
`` He has a tail , your excellency , and that would be irregular ! 
Le diable n'existe point ! 
Do n't pay attention : he is a paltry , pitiful devil , '' he added suddenly . 
He ceased laughing and spoke as it were , confidentially . 
`` He is here somewhere , no doubt - under that table with the material evidence on it , perhaps . 
Where should he sit if not there ? 
You see , listen to me . 
I told him I do n't want to keep quiet , and he talked about the geological cataclysm ... idiocy ! 
Come , release the monster ... he 's been singing a hymn . 
That 's because his heart is light ! 
It 's like a drunken man in the street bawling how ` Vanka went to Petersburg , ' and I would give a quadrillion quadrillions for two seconds of joy . 
You do n't know me ! 
Oh , how stupid all this business is ! 
Come , take me instead of him ! 
I did n't come for nothing ... . 
Why , why is everything so stupid ? 
... '' And he began slowly , and as it were reflectively , looking round him again . 
But the court was all excitement by now . 
Alyosha rushed towards him , but the court usher had already seized Ivan by the arm . 
`` What are you about ? '' 
he cried , staring into the man 's face , and suddenly seizing him by the shoulders , he flung him violently to the floor . 
But the police were on the spot and he was seized . 
He screamed furiously . 
And all the time he was being removed , he yelled and screamed something incoherent . 
The whole court was thrown into confusion . 
I do n't remember everything as it happened . 
I was excited myself and could not follow . 
I only know that afterwards , when everything was quiet again and everyone understood what had happened , the court usher came in for a reprimand , though he very reasonably explained that the witness had been quite well , that the doctor had seen him an hour ago , when he had a slight attack of giddiness , but that , until he had come into the court , he had talked quite consecutively , so that nothing could have been foreseen - that he had , in fact , insisted on giving evidence . 
But before everyone had completely regained their composure and recovered from this scene , it was followed by another . 
Katerina Ivanovna had an attack of hysterics . 
She sobbed , shrieking loudly , but refused to leave the court , struggled , and besought them not to remove her . 
Suddenly she cried to the President : `` There is more evidence I must give at once ... at once ! 
Here is a document , a letter ... take it , read it quickly , quickly ! 
It 's a letter from that monster ... that man there , there ! '' 
she pointed to Mitya . 
`` It was he killed his father , you will see that directly . 
He wrote to me how he would kill his father ! 
But the other one is ill , he is ill , he is delirious ! '' 
she kept crying out , beside herself . 
The court usher took the document she held out to the President , and she , dropping into her chair , hiding her face in her hands , began convulsively and noiselessly sobbing , shaking all over , and stifling every sound for fear she should be ejected from the court . 
The document she had handed up was that letter Mitya had written at the Metropolis tavern , which Ivan had spoken of as a `` mathematical proof . '' 
Alas ! 
its mathematical conclusiveness was recognised , and had it not been for that letter , Mitya might have escaped his doom or , at least , that doom would have been less terrible . 
It was , I repeat , difficult to notice every detail . 
What followed is still confused to my mind . 
The President must , I suppose , have at once passed on the document to the judges , the jury , and the lawyers on both sides . 
I only remember how they began examining the witness . 
On being gently asked by the President whether she had recovered sufficiently , Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed impetuously : `` I am ready , I am ready ! 
I am quite equal to answering you , '' she added , evidently still afraid that she would somehow be prevented from giving evidence . 
She was asked to explain in detail what this letter was and under what circumstances she received it . 
`` I received it the day before the crime was committed , but he wrote it the day before that , at the tavern - that is , two days before he committed the crime . 
Look , it is written on some sort of bill ! '' 
she cried breathlessly . 
`` He hated me at that time , because he had behaved contemptibly and was running after that creature ... and because he owed me that three thousand ... . 
Oh ! 
he was humiliated by that three thousand on account of his own meanness ! 
This is how it happened about that three thousand . 
I beg you , I beseech you , to hear me . 
Three weeks before he murdered his father , he came to me one morning . 
I knew he was in want of money , and what he wanted it for . 
Yes , yes - to win that creature and carry her off . 
I knew then that he had been false to me and meant to abandon me , and it was I , I , who gave him that money , who offered it to him on the pretext of his sending it to my sister in Moscow . 
And as I gave it him , I looked him in the face and said that he could send it when he liked , ` in a month 's time would do . ' 
How , how could he have failed to understand that I was practically telling him to his face , ` You want money to be false to me with your creature , so here 's the money for you . 
I give it to you myself . 
Take it , if you have so little honour as to take it ! ' 
I wanted to prove what he was , and what happened ? 
He took it , he took it , and squandered it with that creature in one night ... . 
But he knew , he knew that I knew all about it . 
I assure you he understood , too , that I gave him that money to test him , to see whether he was so lost to all sense of honour as to take it from me . 
I looked into his eyes and he looked into mine , and he understood it all and he took it - he carried off my money ! 
`` That 's true , Katya , '' Mitya roared suddenly , `` I looked into your eyes and I knew that you were dishonouring me , and yet I took your money . 
Despise me as a scoundrel , despise me , all of you ! 
I 've deserved it ! '' 
`` Prisoner , '' cried the President , `` another word and I will order you to be removed . '' 
`` That money was a torment to him , '' Katya went on with impulsive haste . 
`` He wanted to repay it me . 
He wanted to , that 's true ; but he needed money for that creature , too . 
So he murdered his father , but he did n't repay me , and went off with her to that village where he was arrested . 
There , again , he squandered the money he had stolen after the murder of his father . 
And a day before the murder he wrote me this letter . 
He was drunk when he wrote it . 
I saw it at once , at the time . 
He wrote it from spite , and feeling certain , positively certain , that I should never show it to anyone , even if he did kill him , or else he would n't have written it . 
For he knew I should n't want to revenge myself and ruin him ! 
But read it , read it attentively - more attentively , please - and you will see that he had described it all in his letter , all beforehand , how he would kill his father and where his money was kept . 
Look , please , do n't overlook that , there 's one phrase there , ' I shall kill him as soon as Ivan has gone away . ' 
he thought it all out beforehand how he would kill him , '' Katerina Ivanovna pointed out to the court with venomous and malignant triumph . 
Oh ! 
it was clear she had studied every line of that letter and detected every meaning underlining it . 
`` If he had n't been drunk , he would n't have written to me ; but , look , everything is written there beforehand , just as he committed the murder after . 
A complete programme of it ! '' 
she exclaimed frantically . 
She was reckless now of all consequences to herself , though , no doubt , she had foreseen them even a month ago , for even then , perhaps , shaking with anger , she had pondered whether to show it at the trial or not . 
Now she had taken the fatal plunge . 
I remember that the letter was read aloud by the clerk , directly afterwards , I believe . 
It made an overwhelming impression . 
They asked Mitya whether he admitted having written the letter . 
`` It 's mine , mine ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I should n't have written it if I had n't been drunk ! 
... We 've hated each other for many things , Katya , but I swear , I swear I loved you even while I hated you , and you did n't love me ! '' 
He sank back on his seat , wringing his hands in despair . 
The prosecutor and counsel for the defence began cross-examining her , chiefly to ascertain what had induced her to conceal such a document and to give her evidence in quite a different tone and spirit just before . 
`` Yes , yes . 
I was telling lies just now . 
I was lying against my honour and my conscience , but I wanted to save him , for he has hated and despised me so ! '' 
Katya cried madly . 
`` Oh , he has despised me horribly , he has always despised me , and do you know , he has despised me from the very moment that I bowed down to him for that money . 
I saw that ... . 
I felt it at once at the time , but for a long time I would n't believe it . 
How often I have read it in his eyes , ` You came of yourself , though . ' 
Oh , he did n't understand , he had no idea why I ran to him , he can suspect nothing but baseness , he judged me by himself , he thought everyone was like himself ! '' 
Katya hissed furiously , in a perfect frenzy . 
`` And he only wanted to marry me , because I 'd inherited a fortune , because of that , because of that ! 
I always suspected it was because of that ! 
Oh , he is a brute ! 
He was always convinced that I should be trembling with shame all my life before him , because I went to him then , and that he had a right to despise me forever for it , and so to be superior to me - that 's why he wanted to marry me ! 
That 's so , that 's all so ! 
I tried to conquer him by my love - a love that knew no bounds . 
I even tried to forgive his faithlessness ; but he understood nothing , nothing ! 
How could he understand indeed ? 
He is a monster ! 
I only received that letter the next evening : it was brought me from the tavern - and only that morning , only that morning I wanted to forgive him everything , everything - even his treachery ! '' 
The President and the prosecutor , of course , tried to calm her . 
I ca n't help thinking that they felt ashamed of taking advantage of her hysteria and of listening to such avowals . 
I remember hearing them say to her , `` We understand how hard it is for you ; be sure we are able to feel for you , '' and so on , and so on . 
And yet they dragged the evidence out of the raving , hysterical woman . 
She described at last with extraordinary clearness , which is so often seen , though only for a moment , in such overwrought states , how Ivan had been nearly driven out of his mind during the last two months trying to save `` the monster and murderer , '' his brother . 
`` He tortured himself , '' she exclaimed , `` he was always trying to minimise his brother 's guilt and confessing to me that he , too , had never loved his father , and perhaps desired his death himself . 
Oh , he has a tender , over-tender conscience ! 
He tormented himself with his conscience ! 
He told me everything , everything ! 
He came every day and talked to me as his only friend . 
I have the honour to be his only friend ! '' 
she cried suddenly with a sort of defiance , and her eyes flashed . 
`` He had been twice to see Smerdyakov . 
One day he came to me and said , ` If it was not my brother , but Smerdyakov committed the murder ' -LRB- for the legend was circulating everywhere that Smerdyakov had done it -RRB- , ` perhaps I too am guilty , for Smerdyakov knew I did n't like my father and perhaps believed that I desired my father 's death . ' 
Then I brought out that letter and showed it him . 
He was entirely convinced that his brother had done it , and he was overwhelmed by it . 
He could n't endure the thought that his own brother was a parricide ! 
Only a week ago I saw that it was making him ill . 
During the last few days he has talked incoherently in my presence . 
I saw his mind was giving way . 
He walked about , raving ; he was seen muttering in the streets . 
The doctor from Moscow , at my request , examined him the day before yesterday and told me that he was on the eve of brain fever - and all on his account , on account of this monster ! 
And last night he learnt that Smerdyakov was dead ! 
It was such a shock that it drove him out of his mind ... and all through this monster , all for the sake of saving the monster ! '' 
Oh , of course , such an outpouring , such an avowal is only possible once in a lifetime - at the hour of death , for instance , on the way to the scaffold ! 
But it was in Katya 's character , and it was such a moment in her life . 
It was the same impetuous Katya who had thrown herself on the mercy of a young profligate to save her father ; the same Katya who had just before , in her pride and chastity , sacrificed herself and her maidenly modesty before all these people , telling of Mitya 's generous conduct , in the hope of softening his fate a little . 
And now , again , she sacrificed herself ; but this time it was for another , and perhaps only now - perhaps only at this moment - she felt and knew how dear that other was to her ! 
She had sacrificed herself in terror for him ; conceiving all of a sudden that he had ruined himself by his confession that it was he who had committed the murder , not his brother , she had sacrificed herself to save him , to save his good name , his reputation ! 
And yet one terrible doubt occurred to one - was she lying in her description of her former relations with Mitya ? 
- that was the question . 
No , she had not intentionally slandered him when she cried that Mitya despised her for her bowing down to him ! 
She believed it herself . 
She had been firmly convinced , perhaps ever since that bow , that the simplehearted Mitya , who even then adored her , was laughing at her and despising her . 
She had loved him with an hysterical , `` lacerated '' love only from pride , from wounded pride , and that love was not like love , but more like revenge . 
Oh ! 
perhaps that lacerated love would have grown into real love , perhaps Katya longed for nothing more than that , but Mitya 's faithlessness had wounded her to the bottom of her heart , and her heart could not forgive him . 
The moment of revenge had come upon her suddenly , and all that had been accumulating so long and so painfully in the offended woman 's breast burst out all at once and unexpectedly . 
She betrayed Mitya , but she betrayed herself , too . 
And no sooner had she given full expression to her feelings than the tension of course was over and she was overwhelmed with shame . 
Hysterics began again : she fell on the floor , sobbing and screaming . 
She was carried out . 
At that moment Grushenka , with a wail , rushed towards Mitya before they had time to prevent her . 
`` Mitya , '' she wailed , `` your serpent has destroyed you ! 
There , she has shown you what she is ! '' 
she shouted to the judges , shaking with anger . 
At a signal from the President they seized her and tried to remove her from the court . 
She would n't allow it . 
She fought and struggled to get back to Mitya . 
Mitya uttered a cry and struggled to get to her . 
He was overpowered . 
Yes , I think the ladies who came to see the spectacle must have been satisfied - the show had been a varied one . 
Then I remember the Moscow doctor appeared on the scene . 
I believe the President had previously sent the court usher to arrange for medical aid for Ivan . 
The doctor announced to the court that the sick man was suffering from a dangerous attack of brain fever , and that he must be at once removed . 
In answer to questions from the prosecutor and the counsel for the defence he said that the patient had come to him of his own accord the day before yesterday and that he had warned him that he had such an attack coming on , but he had not consented to be looked after . 
`` He was certainly not in a normal state of mind : he told me himself that he saw visions when he was awake , that he met several persons in the street , who were dead , and that Satan visited him every evening , '' said the doctor , in conclusion . 
Having given his evidence , the celebrated doctor withdrew . 
The letter produced by Katerina Ivanovna was added to the material proofs . 
After some deliberation , the judges decided to proceed with the trial and to enter both the unexpected pieces of evidence -LRB- given by Ivan and Katerina Ivanovna -RRB- on the protocol . 
But I will not detail the evidence of the other witnesses , who only repeated and confirmed what had been said before , though all with their characteristic peculiarities . 
I repeat , all was brought together in the prosecutor 's speech , which I shall quote immediately . 
Everyone was excited , everyone was electrified by the late catastrophe , and all were awaiting the speeches for the prosecution and the defence with intense impatience . 
Fetyukovitch was obviously shaken by Katerina Ivanovna 's evidence . 
But the prosecutor was triumphant . 
When all the evidence had been taken , the court was adjourned for almost an hour . 
I believe it was just eight o'clock when the President returned to his seat and our prosecutor , Ippolit Kirillovitch , began his speech . 
The Prosecutor 's Speech . 
Sketches of Character IPPOLIT KIRILLOVITCH began his speech , trembling with nervousness , with cold sweat on his forehead , feeling hot and cold all over by turns . 
He described this himself afterwards . 
He regarded this speech as his chef-d'oeuvre , the chef-d'oeuvre of his whole life , as his swan-song . 
He died , it is true , nine months later of rapid consumption , so that he had the right , as it turned out , to compare himself to a swan singing his last song . 
He had put his whole heart and all the brain he had into that speech . 
And poor Ippolit Kirillovitch unexpectedly revealed that at least some feeling for the public welfare and `` the eternal question '' lay concealed in him . 
Where his speech really excelled was in its sincerity . 
He genuinely believed in the prisoner 's guilt ; he was accusing him not as an official duty only , and in calling for vengeance he quivered with a genuine passion `` for the security of society . '' 
Even the ladies in thee audience , though they remained hostile to Ippolit Kirillovitch , admitted that he made an extraordinary impression on them . 
He began in a breaking voice , but it soon gained strength and filled the court to the end of his speech . 
But as soon as he had finished , he almost fainted . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , '' began the prosecutor , `` this case has made a stir throughout Russia . 
But what is there to wonder at , what is there so peculiarly horrifying in it for us ? 
We are so accustomed to such crimes ! 
That 's what 's so horrible , that such dark deeds have ceased to horrify us . 
What ought to horrify us is that we are so accustomed to it , and not this or that isolated crime . 
What are the causes of our indifference , our lukewarm attitude to such deeds , to such signs of the times , ominous of an unenviable future ? 
Is it our cynicism , is it the premature exhaustion of intellect and imagination in a society that is sinking into decay , in spite of its youth ? 
Is it that our moral principles are shattered to their foundations , or is it , perhaps , a complete lack of such principles among us ? 
I can not answer such questions ; nevertheless they are disturbing , and every citizen not only must , but ought to be harassed by them . 
Our newborn and still timid press has done good service to the public already , for without it we should never have heard of the horrors of unbridled violence and moral degradation which are continually made known by the press , not merely to those who attend the new jury courts established in the present reign , but to everyone . 
And what do we read almost daily ? 
Of things beside which the present case grows pale , and seems almost commonplace . 
But what is most important is that the majority of our national crimes of violence bear witness to a widespread evil , now so general among us that it is difficult to contend against it . 
`` One day we see a brilliant young officer of high society , at the very outset of his career , in a cowardly underhand way , without a pang of conscience , murdering an official who had once been his benefactor , and the servant girl , to steal his own I O U and what ready money he could find on him ; ` it will come in handy for my pleasures in the fashionable world and for my career in the future . ' 
After murdering them , he puts pillows under the head of each of his victims ; he goes away . 
Next , a young hero ` decorated for bravery ' kills the mother of his chief and benefactor , like a highwayman , and to urge his companions to join him he asserts that ` she loves him like a son , and so will follow all his directions and take no precautions . ' 
Granted that he is a monster , yet I dare not say in these days that he is unique . 
Another man will not commit the murder , but will feel and think like him , and is as dishonourable in soul . 
In silence , alone with his conscience , he asks himself perhaps , ` What is honour , and is n't the condemnation of bloodshed a prejudice ? ' 
`` Perhaps people will cry out against me that I am morbid , hysterical , that it is a monstrous slander , that I am exaggerating . 
Let them say so - and heavens ! 
I should be the first to rejoice if it were so ! 
Oh , do n't believe me , think of me as morbid , but remember my words ; if only a tenth , if only a twentieth part of what I say is true - even so it 's awful ! 
Look how our young people commit suicide , without asking themselves Hamlet 's question what there is beyond , without a sign of such a question , as though all that relates to the soul and to what awaits us beyond the grave had long been erased in their minds and buried under the sands . 
Look at our vice , at our profligates . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , the luckless victim in the present case , was almost an innocent babe compared with many of them . 
And yet we all knew him , ` he lived among us ! ' 
... `` Yes , one day perhaps the leading intellects of Russia and of Europe will study the psychology of Russian crime , for the subject is worth it . 
But this study will come later , at leisure , when all the tragic topsy-turvydom of to-day is farther behind us , so that it 's possible to examine it with more insight and more impartiality than I can do . 
Now we are either horrified or pretend to be horrified , though we really gloat over the spectacle , and love strong and eccentric sensations which tickle our cynical , pampered idleness . 
Or , like little children , we brush the dreadful ghosts away and hide our heads in the pillow so as to return to our sports and merriment as soon as they have vanished . 
But we must one day begin life in sober earnest , we must look at ourselves as a society ; it 's time we tried to grasp something of our social position , or at least to make a beginning in that direction . 
`` A great writer * of the last epoch , comparing Russia to a swift troika galloping to an unknown goal , exclaims , ` Oh , troika , birdlike troika , who invented thee ! ' 
and adds , in proud ecstasy , that all the peoples of the world stand aside respectfully to make way for the recklessly galloping troika to pass . 
That may be , they may stand aside , respectfully or no , but in my poor opinion the great writer ended his book in this way either in an excess of childish and naive optimism , or simply in fear of the censorship of the day . 
For if the troika were drawn by his heroes , Sobakevitch , Nozdryov , Tchitchikov , it could reach no rational goal , whoever might be driving it . 
And those were the heroes of an older generation , ours are worse specimens still ... '' * Gogol . 
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch 's speech was interrupted by applause . 
The liberal significance of this simile was appreciated . 
The applause was , it 's true , of brief duration , so that the President did not think it necessary to caution the public , and only looked severely in the direction of the offenders . 
But Ippolit Kirillovitch was encouraged ; he had never been applauded before ! 
He had been all his life unable to get a hearing , and now he suddenly had an opportunity of securing the ear of all Russia . 
`` What , after all , is this Karamazov family , which has gained such an unenviable notoriety throughout Russia ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Perhaps I am exaggerating , but it seems to me that certain fundamental features of the educated class of to-day are reflected in this family picture - only , of course , in miniature , ` like the sun in a drop of water . ' 
Think of that unhappy , vicious , unbridled old man , who has met with such a melancholy end , the head of a family ! 
Beginning life of noble birth , but in a poor dependent position , through an unexpected marriage he came into a small fortune . 
A petty knave , a toady and buffoon , of fairly good , though undeveloped , intelligence , he was , above all , a moneylender , who grew bolder with growing prosperity . 
His abject and servile characteristics disappeared , his , malicious and sarcastic cynicism was all that remained . 
On the spiritual side he was undeveloped , while his vitality was excessive . 
He saw nothing in life but sensual pleasure , and he brought his children up to be the same . 
He had no feelings for his duties as a father . 
He ridiculed those duties . 
He left his little children to the servants , and was glad to be rid of them , forgot about them completely . 
The old man 's maxim was Apres moi le deluge . 
* He was an example of everything that is opposed to civic duty , of the most complete and malignant individualism . 
` The world may burn for aught I care , so long as I am all right , ' and he was all right ; he was content , he was eager to go on living in the same way for another twenty or thirty years . 
He swindled his own son and spent his money , his maternal inheritance , on trying to get his mistress from him . 
No , I do n't intend to leave the prisoner 's defence altogether to my talented colleague from Petersburg . 
I will speak the truth myself , I can well understand what resentment he had heaped up in his son 's heart against him . 
* After me , the deluge . 
`` But enough , enough of that unhappy old man ; he has paid the penalty . 
Let us remember , however , that he was a father , and one of the typical fathers of to-day . 
Am I unjust , indeed , in saying that he is typical of many modern fathers ? 
Alas ! 
many of them only differ in not openly professing such cynicism , for they are better educated , more cultured , but their philosophy is essentially the same as his . 
Perhaps I am a pessimist , but you have agreed to forgive me . 
Let us agree beforehand , you need not believe me , but let me speak . 
Let me say what I have to say , and remember something of my words . 
`` Now for the children of this father , this head of a family . 
One of them is the prisoner before us , all the rest of my speech will deal with him . 
Of the other two I will speak only cursorily . 
`` The elder is one of those modern young men of brilliant education and vigorous intellect , who has lost all faith in everything . 
He has denied and rejected much already , like his father . 
We have all heard him , he was a welcome guest in local society . 
He never concealed his opinions , quite the contrary in fact , which justifies me in speaking rather openly of him now , of course , not as an individual , but as a member of the Karamazov family . 
Another personage closely connected with the case died here by his own hand last night . 
I mean an afflicted idiot , formerly the servant , and possibly the illegitimate son , of Fyodor Pavlovitch , Smerdyakov . 
At the preliminary inquiry , he told me with hysterical tears how the young Ivan Karamazov had horrified him by his spiritual audacity . 
` Everything in the world is lawful according to him , and nothing must be forbidden in the future - that is what he always taught me . ' 
I believe that idiot was driven out of his mind by this theory , though , of course , the epileptic attacks from which he suffered , and this terrible catastrophe , have helped to unhinge his faculties . 
But he dropped one very interesting observation , which would have done credit to a more intelligent observer , and that is , indeed , why I 've mentioned it : ` If there is one of the sons that is like Fyodor Pavlovitch in character , it is Ivan Fyodorovitch . ' 
`` With that remark I conclude my sketch of his character , feeling it indelicate to continue further . 
Oh , I do n't want to draw any further conclusions and croak like a raven over the young man 's future . 
We 've seen to-day in this court that there are still good impulses in his young heart , that family feeling has not been destroyed in him by lack of faith and cynicism , which have come to him rather by inheritance than by the exercise of independent thought . 
`` Then the third son . 
Oh , he is a devout and modest youth , who does not share his elder brother 's gloomy and destructive theory of life . 
He has sought to cling to the ` ideas of the people , ' or to what goes by that name in some circles of our intellectual classes . 
He clung to the monastery , and was within an ace of becoming a monk . 
He seems to me to have betrayed unconsciously , and so early , that timid despair which leads so many in our unhappy society , who dread cynicism and its corrupting influences , and mistakenly attribute all the mischief to European enlightenment , to return to their ` native soil , ' as they say , to the bosom , so to speak , of their mother earth , like frightened children , yearning to fall asleep on the withered bosom of their decrepit mother , and to sleep there for ever , only to escape the horrors that terrify them . 
`` For my part I wish the excellent and gifted young man every success ; I trust that youthful idealism and impulse towards the ideas of the people may never degenerate , as often happens , on the moral side into gloomy mysticism , and on the political into blind chauvinism - two elements which are even a greater menace to Russia than the premature decay , due to misunderstanding and gratuitous adoption of European ideas , from which his elder brother is suffering . '' 
Two or three people clapped their hands at the mention of chauvinism and mysticism . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch had been , indeed , carried away by his own eloquence . 
All this had little to do with the case in hand , to say nothing of the fact of its being somewhat vague , but the sickly and consumptive man was overcome by the desire to express himself once in his life . 
People said afterwards that he was actuated by unworthy motives in his criticism of Ivan , because the latter had on one or two occasions got the better of him in argument , and Ippolit Kirillovitch , remembering it , tried now to take his revenge . 
But I do n't know whether it was true . 
All this was only introductory , however , and the speech passed to more direct consideration of the case . 
`` But to return to the eldest son , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch went on . 
`` He is the prisoner before us . 
We have his life and his actions , too , before us ; the fatal day has come and all has been brought to the surface . 
While his brothers seem to stand for ` Europeanism ' and ` the principles of the people , ' he seems to represent Russia as she is . 
Oh , not all Russia , not all ! 
God preserve us , if it were ! 
Yet , here we have her , our mother Russia , the very scent and sound of her . 
Oh , he is spontaneous , he is a marvellous mingling of good and evil , he is a lover of culture and Schiller , yet he brawls in taverns and plucks out the beards of his boon companions . 
Oh , he , too , can be good and noble , but only when all goes well with him . 
What is more , he can be carried off his feet , positively carried off his feet by noble ideals , but only if they come of themselves , if they fall from heaven for him , if they need not be paid for . 
He dislikes paying for anything , but is very fond of receiving , and that 's so with him in everything . 
Oh , give him every possible good in life -LRB- he could n't be content with less -RRB- , and put no obstacle in his way , and he will show that he , too , can be noble . 
He is not greedy , no , but he must have money , a great deal of money , and you will see how generously , with what scorn of filthy lucre , he will fling it all away in the reckless dissipation of one night . 
But if he has not money , he will show what he is ready to do to get it when he is in great need of it . 
But all this later , let us take events in their chronological order . 
`` First , we have before us a poor abandoned child , running about the back-yard ` without boots on his feet , ' as our worthy and esteemed fellow citizen , of foreign origin , alas ! 
expressed it just now . 
I repeat it again , I yield to no one the defence of the criminal . 
I am here to accuse him , but to defend him also . 
Yes , I , too , am human ; I , too , can weigh the influence of home and childhood on the character . 
But the boy grows up and becomes an officer ; for a duel and other reckless conduct he is exiled to one of the remote frontier towns of Russia . 
There he led a wild life as an officer . 
And , of course , he needed money , money before all things , and so after prolonged disputes he came to a settlement with his father , and the last six thousand was sent him . 
A letter is in existence in which he practically gives up his claim to the rest and settles his conflict with his father over the inheritance on the payment of this six thousand . 
`` Then came his meeting with a young girl of lofty character and brilliant education . 
Oh , I do not venture to repeat the details ; you have only just heard them . 
Honour , self-sacrifice were shown there , and I will be silent . 
The figure of the young officer , frivolous and profligate , doing homage to true nobility and a lofty ideal , was shown in a very sympathetic light before us . 
But the other side of the medal was unexpectedly turned to us immediately after in this very court . 
Again I will not venture to conjecture why it happened so , but there were causes . 
The same lady , bathed in tears of long-concealed indignation , alleged that he , he of all men , had despised her for her action , which , though incautious , reckless perhaps , was still dictated by lofty and generous motives . 
He , he , the girl 's betrothed , looked at her with that smile of mockery , which was more insufferable from him than from anyone . 
And knowing that he had already deceived her -LRB- he had deceived her , believing that she was bound to endure everything from him , even treachery -RRB- , she intentionally offered him three thousand roubles , and clearly , too clearly , let him understand that she was offering him money to deceive her . 
` Well , will you take it or not , are you so lost to shame ? ' 
was the dumb question in her scrutinising eyes . 
He looked at her , saw clearly what was in her mind -LRB- he 's admitted here before you that he understood it all -RRB- , appropriated that three thousand unconditionally , and squandered it in two days with the new object of his affections . 
`` What are we to believe then ? 
The first legend of the young officer sacrificing his last farthing in a noble impulse of generosity and doing reverence to virtue , or this other revolting picture ? 
As a rule , between two extremes one has to find the mean , but in the present case this is not true . 
The probability is that in the first case he was genuinely noble , and in the second as genuinely base . 
And why ? 
Because he was of the broad Karamazov character - that 's just what I am leading up to - capable of combining the most incongruous contradictions , and capable of the greatest heights and of the greatest depths . 
Remember the brilliant remark made by a young observer who has seen the Karamazov family at close quarters - Mr. Rakitin : ` The sense of their own degradation is as essential to those reckless , unbridled natures as the sense of their lofty generosity . ' 
And that 's true , they need continually this unnatural mixture . 
Two extremes at the same moment , or they are miserable and dissatisfied and their existence is incomplete . 
They are wide , wide as mother Russia ; they include everything and put up with everything . 
`` By the way , gentlemen of the jury , we 've just touched upon that three thousand roubles , and I will venture to anticipate things a little . 
Can you conceive that a man like that , on receiving that sum and in such a way , at the price of such shame , such disgrace , such utter degradation , could have been capable that very day of setting apart half that sum , that very day , and sewing it up in a little bag , and would have had the firmness of character to carry it about with him for a whole month afterwards , in spite of every temptation and his extreme need of it ! 
Neither in drunken debauchery in taverns , nor when he was flying into the country , trying to get from God knows whom , the money so essential to him to remove the object of his affections from being tempted by his father , did he bring himself to touch that little bag ! 
Why , if only to avoid abandoning his mistress to the rival of whom he was so jealous , he would have been certain to have opened that bag and to have stayed at home to keep watch over her , and to await the moment when she would say to him at last ' I am yours , ' and to fly with her far from their fatal surroundings . 
`` But no , he did not touch his talisman , and what is the reason he gives for it ? 
The chief reason , as I have just said , was that when she would say ' I am yours , take me where you will , ' he might have the wherewithal to take her . 
But that first reason , in the prisoner 's own words , was of little weight beside the second . 
While I have that money on me , he said , I am a scoundrel , not a thief , for I can always go to my insulted betrothed , and , laying down half the sum I have fraudulently appropriated , I can always say to her , ` You see , I 've squandered half your money , and shown I am a weak and immoral man , and , if you like , a scoundrel ' -LRB- I use the prisoner 's own expressions -RRB- , ` but though I am a scoundrel , I am not a thief , for if I had been a thief , I should n't have brought you back this half of the money , but should have taken it as I did the other half ! ' 
A marvellous explanation ! 
This frantic , but weak man , who could not resist the temptation of accepting the three thousand roubles at the price of such disgrace , this very man suddenly develops the most stoical firmness , and carries about a thousand roubles without daring to touch it . 
Does that fit in at all with the character we have analysed ? 
No , and I venture to tell you how the real Dmitri Karamazov would have behaved in such circumstances , if he really had brought himself to put away the money . 
`` At the first temptation - for instance , to entertain the woman with whom he had already squandered half the money - he would have unpicked his little bag and have taken out some hundred roubles , for why should he have taken back precisely half the money , that is , fifteen hundred roubles ? 
Why not fourteen hundred ? 
He could just as well have said then that he was not a thief , because he brought back fourteen hundred roubles . 
Then another time he would have unpicked it again and taken out another hundred , and then a third , and then a fourth , and before the end of the month he would have taken the last note but one , feeling that if he took back only a hundred it would answer the purpose , for a thief would have stolen it all . 
And then he would have looked at this last note , and have said to himself , ` It 's really not worth while to give back one hundred ; let 's spend that , too ! ' 
That 's how the real Dmitri Karamazov , as we know him , would have behaved . 
One can not imagine anything more incongruous with the actual fact than this legend of the little bag . 
Nothing could be more inconceivable . 
But we shall return to that later . '' 
After touching upon what had come out in the proceedings concerning the financial relations of father and son , and arguing again and again that it was utterly impossible , from the facts known , to determine which was in the wrong , Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to the evidence of the medical experts in reference to Mitya 's fixed idea about the three thousand owing him . 
An Historical Survey `` THE medical experts have striven to convince us that the prisoner is out of his mind and , in fact , a maniac . 
I maintain that he is in his right mind , and that if he had not been , he would have behaved more cleverly . 
As for his being a maniac , that I would agree with , but only in one point , that is , his fixed idea about the three thousand . 
Yet I think one might find a much simpler cause than his tendency to insanity . 
For my part I agree thoroughly with the young doctor who maintained that the prisoner 's mental faculties have always been normal , and that he has only been irritable and exasperated . 
The object of the prisoner 's continual and violent anger was not the sum itself ; there was a special motive at the bottom of it . 
That motive is jealousy ! '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch described at length the prisoner 's fatal passion for Grushenka . 
He began from the moment when the prisoner went to the `` young person 's '' lodgings `` to beat her '' - `` I use his own expression , '' the prosecutor explained - `` but instead of beating her , he remained there , at her feet . 
That was the beginning of the passion . 
At the same time the prisoner 's father was captivated by the same young person - a strange and fatal coincidence , for they both lost their hearts to her simultaneously , though both had known her before . 
And she inspired in both of them the most violent , characteristically Karamazov passion . 
We have her own confession : ' I was laughing at both of them . ' 
Yes , the sudden desire to make a jest of them came over her , and she conquered both of them at once . 
The old man , who worshipped money , at once set aside three thousand roubles as a reward for one visit from her , but soon after that , he would have been happy to lay his property and his name at her feet , if only she would become his lawful wife . 
We have good evidence of this . 
As for the prisoner , the tragedy of his fate is evident ; it is before us . 
But such was the young person 's ` game . ' 
The enchantress gave the unhappy young man no hope until the last moment , when he knelt before her , stretching out hands that were already stained with the blood of his father and rival . 
It was in that position that he was arrested . 
` Send me to Siberia with him , I have brought him to this , I am most to blame , ' the woman herself cried , in genuine remorse at the moment of his arrest . 
`` The talented young man , to whom I have referred already , Mr. Rakitin , characterised this heroine in brief and impressive terms : ` She was disillusioned early in life , deceived and ruined by a betrothed , who seduced and abandoned her . 
She was left in poverty , cursed by her respectable family and taken under the protection of a wealthy old man , whom she still , however , considers as her benefactor . 
There was perhaps much that was good in her young heart , but it was embittered too early . 
She became prudent and saved money . 
She grew sarcastic and resentful against society . ' 
After this sketch of her character it may well be understood that she might laugh at both of them simply from mischief , from malice . 
`` After a month of hopeless love and moral degradation , during which he betrayed his betrothed and appropriated money entrusted to his honour , the prisoner was driven almost to frenzy , almost to madness by continual jealousy - and of whom ? 
His father ! 
And the worst of it was that the crazy old man was alluring and enticing the object of his affection by means of that very three thousand roubles , which the son looked upon as his own property , part of his inheritance from his mother , of which his father was cheating him . 
Yes , I admit it was hard to bear ! 
It might well drive a man to madness . 
It was not the money , but the fact that this money was used with such revolting cynicism to ruin his happiness ! '' 
Then the prosecutor went on to describe how the idea of murdering his father had entered the prisoner 's head , and illustrated his theory with facts . 
`` At first he only talked about it in taverns - he was talking about it all that month . 
Ah , he likes being always surrounded with company , and he likes to tell his companions everything , even his most diabolical and dangerous ideas ; he likes to share every thought with others , and expects , for some reason , that those he confides in will meet him with perfect sympathy , enter into all his troubles and anxieties , take his part and not oppose him in anything . 
If not , he flies into a rage and smashes up everything in the tavern . 
-LRB- Then followed the anecdote about Captain Snegiryov . -RRB- 
Those who heard the prisoner began to think at last that he might mean more than threats , and that such a frenzy might turn threats into actions . '' 
Here the prosecutor described the meeting of the family at the monastery , the conversations with Alyosha , and the horrible scene of violence when the prisoner had rushed into his father 's house just after dinner . 
`` I can not positively assert , '' the prosecutor continued , `` that the prisoner fully intended to murder his father before that incident . 
Yet the idea had several times presented itself to him , and he had deliberated on it - for that we have facts , witnesses , and his own words . 
I confess , gentlemen of the jury , '' he added , `` that till to-day I have been uncertain whether to attribute to the prisoner conscious premeditation . 
I was firmly convinced that he had pictured the fatal moment beforehand , but had only pictured it , contemplating it as a possibility . 
He had not definitely considered when and how he might commit the crime . 
`` But I was only uncertain till to-day , till that fatal document was presented to the court just now . 
You yourselves heard that young lady 's exclamation , ` It is the plan , the programme of the murder ! ' 
That is how she defined that miserable , drunken letter of the unhappy prisoner . 
And , in fact , from that letter we see that the whole fact of the murder was premeditated . 
It was written two days before , and so we know now for a fact that , forty-eight hours before the perpetration of his terrible design , the prisoner swore that , if he could not get money next day , he would murder his father in order to take the envelope with the notes from under his pillow , as soon as Ivan had left . 
` As soon as Ivan had gone away ' - you hear that ; so he had thought everything out , weighing every circumstance , and he carried it all out just as he had written it . 
The proof of premeditation is conclusive ; the crime must have been committed for the sake of the money , that is stated clearly , that is written and signed . 
The prisoner does not deny his signature . 
`` I shall be told he was drunk when he wrote it . 
But that does not diminish the value of the letter , quite the contrary ; he wrote when drunk what he had planned when sober . 
Had he not planned it when sober , he would not have written it when drunk . 
I shall be asked : Then why did he talk about it in taverns ? 
A man who premeditates such a crime is silent and keeps it to himself . 
Yes , but he talked about it before he had formed a plan , when he had only the desire , only the impulse to it . 
Afterwards he talked less about it . 
On the evening he wrote that letter at the Metropolis tavern , contrary to his custom he was silent , though he had been drinking . 
He did not play billiards , he sat in a corner , talked to no one . 
He did indeed turn a shopman out of his seat , but that was done almost unconsciously , because he could never enter a tavern without making a disturbance . 
It is true that after he had taken the final decision , he must have felt apprehensive that he had talked too much about his design beforehand , and that this might lead to his arrest and prosecution afterwards . 
But there was nothing for it ; he could not take his words back , but his luck had served him before , it would serve him again . 
He believed in his star , you know ! 
I must confess , too , that he did a great deal to avoid the fatal catastrophe . 
` To-morrow I shall try and borrow the money from everyone , ' as he writes in his peculiar language , ' and if they wo n't give it to me , there will be bloodshed . ' '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to a detailed description of all Mitya 's efforts to borrow the money . 
He described his visit to Samsonov , his journey to Lyagavy . 
`` Harassed , jeered at , hungry , after selling his watch to pay for the journey -LRB- though he tells us he had fifteen hundred roubles on him - a likely story -RRB- , tortured by jealousy at having left the object of his affections in the town , suspecting that she would go to Fyodor Pavlovitch in his absense , he returned at last to the town , to find , to his joy , that she had not been near his father . 
He accompanied her himself to her protector . 
-LRB- Strange to say , he does n't seem to have been jealous of Samsonov , which is psychologically interesting . -RRB- 
Then he hastens back to his ambush in the back gardens , and then learns that Smerdyakov is in a fit , that the other servant is ill - the coast is clear and he knows the ` signals ' - what a temptation ! 
Still he resists it ; he goes off to a lady who has for some time been residing in the town , and who is highly esteemed among us , Madame Hohlakov . 
That lady , who had long watched his career with compassion , gave him the most judicious advice , to give up his dissipated life , his unseemly love-affair , the waste of his youth and vigour in pot-house debauchery , and to set off to Siberia to the gold mines : ` that would be an outlet for your turbulent energies , your romantic character , your thirst for adventure . ' '' 
After describing the result of this conversation and the moment when the prisoner learnt that Grushenka had not remained at Samsonov 's , the sudden frenzy of the luckless man worn out with jealousy and nervous exhaustion , at the thought that she had deceived him and was now with his father , Ippolit Kirillovitch concluded by dwelling upon the fatal influence of chance . 
`` Had the maid told him that her mistress was at Mokroe with her former lover , nothing would have happened . 
But she lost her head , she could only swear and protest her ignorance , and if the prisoner did not kill her on the spot , it was only because he flew in pursuit of his false mistress . 
`` But note , frantic as he was , he took with him a brass pestle . 
Why that ? 
Why not some other weapon ? 
But since he had been contemplating his plan and preparing himself for it for a whole month , he would snatch up anything like a weapon that caught his eye . 
He had realised for a month past that any object of the kind would serve as a weapon , so he instantly , without hesitation , recognised that it would serve his purpose . 
So it was by no means unconsciously , by no means involuntarily , that he snatched up that fatal pestle . 
And then we find him in his father 's garden - the coast is clear , there are no witnesses , darkness and jealousy . 
The suspicion that she was there , with him , with his rival , in his arms , and perhaps laughing at him at that moment - took his breath away . 
And it was not mere suspicion , the deception was open , obvious . 
She must be there , in that lighted room , she must be behind the screen ; and the unhappy man would have us believe that he stole up to the window , peeped respectfully in , and discreetly withdrew , for fear something terrible and immoral should happen . 
And he tries to persuade us of that , us , who understand his character , who know his state of mind at the moment , and that he knew the signals by which he could at once enter the house . '' 
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch broke off to discuss exhaustively the suspected connection of Smerdyakov with the murder . 
He did this very circumstantially , and everyone realised that , although he professed to despise that suspicion , he thought the subject of great importance . 
A Treatise on Smerdyakov `` TO begin with , what was the source of this suspicion ? '' 
-LRB- Ippolit Kirillovitch began -RRB- . 
`` The first person who cried out that Smerdyakov had committed the murder was the prisoner himself at the moment of his arrest , yet from that time to this he had not brought forward a single fact to confirm the charge , nor the faintest suggestion of a fact . 
The charge is confirmed by three persons only - the two brothers of the prisoner and Madame Svyetlov . 
The elder of these brothers expressed his suspicions only to-day , when he was undoubtedly suffering from brain fever . 
But we know that for the last two months he has completely shared our conviction of his brother 's guilt and did not attempt to combat that idea . 
But of that later . 
The younger brother has admitted that he has not the slightest fact to support his notion of Smerdyakov 's guilt , and has only been led to that conclusion from the prisoner 's own words and the expression of his face . 
Yes , that astounding piece of evidence has been brought forward twice to-day by him . 
Madame Svyetslov was even more astounding . 
` What the prisoner tells you , you must believe ; he is not a man to tell a lie . ' 
That is all the evidence against Smerdyakov produced by these three persons . 
who are all deeply concerned in the prisoner 's fate . 
And yet the theory of Smerdyakov 's guilt has been noised about , has been and is still maintained . 
Is it credible ? 
Is it conceivable ? '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch thought it necessary to describe the personality of Smerdyakov , `` who had cut short his life in a fit of insanity . '' 
He depicted him as a man of weak intellect , with a smattering of education , who had been thrown off his balance by philosophical ideas above his level and certain modern theories of duty , which he learnt in practice from the reckless life of his master , who was also perhaps his father - Fyodor Pavlovitch ; and , theoretically , from various strange philosophical conversations with his master 's elder son , Ivan Fyodorovitch , who readily indulged in this diversion , probably feeling dull or wishing to amuse himself at the valet 's expense . 
`` He spoke to me himself of his spiritual condition during the last few days at his father 's house , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch explained ; `` but others too have borne witness to it - the prisoner himself , his brother , and the servant Grigory - that is , all who knew him well . 
`` Moreover , Smerdyakov , whose health was shaken by his attacks of epilepsy , had not the courage of a chicken . 
` He fell at my feet and kissed them , ' the prisoner himself has told us , before he realised how damaging such a statement was to himself . 
` He is an epileptic chicken , ' he declared about him in his characteristic language . 
And the prisoner chose him for his confidant -LRB- we have his own word for it -RRB- and he frightened him into consenting at last to act as a spy for him . 
In that capacity he deceived his master , revealing to the prisoner the existence of the envelope with the notes in it and the signals by means of which he could get into the house . 
How could he help telling him , indeed ? 
` He would have killed me , I could see that he would have killed me , ' he said at the inquiry , trembling and shaking even before us , though his tormentor was by that time arrested and could do him no harm . 
` He suspected me at every instant . 
In fear and trembling I hastened to tell him every secret to pacify him , that he might see that I had not deceived him and let me off alive . ' 
Those are his own words . 
I wrote them down and I remember them . 
` When he began shouting at me , I would fall on my knees . ' 
`` He was naturally very honest and enjoyed the complete confidence of his master , ever since he had restored him some money he had lost . 
So it may be supposed that the poor fellow suffered pangs of remorse at having deceived his master , whom he loved as his benefactor . 
Persons severely afflicted with epilepsy are , so the most skilful doctors tell us , always prone to continual and morbid self-reproach . 
