`` I went in to clear away the samovar and he was hanging on a nail in the wall . '' 
On Alyosha 's inquiring whether she had informed the police , she answered that she had told no one , `` but I flew straight to you , I 've run all the way . '' 
She seemed perfectly crazy , Alyosha reported , and was shaking like a leaf . 
When Alyosha ran with her to the cottage , he found Smerdyakov still hanging . 
On the table lay a note : `` I destroy my life of my own will and desire , so as to throw no blame on anyone . '' 
Alyosha left the note on the table and went straight to the police captain and told him all about it . 
`` And from him I 've come straight to you , '' said Alyosha , in conclusion , looking intently into Ivan 's face . 
He had not taken his eyes off him while he told his story , as though struck by something in his expression . 
`` Brother , '' he cried suddenly , `` you must be terribly ill . 
You look and do n't seem to understand what I tell you . '' 
`` It 's a good thing you came , '' said Ivan , as though brooding , and not hearing Alyosha 's exclamation . 
`` I knew he had hanged himself . '' 
`` From whom ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
But I knew . 
Did I know ? 
Yes , he told me . 
He told me so just now . '' 
Ivan stood in the middle of the room , and still spoke in the same brooding tone , looking at the ground . 
`` Who is he ? '' 
asked Alyosha , involuntarily looking round . 
`` He 's slipped away . '' 
Ivan raised his head and smiled softly . 
`` He was afraid of you , of a dove like you . 
You are a ` pure cherub . ' 
Dmitri calls you a cherub . 
Cherub ! 
... the thunderous rapture of the seraphim . 
What are seraphim ? 
Perhaps a whole constellation . 
But perhaps that constellation is only a chemical molecule . 
There 's a constellation of the Lion and the Sun . 
Do n't you know it ? '' 
`` Brother , sit down , '' said Alyosha in alarm . 
`` For goodness ' sake , sit down on the sofa ! 
You are delirious ; put your head on the pillow , that 's right . 
Would you like a wet towel on your head ? 
Perhaps it will do you good . '' 
`` Give me the towel : it 's here on the chair . 
I just threw it down there . '' 
`` It 's not here . 
Do n't worry yourself . 
I know where it is - here , '' said Alyosha , finding a clean towel , folded up and unused , by Ivan 's dressing-table in the other corner of the room . 
Ivan looked strangely at the towel : recollection seemed to come back to him for an instant . 
`` Stay '' - he got up from the sofa - `` an hour ago I took that new towel from there and wetted it . 
I wrapped it round my head and threw it down here ... How is it it 's dry ? 
There was no other . '' 
`` You put that towel on your head ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , and walked up and down the room an hour ago ... Why have the candles burnt down so ? 
What 's the time ? '' 
`` Nearly twelve '' `` No , no , no ! '' 
Ivan cried suddenly . 
`` It was not a dream . 
He was here ; he was sitting here , on that sofa . 
When you knocked at the window , I threw a glass at him ... this one . 
Wait a minute . 
I was asleep last time , but this dream was not a dream . 
It has happened before . 
I have dreams now , Alyosha ... yet they are not dreams , but reality . 
I walk about , talk and see ... though I am asleep . 
But he was sitting here , on that sofa there ... . 
He is frightfully stupid , Alyosha , frightfully stupid . '' 
Ivan laughed suddenly and began pacing about the room . 
`` Who is stupid ? 
Of whom are you talking , brother ? '' 
Alyosha asked anxiously again . 
`` The devil ! 
He 's taken to visiting me . 
He 's been here twice , almost three times . 
He taunted me with being angry at his being a simple devil and not Satan , with scorched wings , in thunder and lightning . 
But he is not Satan : that 's a lie . 
He is an impostor . 
He is simply a devil - a paltry , trivial devil . 
He goes to the baths . 
If you undressed him , you 'd be sure to find he had a tail , long and smooth like a Danish dog 's , a yard long , dun colour ... . 
Alyosha , you are cold . 
You 've been in the snow . 
Would you like some tea ? 
What ? 
Is it cold ? 
Shall I tell her to bring some ? 
C'est a ne pas mettre un chien dehors ... '' Alyosha ran to the washing-stand , wetted the towel , persuaded Ivan to sit down again , and put the wet towel round his head . 
He sat down beside him . 
`` What were you telling me just now about Lise ? '' 
Ivan began again . 
-LRB- He was becoming very talkative . -RRB- 
`` I like Lise . 
I said something nasty about her . 
It was a lie . 
I like her ... I am afraid for Katya to-morrow . 
I am more afraid of her than of anything . 
On account of the future . 
She will cast me off to-morrow and trample me under foot . 
She thinks that I am ruining Mitya from jealousy on her account ! 
Yes , she thinks that ! 
But it 's not so . 
To-morrow the cross , but not the gallows . 
No , I sha n't hang myself . 
Do you know , I can never commit suicide , Alyosha . 
Is it because I am base ? 
I am not a coward . 
Is it from love of life ? 
How did I know that Smerdyakov had hanged himself ? 
Yes , it was he told me so . '' 
`` And you are quite convinced that there has been someone here ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , on that sofa in the corner . 
You would have driven him away . 
You did drive him away : he disappeared when you arrived . 
I love your face , Alyosha . 
Did you know that I loved your face ? 
And he is myself , Alyosha . 
All that 's base in me , all that 's mean and contemptible . 
Yes , I am a romantic . 
He guessed it ... though it 's a libel . 
He is frightfully stupid ; but it 's to his advantage . 
He has cunning , animal cunning - he knew how to infuriate me . 
He kept taunting me with believing in him , and that was how he made me listen to him . 
He fooled me like a boy . 
He told me a great deal that was true about myself , though . 
I should never have owned it to myself . 
Do you know , Alyosha , '' Ivan added in an intensely earnest and confidential tone , `` I should be awfully glad to think that it was he and not I. '' `` He has worn you out , '' said Alyosha , looking compassionately at his brother . 
`` He 's been teasing me . 
And you know he does it so cleverly , so cleverly . 
` Conscience ! 
What is conscience ? 
I make it up for myself . 
Why am I tormented by it ? 
From habit . 
From the universal habit of mankind for the seven thousand years . 
So let us give it up , and we shall be gods . ' 
It was he said that , it was he said that ! '' 
`` And not you , not you ? '' 
Alyosha could not help crying , looking frankly at his brother . 
`` Never mind him , anyway ; have done with him and forget him . 
And let him take with him all that you curse now , and never come back ! '' 
`` Yes , but he is spiteful . 
He laughed at me . 
He was impudent , Alyosha , '' Ivan said , with a shudder of offence . 
`` But he was unfair to me , unfair to me about lots of things . 
He told lies about me to my face . 
` Oh , you are going to perform an act of heroic virtue : to confess you murdered your father , that the valet murdered him at your instigation . ' '' 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha interposed , `` restrain yourself . 
It was not you murdered him . 
It 's not true ! '' 
`` That 's what he says , he , and he knows it . 
` You are going to perform an act of heroic virtue , and you do n't believe in virtue ; that 's what tortures you and makes you angry , that 's why you are so vindictive . ' 
He said that to me about me and he knows what he says . '' 
`` It 's you say that , not he , '' exclaimed Alyosha mournfully , `` and you say it because you are ill and delirious , tormenting yourself . '' 
`` No , he knows what he says . 
` You are going from pride , ' he says . 
` You 'll stand up and say it was I killed him , and why do you writhe with horror ? 
You are lying ! 
I despise your opinion , I despise your horror ! ' 
He said that about me . 
` And do you know you are longing for their praise - `` he is a criminal , a murderer , but what a generous soul ; he wanted to save his brother and he confessed . '' 
That 's a lie Alyosha ! '' 
Ivan cried suddenly , with flashing eyes . 
`` I do n't want the low rabble to praise me , I swear I do n't ! 
That 's a lie ! 
That 's why I threw the glass at him and it broke against his ugly face . '' 
`` Brother , calm yourself , stop ! '' 
Alyosha entreated him . 
`` Yes , he knows how to torment one . 
He 's cruel , '' Ivan went on , unheeding . 
`` I had an inkling from the first what he came for . 
` Granting that you go through pride , still you had a hope that Smerdyakov might be convicted and sent to Siberia , and Mitya would be acquitted , while you would only be punished , with moral condemnation ' -LRB- ` Do you hear ? ' 
he laughed then -RRB- - ` and some people will praise you . 
But now Smerdyakov 's dead , he has hanged himself , and who 'll believe you alone ? 
But yet you are going , you are going , you 'll go all the same , you 've decided to go . 
What are you going for now ? ' 
That 's awful , Alyosha . 
I ca n't endure such questions . 
Who dare ask me such questions ? '' 
`` Brother , '' interposed Alyosha - his heart sank with terror , but he still seemed to hope to bring Ivan to reason - `` how could he have told you of Smerdyakov 's death before I came , when no one knew of it and there was no time for anyone to know of it ? '' 
`` He told me , '' said Ivan firmly , refusing to admit a doubt . 
`` It was all he did talk about , if you come to that . 
` And it would be all right if you believed in virtue , ' he said . 
` No matter if they disbelieve you , you are going for the sake of principle . 
But you are a little pig like Fyodor Pavlovitch , and what do you want with virtue ? 
Why do you want to go meddling if your sacrifice is of no use to anyone ? 
Because you do n't know yourself why you go ! 
Oh , you 'd give a great deal to know yourself why you go ! 
And can you have made up your mind ? 
You 've not made up your mind . 
You 'll sit all night deliberating whether to go or not . 
But you will go ; you know you 'll go . 
You know that whichever way you decide , the decision does not depend on you . 
You 'll go because you wo n't dare not to go . 
Why wo n't you dare ? 
You must guess that for yourself . 
That 's a riddle for you ! ' 
He got up and went away . 
You came and he went . 
He called me a coward , Alyosha ! 
Le mot de l'enigme is that I am a coward . 
` It is not for such eagles to soar above the earth . 
` It was he added that - he ! 
And Smerdyakov said the same . 
He must be killed ! 
Katya despises me . 
I 've seen that for a month past . 
Even Lise will begin to despise me ! 
` You are going in order to be praised . ' 
That 's a brutal lie ! 
And you despise me too , Alyosha . 
Now I am going to hate you again ! 
And I hate the monster , too ! 
I hate the monster ! 
I do n't want to save the monster . 
Let him rot in Siberia ! 
He 's begun singing a hymn ! 
Oh , to-morrow I 'll go , stand before them , and spit in their faces ! '' 
He jumped up in a frenzy , flung off the towel , and fell to pacing up and down the room again . 
Alyosha recalled what he had just said . 
`` I seem to be sleeping awake ... I walk , I speak , I see , but I am asleep . '' 
It seemed to be just like that now . 
Alyosha did not leave him . 
The thought passed through his mind to run for a doctor , but he was afraid to leave his brother alone : there was no one to whom he could leave him . 
By degrees Ivan lost consciousness completely at last . 
He still went on talking , talking incessantly , but quite incoherently , and even articulated his words with difficulty . 
Suddenly he staggered violently ; but Alyosha was in time to support him . 
Ivan let him lead him to his bed . 
Alyosha undressed him somehow and put him to bed . 
He sat watching over him for another two hours . 
The sick man slept soundly , without stirring , breathing softly and evenly . 
Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on the sofa , without undressing . 
As he fell asleep he prayed for Mitya and Ivan . 
He began to understand Ivan 's illness . 
`` The anguish of a proud determination . 
An earnest conscience ! '' 
God , in Whom he disbelieved , and His truth were gaining mastery over his heart , which still refused to submit . 
`` Yes , '' the thought floated through Alyosha 's head as it lay on the pillow , `` yes , if Smerdyakov is dead , no one will believe Ivan 's evidence ; but he will go and give it . '' 
Alyosha smiled softly . 
`` God will conquer ! '' 
he thought . 
`` He will either rise up in the light of truth , or ... he 'll perish in hate , revenging on himself and on everyone his having served the cause he does not believe in , '' Alyosha added bitterly , and again he prayed for Ivan . 
A Judicial Error The Fatal Day AT ten o'clock in the morning of the day following the events I have described , the trial of Dmitri Karamazov began in our district court . 
I hasten to emphasise the fact that I am far from esteeming myself capable of reporting all that took place at the trial in full detail , or even in the actual order of events . 
I imagine that to mention everything with full explanation would fill a volume , even a very large one . 
And so I trust I may not be reproached , for confining myself to what struck me . 
I may have selected as of most interest what was of secondary importance , and may have omitted the most prominent and essential details . 
But I see I shall do better not to apologise . 
I will do my best and the reader will see for himself that I have done all I can . 
And , to begin with , before entering the court , I will mention what surprised me most on that day . 
Indeed , as it appeared later , everyone was surprised at it , too . 
We all knew that the affair had aroused great interest , that everyone was burning with impatience for the trial to begin , that it had been a subject of talk , conjecture , exclamation and surmise for the last two months in local society . 
Everyone knew , too , that the case had become known throughout Russia , but yet we had not imagined that it had aroused such burning , such intense , interest in everyone , not only among ourselves , but all over Russia . 
This became evident at the trial this day . 
Visitors had arrived not only from the chief town of our province , but from several other Russian towns , as well as from Moscow and Petersburg . 
Among them were lawyers , ladies , and even several distinguished personages . 
Every ticket of admission had been snatched up . 
A special place behind the table at which the three judges sat was set apart for the most distinguished and important of the men visitors ; a row of arm-chairs had been placed there - something exceptional , which had never been allowed before . 
A large proportion not less than half of the public - were ladies . 
There was such a large number of lawyers from all parts that they did not know where to seat them , for every ticket had long since been eagerly sought for and distributed . 
I saw at the end of the room , behind the platform , a special partition hurriedly put up , behind which all these lawyers were admitted , and they thought themselves lucky to have standing room there , for all chairs had been removed for the sake of space , and the crowd behind the partition stood throughout the case closely packed , shoulder to shoulder . 
Some of the ladies , especially those who came from a distance , made their appearance in the gallery very smartly dressed , but the majority of the ladies were oblivious even of dress . 
Their faces betrayed hysterical , intense , almost morbid , curiosity . 
A peculiar fact - established afterwards by many observations - was that almost all the ladies , or , at least the vast majority of them , were on Mitya 's side and in favour of his being acquitted . 
This was perhaps chiefly owing to his reputation as a conqueror of female hearts . 
It was known that two women rivals were to appear in the case . 
One of them - Katerina Ivanovna - was an object of general interest . 
All sorts of extraordinary tales were told about her , amazing anecdotes of her passion for Mitya , in spite of his crime . 
Her pride and `` aristocratic connections '' were particularly insisted upon -LRB- she had called upon scarcely anyone in the town -RRB- . 
People said she intended to petition the Government for leave to accompany the criminal to Siberia and to be married to him somewhere in the mines . 
The appearance of Grushenka in court was awaited with no less impatience . 
The public was looking forward with anxious curiosity to the meeting of the two rivals - the proud aristocratic girl and `` the hetaira . '' 
But Grushenka was a more familiar figure to the ladies of the district than Katerina Ivanovna . 
They had already seen `` the woman who had ruined Fyodor Pavlovitch and his unhappy son , '' and all , almost without exception , wondered how father and son could be so in love with `` such a very common , ordinary Russian girl , who was not even pretty . '' 
In brief , there was a great deal of talk . 
I know for a fact that there were several serious family quarrels on Mitya 's account in our town . 
Many ladies quarrelled violently with their husbands over differences of opinion about the dreadful case , and it was that the husbands of these ladies , far from being favourably disposed to the prisoner , should enter the court bitterly prejudiced against him . 
In fact , one may say pretty certainly that the masculine , as distinguished from the feminine , part of the audience was biased against the prisoner . 
There were numbers of severe , frowning , even vindictive faces . 
Mitya , indeed , had managed to offend many people during his stay in the town . 
Some of the visitors were , of course , in excellent spirits and quite unconcerned as to the fate of Mitya personally . 
But all were interested in the trial , and the majority of the men were certainly hoping for the conviction of the criminal , except perhaps the lawyers , who were more interested in the legal than in the moral aspect of the case . 
Everybody was excited at the presence of the celebrated lawyer , Fetyukovitch . 
His talent was well known , and this was not the first time he had defended notorious criminal cases in the provinces . 
And if he defended them , such cases became celebrated and long remembered all over Russia . 
There were stories , too , about our prosecutor and about the President of the Court . 
It was said that Ippolit Kirillovitch was in a tremor at meeting Fetyukovitch , and that they had been enemies from the beginning of their careers in Petersburg , that though our sensitive prosecutor , who always considered that he had been aggrieved by someone in Petersburg because his talents had not been properly appreciated , was keenly excited over the Karamazov case , and was even dreaming of rebuilding his flagging fortunes by means of it , Fetyukovitch , they said , was his one anxiety . 
But these rumours were not quite just . 
Our prosecutor was not one of those men who lose heart in face of danger . 
On the contrary , his self-confidence increased with the increase of danger . 
It must be noted that our prosecutor was in general too hasty and morbidly impressionable . 
He would put his whole soul into some case and work at it as though his whole fate and his whole fortune depended on its result . 
This was the subject of some ridicule in the legal world , for just by this characteristic our prosecutor had gained a wider notoriety than could have been expected from his modest position . 
People laughed particularly at his passion for psychology . 
In my opinion , they were wrong , and our prosecutor was , I believe , a character of greater depth than was generally supposed . 
But with his delicate health he had failed to make his mark at the outset of his career and had never made up for it later . 
As for the President of our Court , I can only say that he was a humane and cultured man , who had a practical knowledge of his work and progressive views . 
He was rather ambitious , but did not concern himself greatly about his future career . 
The great aim of his life was to be a man of advanced ideas . 
He was , too , a man of connections and property . 
He felt , as we learnt afterwards , rather strongly about the Karamazov case , but from a social , not from a personal standpoint . 
He was interested in it as a social phenomenon , in its classification and its character as a product of our social conditions , as typical of the national character , and so on , and so on . 
His attitude to the personal aspect of the case , to its tragic significance and the persons involved in it , including the prisoner , was rather indifferent and abstract , as was perhaps fitting , indeed . 
The court was packed and overflowing long before the judges made their appearance . 
Our court is the best hall in the town - spacious , lofty , and good for sound . 
On the right of the judges , who were on a raised platform , a table and two rows of chairs had been put ready for the jury . 
On the left was the place for the prisoner and the counsel for the defence . 
In the middle of the court , near the judges , was a table with the `` material proofs . '' 
On it lay Fyodor Pavlovitch 's white silk dressing-gown , stained with blood ; the fatal brass pestle with which the supposed murder had been committed ; Mitya 's shirt , with a blood-stained sleeve ; his coat , stained with blood in patches over the pocket in which he had put his handkerchief ; the handkerchief itself , stiff with blood and by now quite yellow ; the pistol loaded by Mitya at Perhotin 's with a view to suicide , and taken from him on the sly at Mokroe by Trifon Borrissovitch ; the envelope in which the three thousand roubles had been put ready for Grushenka , the narrow pink ribbon with which it had been tied , and many other articles I do n't remember . 
In the body of the hall , at some distance , came the seats for the public . 
But in front of the balustrade a few chairs had been placed for witnesses who remained in the court after giving their evidence . 
At ten o'clock the three judges arrived - the President , one honorary justice of the peace , and one other . 
The prosecutor , of course , entered immediately after . 
The President was a short , stout , thick-set man of fifty , with a dyspeptic complexion , dark hair turning grey and cut short , and a red ribbon , of what Order I do n't remember . 
The prosecutor struck me and the others , too , as looking particularly pale , almost green . 
His face seemed to have grown suddenly thinner , perhaps in a single night , for I had seen him looking as usual only two days before . 
The President began with asking the court whether all the jury were present . 
But I see I ca n't go on like this , partly because some things I did not hear , others I did not notice , and others I have forgotten , but most of all because , as I have said before , I have literally no time or space to mention everything that was said and done . 
I only know that neither side objected to very many of the jurymen . 
I remember the twelve jurymen - four were petty officials of the town , two were merchants , and six peasants and artisans of the town . 
I remember , long before the trial , questions were continually asked with some surprise , especially by ladies : `` Can such a delicate , complex and psychological case be submitted for decision to petty officials and even peasants ? '' 
and `` What can an official , still more a peasant , understand in such an affair ? '' 
All the four officials in the jury were , in fact , men of no consequence and of low rank . 
Except one who was rather younger , they were grey-headed men , little known in society , who had vegetated on a pitiful salary , and who probably had elderly , unpresentable wives and crowds of children , perhaps even without shoes and stockings . 
At most , they spent their leisure over cards and , of course , had never read a single book . 
The two merchants looked respectable , but were strangely silent and stolid . 
One of them was close-shaven , and was dressed in European style ; the other had a small , grey beard , and wore a red ribbon with some sort of a medal upon it on his neck . 
There is no need to speak of the artisans and the peasants . 
The artisans of Skotoprigonyevsk are almost peasants , and even work on the land . 
Two of them also wore European dress , and , perhaps for that reason , were dirtier and more uninviting-looking than the others . 
So that one might well wonder , as I did as soon as I had looked at them , `` what men like that could possibly make of such a case ? '' 
Yet their faces made a strangely imposing , almost menacing , impression ; they were stern and frowning . 
At last the President opened the case of the murder of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov . 
I do n't quite remember how he described him . 
The court usher was told to bring in the prisoner , and Mitya made his appearance . 
There was a hush through the court . 
One could have heard a fly . 
I do n't know how it was with others , but Mitya made a most unfavourable impression on me . 
He looked an awful dandy in a brand-new frock-coat . 
I heard afterwards that he had ordered it in Moscow expressly for the occasion from his own tailor , who had his measure . 
He wore immaculate black kid gloves and exquisite linen . 
He walked in with his yard-long strides , looking stiffly straight in front of him , and sat down in his place with a most unperturbed air . 
At the same moment the counsel for defence , the celebrated Fetyukovitch , entered , and a sort of subdued hum passed through the court . 
He was a tall , spare man , with long thin legs , with extremely long , thin , pale fingers , clean-shaven face , demurely brushed , rather short hair , and thin lips that were at times curved into something between a sneer and a smile . 
He looked about forty . 
His face would have been pleasant , if it had not been for his eyes , which , in themselves small and inexpressive , were set remarkably close together , with only the thin , long nose as a dividing line between them . 
In fact , there was something strikingly birdlike about his face . 
He was in evening dress and white tie . 
I remember the President 's first questions to Mitya , about his name , his calling , and so on . 
Mitya answered sharply , and his voice was so unexpectedly loud that it made the President start and look at the prisoner with surprise . 
Then followed a list of persons who were to take part in the proceedings - that is , of the witnesses and experts . 
It was a long list . 
Four of the witnesses were not present - Miusov , who had given evidence at the preliminary inquiry , but was now in Paris ; Madame Hohlakov and Maximov , who were absent through illness ; and Smerdyakov , through his sudden death , of which an official statement from the police was presented . 
The news of Smerdyakov 's death produced a sudden stir and whisper in the court . 
Many of the audience , of course , had not heard of the sudden suicide . 
What struck people most was Mitya 's sudden outburst . 
As soon as the statement of Smerdyakov 's death was made , he cried out aloud from his place : `` He was a dog and died like a dog ! '' 
I remember how his counsel rushed to him , and how the President addressed him , threatening to take stern measures , if such an irregularity were repeated . 
Mitya nodded and in a subdued voice repeated several times abruptly to his counsel , with no show of regret : `` I wo n't again , I wo n't . 
It escaped me . 
I wo n't do it again . '' 
And , of course , this brief episode did him no good with the jury or the public . 
His character was displayed , and it spoke for itself . 
It was under the influence of this incident that the opening statement was read . 
It was rather short , but circumstantial . 
It only stated the chief reasons why he had been arrested , why he must be tried , and so on . 
Yet it made a great impression on me . 
The clerk read it loudly and distinctly . 
The whole tragedy was suddenly unfolded before us , concentrated , in bold relief , in a fatal and pitiless light . 
I remember how , immediately after it had been read , the President asked Mitya in a loud impressive voice : `` Prisoner , do you plead guilty ? '' 
Mitya suddenly rose from his seat . 
`` I plead guilty to drunkenness and dissipation , '' he exclaimed , again in a startling , almost frenzied , voice , `` to idleness and debauchery . 
I meant to become an honest man for good , just at the moment when I was struck down by fate . 
But I am not guilty of the death of that old man , my enemy and my father . 
No , no , I am not guilty of robbing him ! 
I could not be . 
Dmitri Karamazov is a scoundrel , but not a thief . '' 
He sat down again , visibly trembling all over . 
The President again briefly , but impressively , admonished him to answer only what was asked , and not to go off into irrelevant exclamations . 
Then he ordered the case to proceed . 
All the witnesses were led up to take the oath . 
Then I saw them all together . 
The brothers of the prisoner were , however , allowed to give evidence without taking the oath . 
After an exhortation from the priest and the President , the witnesses were led away and were made to sit as far as possible apart from one another . 
Then they began calling them up one by one . 
Dangerous Witnesses I DO NOT know whether the witnesses for the defence and for the prosecution were separated into groups by the President , and whether it was arranged to call them in a certain order . 
But no doubt it was so . 
I only know that the witnesses for the prosecution were called first . 
I repeat I do n't intend to describe all the questions step by step . 
Besides , my account would be to some extent superfluous , because in the speeches for the prosecution and for the defence the whole course of the evidence was brought together and set in a strong and significant light , and I took down parts of those two remarkable speeches in full , and will quote them in due course , together with one extraordinary and quite unexpected episode , which occurred before the final speeches , and undoubtedly influenced the sinister and fatal outcome of the trial . 
I will only observe that from the first moments of the trial one peculiar characteristic of the case was conspicuous and observed by all , that is , the overwhelming strength of the prosecution as compared with the arguments the defence had to rely upon . 
Everyone realised it from the first moment that the facts began to group themselves round a single point , and the whole horrible and bloody crime was gradually revealed . 
Everyone , perhaps , felt from the first that the case was beyond dispute , that there was no doubt about it , that there could be really no discussion , and that the defence was only a matter of form , and that the prisoner was guilty , obviously and conclusively guilty . 
I imagine that even the ladies , who were so impatiently longing for the acquittal of the interesting prisoner , were at the same time , without exception , convinced of his guilt . 
What 's more , I believe they would have been mortified if his guilt had not been so firmly established , as that would have lessened the effect of the closing scene of the criminal 's acquittal . 
That he would be acquitted , all the ladies , strange to say , were firmly persuaded up to the very last moment . 
`` He is guilty , but he will be acquitted , from motives of humanity , in accordance with the new ideas , the new sentiments that had come into fashion , '' and so on , and so on . 
And that was why they had crowded into the court so impatiently . 
The men were more interested in the contest between the prosecutor and the famous Fetyukovitch . 
All were wondering and asking themselves what could even a talent like Fetyukovitch 's make of such a desperate case ; and so they followed his achievements , step by step , with concentrated attention . 
But Fetyukovitch remained an enigma to all up to the very end , up to his speech . 
Persons of experience suspected that he had some design , that he was working towards some object , but it was almost impossible to guess what it was . 
His confidence and self-reliance were unmistakable , however . 
Everyone noticed with pleasure , moreover , that he , after so short a stay , not more than three days , perhaps , among us , had so wonderfully succeeded in mastering the case and `` had studied it to a nicety . '' 
People described with relish , afterwards , how cleverly he had `` taken down '' all the witnesses for the prosecution , and as far as possible perplexed them and , what 's more , had aspersed their reputation and so depreciated the value of their evidence . 
But it was supposed that he did this rather by way of sport , so to speak , for professional glory , to show nothing had been omitted of the accepted methods , for all were convinced that he could do no real good by such disparagement of the witnesses , and probably was more aware of this than anyone , having some idea of his own in the background , some concealed weapon of defence , which he would suddenly reveal when the time came . 
But meanwhile , conscious of his strength , he seemed to be diverting himself . 
So , for instance , when Grigory , Fyodor Pavlovitch 's old servant , who had given the most damning piece of evidence about the open door , was examined , the counsel for the defence positively fastened upon him when his turn came to question him . 
It must be noted that Grigory entered the trial with a composed and almost stately air , not the least disconcerted by the majesty of the court or the vast audience listening to him . 
He gave evidence with as much confidence as though he had been talking with his Marfa , only perhaps more respectfully . 
It was impossible to make him contradict himself . 
The prosecutor questioned him first in detail about the family life of the Karamazovs . 
The family picture stood out in lurid colours . 
It was plain to ear and eye that the witness was guileless and impartial . 
In spite of his profound reverence for the memory of his deceased master , he yet bore witness that he had been unjust to Mitya and `` had n't brought up his children as he should . 
He 'd have been devoured by lice when he was little , if it had n't been for me , '' he added , describing Mitya 's early childhood . 
`` It was n't fair either of the father to wrong his son over his mother 's property , which was by right his . '' 
In reply to the prosecutor 's question what grounds he had for asserting that Fyodor Pavlovitch had wronged his son in their money relations , Grigory , to the surprise of everyone , had no proof at all to bring forward , but he still persisted that the arrangement with the son was `` unfair , '' and that he ought `` to have paid him several thousand roubles more . '' 
I must note , by the way , that the prosecutor asked this question -LRB- whether Fyodor Pavlovitch had really kept back part of Mitya 's inheritance -RRB- with marked persistence of all the witnesses who could be asked it , not excepting Alyosha and Ivan , but he obtained no exact information from anyone ; all alleged that it was so , but were unable to bring forward any distinct proof . 
Grigory 's description of the scene at the dinner-table , when Dmitri had burst in and beaten his father , threatening to come back to kill him , made a sinister impression on the court , especially as the old servant 's composure in telling it , his parsimony of words , and peculiar phraseology were as effective as eloquence . 
He observed that he was not angry with Mitya for having knocked him down and struck him on the face ; he had forgiven him long ago , he said . 
Of the deceased Smerdyakov he observed , crossing himself , that he was a lad of ability , but stupid and afflicted , and , worse still , an infidel , and that it was Fyodor Pavlovitch and his elder son who had taught him to be so . 
But he defended Smerdyakov 's honesty almost with warmth , and related how Smerdyakov had once found the master 's money in the yard , and , instead of concealing it , had taken it to his master , who had rewarded him with a `` gold piece '' for it , and trusted him implicitly from that time forward . 
He maintained obstinately that the door into the garden had been open . 
But he was asked so many questions that I ca n't recall them all . 
At last the counsel for the defence began to cross-examine him , and the first question he asked was about the envelope in which Fyodor Pavlovitch was supposed to have put three thousand roubles for `` a certain person . '' 
`` Have you ever seen it , you , who were for so many years in close attendance on your master ? '' 
Grigory answered that he had not seen it and had never heard of the money from anyone `` till everybody was talking about it . '' 
This question about the envelope Fetyukovitch put to everyone who could conceivably have known of it , as persistently as the prosecutor asked his question about Dmitri 's inheritance , and got the same answer from all , that no one had seen the envelope , though many had heard of it . 
From the beginning everyone noticed Fetyukovitch 's persistence on this subject . 
`` Now , with your permission I 'll ask you a question , '' Fetyukovitch said , suddenly and unexpectedly . 
`` Of what was that balsam , or , rather , decoction , made , which , as we learn from the preliminary inquiry , you used on that evening to rub your lumbago , in the hope of curing it ? '' 
Grigory looked blankly at the questioner , and after a brief silence muttered , `` There was saffron in it . '' 
`` Nothing but saffron ? 
Do n't you remember any other ingredient ? '' 
`` There was milfoil in it , too . '' 
`` And pepper perhaps ? '' 
Fetyukovitch queried . 
`` Yes , there was pepper , too . '' 
`` Etcetera . 
And all dissolved in vodka ? '' 
`` In spirit . '' 
There was a faint sound of laughter in the court . 
`` You see , in spirit . 
After rubbing your back , I believe , you drank what was left in the bottle with a certain pious prayer , only known to your wife ? '' 
`` I did . '' 
`` Did you drink much ? 
Roughly speaking , a wine-glass or two ? '' 
`` It might have been a tumbler-full . '' 
`` A tumbler-full , even . 
Perhaps a tumbler and a half ? '' 
Grigory did not answer . 
He seemed to see what was meant . 
`` A glass and a half of neat spirit - is not at all bad , do n't you think ? 
You might see the gates of heaven open , not only the door into the garden ? '' 
Grigory remained silent . 
There was another laugh in the court . 
The President made a movement . 
`` Do you know for a fact , '' Fetyukovitch persisted , `` whether you were awake or not when you saw the open door ? '' 
`` I was on my legs . '' 
`` That 's not a proof that you were awake . '' 
-LRB- There was again laughter in the court . -RRB- 
`` Could you have answered at that moment , if anyone had asked you a question - for instance , what year it is ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` And what year is it , Anno Domini , do you know ? '' 
Grigory stood with a perplexed face , looking straight at his tormentor . 
Strange to say , it appeared he really did not know what year it was . 
`` But perhaps you can tell me how many fingers you have on your hands ? '' 
`` I am a servant , '' Grigory said suddenly , in a loud and distinct voice . 
`` If my betters think fit to make game of me , it is my duty to suffer it . '' 
Fetyukovitch was a little taken aback , and the President intervened , reminding him that he must ask more relevant questions . 
Fetyukovitch bowed with dignity and said that he had no more questions to ask of the witness . 
The public and the jury , of course , were left with a grain of doubt in their minds as to the evidence of a man who might , while undergoing a certain cure , have seen `` the gates of heaven , '' and who did not even know what year he was living in . 
But before Grigory left the box another episode occurred . 
The President , turning to the prisoner , asked him whether he had any comment to make on the evidence of the last witness . 
`` Except about the door , all he has said is true , '' cried Mitya , in a loud voice . 
`` For combing the lice off me , I thank him ; for forgiving my blows , I thank him . 
The old man has been honest all his life and as faithful to my father as seven hundred poodles . '' 
`` Prisoner , be careful in your language , '' the President admonished him . 
`` I am not a poodle , '' Grigory muttered . 
`` All right , it 's I am a poodle myself , '' cried Mitya . 
`` If it 's an insult , I take it to myself and I beg his pardon . 
I was a beast and cruel to him . 
I was cruel to Aesop too . '' 
`` What Aesop ? '' 
the President asked sternly again . 
`` Oh , Pierrot ... my father , Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
The President again and again warned Mitya impressively and very sternly to be more careful in his language . 
`` You are injuring yourself in the opinion of your judges . '' 
The counsel for the defence was equally clever in dealing with the evidence of Rakitin . 
I may remark that Rakitin was one of the leading witnesses and one to whom the prosecutor attached great significance . 
It appeared that he knew everything ; his knowledge was amazing , he had been everywhere , seen everything , talked to everybody , knew every detail of the biography of Fyodor Pavlovitch and all the Karamazovs . 
Of the envelope , it is true , he had only heard from Mitya himself . 
But he described minutely Mitya 's exploits in the Metropolis , all his compromising doings and sayings , and told the story of Captain Snegiryov 's `` wisp of tow . '' 
But even Rakitin could say nothing positive about Mitya 's inheritance , and confined himself to contemptuous generalities . 
`` Who could tell which of them was to blame , and which was in debt to the other , with their crazy Karamazov way of muddling things so that no one could make head or tail of it ? '' 
He attributed the tragic crime to the habits that had become ingrained by ages of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia , due to the lack of appropriate institutions . 
He was , in fact , allowed some latitude of speech . 
This was the first occasion on which Rakitin showed what he could do , and attracted notice . 
The prosecutor knew that the witness was preparing a magazine article on the case , and afterwards in his speech , as we shall see later , quoted some ideas from the article , showing that he had seen it already . 
The picture drawn by the witness was a gloomy and sinister one , and greatly strengthened the case for the prosecution . 
Altogether , Rakatin 's discourse fascinated the public by its independence and the extraordinary nobility of its ideas . 
There were even two or three outbreaks of applause when he spoke of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia . 
But Rakitin , in his youthful ardour , made a slight blunder , of which the counsel for the defence at once adroitly took advantage . 
