He was suddenly seized with the desire to see the monastery and the holy man . 
As his lawsuit with the monastery still dragged on , he made it the pretext for seeing the Superior , in order to attempt to settle it amicably . 
A visitor coming with such laudable intentions might be received with more attention and consideration than if he came from simple curiosity . 
Influences from within the monastery were brought to bear on the elder , who of late had scarcely left his cell , and had been forced by illness to deny even his ordinary visitors . 
In the end he consented to see them , and the day was fixed . 
`` Who has made me a judge over them ? '' 
was all he said , smilingly , to Alyosha . 
Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit . 
Of all the wrangling , quarrelsome party , Dmitri was the only one who could regard the interview seriously . 
All the others would come from frivolous motives , perhaps insulting to the elder . 
Alyosha was well aware of that . 
Ivan and Miusov would come from curiosity , perhaps of the coarsest kind , while his father might be contemplating some piece of buffoonery . 
Though he said nothing , Alyosha thoroughly understood his father . 
The boy , I repeat , was far from being so simple as everyone thought him . 
He awaited the day with a heavy heart . 
No doubt he was always pondering in his mind how the family discord could be ended . 
But his chief anxiety concerned the elder . 
He trembled for him , for his glory , and dreaded any affront to him , especially the refined , courteous irony of Miusov and the supercilious half-utterances of the highly educated Ivan . 
He even wanted to venture on warning the elder , telling him something about them , but , on second thoughts , said nothing . 
He only sent word the day before , through a friend , to his brother Dmitri , that he loved him and expected him to keep his promise . 
Dmitri wondered , for he could not remember what he had promised , but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to let himself be provoked `` by vileness , '' but that , although he had a deep respect for the elder and for his brother Ivan , he was convinced that the meeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce . 
`` Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking in respect to the sainted man whom you reverence so highly , '' he wrote in conclusion . 
Alyosha was not greatly cheered by the letter . 
An Unfortunate Gathering They Arrive at the Monastery IT was a warm , bright day the end of August . 
The interview with the elder had been fixed for half-past eleven , immediately after late mass . 
Our visitors did not take part in the service , but arrived just as it was over . 
First an elegant open carriage , drawn by two valuable horses , drove up with Miusov and a distant relative of his , a young man of twenty , called Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov . 
This young man was preparing to enter the university . 
Miusov with whom he was staying for the time , was trying to persuade him to go abroad to the university of Zurich or Jena . 
The young man was still undecided . 
He was thoughtful and absent-minded . 
He was nice-looking , strongly built , and rather tall . 
There was a strange fixity in his gaze at times . 
Like all very absent-minded people he would sometimes stare at a person without seeing him . 
He was silent and rather awkward , but sometimes , when he was alone with anyone , he became talkative and effusive , and would laugh at anything or nothing . 
But his animation vanished as quickly as it appeared . 
He was always well and even elaborately dressed ; he had already some independent fortune and expectations of much more . 
He was a friend of Alyosha 's . 
In an ancient , jolting , but roomy , hired carriage , with a pair of old pinkish-grey horses , a long way behind Miusov 's carriage , came Fyodor Pavlovitch , with his son Ivan . 
Dmitri was late , though he had been informed of the time the evening before . 
The visitors left their carriage at the hotel , outside the precincts , and went to the gates of the monastery on foot . 
Except Fyodor Pavlovitch , more of the party had ever seen the monastery , and Miusov had probably not even been to church for thirty years . 
He looked about him with curiosity , together with assumed ease . 
But , except the church and the domestic buildings , though these too were ordinary enough , he found nothing of interest in the interior of the monastery . 
The last of the worshippers were coming out of the church bareheaded and crossing themselves . 
Among the humbler people were a few of higher rank - two or three ladies and a very old general . 
They were all staying at the hotel . 
Our visitors were at once surrounded by beggars , but none of them gave them anything , except young Kalganov , who took a ten-copeck piece out of his purse , and , nervous and embarrassed - God knows why ! 
- hurriedly gave it to an old woman , saying : `` Divide it equally . '' 
None of his companions made any remark upon it , so that he had no reason to be embarrassed ; but , perceiving this , he was even more overcome . 
It was strange that their arrival did not seem expected , and that they were not received with special honour , though one of them had recently made a donation of a thousand roubles , while another was a very wealthy and highly cultured landowner , upon whom all in the monastery were in a sense dependent , as a decision of the lawsuit might at any moment put their fishing rights in his hands . 
Yet no official personage met them . 
Miusov looked absent-mindedly at the tombstones round the church , and was on the point of saying that the dead buried here must have paid a pretty penny for the right of lying in this `` holy place , '' but refrained . 
His liberal irony was rapidly changing almost into anger . 
`` Who the devil is there to ask in this imbecile place ? 
We must find out , for time is passing , '' he observed suddenly , as though speaking to himself . 
All at once there came up a bald-headed , elderly man with ingratiating little eyes , wearing a full , summer overcoat . 
Lifting his hat , he introduced himself with a honeyed lisp as Maximov , a landowner of Tula . 
He at once entered into our visitors ' difficulty . 
`` Father Zossima lives in the hermitage , apart , four hundred paces from the monastery , the other side of the copse . '' 
`` I know it 's the other side of the copse , '' observed Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` but we do n't remember the way . 
It is a long time since we 've been here . '' 
`` This way , by this gate , and straight across the copse ... the copse . 
Come with me , wo n't you ? 
I 'll show you . 
I have to go ... . 
I am going myself . 
This way , this way . '' 
They came out of the gate and turned towards the copse . 
Maximov , a man of sixty , ran rather than walked , turning sideways to stare at them all , with an incredible degree of nervous curiosity . 
His eyes looked starting out of his head . 
`` You see , we have come to the elder upon business of our own , '' observed Miusov severely . 
`` That personage has granted us an audience , so to speak , and so , though we thank you for showing us the way , we can not ask you to accompany us . '' 
`` I 've been there . 
I 've been already ; un chevalier parfait , '' and Maximov snapped his fingers in the air . 
`` Who is a chevalier ? '' 
asked Miusov . 
`` The elder , the splendid elder , the elder ! 
The honour and glory of the monastery , Zossima . 
Such an elder ! '' 
But his incoherent talk was cut short by a very pale , wan-looking monk of medium height wearing a monk 's cap , who overtook them . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch and Miusov stopped . 
The monk , with an extremely courteous , profound bow , announced : `` The Father Superior invites all of you gentlemen to dine with him after your visit to the hermitage . 
At one o'clock , not later . 
And you also , '' he added , addressing Maximov . 
`` That I certainly will , without fail , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , hugely delighted at the invitation . 
`` And , believe me , we 've all given our word to behave properly here ... . 
And you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , will you go , too ? '' 
`` Yes , of course . 
What have I come for but to study all the customs here ? 
The only obstacle to me is your company ... '' `` Yes , Dmitri Fyodorovitch is non-existent as yet . '' 
`` It would be a capital thing if he did n't turn up . 
Do you suppose I like all this business , and in your company , too ? 
So we will come to dinner . 
Thank the Father Superior , '' he said to the monk . 
`` No , it is my duty now to conduct you to the elder , '' answered the monk . 
`` If so I 'll go straight to the Father Superior - to the Father Superior , '' babbled Maximov . 
`` The Father Superior is engaged just now . 
But as you please - '' the monk hesitated . 
`` Impertinent old man ! '' 
Miusov observed aloud , while Maximov ran back to the monastery . 
`` He 's like von Sohn , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said suddenly . 
`` Is that all you can think of ? 
... In what way is he like von Sohn ? 
Have you ever seen von Sohn ? '' 
`` I 've seen his portrait . 
It 's not the features , but something indefinable . 
He 's a second von Sohn . 
I can always tell from the physiognomy . '' 
`` Ah , I dare say you are a connoisseur in that . 
But , look here , Fyodor Pavlovitch , you said just now that we had given our word to behave properly . 
Remember it . 
I advise you to control yourself . 
But , if you begin to play the fool I do n't intend to be associated with you here ... You see what a man he is '' - he turned to the monk - `` I 'm afraid to go among decent people with him . '' 
A fine smile , not without a certain slyness , came on to the pale , bloodless lips of the monk , but he made no reply , and was evidently silent from a sense of his own dignity . 
Miusov frowned more than ever . 
`` Oh , devil take them all ! 
An outer show elaborated through centuries , and nothing but charlatanism and nonsense underneath , '' flashed through Miusov 's mind . 
`` Here 's the hermitage . 
We 've arrived , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` The gates are shut . '' 
And he repeatedly made the sign of the cross to the saints painted above and on the sides of the gates . 
`` When you go to Rome you must do as the Romans do . 
Here in this hermitage there are twenty-five saints being saved . 
They look at one another , and eat cabbages . 
And not one woman goes in at this gate . 
That 's what is remarkable . 
And that really is so . 
But I did hear that the elder receives ladies , '' he remarked suddenly to the monk . 
`` Women of the people are here too now , lying in the portico there waiting . 
But for ladies of higher rank two rooms have been built adjoining the portico , but outside the precincts you can see the windows - and the elder goes out to them by an inner passage when he is well enough . 
They are always outside the precincts . 
There is a Harkov lady , Madame Hohlakov , waiting there now with her sick daughter . 
Probably he has promised to come out to her , though of late he has been so weak that he has hardly shown himself even to the people . '' 
`` So then there are loopholes , after all , to creep out of the hermitage to the ladies . 
Do n't suppose , holy father , that I mean any harm . 
But do you know that at Athos not only the visits of women are not allowed , but no creature of the female sex - no hens , nor turkey hens , nor cows . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , I warn you I shall go back and leave you here . 
They 'll turn you out when I 'm gone . '' 
`` But I 'm not interfering with you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
Look , '' he cried suddenly , stepping within the precincts , `` what a vale of roses they live in ! '' 
Though there were no roses now , there were numbers of rare and beautiful autumn flowers growing wherever there was space for them , and evidently tended by a skilful hand ; there were flower-beds round the church , and between the tombs ; and the one-storied wooden house where the elder lived was also surrounded with flowers . 
`` And was it like this in the time of the last elder , Varsonofy ? 
He did n't care for such elegance . 
They say he used to jump up and thrash even ladies with a stick , '' observed Fyodor Pavlovitch , as he went up the steps . 
`` The elder Varsonofy did sometimes seem rather strange , but a great deal that 's told is foolishness . 
He never thrashed anyone , '' answered the monk . 
`` Now , gentlemen , if you will wait a minute I will announce you . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , for the last time , your compact , do you hear ? 
Behave properly or I will pay you out ! '' 
Miusov had time to mutter again . 
`` I ca n't think why you are so agitated , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch observed sarcastically . 
`` Are you uneasy about your sins ? 
They say he can tell by one 's eyes what one has come about . 
And what a lot you think of their opinion ! 
you , a Parisian , and so advanced . 
I 'm surprised at you . '' 
But Miusov had no time to reply to this sarcasm . 
They were asked to come in . 
He walked in , somewhat irritated . 
`` Now , I know myself , I am annoyed , I shall lose my temper and begin to quarrel - and lower myself and my ideas , '' he reflected . 
The Old Buffoon THEY entered the room almost at the same moment that the elder came in from his bedroom . 
There were already in the cell , awaiting the elder , two monks of the hermitage , one the Father Librarian , and the other Father Paissy , a very learned man , so they said , in delicate health , though not old . 
There was also a tall young man , who looked about two and twenty , standing in the corner throughout the interview . 
He had a broad , fresh face , and clever , observant , narrow brown eyes , and was wearing ordinary dress . 
He was a divinity student , living under the protection of the monastery . 
His expression was one of unquestioning , but self-respecting , reverence . 
Being in a subordinate and dependent position , and so not on an equality with the guests , he did not greet them with a bow . 
Father Zossima was accompanied by a novice , and by Alyosha . 
The two monks rose and greeted him with a very deep bow , touching the ground with their fingers ; then kissed his hand . 
Blessing them , the elder replied with as deep a reverence to them , and asked their blessing . 
The whole ceremony was performed very seriously and with an appearance of feeling , not like an everyday rite . 
But Miusov fancied that it was all done with intentional impressiveness . 
He stood in front of the other visitors . 
He ought - he had reflected upon it the evening before - from simple politeness , since it was the custom here , to have gone up to receive the elder 's blessing , even if he did not kiss his hand . 
But when he saw all this bowing and kissing on the part of the monks he instantly changed his mind . 
With dignified gravity he made a rather deep , conventional bow , and moved away to a chair . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did the same , mimicking Miusov like an ape . 
Ivan bowed with great dignity and courtesy , but he too kept his hands at his sides , while Kalganov was so confused that he did not bow at all . 
The elder let fall the hand raised to bless them , and bowing to them again , asked them all to sit down . 
The blood rushed to Alyosha 's cheeks . 
He was ashamed . 
His forebodings were coming true . 
Father Zossima sat down on a very old-fashioned mahogany sofa , covered with leather , and made his visitors sit down in a row along the opposite wall on four mahogany chairs , covered with shabby black leather . 
The monks sat , one at the door and the other at the window . 
The divinity student , the novice , and Alyosha remained standing . 
The cell was not very large and had a faded look . 
It contained nothing but the most necessary furniture , of coarse and poor quality . 
There were two pots of flowers in the window , and a number of holy pictures in the corner . 
Before one huge ancient ikon of the virgin a lamp was burning . 
Near it were two other holy pictures in shining settings , and , next them , carved cherubim , china eggs , a Catholic cross of ivory , with a Mater Dolorosa embracing it , and several foreign engravings from the great Italian artists of past centuries . 
Next to these costly and artistic engravings were several of the roughest Russian prints of saints and martyrs , such as are sold for a few farthings at all the fairs . 
On the other walls were portraits of Russian bishops , past and present . 
Miusov took a cursory glance at all these `` conventional '' surroundings and bent an intent look upon the elder . 
He had a high opinion of his own insight a weakness excusable in him as he was fifty , an age at which a clever man of the world of established position can hardly help taking himself rather seriously . 
At the first moment he did not like Zossima . 
There was , indeed , something in the elder 's face which many people besides Miusov might not have liked . 
He was a short , bent , little man , with very weak legs , and though he was only sixty-five , he looked at least ten years older . 
His face was very thin and covered with a network of fine wrinkles , particularly numerous about his eyes , which were small , light-coloured , quick , and shining like two bright points . 
He had a sprinkling of grey hair about his temples . 
His pointed beard was small and scanty , and his lips , which smiled frequently , were as thin as two threads . 
His nose was not long , but sharp , like a bird 's beak . 
`` To all appearances a malicious soul , full of petty pride , '' thought Miusov . 
He felt altogether dissatisfied with his position . 
A cheap little clock on the wall struck twelve hurriedly , and served to begin the conversation . 
`` Precisely to our time , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` but no sign of my son , Dmitri . 
I apologise for him , sacred elder ! '' 
-LRB- Alyosha shuddered all over at `` sacred elder '' . -RRB- 
`` I am always punctual myself , minute for minute , remembering that punctuality is the courtesy of kings ... `` But you are not a king , anyway , '' Miusov muttered , losing his self-restraint at once . 
`` Yes ; that 's true . 
I 'm not a king , and , would you believe it , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , I was aware of that myself . 
But , there ! 
I always say the wrong thing . 
Your reverence , '' he cried , with sudden pathos , `` you behold before you a buffoon in earnest ! 
I introduce myself as such . 
It 's an old habit , alas ! 
And if I sometimes talk nonsense out of place it 's with an object , with the object of amusing people and making myself agreeable . 
One must be agreeable , must n't one ? 
I was seven years ago in a little town where I had business , and I made friends with some merchants there . 
We went to the captain of police because we had to see him about something , and to ask him to dine with us . 
He was a tall , fat , fair , sulky man , the most dangerous type in such cases . 
It 's their liver . 
I went straight up to him , and with the ease of a man of the world , you know , ` Mr. Ispravnik , ' said I , ` be our Napravnik . ' 
` What do you mean by Napravnik ? ' 
said he . 
I saw , at the first half-second , that it had missed fire . 
He stood there so glum . ' 
I wanted to make a joke , ' said I , ` for the general diversion , as Mr. Napravnik is our well-known Russian orchestra conductor and what we need for the harmony of our undertaking is someone of that sort . ' 
And I explained my comparison very reasonably , did n't I ? 
` Excuse me , ' said he , ' I am an Ispravnik , and I do not allow puns to be made on my calling . ' 
He turned and walked away . 
I followed him , shouting , ` Yes , yes , you are an Ispravnik , not a Napravnik . ' 
` No , ' he said , ` since you called me a Napravnik I am one . ' 
And would you believe it , it ruined our business ! 
And I 'm always like that , always like that . 
Always injuring myself with my politeness . 
Once , many years ago , I said to an influential person : ` Your wife is a ticklish lady , ' in an honourable sense , of the moral qualities , so to speak . 
But he asked me , ` Why , have you tickled her ? ' 
I thought I 'd be polite , so I could n't help saying , ` Yes , ' and he gave me a fine tickling on the spot . 
Only that happened long ago , so I 'm not ashamed to tell the story . 
I 'm always injuring myself like that . '' 
`` You 're doing it now , '' muttered Miusov , with disgust . 
Father Zossima scrutinised them both in silence . 
`` Am I ? 
Would you believe it , I was aware of that , too , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , and let tell you , indeed , I foresaw I should as soon as I began to speak . 
And do you know I foresaw , too , that you 'd be the first to remark on it . 
The minute I see my joke is n't coming off , your reverence , both my cheeks feel as though they were drawn down to the lower jaw and there is almost a spasm in them . 
That 's been so since I was young , when I had to make jokes for my living in noblemen 's families . 
I am an inveterate buffoon , and have been from birth up , your reverence , it 's as though it were a craze in me . 
I dare say it 's a devil within me . 
But only a little one . 
A more serious one would have chosen another lodging . 
But not your soul , Pyotr Alexandrovitch ; you 're not a lodging worth having either . 
But I do believe - I believe in God , though I have had doubts of late . 
But now I sit and await words of wisdom . 
I 'm like the philosopher , Diderot , your reverence . 
Did you ever hear , most Holy Father , how Diderot went to see the Metropolitan Platon , in the time of the Empress Catherine ? 
He went in and said straight out , ` There is no God . ' 
To which the great bishop lifted up his finger and answered , ` The fool has said in his heart there is no God and he fell down at his feet on the spot . ' 
I believe , ' he cried , ` and will be christened . ' 
And so he was . 
Princess Dashkov was his godmother , and Potyomkin his godfather . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , this is unbearable ! 
You know you 're telling lies and that that stupid anecdote is n't true . 
Why are you playing the fool ? '' 
cried Miusov in a shaking voice . 
`` I suspected all my life that it was n't true , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cried with conviction . 
`` But I 'll tell you the whole truth , gentlemen . 
Great elder ! 
Forgive me , the last thing about Diderot 's christening I made up just now . 
I never thought of it before . 
I made it up to add piquancy . 
I play the fool , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , to make myself agreeable . 
Though I really do n't know myself , sometimes , what I do it for . 
And as for Diderot , I heard as far as ` the fool hath said in his heart ' twenty times from the gentry about here when I was young . 
I heard your aunt , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , tell the story . 
They all believe to this day that the infidel Diderot came to dispute about God with the Metropolitan Platon ... '' Miusov got up , forgetting himself in his impatience . 
He was furious , and conscious of being ridiculous . 
What was taking place in the cell was really incredible . 
For forty or fifty years past , from the times of former elders , no visitors had entered that cell without feelings of the profoundest veneration . 
Almost everyone admitted to the cell felt that a great favour was being shown him . 
Many remained kneeling during the whole visit . 
Of those visitors , many had been men of high rank and learning , some even free thinkers , attracted by curiosity , but all without exception had shown the profoundest reverence and delicacy , for here there was no question of money , but only , on the one side love and kindness , and on the other penitence and eager desire to decide some spiritual problem or crisis . 
So that such buffoonery amazed and bewildered the spectators , or at least some of them . 
The monks , with unchanged countenances , waited , with earnest attention , to hear what the elder would say , but seemed on the point of standing up , like Miusov . 
Alyosha stood , with hanging head , on the verge of tears . 
What seemed to him strangest of all was that his brother Ivan , on whom alone he had rested his hopes , and who alone had such influence on his father that he could have stopped him , sat now quite unmoved , with downcast eyes , apparently waiting with interest to see how it would end , as though he had nothing to do with it . 
Alyosha did not dare to look at Rakitin , the divinity student , whom he knew almost intimately . 
He alone in the monastery knew Rakitin 's thoughts . 
`` Forgive me , '' began Miusov , addressing Father Zossima , `` for perhaps I seem to be taking part in this shameful foolery . 
I made a mistake in believing that even a man like Fyodor Pavlovitch would understand what was due on a visit to so honoured a personage . 
I did not suppose I should have to apologise simply for having come with him ... '' Pyotr Alexandrovitch could say no more , and was about to leave the room , overwhelmed with confusion . 
`` Do n't distress yourself , I beg . '' 
The elder got on to his feeble legs , and taking Pyotr Alexandrovitch by both hands , made him sit down again . 
`` I beg you not to disturb yourself . 
I particularly beg you to be my guest . '' 
And with a bow he went back and sat down again on his little sofa . 
`` Great elder , speak ! 
Do I annoy you by my vivacity ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch cried suddenly , clutching the arms of his chair in both hands , as though ready to leap up from it if the answer were unfavourable . 
`` I earnestly beg you , too , not to disturb yourself , and not to be uneasy , '' the elder said impressively . 
`` Do not trouble . 
Make yourself quite at home . 
And , above all , do not be so ashamed of yourself , for that is at the root of it all . '' 
`` Quite at home ? 
To be my natural self ? 
Oh , that is much too much , but I accept it with grateful joy . 
Do you know , blessed father , you 'd better not invite me to be my natural self . 
Do n't risk it ... . 
I will not go so far as that myself . 
I warn you for your own sake . 
Well , the rest is still plunged in the mists of uncertainty , though there are people who 'd be pleased to describe me for you . 
I mean that for you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
But as for you , holy being , let me tell you , I am brimming over with ecstasy . '' 
He got up , and throwing up his hands , declaimed , `` Blessed be the womb that bare thee , and the paps that gave thee suck - the paps especially . 
When you said just now , ` Do n't be so ashamed of yourself , for that is at the root of it all , ' you pierced right through me by that remark , and read me to the core . 
Indeed , I always feel when I meet people that I am lower than all , and that they all take me for a buffoon . 
So I say , ` Let me really play the buffoon . 
I am not afraid of your opinion , for you are every one of you worse than I am . ' 
That is why I am a buffoon . 
It is from shame , great elder , from shame ; it 's simply over-sensitiveness that makes me rowdy . 
If I had only been sure that everyone would accept me as the kindest and wisest of men , oh , Lord , what a good man I should have been then ! 
Teacher ! '' 
he fell suddenly on his knees , `` what must I do to gain eternal life ? '' 
It was difficult even now to decide whether he was joking or really moved . 
Father Zossima , lifting his eyes , looked at him , and said with a smile : `` You have known for a long time what you must do . 
You have sense enough : do n't give way to drunkenness and incontinence of speech ; do n't give way to sensual lust ; and , above all , to the love of money . 
And close your taverns . 
If you ca n't close all , at least two or three . 
And , above all - do n't lie . '' 
`` You mean about Diderot ? '' 
`` No , not about Diderot . 
Above all , do n't lie to yourself . 
The man who lies to himself and listens to his own lie comes to such a pass that he can not distinguish the truth within him , or around him , and so loses all respect for himself and for others . 
And having no respect he ceases to love , and in order to occupy and distract himself without love he gives way to passions and coarse pleasures , and sinks to bestiality in his vices , all from continual lying to other men and to himself . 
The man who lies to himself can be more easily offended than anyone . 
You know it is sometimes very pleasant to take offence , is n't it ? 
A man may know that nobody has insulted him , but that he has invented the insult for himself , has lied and exaggerated to make it picturesque , has caught at a word and made a mountain out of a molehill - he knows that himself , yet he will be the first to take offence , and will revel in his resentment till he feels great pleasure in it , and so pass to genuine vindictiveness . 
But get up , sit down , I beg you . 
All this , too , is deceitful posturing ... '' `` Blessed man ! 
Give me your hand to kiss . '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch skipped up , and imprinted a rapid kiss on the elder 's thin hand . 
`` It is , it is pleasant to take offence . 
You said that so well , as I never heard it before . 
Yes , I have been all my life taking offence , to please myself , taking offence on aesthetic grounds , for it is not so much pleasant as distinguished sometimes to be insulted - that you had forgotten , great elder , it is distinguished ! 
I shall make a note of that . 
But I have been lying , lying positively my whole life long , every day and hour of it . 
Of a truth , I am a lie , and the father of lies . 
Though I believe I am not the father of lies . 
I am getting mixed in my texts . 
Say , the son of lies , and that will be enough . 
Only ... my angel ... may sometimes talk about Diderot ! 
Diderot will do no harm , though sometimes a word will do harm . 
Great elder , by the way , I was forgetting , though I had been meaning for the last two years to come here on purpose to ask and to find out something . 
Only do tell Pyotr Alexandrovitch not to interrupt me . 
Here is my question : Is it true , great Father , that the story is told somewhere in the Lives of the Saints of a holy saint martyred for his faith who , when his head was cut off at last , stood up , picked up his head , and , ` courteously kissing it , ' walked a long way , carrying it in his hands . 
Is that true or not , honoured Father ? '' 
`` No , it is untrue , '' said the elder . 
`` There is nothing of the kind in all the lives of the saints . 
What saint do you say the story is told of ? '' 
asked the Father Librarian . 
`` I do not know what saint . 
I do not know , and ca n't tell . 
I was deceived . 
I was told the story . 
I had heard it , and do you know who told it ? 
Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miusov here , was so angry just now about Diderot . 
He it was who told the story . '' 
`` I have never told it you , I never speak to you at all . '' 
`` It is true you did not tell me , but you told it when I was present . 
It was three years ago . 
I mentioned it because by that ridiculous story you shook my faith , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
You knew nothing of it , but I went home with my faith shaken , and I have been getting more and more shaken ever since . 
Yes , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , you were the cause of a great fall . 
That was not a Diderot ! 
Fyodor Pavlovitch got excited and pathetic , though it was perfectly clear to everyone by now that he was playing a part again . 
Yet Miusov was stung by his words . 
`` What nonsense , and it is all nonsense , '' he muttered . 
`` I may really have told it , some time or other ... but not to you . 
I was told it myself . 
I heard it in Paris from a Frenchman . 
He told me it was read at our mass from the Lives of the Saints ... he was a very learned man who had made a special study of Russian statistics and had lived a long time in Russia ... . 
I have not read the Lives of the Saints myself , and I am not going to read them ... all sorts of things are said at dinner - we were dining then . '' 
`` Yes , you were dining then , and so I lost my faith ! '' 
said Fyodor Pavlovitch , mimicking him . 
`` What do I care for your faith ? '' 
Miusov was on the point of shouting , but he suddenly checked himself , and said with contempt , `` You defile everything you touch . '' 
The elder suddenly rose from his seat . 
`` Excuse me , gentlemen , for leaving you a few minutes , '' he said , addressing all his guests . 
`` I have visitors awaiting me who arrived before you . 
But do n't you tell lies all the same , '' he added , turning to Fyodor Pavlovitch with a good-humoured face . 
He went out of the cell . 
Alyosha and the novice flew to escort him down the steps . 
Alyosha was breathless : he was glad to get away , but he was glad , too , that the elder was good-humoured and not offended . 
Father Zossima was going towards the portico to bless the people waiting for him there . 
But Fyodor Pavlovitch persisted , in stopping him at the door of the cell . 
`` Blessed man ! '' 
he cried , with feeling . 
`` Allow me to kiss your hand once more . 
Yes , with you I could still talk , I could still get on . 
Do you think I always lie and play the fool like this ? 
Believe me , I have been acting like this all the time on purpose to try you . 
I have been testing you all the time to see whether I could get on with you . 
Is there room for my humility beside your pride ? 
I am ready to give you a testimonial that one can get on with you ! 
But now , I 'll be quiet ; I will keep quiet all the time . 
I 'll sit in a chair and hold my tongue . 
Now it is for you to speak , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
You are the principal person left now - for ten minutes . '' 
Peasant Women Who Have Faith NEAR the wooden portico below , built on to the outer wall of the precinct , there was a crowd of about twenty peasant women . 
They had been told that the elder was at last coming out , and they had gathered together in anticipation . 
Two ladies , Madame Hohlakov and her daughter , had also come out into the portico to wait for the elder , but in a separate part of it set aside for women of rank . 
Madame Hohlakov was a wealthy lady , still young and attractive , and always dressed with taste . 
She was rather pale , and had lively black eyes . 
She was not more than thirty-three , and had been five years a widow . 
Her daughter , a girl of fourteen , was partially paralysed . 
The poor child had not been able to walk for the last six months , and was wheeled about in a long reclining chair . 
She had a charming little face , rather thin from illness , but full of gaiety . 
There was a gleam of mischief in her big dark eyes with their long lashes . 
Her mother had been intending to take her abroad ever since the spring , but they had been detained all the summer by business connected with their estate . 
They had been staying a week in our town , where they had come more for purposes of business than devotion , but had visited Father Zossima once already , three days before . 
Though they knew that the elder scarcely saw anyone , they had now suddenly turned up again , and urgently entreated `` the happiness of looking once again on the great healer . '' 
The mother was sitting on a chair by the side of her daughter 's invalid carriage , and two paces from her stood an old monk , not one of our monastery , but a visitor from an obscure religious house in the far north . 
He too sought the elder 's blessing . 
But Father Zossima , on entering the portico , went first straight to the peasants who were crowded at the foot of the three steps that led up into the portico . 
Father Zossima stood on the top step , put on his stole , and began blessing the women who thronged about him . 
One crazy woman was led up to him . 
As soon as she caught sight of the elder she began shrieking and writhing as though in the pains of childbirth . 
Laying the stole on her forehead , he read a short prayer over her , and she was at once soothed and quieted . 
I do not know how it may be now , but in my childhood I often happened to see and hear these `` possessed '' women in the villages and monasteries . 
They used to be brought to mass ; they would squeal and bark like a dog so that they were heard all over the church . 
But when the sacrament was carried in and they were led up to it , at once the `` possession '' ceased , and the sick women were always soothed for a time . 
I was greatly impressed and amazed at this as a child ; but then I heard from country neighbours and from my town teachers that the whole illness was simulated to avoid work , and that it could always be cured by suitable severity ; various anecdotes were told to confirm this . 
But later on I learnt with astonishment from medical specialists that there is no pretence about it , that it is a terrible illness to which women are subject , especially prevalent among us in Russia , and that it is due to the hard lot of the peasant women . 
It is a disease , I was told , arising from exhausting toil too soon after hard , abnormal and unassisted labour in childbirth , and from the hopeless misery , from beatings , and so on , which some women were not able to endure like others . 
The strange and instant healing of the frantic and struggling woman as soon as she was led up to the holy sacrament , which had been explained to me as due to malingering and the trickery of the `` clericals , '' arose probably in the most natural manner . 
Both the women who supported her and the invalid herself fully believed as a truth beyond question that the evil spirit in possession of her could not hold if the sick woman were brought to the sacrament and made to bow down before it . 
And so , with a nervous and psychically deranged woman , a sort of convulsion of the whole organism always took place , and was bound to take place , at the moment of bowing down to the sacrament , aroused by the expectation of the miracle of healing and the implicit belief that it would come to pass ; and it did come to pass , though only for a moment . 
It was exactly the same now as soon as the elder touched the sick woman with the stole . 
Many of the women in the crowd were moved to tears of ecstasy by the effect of the moment : some strove to kiss the hem of his garment , others cried out in sing-song voices . 
He blessed them all and talked with some of them . 
The `` possessed '' woman he knew already . 
She came from a village only six versts from the monastery , and had been brought to him before . 
`` But here is one from afar . '' 
He pointed to a woman by no means old but very thin and wasted , with a face not merely sunburnt but almost blackened by exposure . 
She was kneeling and gazing with a fixed stare at the elder ; there was something almost frenzied in her eyes . 
`` From afar off , Father , from afar off ! 
From two hundred miles from here . 
From afar off , Father , from afar off ! '' 
the woman began in a sing-song voice as though she were chanting a dirge , swaying her head from side to side with her cheek resting in her hand . 
There is silent and long-suffering sorrow to be met with among the peasantry . 
It withdraws into itself and is still . 
But there is a grief that breaks out , and from that minute it bursts into tears and finds vent in wailing . 
This is particularly common with women . 
But it is no lighter a grief than the silent . 
Lamentations comfort only by lacerating the heart still more . 
Such grief does not desire consolation . 
It feeds on the sense of its hopelessness . 
Lamentations spring only from the constant craving to re-open the wound . 
`` You are of the tradesman class ? '' 
said Father Zossima , looking curiously at her . 
`` Townfolk we are , Father , townfolk . 
Yet we are peasants though we live in the town . 
I have come to see you , O Father ! 
We heard of you , Father , we heard of you . 
I have buried my little son , and I have come on a pilgrimage . 
I have been in three monasteries , but they told me , ` Go , Nastasya , go to them ' - that is to you . 
I have come ; I was yesterday at the service , and to-day I have come to you . '' 
`` What are you weeping for ? '' 
`` It 's my little son I 'm grieving for , Father . 
he was three years old - three years all but three months . 
For my little boy , Father , I 'm in anguish , for my little boy . 
He was the last one left . 
We had four , my Nikita and I , and now we 've no children , our dear ones have all gone I buried the first three without grieving overmuch , and now I have buried the last I ca n't forget him . 
He seems always standing before me . 
He never leaves me . 
He has withered my heart . 
I look at his little clothes , his little shirt , his little boots , and I wail . 
I lay out all that is left of him , all his little things . 
I look at them and wail . 
I say to Nikita , my husband , ` let me go on a pilgrimage , master . ' 
He is a driver . 
We 're not poor people , Father , not poor ; he drives our own horse . 
It 's all our own , the horse and the carriage . 
And what good is it all to us now ? 
My Nikita has begun drinking while I am away . 
He 's sure to . 
It used to be so before . 
As soon as I turn my back he gives way to it . 
But now I do n't think about him . 
It 's three months since I left home . 
I 've forgotten him . 
I 've forgotten everything . 
I do n't want to remember . 
And what would our life be now together ? 
I 've done with him , I 've done . 
I 've done with them all . 
I do n't care to look upon my house and my goods . 
I do n't care to see anything at all ! '' 
`` Listen , mother , '' said the elder . 
