The anxiety in which , for three days , London society existed , can not be described . 
Telegrams were sent to America and Asia for news of Phileas Fogg . 
Messengers were dispatched to the house in Saville Row morning and evening . 
No news . 
The police were ignorant what had become of the detective , Fix , who had so unfortunately followed up a false scent . 
Bets increased , nevertheless , in number and value . 
Phileas Fogg , like a racehorse , was drawing near his last turning-point . 
The bonds were quoted , no longer at a hundred below par , but at twenty , at ten , and at five ; and paralytic old Lord Albemarle bet even in his favour . 
A great crowd was collected in Pall Mall and the neighbouring streets on Saturday evening ; it seemed like a multitude of brokers permanently established around the Reform Club . 
Circulation was impeded , and everywhere disputes , discussions , and financial transactions were going on . 
The police had great difficulty in keeping back the crowd , and as the hour when Phileas Fogg was due approached , the excitement rose to its highest pitch . 
The five antagonists of Phileas Fogg had met in the great saloon of the club . 
John Sullivan and Samuel Fallentin , the bankers , Andrew Stuart , the engineer , Gauthier Ralph , the director of the Bank of England , and Thomas Flanagan , the brewer , one and all waited anxiously . 
When the clock indicated twenty minutes past eight , Andrew Stuart got up , saying , `` Gentlemen , in twenty minutes the time agreed upon between Mr. Fogg and ourselves will have expired . '' 
`` What time did the last train arrive from Liverpool ? '' 
asked Thomas Flanagan . 
`` At twenty-three minutes past seven , '' replied Gauthier Ralph ; `` and the next does not arrive till ten minutes after twelve . '' 
`` Well , gentlemen , '' resumed Andrew Stuart , `` if Phileas Fogg had come in the 7:23 train , he would have got here by this time . 
We can , therefore , regard the bet as won . '' 
`` Wait ; do n't let us be too hasty , '' replied Samuel Fallentin . 
`` You know that Mr. Fogg is very eccentric . 
His punctuality is well known ; he never arrives too soon , or too late ; and I should not be surprised if he appeared before us at the last minute . '' 
`` Why , '' said Andrew Stuart nervously , `` if I should see him , I should not believe it was he . '' 
`` The fact is , '' resumed Thomas Flanagan , `` Mr. Fogg 's project was absurdly foolish . 
Whatever his punctuality , he could not prevent the delays which were certain to occur ; and a delay of only two or three days would be fatal to his tour . '' 
`` Observe , too , '' added John Sullivan , `` that we have received no intelligence from him , though there are telegraphic lines all along is route . '' 
`` He has lost , gentleman , '' said Andrew Stuart , `` he has a hundred times lost ! 
You know , besides , that the China the only steamer he could have taken from New York to get here in time arrived yesterday . 
I have seen a list of the passengers , and the name of Phileas Fogg is not among them . 
Even if we admit that fortune has favoured him , he can scarcely have reached America . 
I think he will be at least twenty days behind-hand , and that Lord Albemarle will lose a cool five thousand . '' 
`` It is clear , '' replied Gauthier Ralph ; `` and we have nothing to do but to present Mr. Fogg 's cheque at Barings to-morrow . '' 
At this moment , the hands of the club clock pointed to twenty minutes to nine . 
`` Five minutes more , '' said Andrew Stuart . 
The five gentlemen looked at each other . 
Their anxiety was becoming intense ; but , not wishing to betray it , they readily assented to Mr. Fallentin 's proposal of a rubber . 
`` I would n't give up my four thousand of the bet , '' said Andrew Stuart , as he took his seat , `` for three thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine . '' 
The clock indicated eighteen minutes to nine . 
The players took up their cards , but could not keep their eyes off the clock . 
Certainly , however secure they felt , minutes had never seemed so long to them ! 
`` Seventeen minutes to nine , '' said Thomas Flanagan , as he cut the cards which Ralph handed to him . 
Then there was a moment of silence . 
The great saloon was perfectly quiet ; but the murmurs of the crowd outside were heard , with now and then a shrill cry . 
The pendulum beat the seconds , which each player eagerly counted , as he listened , with mathematical regularity . 
`` Sixteen minutes to nine ! '' 
said John Sullivan , in a voice which betrayed his emotion . 
One minute more , and the wager would be won . 
Andrew Stuart and his partners suspended their game . 
They left their cards , and counted the seconds . 
At the fortieth second , nothing . 
At the fiftieth , still nothing . 
At the fifty-fifth , a loud cry was heard in the street , followed by applause , hurrahs , and some fierce growls . 
The players rose from their seats . 
At the fifty-seventh second the door of the saloon opened ; and the pendulum had not beat the sixtieth second when Phileas Fogg appeared , followed by an excited crowd who had forced their way through the club doors , and in his calm voice , said , `` Here I am , gentlemen ! '' 
IN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT PHILEAS FOGG GAINED NOTHING BY HIS TOUR AROUND THE WORLD , UNLESS IT WERE HAPPINESS Yes ; Phileas Fogg in person . 
The reader will remember that at five minutes past eight in the evening -- about five and twenty hours after the arrival of the travellers in London -- Passepartout had been sent by his master to engage the services of the Reverend Samuel Wilson in a certain marriage ceremony , which was to take place the next day . 
Passepartout went on his errand enchanted . 
He soon reached the clergyman 's house , but found him not at home . 
Passepartout waited a good twenty minutes , and when he left the reverend gentleman , it was thirty-five minutes past eight . 
But in what a state he was ! 
With his hair in disorder , and without his hat , he ran along the street as never man was seen to run before , overturning passers-by , rushing over the sidewalk like a waterspout . 
In three minutes he was in Saville Row again , and staggered back into Mr. Fogg 's room . 
He could not speak . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` My master ! '' 
gasped Passepartout -- `` marriage -- impossible -- '' `` Impossible ? '' 
`` Impossible -- for to-morrow . '' 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` Because to-morrow -- is Sunday ! '' 
`` Monday , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` No -- to-day is Saturday . '' 
`` Saturday ? 
Impossible ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , yes , yes ! '' 
cried Passepartout . 
`` You have made a mistake of one day ! 
We arrived twenty-four hours ahead of time ; but there are only ten minutes left ! '' 
Passepartout had seized his master by the collar , and was dragging him along with irresistible force . 
Phileas Fogg , thus kidnapped , without having time to think , left his house , jumped into a cab , promised a hundred pounds to the cabman , and , having run over two dogs and overturned five carriages , reached the Reform Club . 
The clock indicated a quarter before nine when he appeared in the great saloon . 
Phileas Fogg had accomplished the journey round the world in eighty days ! 
Phileas Fogg had won his wager of twenty thousand pounds ! 
How was it that a man so exact and fastidious could have made this error of a day ? 
How came he to think that he had arrived in London on Saturday , the twenty-first day of December , when it was really Friday , the twentieth , the seventy-ninth day only from his departure ? 
The cause of the error is very simple . 
Phileas Fogg had , without suspecting it , gained one day on his journey , and this merely because he had travelled constantly eastward ; he would , on the contrary , have lost a day had he gone in the opposite direction , that is , westward . 
In journeying eastward he had gone towards the sun , and the days therefore diminished for him as many times four minutes as he crossed degrees in this direction . 
There are three hundred and sixty degrees on the circumference of the earth ; and these three hundred and sixty degrees , multiplied by four minutes , gives precisely twenty-four hours -- that is , the day unconsciously gained . 
In other words , while Phileas Fogg , going eastward , saw the sun pass the meridian eighty times , his friends in London only saw it pass the meridian seventy-nine times . 
This is why they awaited him at the Reform Club on Saturday , and not Sunday , as Mr. Fogg thought . 
And Passepartout 's famous family watch , which had always kept London time , would have betrayed this fact , if it had marked the days as well as the hours and the minutes ! 
Phileas Fogg , then , had won the twenty thousand pounds ; but , as he had spent nearly nineteen thousand on the way , the pecuniary gain was small . 
His object was , however , to be victorious , and not to win money . 
He divided the one thousand pounds that remained between Passepartout and the unfortunate Fix , against whom he cherished no grudge . 
He deducted , however , from Passepartout 's share the cost of the gas which had burned in his room for nineteen hundred and twenty hours , for the sake of regularity . 
That evening , Mr. Fogg , as tranquil and phlegmatic as ever , said to Aouda : `` Is our marriage still agreeable to you ? '' 
`` Mr. Fogg , '' replied she , `` it is for me to ask that question . 
You were ruined , but now you are rich again . '' 
`` Pardon me , madam ; my fortune belongs to you . 
