Then he cried , `` Well -- yes ! 
Your honour is right . 
To Shanghai ! '' 
So the Tankadere kept steadily on her northward track . 
The night was really terrible ; it would be a miracle if the craft did not founder . 
Twice it could have been all over with her if the crew had not been constantly on the watch . 
Aouda was exhausted , but did not utter a complaint . 
More than once Mr. Fogg rushed to protect her from the violence of the waves . 
Day reappeared . 
The tempest still raged with undiminished fury ; but the wind now returned to the south-east . 
It was a favourable change , and the Tankadere again bounded forward on this mountainous sea , though the waves crossed each other , and imparted shocks and counter-shocks which would have crushed a craft less solidly built . 
From time to time the coast was visible through the broken mist , but no vessel was in sight . 
The Tankadere was alone upon the sea . 
There were some signs of a calm at noon , and these became more distinct as the sun descended toward the horizon . 
The tempest had been as brief as terrific . 
The passengers , thoroughly exhausted , could now eat a little , and take some repose . 
The night was comparatively quiet . 
Some of the sails were again hoisted , and the speed of the boat was very good . 
The next morning at dawn they espied the coast , and John Bunsby was able to assert that they were not one hundred miles from Shanghai . 
A hundred miles , and only one day to traverse them ! 
That very evening Mr. Fogg was due at Shanghai , if he did not wish to miss the steamer to Yokohama . 
Had there been no storm , during which several hours were lost , they would be at this moment within thirty miles of their destination . 
The wind grew decidedly calmer , and happily the sea fell with it . 
All sails were now hoisted , and at noon the Tankadere was within forty-five miles of Shanghai . 
There remained yet six hours in which to accomplish that distance . 
All on board feared that it could not be done , and every one -- Phileas Fogg , no doubt , excepted -- felt his heart beat with impatience . 
The boat must keep up an average of nine miles an hour , and the wind was becoming calmer every moment ! 
It was a capricious breeze , coming from the coast , and after it passed the sea became smooth . 
Still , the Tankadere was so light , and her fine sails caught the fickle zephyrs so well , that , with the aid of the currents John Bunsby found himself at six o'clock not more than ten miles from the mouth of Shanghai River . 
Shanghai itself is situated at least twelve miles up the stream . 
At seven they were still three miles from Shanghai . 
The pilot swore an angry oath ; the reward of two hundred pounds was evidently on the point of escaping him . 
He looked at Mr. Fogg . 
Mr. Fogg was perfectly tranquil ; and yet his whole fortune was at this moment at stake . 
At this moment , also , a long black funnel , crowned with wreaths of smoke , appeared on the edge of the waters . 
It was the American steamer , leaving for Yokohama at the appointed time . 
`` Confound her ! '' 
cried John Bunsby , pushing back the rudder with a desperate jerk . 
`` Signal her ! '' 
said Phileas Fogg quietly . 
A small brass cannon stood on the forward deck of the Tankadere , for making signals in the fogs . 
It was loaded to the muzzle ; but just as the pilot was about to apply a red-hot coal to the touchhole , Mr. Fogg said , `` Hoist your flag ! '' 
The flag was run up at half-mast , and , this being the signal of distress , it was hoped that the American steamer , perceiving it , would change her course a little , so as to succour the pilot-boat . 
`` Fire ! '' 
said Mr. Fogg . 
And the booming of the little cannon resounded in the air . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT FINDS OUT THAT , EVEN AT THE ANTIPODES , IT IS CONVENIENT TO HAVE SOME MONEY IN ONE 'S POCKET The Carnatic , setting sail from Hong Kong at half-past six on the 7th of November , directed her course at full steam towards Japan . 
She carried a large cargo and a well-filled cabin of passengers . 
Two state-rooms in the rear were , however , unoccupied -- those which had been engaged by Phileas Fogg . 
The next day a passenger with a half-stupefied eye , staggering gait , and disordered hair , was seen to emerge from the second cabin , and to totter to a seat on deck . 
It was Passepartout ; and what had happened to him was as follows : Shortly after Fix left the opium den , two waiters had lifted the unconscious Passepartout , and had carried him to the bed reserved for the smokers . 
Three hours later , pursued even in his dreams by a fixed idea , the poor fellow awoke , and struggled against the stupefying influence of the narcotic . 
The thought of a duty unfulfilled shook off his torpor , and he hurried from the abode of drunkenness . 
Staggering and holding himself up by keeping against the walls , falling down and creeping up again , and irresistibly impelled by a kind of instinct , he kept crying out , `` The Carnatic ! 
the Carnatic ! '' 
The steamer lay puffing alongside the quay , on the point of starting . 
Passepartout had but few steps to go ; and , rushing upon the plank , he crossed it , and fell unconscious on the deck , just as the Carnatic was moving off . 
Several sailors , who were evidently accustomed to this sort of scene , carried the poor Frenchman down into the second cabin , and Passepartout did not wake until they were one hundred and fifty miles away from China . 
Thus he found himself the next morning on the deck of the Carnatic , and eagerly inhaling the exhilarating sea-breeze . 
The pure air sobered him . 
He began to collect his sense , which he found a difficult task ; but at last he recalled the events of the evening before , Fix 's revelation , and the opium-house . 
`` It is evident , '' said he to himself , `` that I have been abominably drunk ! 
What will Mr. Fogg say ? 
At least I have not missed the steamer , which is the most important thing . '' 
Then , as Fix occurred to him : `` As for that rascal , I hope we are well rid of him , and that he has not dared , as he proposed , to follow us on board the Carnatic . 
A detective on the track of Mr. Fogg , accused of robbing the Bank of England ! 
Pshaw ! 
Mr. Fogg is no more a robber than I am a murderer . '' 
Should he divulge Fix 's real errand to his master ? 
Would it do to tell the part the detective was playing . 
Would it not be better to wait until Mr. Fogg reached London again , and then impart to him that an agent of the metropolitan police had been following him round the world , and have a good laugh over it ? 
No doubt ; at least , it was worth considering . 
The first thing to do was to find Mr. Fogg , and apologise for his singular behaviour . 
Passepartout got up and proceeded , as well as he could with the rolling of the steamer , to the after-deck . 
He saw no one who resembled either his master or Aouda . 
`` Good ! '' 
muttered he ; `` Aouda has not got up yet , and Mr. Fogg has probably found some partners at whist . '' 
He descended to the saloon . 
Mr. Fogg was not there . 
Passepartout had only , however , to ask the purser the number of his master 's state-room . 
The purser replied that he did not know any passenger by the name of Fogg . 
`` I beg your pardon , '' said Passepartout persistently . 
`` He is a tall gentleman , quiet , and not very talkative , and has with him a young lady -- '' `` There is no young lady on board , '' interrupted the purser . 
`` Here is a list of the passengers ; you may see for yourself . '' 
Passepartout scanned the list , but his master 's name was not upon it . 
All at once an idea struck him . 
`` Ah ! 
am I on the Carnatic ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` On the way to Yokohama ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
Passepartout had for an instant feared that he was on the wrong boat ; but , though he was really on the Carnatic , his master was not there . 
He fell thunderstruck on a seat . 
He saw it all now . 
He remembered that the time of sailing had been changed , that he should have informed his master of that fact , and that he had not done so . 
It was his fault , then , that Mr. Fogg and Aouda had missed the steamer . 
Yes , but it was still more the fault of the traitor who , in order to separate him from his master , and detain the latter at Hong Kong , had inveigled him into getting drunk ! 
He now saw the detective 's trick ; and at this moment Mr. Fogg was certainly ruined , his bet was lost , and he himself perhaps arrested and imprisoned ! 
At this thought Passepartout tore his hair . 
Ah , if Fix ever came within his reach , what a settling of accounts there would be ! 
