But if Fix had been able to explain this purely physical effect , Passepartout would not have admitted , even if he had comprehended it . 
Moreover , if the detective had been on board at that moment , Passepartout would have joined issue with him on a quite different subject , and in an entirely different manner . 
Where was Fix at that moment ? 
He was actually on board the General Grant . 
On reaching Yokohama , the detective , leaving Mr. Fogg , whom he expected to meet again during the day , had repaired at once to the English consulate , where he at last found the warrant of arrest . 
It had followed him from Bombay , and had come by the Carnatic , on which steamer he himself was supposed to be . 
Fix 's disappointment may be imagined when he reflected that the warrant was now useless . 
Mr. Fogg had left English ground , and it was now necessary to procure his extradition ! 
`` Well , '' thought Fix , after a moment of anger , `` my warrant is not good here , but it will be in England . 
The rogue evidently intends to return to his own country , thinking he has thrown the police off his track . 
Good ! 
I will follow him across the Atlantic . 
As for the money , heaven grant there may be some left ! 
But the fellow has already spent in travelling , rewards , trials , bail , elephants , and all sorts of charges , more than five thousand pounds . 
Yet , after all , the Bank is rich ! '' 
His course decided on , he went on board the General Grant , and was there when Mr. Fogg and Aouda arrived . 
To his utter amazement , he recognised Passepartout , despite his theatrical disguise . 
He quickly concealed himself in his cabin , to avoid an awkward explanation , and hoped -- thanks to the number of passengers -- to remain unperceived by Mr. Fogg 's servant . 
On that very day , however , he met Passepartout face to face on the forward deck . 
The latter , without a word , made a rush for him , grasped him by the throat , and , much to the amusement of a group of Americans , who immediately began to bet on him , administered to the detective a perfect volley of blows , which proved the great superiority of French over English pugilistic skill . 
When Passepartout had finished , he found himself relieved and comforted . 
Fix got up in a somewhat rumpled condition , and , looking at his adversary , coldly said , `` Have you done ? '' 
`` For this time -- yes . '' 
`` Then let me have a word with you . '' 
`` But I -- '' `` In your master 's interests . '' 
Passepartout seemed to be vanquished by Fix 's coolness , for he quietly followed him , and they sat down aside from the rest of the passengers . 
`` You have given me a thrashing , '' said Fix . 
`` Good , I expected it . 
Now , listen to me . 
Up to this time I have been Mr. Fogg 's adversary . 
I am now in his game . '' 
`` Aha ! '' 
cried Passepartout ; `` you are convinced he is an honest man ? '' 
`` No , '' replied Fix coldly , `` I think him a rascal . 
Sh ! 
do n't budge , and let me speak . 
As long as Mr. Fogg was on English ground , it was for my interest to detain him there until my warrant of arrest arrived . 
I did everything I could to keep him back . 
I sent the Bombay priests after him , I got you intoxicated at Hong Kong , I separated you from him , and I made him miss the Yokohama steamer . '' 
Passepartout listened , with closed fists . 
`` Now , '' resumed Fix , `` Mr. Fogg seems to be going back to England . 
Well , I will follow him there . 
But hereafter I will do as much to keep obstacles out of his way as I have done up to this time to put them in his path . 
I 've changed my game , you see , and simply because it was for my interest to change it . 
Your interest is the same as mine ; for it is only in England that you will ascertain whether you are in the service of a criminal or an honest man . '' 
Passepartout listened very attentively to Fix , and was convinced that he spoke with entire good faith . 
`` Are we friends ? '' 
asked the detective . 
`` Friends ? 
-- no , '' replied Passepartout ; `` but allies , perhaps . 
At the least sign of treason , however , I 'll twist your neck for you . '' 
`` Agreed , '' said the detective quietly . 
Eleven days later , on the 3rd of December , the General Grant entered the bay of the Golden Gate , and reached San Francisco . 
Mr. Fogg had neither gained nor lost a single day . 
IN WHICH A SLIGHT GLIMPSE IS HAD OF SAN FRANCISCO It was seven in the morning when Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout set foot upon the American continent , if this name can be given to the floating quay upon which they disembarked . 
These quays , rising and falling with the tide , thus facilitate the loading and unloading of vessels . 
Alongside them were clippers of all sizes , steamers of all nationalities , and the steamboats , with several decks rising one above the other , which ply on the Sacramento and its tributaries . 
There were also heaped up the products of a commerce which extends to Mexico , Chili , Peru , Brazil , Europe , Asia , and all the Pacific islands . 
Passepartout , in his joy on reaching at last the American continent , thought he would manifest it by executing a perilous vault in fine style ; but , tumbling upon some worm-eaten planks , he fell through them . 
Put out of countenance by the manner in which he thus `` set foot '' upon the New World , he uttered a loud cry , which so frightened the innumerable cormorants and pelicans that are always perched upon these movable quays , that they flew noisily away . 
Mr. Fogg , on reaching shore , proceeded to find out at what hour the first train left for New York , and learned that this was at six o'clock p.m. ; he had , therefore , an entire day to spend in the Californian capital . 
Taking a carriage at a charge of three dollars , he and Aouda entered it , while Passepartout mounted the box beside the driver , and they set out for the International Hotel . 
From his exalted position Passepartout observed with much curiosity the wide streets , the low , evenly ranged houses , the Anglo-Saxon Gothic churches , the great docks , the palatial wooden and brick warehouses , the numerous conveyances , omnibuses , horse-cars , and upon the side-walks , not only Americans and Europeans , but Chinese and Indians . 
Passepartout was surprised at all he saw . 
San Francisco was no longer the legendary city of 1849 -- a city of banditti , assassins , and incendiaries , who had flocked hither in crowds in pursuit of plunder ; a paradise of outlaws , where they gambled with gold-dust , a revolver in one hand and a bowie-knife in the other : it was now a great commercial emporium . 
The lofty tower of its City Hall overlooked the whole panorama of the streets and avenues , which cut each other at right-angles , and in the midst of which appeared pleasant , verdant squares , while beyond appeared the Chinese quarter , seemingly imported from the Celestial Empire in a toy-box . 
Sombreros and red shirts and plumed Indians were rarely to be seen ; but there were silk hats and black coats everywhere worn by a multitude of nervously active , gentlemanly-looking men . 
Some of the streets -- especially Montgomery Street , which is to San Francisco what Regent Street is to London , the Boulevard des Italiens to Paris , and Broadway to New York -- were lined with splendid and spacious stores , which exposed in their windows the products of the entire world . 
When Passepartout reached the International Hotel , it did not seem to him as if he had left England at all . 
The ground floor of the hotel was occupied by a large bar , a sort of restaurant freely open to all passers-by , who might partake of dried beef , oyster soup , biscuits , and cheese , without taking out their purses . 
Payment was made only for the ale , porter , or sherry which was drunk . 
This seemed `` very American '' to Passepartout . 
The hotel refreshment-rooms were comfortable , and Mr. Fogg and Aouda , installing themselves at a table , were abundantly served on diminutive plates by negroes of darkest hue . 
After breakfast , Mr. Fogg , accompanied by Aouda , started for the English consulate to have his passport visaed . 
As he was going out , he met Passepartout , who asked him if it would not be well , before taking the train , to purchase some dozens of Enfield rifles and Colt 's revolvers . 
He had been listening to stories of attacks upon the trains by the Sioux and Pawnees . 
Mr. Fogg thought it a useless precaution , but told him to do as he thought best , and went on to the consulate . 
He had not proceeded two hundred steps , however , when , `` by the greatest chance in the world , '' he met Fix . 
The detective seemed wholly taken by surprise . 
What ! 
Had Mr. Fogg and himself crossed the Pacific together , and not met on the steamer ! 
At least Fix felt honoured to behold once more the gentleman to whom he owed so much , and , as his business recalled him to Europe , he should be delighted to continue the journey in such pleasant company . 
Mr. Fogg replied that the honour would be his ; and the detective -- who was determined not to lose sight of him -- begged permission to accompany them in their walk about San Francisco -- a request which Mr. Fogg readily granted . 
They soon found themselves in Montgomery Street , where a great crowd was collected ; the side-walks , street , horsecar rails , the shop-doors , the windows of the houses , and even the roofs , were full of people . 
Men were going about carrying large posters , and flags and streamers were floating in the wind ; while loud cries were heard on every hand . 
`` Hurrah for Camerfield ! '' 
`` Hurrah for Mandiboy ! '' 
It was a political meeting ; at least so Fix conjectured , who said to Mr. Fogg , `` Perhaps we had better not mingle with the crowd . 
There may be danger in it . '' 
`` Yes , '' returned Mr. Fogg ; `` and blows , even if they are political are still blows . '' 
Fix smiled at this remark ; and , in order to be able to see without being jostled about , the party took up a position on the top of a flight of steps situated at the upper end of Montgomery Street . 
Opposite them , on the other side of the street , between a coal wharf and a petroleum warehouse , a large platform had been erected in the open air , towards which the current of the crowd seemed to be directed . 
For what purpose was this meeting ? 
What was the occasion of this excited assemblage ? 
Phileas Fogg could not imagine . 
Was it to nominate some high official -- a governor or member of Congress ? 
It was not improbable , so agitated was the multitude before them . 
Just at this moment there was an unusual stir in the human mass . 
All the hands were raised in the air . 
Some , tightly closed , seemed to disappear suddenly in the midst of the cries -- an energetic way , no doubt , of casting a vote . 
