`` When and where you will , '' replied the American , `` and with whatever weapon you choose . '' 
Aouda in vain attempted to retain Mr. Fogg ; as vainly did the detective endeavour to make the quarrel his . 
Passepartout wished to throw the colonel out of the window , but a sign from his master checked him . 
Phileas Fogg left the car , and the American followed him upon the platform . 
`` Sir , '' said Mr. Fogg to his adversary , `` I am in a great hurry to get back to Europe , and any delay whatever will be greatly to my disadvantage . '' 
`` Well , what 's that to me ? '' 
replied Colonel Proctor . 
`` Sir , '' said Mr. Fogg , very politely , `` after our meeting at San Francisco , I determined to return to America and find you as soon as I had completed the business which called me to England . '' 
`` Really ! '' 
`` Will you appoint a meeting for six months hence ? '' 
`` Why not ten years hence ? '' 
`` I say six months , '' returned Phileas Fogg ; `` and I shall be at the place of meeting promptly . '' 
`` All this is an evasion , '' cried Stamp Proctor . 
`` Now or never ! '' 
`` Very good . 
You are going to New York ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` To Chicago ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` To Omaha ? '' 
`` What difference is it to you ? 
Do you know Plum Creek ? '' 
`` No , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` It 's the next station . 
The train will be there in an hour , and will stop there ten minutes . 
In ten minutes several revolver-shots could be exchanged . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Mr. Fogg . 
`` I will stop at Plum Creek . '' 
`` And I guess you 'll stay there too , '' added the American insolently . 
`` Who knows ? '' 
replied Mr. Fogg , returning to the car as coolly as usual . 
He began to reassure Aouda , telling her that blusterers were never to be feared , and begged Fix to be his second at the approaching duel , a request which the detective could not refuse . 
Mr. Fogg resumed the interrupted game with perfect calmness . 
At eleven o'clock the locomotive 's whistle announced that they were approaching Plum Creek station . 
Mr. Fogg rose , and , followed by Fix , went out upon the platform . 
Passepartout accompanied him , carrying a pair of revolvers . 
Aouda remained in the car , as pale as death . 
The door of the next car opened , and Colonel Proctor appeared on the platform , attended by a Yankee of his own stamp as his second . 
But just as the combatants were about to step from the train , the conductor hurried up , and shouted , `` You ca n't get off , gentlemen ! '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked the colonel . 
`` We are twenty minutes late , and we shall not stop . '' 
`` But I am going to fight a duel with this gentleman . '' 
`` I am sorry , '' said the conductor ; `` but we shall be off at once . 
There 's the bell ringing now . '' 
The train started . 
`` I 'm really very sorry , gentlemen , '' said the conductor . 
`` Under any other circumstances I should have been happy to oblige you . 
But , after all , as you have not had time to fight here , why not fight as we go along ? 
`` That would n't be convenient , perhaps , for this gentleman , '' said the colonel , in a jeering tone . 
`` It would be perfectly so , '' replied Phileas Fogg . 
`` Well , we are really in America , '' thought Passepartout , `` and the conductor is a gentleman of the first order ! '' 
So muttering , he followed his master . 
The two combatants , their seconds , and the conductor passed through the cars to the rear of the train . 
The last car was only occupied by a dozen passengers , whom the conductor politely asked if they would not be so kind as to leave it vacant for a few moments , as two gentlemen had an affair of honour to settle . 
The passengers granted the request with alacrity , and straightway disappeared on the platform . 
The car , which was some fifty feet long , was very convenient for their purpose . 
The adversaries might march on each other in the aisle , and fire at their ease . 
Never was duel more easily arranged . 
Mr. Fogg and Colonel Proctor , each provided with two six-barrelled revolvers , entered the car . 
The seconds , remaining outside , shut them in . 
They were to begin firing at the first whistle of the locomotive . 
After an interval of two minutes , what remained of the two gentlemen would be taken from the car . 
Nothing could be more simple . 
Indeed , it was all so simple that Fix and Passepartout felt their hearts beating as if they would crack . 
They were listening for the whistle agreed upon , when suddenly savage cries resounded in the air , accompanied by reports which certainly did not issue from the car where the duellists were . 
The reports continued in front and the whole length of the train . 
Cries of terror proceeded from the interior of the cars . 
Colonel Proctor and Mr. Fogg , revolvers in hand , hastily quitted their prison , and rushed forward where the noise was most clamorous . 
They then perceived that the train was attacked by a band of Sioux . 
This was not the first attempt of these daring Indians , for more than once they had waylaid trains on the road . 
A hundred of them had , according to their habit , jumped upon the steps without stopping the train , with the ease of a clown mounting a horse at full gallop . 
The Sioux were armed with guns , from which came the reports , to which the passengers , who were almost all armed , responded by revolver-shots . 
The Indians had first mounted the engine , and half stunned the engineer and stoker with blows from their muskets . 
A Sioux chief , wishing to stop the train , but not knowing how to work the regulator , had opened wide instead of closing the steam-valve , and the locomotive was plunging forward with terrific velocity . 
The Sioux had at the same time invaded the cars , skipping like enraged monkeys over the roofs , thrusting open the doors , and fighting hand to hand with the passengers . 
Penetrating the baggage-car , they pillaged it , throwing the trunks out of the train . 
The cries and shots were constant . 
The travellers defended themselves bravely ; some of the cars were barricaded , and sustained a siege , like moving forts , carried along at a speed of a hundred miles an hour . 
Aouda behaved courageously from the first . 
She defended herself like a true heroine with a revolver , which she shot through the broken windows whenever a savage made his appearance . 
Twenty Sioux had fallen mortally wounded to the ground , and the wheels crushed those who fell upon the rails as if they had been worms . 
Several passengers , shot or stunned , lay on the seats . 
It was necessary to put an end to the struggle , which had lasted for ten minutes , and which would result in the triumph of the Sioux if the train was not stopped . 
Fort Kearney station , where there was a garrison , was only two miles distant ; but , that once passed , the Sioux would be masters of the train between Fort Kearney and the station beyond . 
The conductor was fighting beside Mr. Fogg , when he was shot and fell . 
At the same moment he cried , `` Unless the train is stopped in five minutes , we are lost ! '' 
`` It shall be stopped , '' said Phileas Fogg , preparing to rush from the car . 
`` Stay , monsieur , '' cried Passepartout ; `` I will go . '' 
Mr. Fogg had not time to stop the brave fellow , who , opening a door unperceived by the Indians , succeeded in slipping under the car ; and while the struggle continued and the balls whizzed across each other over his head , he made use of his old acrobatic experience , and with amazing agility worked his way under the cars , holding on to the chains , aiding himself by the brakes and edges of the sashes , creeping from one car to another with marvellous skill , and thus gaining the forward end of the train . 
There , suspended by one hand between the baggage-car and the tender , with the other he loosened the safety chains ; but , owing to the traction , he would never have succeeded in unscrewing the yoking-bar , had not a violent concussion jolted this bar out . 
The train , now detached from the engine , remained a little behind , whilst the locomotive rushed forward with increased speed . 
Carried on by the force already acquired , the train still moved for several minutes ; but the brakes were worked and at last they stopped , less than a hundred feet from Kearney station . 
The soldiers of the fort , attracted by the shots , hurried up ; the Sioux had not expected them , and decamped in a body before the train entirely stopped . 
But when the passengers counted each other on the station platform several were found missing ; among others the courageous Frenchman , whose devotion had just saved them . 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SIMPLY DOES HIS DUTY Three passengers including Passepartout had disappeared . 
Had they been killed in the struggle ? 
Were they taken prisoners by the Sioux ? 
It was impossible to tell . 
There were many wounded , but none mortally . 
