After his first depression , Passepartout became calmer , and began to study his situation . 
It was certainly not an enviable one . 
He found himself on the way to Japan , and what should he do when he got there ? 
His pocket was empty ; he had not a solitary shilling , not so much as a penny . 
His passage had fortunately been paid for in advance ; and he had five or six days in which to decide upon his future course . 
He fell to at meals with an appetite , and ate for Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and himself . 
He helped himself as generously as if Japan were a desert , where nothing to eat was to be looked for . 
At dawn on the 13th the Carnatic entered the port of Yokohama . 
This is an important port of call in the Pacific , where all the mail-steamers , and those carrying travellers between North America , China , Japan , and the Oriental islands put in . 
It is situated in the bay of Yeddo , and at but a short distance from that second capital of the Japanese Empire , and the residence of the Tycoon , the civil Emperor , before the Mikado , the spiritual Emperor , absorbed his office in his own . 
The Carnatic anchored at the quay near the custom-house , in the midst of a crowd of ships bearing the flags of all nations . 
Passepartout went timidly ashore on this so curious territory of the Sons of the Sun . 
He had nothing better to do than , taking chance for his guide , to wander aimlessly through the streets of Yokohama . 
He found himself at first in a thoroughly European quarter , the houses having low fronts , and being adorned with verandas , beneath which he caught glimpses of neat peristyles . 
This quarter occupied , with its streets , squares , docks , and warehouses , all the space between the `` promontory of the Treaty '' and the river . 
Here , as at Hong Kong and Calcutta , were mixed crowds of all races , Americans and English , Chinamen and Dutchmen , mostly merchants ready to buy or sell anything . 
The Frenchman felt himself as much alone among them as if he had dropped down in the midst of Hottentots . 
He had , at least , one resource to call on the French and English consuls at Yokohama for assistance . 
But he shrank from telling the story of his adventures , intimately connected as it was with that of his master ; and , before doing so , he determined to exhaust all other means of aid . 
As chance did not favour him in the European quarter , he penetrated that inhabited by the native Japanese , determined , if necessary , to push on to Yeddo . 
The Japanese quarter of Yokohama is called Benten , after the goddess of the sea , who is worshipped on the islands round about . 
There Passepartout beheld beautiful fir and cedar groves , sacred gates of a singular architecture , bridges half hid in the midst of bamboos and reeds , temples shaded by immense cedar-trees , holy retreats where were sheltered Buddhist priests and sectaries of Confucius , and interminable streets , where a perfect harvest of rose-tinted and red-cheeked children , who looked as if they had been cut out of Japanese screens , and who were playing in the midst of short-legged poodles and yellowish cats , might have been gathered . 
The streets were crowded with people . 
Priests were passing in processions , beating their dreary tambourines ; police and custom-house officers with pointed hats encrusted with lac and carrying two sabres hung to their waists ; soldiers , clad in blue cotton with white stripes , and bearing guns ; the Mikado 's guards , enveloped in silken doubles , hauberks and coats of mail ; and numbers of military folk of all ranks -- for the military profession is as much respected in Japan as it is despised in China -- went hither and thither in groups and pairs . 
Passepartout saw , too , begging friars , long-robed pilgrims , and simple civilians , with their warped and jet-black hair , big heads , long busts , slender legs , short stature , and complexions varying from copper-colour to a dead white , but never yellow , like the Chinese , from whom the Japanese widely differ . 
He did not fail to observe the curious equipages -- carriages and palanquins , barrows supplied with sails , and litters made of bamboo ; nor the women -- whom he thought not especially handsome -- who took little steps with their little feet , whereon they wore canvas shoes , straw sandals , and clogs of worked wood , and who displayed tight-looking eyes , flat chests , teeth fashionably blackened , and gowns crossed with silken scarfs , tied in an enormous knot behind an ornament which the modern Parisian ladies seem to have borrowed from the dames of Japan . 
Passepartout wandered for several hours in the midst of this motley crowd , looking in at the windows of the rich and curious shops , the jewellery establishments glittering with quaint Japanese ornaments , the restaurants decked with streamers and banners , the tea-houses , where the odorous beverage was being drunk with saki , a liquor concocted from the fermentation of rice , and the comfortable smoking-houses , where they were puffing , not opium , which is almost unknown in Japan , but a very fine , stringy tobacco . 
He went on till he found himself in the fields , in the midst of vast rice plantations . 
There he saw dazzling camellias expanding themselves , with flowers which were giving forth their last colours and perfumes , not on bushes , but on trees , and within bamboo enclosures , cherry , plum , and apple trees , which the Japanese cultivate rather for their blossoms than their fruit , and which queerly-fashioned , grinning scarecrows protected from the sparrows , pigeons , ravens , and other voracious birds . 
On the branches of the cedars were perched large eagles ; amid the foliage of the weeping willows were herons , solemnly standing on one leg ; and on every hand were crows , ducks , hawks , wild birds , and a multitude of cranes , which the Japanese consider sacred , and which to their minds symbolise long life and prosperity . 
As he was strolling along , Passepartout espied some violets among the shrubs . 
`` Good ! '' 
said he ; `` I 'll have some supper . '' 
But , on smelling them , he found that they were odourless . 
`` No chance there , '' thought he . 
The worthy fellow had certainly taken good care to eat as hearty a breakfast as possible before leaving the Carnatic ; but , as he had been walking about all day , the demands of hunger were becoming importunate . 
He observed that the butchers stalls contained neither mutton , goat , nor pork ; and , knowing also that it is a sacrilege to kill cattle , which are preserved solely for farming , he made up his mind that meat was far from plentiful in Yokohama -- nor was he mistaken ; and , in default of butcher 's meat , he could have wished for a quarter of wild boar or deer , a partridge , or some quails , some game or fish , which , with rice , the Japanese eat almost exclusively . 
But he found it necessary to keep up a stout heart , and to postpone the meal he craved till the following morning . 
Night came , and Passepartout re-entered the native quarter , where he wandered through the streets , lit by vari-coloured lanterns , looking on at the dancers , who were executing skilful steps and boundings , and the astrologers who stood in the open air with their telescopes . 
Then he came to the harbour , which was lit up by the resin torches of the fishermen , who were fishing from their boats . 
The streets at last became quiet , and the patrol , the officers of which , in their splendid costumes , and surrounded by their suites , Passepartout thought seemed like ambassadors , succeeded the bustling crowd . 
Each time a company passed , Passepartout chuckled , and said to himself : `` Good ! 
another Japanese embassy departing for Europe ! '' 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT 'S NOSE BECOMES OUTRAGEOUSLY LONG The next morning poor , jaded , famished Passepartout said to himself that he must get something to eat at all hazards , and the sooner he did so the better . 
He might , indeed , sell his watch ; but he would have starved first . 
Now or never he must use the strong , if not melodious voice which nature had bestowed upon him . 
He knew several French and English songs , and resolved to try them upon the Japanese , who must be lovers of music , since they were for ever pounding on their cymbals , tam-tams , and tambourines , and could not but appreciate European talent . 
It was , perhaps , rather early in the morning to get up a concert , and the audience prematurely aroused from their slumbers , might not possibly pay their entertainer with coin bearing the Mikado 's features . 
Passepartout therefore decided to wait several hours ; and , as he was sauntering along , it occurred to him that he would seem rather too well dressed for a wandering artist . 
The idea struck him to change his garments for clothes more in harmony with his project ; by which he might also get a little money to satisfy the immediate cravings of hunger . 
The resolution taken , it remained to carry it out . 
It was only after a long search that Passepartout discovered a native dealer in old clothes , to whom he applied for an exchange . 
The man liked the European costume , and ere long Passepartout issued from his shop accoutred in an old Japanese coat , and a sort of one-sided turban , faded with long use . 
A few small pieces of silver , moreover , jingled in his pocket . 
Good ! '' 
thought he . 
`` I will imagine I am at the Carnival ! '' 
His first care , after being thus `` Japanesed , '' was to enter a tea-house of modest appearance , and , upon half a bird and a little rice , to breakfast like a man for whom dinner was as yet a problem to be solved . 
`` Now , '' thought he , when he had eaten heartily , `` I must n't lose my head . 
I ca n't sell this costume again for one still more Japanese . 
I must consider how to leave this country of the Sun , of which I shall not retain the most delightful of memories , as quickly as possible . '' 
It occurred to him to visit the steamers which were about to leave for America . 
He would offer himself as a cook or servant , in payment of his passage and meals . 
Once at San Francisco , he would find some means of going on . 
The difficulty was , how to traverse the four thousand seven hundred miles of the Pacific which lay between Japan and the New World . 
Passepartout was not the man to let an idea go begging , and directed his steps towards the docks . 
But , as he approached them , his project , which at first had seemed so simple , began to grow more and more formidable to his mind . 
What need would they have of a cook or servant on an American steamer , and what confidence would they put in him , dressed as he was ? 
What references could he give ? 
As he was reflecting in this wise , his eyes fell upon an immense placard which a sort of clown was carrying through the streets . 
This placard , which was in English , read as follows : ACROBATIC JAPANESE TROUPE , HONOURABLE WILLIAM BATULCAR , PROPRIETOR , LAST REPRESENTATIONS , PRIOR TO THEIR DEPARTURE TO THE UNITED STATES , OF THE LONG NOSES ! 
LONG NOSES ! 
UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GOD TINGOU ! 
GREAT ATTRACTION ! 
`` The United States ! '' 
said Passepartout ; `` that 's just what I want ! '' 
He followed the clown , and soon found himself once more in the Japanese quarter . 
A quarter of an hour later he stopped before a large cabin , adorned with several clusters of streamers , the exterior walls of which were designed to represent , in violent colours and without perspective , a company of jugglers . 
This was the Honourable William Batulcar 's establishment . 
That gentleman was a sort of Barnum , the director of a troupe of mountebanks , jugglers , clowns , acrobats , equilibrists , and gymnasts , who , according to the placard , was giving his last performances before leaving the Empire of the Sun for the States of the Union . 
Passepartout entered and asked for Mr. Batulcar , who straightway appeared in person . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
said he to Passepartout , whom he at first took for a native . 
`` Would you like a servant , sir ? '' 
asked Passepartout . 
`` A servant ! '' 
cried Mr. Batulcar , caressing the thick grey beard which hung from his chin . 
`` I already have two who are obedient and faithful , have never left me , and serve me for their nourishment and here they are , '' added he , holding out his two robust arms , furrowed with veins as large as the strings of a bass-viol . 
`` So I can be of no use to you ? '' 
`` None . '' 
`` The devil ! 
I should so like to cross the Pacific with you ! '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the Honourable Mr. Batulcar . 
`` You are no more a Japanese than I am a monkey ! 
Who are you dressed up in that way ? '' 
`` A man dresses as he can . '' 
`` That 's true . 
You are a Frenchman , are n't you ? '' 
`` Yes ; a Parisian of Paris . '' 
