Happily the temple walls were built of brick and wood , which could be penetrated with little difficulty ; after one brick had been taken out , the rest would yield easily . 
They set noiselessly to work , and the Parsee on one side and Passepartout on the other began to loosen the bricks so as to make an aperture two feet wide . 
They were getting on rapidly , when suddenly a cry was heard in the interior of the temple , followed almost instantly by other cries replying from the outside . 
Passepartout and the guide stopped . 
Had they been heard ? 
Was the alarm being given ? 
Common prudence urged them to retire , and they did so , followed by Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis . 
They again hid themselves in the wood , and waited till the disturbance , whatever it might be , ceased , holding themselves ready to resume their attempt without delay . 
But , awkwardly enough , the guards now appeared at the rear of the temple , and there installed themselves , in readiness to prevent a surprise . 
It would be difficult to describe the disappointment of the party , thus interrupted in their work . 
They could not now reach the victim ; how , then , could they save her ? 
Sir Francis shook his fists , Passepartout was beside himself , and the guide gnashed his teeth with rage . 
The tranquil Fogg waited , without betraying any emotion . 
`` We have nothing to do but to go away , '' whispered Sir Francis . 
`` Nothing but to go away , '' echoed the guide . 
`` Stop , '' said Fogg . 
`` I am only due at Allahabad tomorrow before noon . '' 
`` But what can you hope to do ? '' 
asked Sir Francis . 
`` In a few hours it will be daylight , and -- '' `` The chance which now seems lost may present itself at the last moment . '' 
Sir Francis would have liked to read Phileas Fogg 's eyes . 
What was this cool Englishman thinking of ? 
Was he planning to make a rush for the young woman at the very moment of the sacrifice , and boldly snatch her from her executioners ? 
This would be utter folly , and it was hard to admit that Fogg was such a fool . 
Sir Francis consented , however , to remain to the end of this terrible drama . 
The guide led them to the rear of the glade , where they were able to observe the sleeping groups . 
Meanwhile Passepartout , who had perched himself on the lower branches of a tree , was resolving an idea which had at first struck him like a flash , and which was now firmly lodged in his brain . 
He had commenced by saying to himself , `` What folly ! '' 
and then he repeated , `` Why not , after all ? 
It 's a chance perhaps the only one ; and with such sots ! '' 
Thinking thus , he slipped , with the suppleness of a serpent , to the lowest branches , the ends of which bent almost to the ground . 
The hours passed , and the lighter shades now announced the approach of day , though it was not yet light . 
This was the moment . 
The slumbering multitude became animated , the tambourines sounded , songs and cries arose ; the hour of the sacrifice had come . 
The doors of the pagoda swung open , and a bright light escaped from its interior , in the midst of which Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis espied the victim . 
She seemed , having shaken off the stupor of intoxication , to be striving to escape from her executioner . 
Sir Francis 's heart throbbed ; and , convulsively seizing Mr. Fogg 's hand , found in it an open knife . 
Just at this moment the crowd began to move . 
The young woman had again fallen into a stupor caused by the fumes of hemp , and passed among the fakirs , who escorted her with their wild , religious cries . 
Phileas Fogg and his companions , mingling in the rear ranks of the crowd , followed ; and in two minutes they reached the banks of the stream , and stopped fifty paces from the pyre , upon which still lay the rajah 's corpse . 
In the semi-obscurity they saw the victim , quite senseless , stretched out beside her husband 's body . 
Then a torch was brought , and the wood , heavily soaked with oil , instantly took fire . 
At this moment Sir Francis and the guide seized Phileas Fogg , who , in an instant of mad generosity , was about to rush upon the pyre . 
But he had quickly pushed them aside , when the whole scene suddenly changed . 
A cry of terror arose . 
The whole multitude prostrated themselves , terror-stricken , on the ground . 
The old rajah was not dead , then , since he rose of a sudden , like a spectre , took up his wife in his arms , and descended from the pyre in the midst of the clouds of smoke , which only heightened his ghostly appearance . 
Fakirs and soldiers and priests , seized with instant terror , lay there , with their faces on the ground , not daring to lift their eyes and behold such a prodigy . 
The inanimate victim was borne along by the vigorous arms which supported her , and which she did not seem in the least to burden . 
Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis stood erect , the Parsee bowed his head , and Passepartout was , no doubt , scarcely less stupefied . 
The resuscitated rajah approached Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg , and , in an abrupt tone , said , `` Let us be off ! '' 
It was Passepartout himself , who had slipped upon the pyre in the midst of the smoke and , profiting by the still overhanging darkness , had delivered the young woman from death ! 
It was Passepartout who , playing his part with a happy audacity , had passed through the crowd amid the general terror . 
A moment after all four of the party had disappeared in the woods , and the elephant was bearing them away at a rapid pace . 
But the cries and noise , and a ball which whizzed through Phileas Fogg 's hat , apprised them that the trick had been discovered . 
The old rajah 's body , indeed , now appeared upon the burning pyre ; and the priests , recovered from their terror , perceived that an abduction had taken place . 
They hastened into the forest , followed by the soldiers , who fired a volley after the fugitives ; but the latter rapidly increased the distance between them , and ere long found themselves beyond the reach of the bullets and arrows . 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DESCENDS THE WHOLE LENGTH OF THE BEAUTIFUL VALLEY OF THE GANGES WITHOUT EVER THINKING OF SEEING IT The rash exploit had been accomplished ; and for an hour Passepartout laughed gaily at his success . 
Sir Francis pressed the worthy fellow 's hand , and his master said , `` Well done ! '' 
which , from him , was high commendation ; to which Passepartout replied that all the credit of the affair belonged to Mr. Fogg . 
As for him , he had only been struck with a `` queer '' idea ; and he laughed to think that for a few moments he , Passepartout , the ex-gymnast , ex-sergeant fireman , had been the spouse of a charming woman , a venerable , embalmed rajah ! 
As for the young Indian woman , she had been unconscious throughout of what was passing , and now , wrapped up in a travelling-blanket , was reposing in one of the howdahs . 
The elephant , thanks to the skilful guidance of the Parsee , was advancing rapidly through the still darksome forest , and , an hour after leaving the pagoda , had crossed a vast plain . 
They made a halt at seven o'clock , the young woman being still in a state of complete prostration . 
The guide made her drink a little brandy and water , but the drowsiness which stupefied her could not yet be shaken off . 
Sir Francis , who was familiar with the effects of the intoxication produced by the fumes of hemp , reassured his companions on her account . 
But he was more disturbed at the prospect of her future fate . 
He told Phileas Fogg that , should Aouda remain in India , she would inevitably fall again into the hands of her executioners . 
These fanatics were scattered throughout the county , and would , despite the English police , recover their victim at Madras , Bombay , or Calcutta . 
She would only be safe by quitting India for ever . 
Phileas Fogg replied that he would reflect upon the matter . 
The station at Allahabad was reached about ten o'clock , and , the interrupted line of railway being resumed , would enable them to reach Calcutta in less than twenty-four hours . 
Phileas Fogg would thus be able to arrive in time to take the steamer which left Calcutta the next day , October 25th , at noon , for Hong Kong . 
The young woman was placed in one of the waiting-rooms of the station , whilst Passepartout was charged with purchasing for her various articles of toilet , a dress , shawl , and some furs ; for which his master gave him unlimited credit . 
Passepartout started off forthwith , and found himself in the streets of Allahabad , that is , the City of God , one of the most venerated in India , being built at the junction of the two sacred rivers , Ganges and Jumna , the waters of which attract pilgrims from every part of the peninsula . 
The Ganges , according to the legends of the Ramayana , rises in heaven , whence , owing to Brahma 's agency , it descends to the earth . 
Passepartout made it a point , as he made his purchases , to take a good look at the city . 
It was formerly defended by a noble fort , which has since become a state prison ; its commerce has dwindled away , and Passepartout in vain looked about him for such a bazaar as he used to frequent in Regent Street . 
At last he came upon an elderly , crusty Jew , who sold second-hand articles , and from whom he purchased a dress of Scotch stuff , a large mantle , and a fine otter-skin pelisse , for which he did not hesitate to pay seventy-five pounds . 
He then returned triumphantly to the station . 
The influence to which the priests of Pillaji had subjected Aouda began gradually to yield , and she became more herself , so that her fine eyes resumed all their soft Indian expression . 
When the poet-king , Ucaf Uddaul , celebrates the charms of the queen of Ahmehnagara , he speaks thus : `` Her shining tresses , divided in two parts , encircle the harmonious contour of her white and delicate cheeks , brilliant in their glow and freshness . 
Her ebony brows have the form and charm of the bow of Kama , the god of love , and beneath her long silken lashes the purest reflections and a celestial light swim , as in the sacred lakes of Himalaya , in the black pupils of her great clear eyes . 
Her teeth , fine , equal , and white , glitter between her smiling lips like dewdrops in a passion-flower 's half-enveloped breast . 
Her delicately formed ears , her vermilion hands , her little feet , curved and tender as the lotus-bud , glitter with the brilliancy of the loveliest pearls of Ceylon , the most dazzling diamonds of Golconda . 
Her narrow and supple waist , which a hand may clasp around , sets forth the outline of her rounded figure and the beauty of her bosom , where youth in its flower displays the wealth of its treasures ; and beneath the silken folds of her tunic she seems to have been modelled in pure silver by the godlike hand of Vicvarcarma , the immortal sculptor . '' 
It is enough to say , without applying this poetical rhapsody to Aouda , that she was a charming woman , in all the European acceptation of the phrase . 
She spoke English with great purity , and the guide had not exaggerated in saying that the young Parsee had been transformed by her bringing up . 
The train was about to start from Allahabad , and Mr. Fogg proceeded to pay the guide the price agreed upon for his service , and not a farthing more ; which astonished Passepartout , who remembered all that his master owed to the guide 's devotion . 
He had , indeed , risked his life in the adventure at Pillaji , and , if he should be caught afterwards by the Indians , he would with difficulty escape their vengeance . 
Kiouni , also , must be disposed of . 
What should be done with the elephant , which had been so dearly purchased ? 
Phileas Fogg had already determined this question . 
`` Parsee , '' said he to the guide , `` you have been serviceable and devoted . 
I have paid for your service , but not for your devotion . 
Would you like to have this elephant ? 
He is yours . '' 
The guide 's eyes glistened . 
`` Your honour is giving me a fortune ! '' 
cried he . 
