`` Then you ought to know how to make grimaces ? '' 
`` Why , '' replied Passepartout , a little vexed that his nationality should cause this question , `` we Frenchmen know how to make grimaces , it is true but not any better than the Americans do . '' 
`` True . 
Well , if I ca n't take you as a servant , I can as a clown . 
You see , my friend , in France they exhibit foreign clowns , and in foreign parts French clowns . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
`` You are pretty strong , eh ? '' 
`` Especially after a good meal . '' 
`` And you can sing ? '' 
`` Yes , '' returned Passepartout , who had formerly been wont to sing in the streets . 
`` But can you sing standing on your head , with a top spinning on your left foot , and a sabre balanced on your right ? '' 
`` Humph ! 
I think so , '' replied Passepartout , recalling the exercises of his younger days . 
`` Well , that 's enough , '' said the Honourable William Batulcar . 
The engagement was concluded there and then . 
Passepartout had at last found something to do . 
He was engaged to act in the celebrated Japanese troupe . 
It was not a very dignified position , but within a week he would be on his way to San Francisco . 
The performance , so noisily announced by the Honourable Mr. Batulcar , was to commence at three o'clock , and soon the deafening instruments of a Japanese orchestra resounded at the door . 
Passepartout , though he had not been able to study or rehearse a part , was designated to lend the aid of his sturdy shoulders in the great exhibition of the `` human pyramid , '' executed by the Long Noses of the god Tingou . 
This `` great attraction '' was to close the performance . 
Before three o'clock the large shed was invaded by the spectators , comprising Europeans and natives , Chinese and Japanese , men , women and children , who precipitated themselves upon the narrow benches and into the boxes opposite the stage . 
The musicians took up a position inside , and were vigorously performing on their gongs , tam-tams , flutes , bones , tambourines , and immense drums . 
The performance was much like all acrobatic displays ; but it must be confessed that the Japanese are the first equilibrists in the world . 
One , with a fan and some bits of paper , performed the graceful trick of the butterflies and the flowers ; another traced in the air , with the odorous smoke of his pipe , a series of blue words , which composed a compliment to the audience ; while a third juggled with some lighted candles , which he extinguished successively as they passed his lips , and relit again without interrupting for an instant his juggling . 
Another reproduced the most singular combinations with a spinning-top ; in his hands the revolving tops seemed to be animated with a life of their own in their interminable whirling ; they ran over pipe-stems , the edges of sabres , wires and even hairs stretched across the stage ; they turned around on the edges of large glasses , crossed bamboo ladders , dispersed into all the corners , and produced strange musical effects by the combination of their various pitches of tone . 
The jugglers tossed them in the air , threw them like shuttlecocks with wooden battledores , and yet they kept on spinning ; they put them into their pockets , and took them out still whirling as before . 
It is useless to describe the astonishing performances of the acrobats and gymnasts . 
The turning on ladders , poles , balls , barrels , & c. , was executed with wonderful precision . 
But the principal attraction was the exhibition of the Long Noses , a show to which Europe is as yet a stranger . 
The Long Noses form a peculiar company , under the direct patronage of the god Tingou . 
Attired after the fashion of the Middle Ages , they bore upon their shoulders a splendid pair of wings ; but what especially distinguished them was the long noses which were fastened to their faces , and the uses which they made of them . 
These noses were made of bamboo , and were five , six , and even ten feet long , some straight , others curved , some ribboned , and some having imitation warts upon them . 
It was upon these appendages , fixed tightly on their real noses , that they performed their gymnastic exercises . 
A dozen of these sectaries of Tingou lay flat upon their backs , while others , dressed to represent lightning-rods , came and frolicked on their noses , jumping from one to another , and performing the most skilful leapings and somersaults . 
As a last scene , a `` human pyramid '' had been announced , in which fifty Long Noses were to represent the Car of Juggernaut . 
But , instead of forming a pyramid by mounting each other 's shoulders , the artists were to group themselves on top of the noses . 
It happened that the performer who had hitherto formed the base of the Car had quitted the troupe , and as , to fill this part , only strength and adroitness were necessary , Passepartout had been chosen to take his place . 
The poor fellow really felt sad when -- melancholy reminiscence of his youth ! 
-- he donned his costume , adorned with vari-coloured wings , and fastened to his natural feature a false nose six feet long . 
But he cheered up when he thought that this nose was winning him something to eat . 
He went upon the stage , and took his place beside the rest who were to compose the base of the Car of Juggernaut . 
They all stretched themselves on the floor , their noses pointing to the ceiling . 
A second group of artists disposed themselves on these long appendages , then a third above these , then a fourth , until a human monument reaching to the very cornices of the theatre soon arose on top of the noses . 
This elicited loud applause , in the midst of which the orchestra was just striking up a deafening air , when the pyramid tottered , the balance was lost , one of the lower noses vanished from the pyramid , and the human monument was shattered like a castle built of cards ! 
It was Passepartout 's fault . 
Abandoning his position , clearing the footlights without the aid of his wings , and , clambering up to the right-hand gallery , he fell at the feet of one of the spectators , crying , `` Ah , my master ! 
my master ! '' 
`` You here ? '' 
`` Myself . '' 
`` Very well ; then let us go to the steamer , young man ! '' 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout passed through the lobby of the theatre to the outside , where they encountered the Honourable Mr. Batulcar , furious with rage . 
He demanded damages for the `` breakage '' of the pyramid ; and Phileas Fogg appeased him by giving him a handful of banknotes . 
At half-past six , the very hour of departure , Mr. Fogg and Aouda , followed by Passepartout , who in his hurry had retained his wings , and nose six feet long , stepped upon the American steamer . 
DURING WHICH MR. FOGG AND PARTY CROSS THE PACIFIC OCEAN What happened when the pilot-boat came in sight of Shanghai will be easily guessed . 
The signals made by the Tankadere had been seen by the captain of the Yokohama steamer , who , espying the flag at half-mast , had directed his course towards the little craft . 
Phileas Fogg , after paying the stipulated price of his passage to John Busby , and rewarding that worthy with the additional sum of five hundred and fifty pounds , ascended the steamer with Aouda and Fix ; and they started at once for Nagasaki and Yokohama . 
They reached their destination on the morning of the 14th of November . 
Phileas Fogg lost no time in going on board the Carnatic , where he learned , to Aouda 's great delight -- and perhaps to his own , though he betrayed no emotion -- that Passepartout , a Frenchman , had really arrived on her the day before . 
The San Francisco steamer was announced to leave that very evening , and it became necessary to find Passepartout , if possible , without delay . 
Mr. Fogg applied in vain to the French and English consuls , and , after wandering through the streets a long time , began to despair of finding his missing servant . 
Chance , or perhaps a kind of presentiment , at last led him into the Honourable Mr. Batulcar 's theatre . 
He certainly would not have recognised Passepartout in the eccentric mountebank 's costume ; but the latter , lying on his back , perceived his master in the gallery . 
He could not help starting , which so changed the position of his nose as to bring the `` pyramid '' pell-mell upon the stage . 
All this Passepartout learned from Aouda , who recounted to him what had taken place on the voyage from Hong Kong to Shanghai on the Tankadere , in company with one Mr. Fix . 
Passepartout did not change countenance on hearing this name . 
He thought that the time had not yet arrived to divulge to his master what had taken place between the detective and himself ; and , in the account he gave of his absence , he simply excused himself for having been overtaken by drunkenness , in smoking opium at a tavern in Hong Kong . 
Mr. Fogg heard this narrative coldly , without a word ; and then furnished his man with funds necessary to obtain clothing more in harmony with his position . 
Within an hour the Frenchman had cut off his nose and parted with his wings , and retained nothing about him which recalled the sectary of the god Tingou . 
The steamer which was about to depart from Yokohama to San Francisco belonged to the Pacific Mail Steamship Company , and was named the General Grant . 
She was a large paddle-wheel steamer of two thousand five hundred tons ; well equipped and very fast . 
The massive walking-beam rose and fell above the deck ; at one end a piston-rod worked up and down ; and at the other was a connecting-rod which , in changing the rectilinear motion to a circular one , was directly connected with the shaft of the paddles . 
The General Grant was rigged with three masts , giving a large capacity for sails , and thus materially aiding the steam power . 
By making twelve miles an hour , she would cross the ocean in twenty-one days . 
Phileas Fogg was therefore justified in hoping that he would reach San Francisco by the 2nd of December , New York by the 11th , and London on the 20th -- thus gaining several hours on the fatal date of the 21st of December . 
There was a full complement of passengers on board , among them English , many Americans , a large number of coolies on their way to California , and several East Indian officers , who were spending their vacation in making the tour of the world . 
Nothing of moment happened on the voyage ; the steamer , sustained on its large paddles , rolled but little , and the Pacific almost justified its name . 
Mr. Fogg was as calm and taciturn as ever . 
His young companion felt herself more and more attached to him by other ties than gratitude ; his silent but generous nature impressed her more than she thought ; and it was almost unconsciously that she yielded to emotions which did not seem to have the least effect upon her protector . 
Aouda took the keenest interest in his plans , and became impatient at any incident which seemed likely to retard his journey . 
She often chatted with Passepartout , who did not fail to perceive the state of the lady 's heart ; and , being the most faithful of domestics , he never exhausted his eulogies of Phileas Fogg 's honesty , generosity , and devotion . 
He took pains to calm Aouda 's doubts of a successful termination of the journey , telling her that the most difficult part of it had passed , that now they were beyond the fantastic countries of Japan and China , and were fairly on their way to civilised places again . 
A railway train from San Francisco to New York , and a transatlantic steamer from New York to Liverpool , would doubtless bring them to the end of this impossible journey round the world within the period agreed upon . 
On the ninth day after leaving Yokohama , Phileas Fogg had traversed exactly one half of the terrestrial globe . 
The General Grant passed , on the 23rd of November , the one hundred and eightieth meridian , and was at the very antipodes of London . 
Mr. Fogg had , it is true , exhausted fifty-two of the eighty days in which he was to complete the tour , and there were only twenty-eight left . 
But , though he was only half-way by the difference of meridians , he had really gone over two-thirds of the whole journey ; for he had been obliged to make long circuits from London to Aden , from Aden to Bombay , from Calcutta to Singapore , and from Singapore to Yokohama . 
Could he have followed without deviation the fiftieth parallel , which is that of London , the whole distance would only have been about twelve thousand miles ; whereas he would be forced , by the irregular methods of locomotion , to traverse twenty-six thousand , of which he had , on the 23rd of November , accomplished seventeen thousand five hundred . 
And now the course was a straight one , and Fix was no longer there to put obstacles in their way ! 
It happened also , on the 23rd of November , that Passepartout made a joyful discovery . 
It will be remembered that the obstinate fellow had insisted on keeping his famous family watch at London time , and on regarding that of the countries he had passed through as quite false and unreliable . 
Now , on this day , though he had not changed the hands , he found that his watch exactly agreed with the ship 's chronometers . 
His triumph was hilarious . 
He would have liked to know what Fix would say if he were aboard ! 
`` The rogue told me a lot of stories , '' repeated Passepartout , `` about the meridians , the sun , and the moon ! 
Moon , indeed ! 
moonshine more likely ! 
If one listened to that sort of people , a pretty sort of time one would keep ! 
I was sure that the sun would some day regulate itself by my watch ! '' 
Passepartout was ignorant that , if the face of his watch had been divided into twenty-four hours , like the Italian clocks , he would have no reason for exultation ; for the hands of his watch would then , instead of as now indicating nine o'clock in the morning , indicate nine o'clock in the evening , that is , the twenty-first hour after midnight precisely the difference between London time and that of the one hundred and eightieth meridian . 
