When he was asked to explain how it was apparent now at this moment , the old doctor , with simple-hearted directness , pointed out that the prisoner had `` an extraordinary air , remarkable in the circumstances '' ; that he had `` marched in like a soldier , looking straight before him , though it would have been more natural for him to look to the left where , among the public , the ladies were sitting , seeing that he was a great admirer of the fair sex and must be thinking much of what the ladies are saying of him now , '' the old man concluded in his peculiar language . 
I must add that he spoke Russian readily , but every phrase was formed in German style , which did not , however , trouble him , for it had always been a weakness of his to believe that he spoke Russian perfectly , better indeed than Russians . 
And he was very fond of using Russian proverbs , always declaring that the Russian proverbs were the best and most expressive sayings in the whole world . 
I may remark , too , that in conversation , through absent-mindedness he often forgot the most ordinary words , which sometimes went out of his head , though he knew them perfectly . 
The same thing happened , though , when he spoke German , and at such times he always waved his hand before his face as though trying to catch the lost word , and no one could induce him to go on speaking till he had found the missing word . 
His remark that the prisoner ought to have looked at the ladies on entering roused a whisper of amusement in the audience . 
All our ladies were very fond of our old doctor ; they knew , too , that having been all his life a bachelor and a religious man of exemplary conduct , he looked upon women as lofty creatures . 
And so his unexpected observation struck everyone as very queer . 
The Moscow doctor , being questioned in his turn , definitely and emphatically repeated that he considered the prisoner 's mental condition abnormal in the highest degree . 
He talked at length and with erudition of `` aberration '' and `` mania , '' and argued that , from all the facts collected , the prisoner had undoubtedly been in a condition of aberration for several days before his arrest , and , if the crime had been committed by him , it must , even if he were conscious of it , have been almost involuntary , as he had not the power to control the morbid impulse that possessed him . 
