Besides , Mitya hardly looked upon him as a man at all , for it was known to everyone in the town that he was only a shattered wreck , whose relations with Grushenka had changed their character and were now simply paternal , and that this had been so for a long time . 
In any case there was much simplicity on Mitya 's part in all this , for in spite of all his vices , he was a very simple-hearted man . 
It was an instance of this simplicity that Mitya was seriously persuaded that , being on the eve of his departure for the next world , old Kuzma must sincerely repent of his past relations with Grushenka , and that she had no more devoted friend and protector in the world than this , now harmless , old man . 
After his conversation with Alyosha , at the cross-roads , he hardly slept all night , and at ten o'clock next morning , he was at the house of Samsonov and telling the servant to announce him . 
It was a very large and gloomy old house of two stories , with a lodge and outhouses . 
In the lower story lived Samsonov 's two married sons with their families , his old sister , and his unmarried daughter . 
In the lodge lived two of his clerks , one of whom also had a large family . 
Both the lodge and the lower story were overcrowded , but the old man kept the upper floor to himself , and would not even let the daughter live there with him , though she waited upon him , and in spite of her asthma was obliged at certain fixed hours , and at any time he might call her , to run upstairs to him from below . 
This upper floor contained a number of large rooms kept purely for show , furnished in the old-fashioned merchant style , with long monotonous rows of clumsy mahogany chairs along the walls , with glass chandeliers under shades , and gloomy mirrors on the walls . 
All these rooms were entirely empty and unused , for the old man kept to one room , a small , remote bedroom , where he was waited upon by an old servant with a kerchief on her head , and by a lad , who used to sit on the locker in the passage . 
