Let him open that book and begin reading it without grand words or superciliousness , without condescension to them , but gently and kindly , being glad that he is reading to them and that they are listening with attention , loving the words himself , only stopping from time to time to explain words that are not understood by the peasants . 
Do n't be anxious , they will understand everything , the orthodox heart will understand all ! 
Let him read them about Abraham and Sarah , about Isaac and Rebecca , of how Jacob went to Laban and wrestled with the Lord in his dream and said , `` This place is holy '' - and he will impress the devout mind of the peasant . 
Let him read , especially to the children , how the brothers sold Joseph , the tender boy , the dreamer and prophet , into bondage , and told their father that a wild beast had devoured him , and showed him his blood-stained clothes . 
Let him read them how the brothers afterwards journeyed into Egypt for corn , and Joseph , already a great ruler , unrecognised by them , tormented them , accused them , kept his brother Benjamin , and all through love : `` I love you , and loving you I torment you . '' 
For he remembered all his life how they had sold him to the merchants in the burning desert by the well , and how , wringing his hands , he had wept and besought his brothers not to sell him as a slave in a strange land . 
And how , seeing them again after many years , he loved them beyond measure , but he harassed and tormented them in love . 
He left them at last not able to bear the suffering of his heart , flung himself on his bed and wept . 
Then , wiping his tears away , he went out to them joyful and told them , `` Brothers , I am your brother Joseph '' Let him read them further how happy old Jacob was on learning that his darling boy was still alive , and how he went to Egypt leaving his own country , and died in a foreign land , bequeathing his great prophecy that had lain mysteriously hidden in his meek and timid heart all his life , that from his offspring , from Judah , will come the great hope of the world , the Messiah and Saviour . 
Fathers and teachers , forgive me and do n't be angry , that like a little child I 've been babbling of what you know long ago , and can teach me a hundred times more skilfully . 
