I may add here , for myself personally , that I feel it almost repulsive that event which caused such frivolous agitation and was such a stumbling-block to many , though in reality it was the most natural and trivial matter . 
I should , of course , have omitted all mention of it in my story , if it had not exerted a very strong influence on the heart and soul of the chief , though future , hero of my story , Alyosha , forming a crisis and turning-point in his spiritual development , giving a shock to his intellect , which finally strengthened it for the rest of his life and gave it a definite aim . 
And so , to return to our story . 
When before dawn they laid Father Zossima 's body in the coffin and brought it into the front room , the question of opening the windows was raised among those who were around the coffin . 
But this suggestion made casually by someone was unanswered and almost unnoticed . 
Some of those present may perhaps have inwardly noticed it , only to reflect that the anticipation of decay and corruption from the body of such a saint was an actual absurdity , calling for compassion -LRB- if not a smile -RRB- for the lack of faith and the frivolity it implied . 
For they expected something quite different . 
And , behold , soon after midday there were signs of something , at first only observed in silence by those who came in and out and were evidently each afraid to communicate the thought in his mind . 
But by three o'clock those signs had become so clear and unmistakable , that the news swiftly reached all the monks and visitors in the hermitage , promptly penetrated to the monastery , throwing all the monks into amazement , and finally , in the shortest possible time , spread to the town , exciting everyone in it , believers and unbelievers alike . 
The unbelievers rejoiced , and as for the believers some of them rejoiced even more than the unbelievers , for `` men love the downfall and disgrace of the righteous , '' as the deceased elder had said in one of his exhortations . 
