Though he did not want to remind the Rostovs of Bolkonski , Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by the news of their son 's having received a decoration , so he sent that printed army order and Nicholas ' letter to the Rostovs , keeping the appeal , the bulletin , and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner . 
His conversation with Count Rostopchin and the latter 's tone of anxious hurry , the meeting with the courier who talked casually of how badly things were going in the army , the rumors of the discovery of spies in Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised to be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn , and the talk of the Emperor 's being expected to arrive next day -- all aroused with fresh force that feeling of agitation and expectation in Pierre which he had been conscious of ever since the appearance of the comet , and especially since the beginning of the war . 
He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done so had he not been hindered , first , by his membership of the Society of Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual peace and the abolition of war , and secondly , by the fact that when he saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talking patriotism , he somehow felt ashamed to take the step . 
But the chief reason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in the vague idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast , 666 ; that his part in the great affair of setting a limit to the power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemous things had been predestined from eternity , and that therefore he ought not to undertake anything , but wait for what was bound to come to pass . 
A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that day , as usual on Sundays . 
Pierre came early so as to find them alone . 
He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he not been so tall , so broad of limb , and so strong that he carried his bulk with evident ease . 
He went up the stairs , puffing and muttering something . 
His coachman did not even ask whether he was to wait . 
He knew that when his master was at the Rostovs ' he stayed till midnight . 
