He remembered a general impression of the misfortunes and sufferings of people and of being worried by the curiosity of officers and generals who questioned him , he also remembered his difficulty in procuring a conveyance and horses , and above all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time . 
On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Petya Rostov . 
That same day he had learned that Prince Andrew , after surviving the battle of Borodino for more than a month had recently died in the Rostovs ' house at Yaroslavl , and Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene 's death , supposing that Pierre had heard of it long before . 
All this at the time seemed merely strange to Pierre : he felt he could not grasp its significance . 
Just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly as possible from places where people were killing one another , to some peaceful refuge where he could recover himself , rest , and think over all the strange new facts he had learned ; but on reaching Orel he immediately fell ill . 
When he came to himself after his illness he saw in attendance on him two of his servants , Terenty and Vaska , who had come from Moscow ; and also his cousin the eldest princess , who had been living on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue and illness had come to look after him . 
It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre lost the impressions he had become accustomed to during the last few months and got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhere tomorrow , that no one would deprive him of his warm bed , and that he would be sure to get his dinner , tea , and supper . 
But for a long time in his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity . 
In the same way little by little he came to understand the news he had been told after his rescue , about the death of Prince Andrew , the death of his wife , and the destruction of the French . 
A joyous feeling of freedom -- that complete inalienable freedom natural to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside Moscow -- filled Pierre 's soul during his convalescence . 
