He had a dim perception of the following budget : About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank , about 30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow , the town house , and the allowance to the three princesses ; about 15,000 was given in pensions and the same amount for asylums ; 150,000 alimony was sent to the countess ; about 70,00 went for interest on debts . 
The building of a new church , previously begun , had cost about 10,000 in each of the last two years , and he did not know how the rest , about 100,000 rubles , was spent , and almost every year he was obliged to borrow . 
Besides this the chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests , or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops . 
So the first task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or inclination -- practical business . 
He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward . 
But he felt that this did not forward matters at all . 
He felt that these consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with them or make them move . 
On the one hand , the chief steward put the state of things to him in the very worst light , pointing out the necessity of paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor , to which Pierre did not agree . 
On the other hand , Pierre demanded that steps should be taken to liberate the serfs , which the steward met by showing the necessity of first paying off the loans from the Land Bank , and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation . 
The steward did not say it was quite impossible , but suggested selling the forests in the province of Kostroma , the land lower down the river , and the Crimean estate , in order to make it possible : all of which operations according to him were connected with such complicated measures -- the removal of injunctions , petitions , permits , and so on -- that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied : `` Yes , yes , do so . '' 
