The burning of towns and villages , the retreats after battles , the blow dealt at Borodino and the renewed retreat , the burning of Moscow , the capture of marauders , the seizure of transports , and the guerrilla war were all departures from the rules . 
Napoleon felt this , and from the time he took up the correct fencing attitude in Moscow and instead of his opponent 's rapier saw a cudgel raised above his head , he did not cease to complain to Kutuzov and to the Emperor Alexander that the war was being carried on contrary to all the rules -- as if there were any rules for killing people . 
In spite of the complaints of the French as to the nonobservance of the rules , in spite of the fact that to some highly placed Russians it seemed rather disgraceful to fight with a cudgel and they wanted to assume a pose en quarte or en tierce according to all the rules , and to make an adroit thrust en prime , and so on -- the cudgel of the people 's war was lifted with all its menacing and majestic strength , and without consulting anyone 's tastes or rules and regardless of anything else , it rose and fell with stupid simplicity , but consistently , and belabored the French till the whole invasion had perished . 
And it is well for a people who do not -- as the French did in 1813 - salute according to all the rules of art , and , presenting the hilt of their rapier gracefully and politely , hand it to their magnanimous conqueror , but at the moment of trial , without asking what rules others have adopted in similar cases , simply and easily pick up the first cudgel that comes to hand and strike with it till the feeling of resentment and revenge in their soul yields to a feeling of contempt and compassion . 
One of the most obvious and advantageous departures from the so-called laws of war is the action of scattered groups against men pressed together in a mass . 
Such action always occurs in wars that take on a national character . 
In such actions , instead of two crowds opposing each other , the men disperse , attack singly , run away when attacked by stronger forces , but again attack when opportunity offers . 
This was done by the guerrillas in Spain , by the mountain tribes in the Caucasus , and by the Russians in 1812 . 
People have called this kind of war `` guerrilla warfare '' and assume that by so calling it they have explained its meaning . 
But such a war does not fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to a well-known rule of tactics which is accepted as infallible . 
