Commanded by the Emperor himself they could not fail to vanquish anyone , be it whom it might : so thought Rostov and most of the officers after the review . 
All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battles would have made them . 
The day after the review , Boris , in his best uniform and with his comrade Berg 's best wishes for success , rode to Olmutz to see Bolkonski , wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself the best post he could -- preferably that of adjutant to some important personage , a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive . 
`` It is all very well for Rostov , whose father sends him ten thousand rubles at a time , to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not be anyone 's lackey , but I who have nothing but my brains have to make a career and must not miss opportunities , but must avail myself of them ! '' 
he reflected . 
He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day , but the appearance of the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed and the two Emperors were living with their suites , households , and courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world . 
He knew no one , and despite his smart Guardsman 's uniform , all these exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages with their plumes , ribbons , and medals , both courtiers and military men , seemed so immeasurably above him , an insignificant officer of the Guards , that they not only did not wish to , but simply could not , be aware of his existence . 
At the quarters of the commander in chief , Kutuzov , where he inquired for Bolkonski , all the adjutants and even the orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a great many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody was heartily sick of them . 
In spite of this , or rather because of it , next day , November 15 , after dinner he again went to Olmutz and , entering the house occupied by Kutuzov , asked for Bolkonski . 
Prince Andrew was in and Boris was shown into a large hall probably formerly used for dancing , but in which five beds now stood , and furniture of various kinds : a table , chairs , and a clavichord . 
