On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostov , Princess Mary had found her nephew there with his tutor , and a letter from Prince Andrew giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvintseva at Voronezh . 
That feeling akin to temptation which had tormented her during her father 's illness , since his death , and especially since her meeting with Rostov was smothered by arrangements for the journey , anxiety about her brother , settling in a new house , meeting new people , and attending to her nephew 's education . 
She was sad . 
Now , after a month passed in quiet surroundings , she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia . 
She was agitated and incessantly tortured by the thought of the dangers to which her brother , the only intimate person now remaining to her , was exposed . 
She was worried too about her nephew 's education for which she had always felt herself incompetent , but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace -- a peace arising from consciousness of having stifled those personal dreams and hopes that had been on the point of awakening within her and were related to her meeting with Rostov . 
The day after her party the governor 's wife came to see Malvintseva and , after discussing her plan with the aunt , remarked that though under present circumstances a formal betrothal was , of course , not to be thought of , all the same the young people might be brought together and could get to know one another . 
Malvintseva expressed approval , and the governor 's wife began to speak of Rostov in Mary 's presence , praising him and telling how he had blushed when Princess Mary 's name was mentioned . 
But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful feeling -- her mental tranquillity was destroyed , and desires , doubts , self-reproach , and hopes reawoke . 
During the two days that elapsed before Rostov called , Princess Mary continually thought of how she ought to behave to him . 
