If Barclay is now to be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost , for Bennigsen showed his incapacity already in 1807 . '' 
The sixth party , the Bennigsenites , said , on the contrary , that at any rate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen : `` and twist about as you may , you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually . 
Let the others make mistakes now ! '' 
said they , arguing that our retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series of blunders . 
`` The more mistakes that are made the better . 
It will at any rate be understood all the sooner that things can not go on like this . 
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other , but a man like Bennigsen , who made his mark in 1807 , and to whom Napoleon himself did justice -- a man whose authority would be willingly recognized , and Bennigsen is the only such man . '' 
The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to be found , especially around young sovereigns , and of whom there were particularly many round Alexander -- generals and imperial aides-de-camp passionately devoted to the Emperor , not merely as a monarch but as a man , adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly , as Rostov had done in 1805 , and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human capabilities as well . 
These men , though enchanted with the sovereign for refusing the command of the army , yet blamed him for such excessive modesty , and only desired and insisted that their adored sovereign should abandon his diffidence and openly announce that he would place himself at the head of the army , gather round him a commander in chief 's staff , and , consulting experienced theoreticians and practical men where necessary , would himself lead the troops , whose spirits would thereby be raised to the highest pitch . 
The eighth and largest group , which in its enormous numbers was to the others as ninety-nine to one , consisted of men who desired neither peace nor war , neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa or anywhere else , neither Barclay nor the Emperor , neither Pfuel nor Bennigsen , but only the one most essential thing -- as much advantage and pleasure for themselves as possible . 
