To this question historians reply that Louis XIV 's activity , contrary to the program , reacted on Louis XVI . 
But why did it not react on Louis XIV or on Louis XV -- why should it react just on Louis XVI ? 
And what is the time limit for such reactions ? 
To these questions there are and can be no answers . 
Equally little does this view explain why for several centuries the collective will is not withdrawn from certain rulers and their heirs , and then suddenly during a period of fifty years is transferred to the Convention , to the Directory , to Napoleon , to Alexander , to Louis XVIII , to Napoleon again , to Charles X , to Louis Philippe , to a Republican government , and to Napoleon III . 
When explaining these rapid transfers of the people 's will from from one individual to another , especially in view of international relations , conquests , and alliances , the historians are obliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normal delegations of the people 's will but are accidents dependent on cunning , on mistakes , on craft , or on the weakness of a diplomatist , a ruler , or a party leader . 
So that the greater part of the events of history -- civil wars , revolutions , and conquests -- are presented by these historians not as the results of free transferences of the people 's will , but as results of the ill-directed will of one or more individuals , that is , once again , as usurpations of power . 
And so these historians also see and admit historical events which are exceptions to the theory . 
These historians resemble a botanist who , having noticed that some plants grow from seeds producing two cotyledons , should insist that all that grows does so by sprouting into two leaves , and that the palm , the mushroom , and even the oak , which blossom into full growth and no longer resemble two leaves , are deviations from the theory . 
Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people is transferred to historic personages conditionally , but that the conditions are unknown to us . 
