From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating of the forces of Western Europe began , and in 1812 these forces - millions of men , reckoning those transporting and feeding the army - moved from the west eastwards to the Russian frontier , toward which since 1811 Russian forces had been similarly drawn . 
On the twelfth of June , 1812 , the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war began , that is , an event took place opposed to human reason and to human nature . 
Millions of men perpetrated against one another such innumerable crimes , frauds , treacheries , thefts , forgeries , issues of false money , burglaries , incendiarisms , and murders as in whole centuries are not recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world , but which those who committed them did not at the time regard as being crimes . 
What produced this extraordinary occurrence ? 
What were its causes ? 
The historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the wrongs inflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg , the nonobservance of the Continental System , the ambition of Napoleon , the firmness of Alexander , the mistakes of the diplomatists , and so on . 
Consequently , it would only have been necessary for Metternich , Rumyantsev , or Talleyrand , between a levee and an evening party , to have taken proper pains and written a more adroit note , or for Napoleon to have written to Alexander : `` My respected Brother , I consent to restore the duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg '' -- and there would have been no war . 
We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries . 
It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England 's intrigues -LRB- as in fact he said on the island of St. Helena -RRB- . 
It naturally seemed to members of the English Parliament that the cause of the war was Napoleon 's ambition ; to the Duke of Oldenburg , that the cause of the war was the violence done to him ; to businessmen that the cause of the way was the Continental System which was ruining Europe ; to the generals and old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessity of giving them employment ; to the legitimists of that day that it was the need of re-establishing les bons principes , and to the diplomatists of that time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance between Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealed from Napoleon , and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178 . 
