`` I do n't say it 's a plan I approve of , '' said the son ; `` I am only telling you what it is . 
Napoleon has also formed his plan by now , not worse than this one . '' 
`` Well , you 've told me nothing new , '' and the old man repeated , meditatively and rapidly : `` Dieu sait quand reviendra . 
Go to the dining room . '' 
At the appointed hour the prince , powdered and shaven , entered the dining room where his daughter-in-law , Princess Mary , and Mademoiselle Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect , who by a strange caprice of his employer 's was admitted to table though the position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly not have caused him to expect that honor . 
The prince , who generally kept very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important government officials to his table , had unexpectedly selected Michael Ivanovich -LRB- who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checked handkerchief -RRB- to illustrate the theory that all men are equals , and had more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivanovich was `` not a whit worse than you or I. '' At dinner the prince usually spoke to the taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else . 
In the dining room , which like all the rooms in the house was exceedingly lofty , the members of the household and the footmen -- one behind each chair -- stood waiting for the prince to enter . 
The head butler , napkin on arm , was scanning the setting of the table , making signs to the footmen , and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door by which the prince was to enter . 
Prince Andrew was looking at a large gilt frame , new to him , containing the genealogical tree of the Princes Bolkonski , opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted portrait -LRB- evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate -RRB- of a ruling prince , in a crown -- an alleged descendant of Rurik and ancestor of the Bolkonskis . 
Prince Andrew , looking again at that genealogical tree , shook his head , laughing as a man laughs who looks at a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing . 
