In the English Club , where all who were distinguished , important , and well informed forgathered when the news began to arrive in December , nothing was said about the war and the last battle , as though all were in a conspiracy of silence . 
The men who set the tone in conversation -- Count Rostopchin , Prince Yuri Dolgorukov , Valuev , Count Markov , and Prince Vyazemski -- did not show themselves at the Club , but met in private houses in intimate circles , and the Moscovites who took their opinions from others -- Ilya Rostov among them -- remained for a while without any definite opinion on the subject of the war and without leaders . 
The Moscovites felt that something was wrong and that to discuss the bad news was difficult , and so it was best to be silent . 
But after a while , just as a jury comes out of its room , the bigwigs who guided the Club 's opinion reappeared , and everybody began speaking clearly and definitely . 
Reasons were found for the incredible , unheard-of , and impossible event of a Russian defeat , everything became clear , and in all corners of Moscow the same things began to be said . 
These reasons were the treachery of the Austrians , a defective commissariat , the treachery of the Pole Przebyszewski and of the Frenchman Langeron , Kutuzov 's incapacity , and -LRB- it was whispered -RRB- the youth and inexperience of the sovereign , who had trusted worthless and insignificant people . 
But the army , the Russian army , everyone declared , was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor . 
The soldiers , officers , and generals were heroes . 
But the hero of heroes was Prince Bagration , distinguished by his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat from Austerlitz , where he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and had all day beaten back an enemy force twice as numerous as his own . 
What also conduced to Bagration 's being selected as Moscow 's hero was the fact that he had no connections in the city and was a stranger there . 
