The activity of Alexander or of Napoleon can not be called useful or harmful , for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful . 
If that activity displeases somebody , this is only because it does not agree with his limited understanding of what is good . 
Whether the preservation of my father 's house in Moscow , or the glory of the Russian arms , or the prosperity of the Petersburg and other universities , or the freedom of Poland or the greatness of Russia , or the balance of power in Europe , or a certain kind of European culture called `` progress '' appear to me to be good or bad , I must admit that besides these things the action of every historic character has other more general purposes inaccessible to me . 
But let us assume that what is called science can harmonize all contradictions and possesses an unchanging standard of good and bad by which to try historic characters and events ; let us say that Alexander could have done everything differently ; let us say that with guidance from those who blame him and who profess to know the ultimate aim of the movement of humanity , he might have arranged matters according to the program his present accusers would have given him -- of nationality , freedom , equality , and progress -LRB- these , I think , cover the ground -RRB- . 
Let us assume that this program was possible and had then been formulated , and that Alexander had acted on it . 
What would then have become of the activity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed in the government -- an activity that in the opinion of the historians was good and beneficent ? 
Their activity would not have existed : there would have been no life , there would have been nothing . 
If we admit that human life can be ruled by reason , the possibility of life is destroyed . 
If we assume as the historians do that great men lead humanity to the attainment of certain ends -- the greatness of Russia or of France , the balance of power in Europe , the diffusion of the ideas of the Revolution general progress or anything else -- then it is impossible to explain the facts of history without introducing the conceptions of chance and genius . 
If the aim of the European wars at the beginning of the nineteenth century had been the aggrandizement of Russia , that aim might have been accomplished without all the preceding wars and without the invasion . 
