What he had just been praying for with confidence that God would hear him had come to pass ; but Nicholas was as much astonished as if it were something extraordinary and unexpected , and as if the very fact that it had happened so quickly proved that it had not come from God to whom he had prayed , but by some ordinary coincidence . 
This unexpected and , as it seemed to Nicholas , quite voluntary letter from Sonya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which there had seemed no escape . 
She wrote that the last unfortunate events -- the loss of almost the whole of the Rostovs ' Moscow property -- and the countess ' repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas should marry Princess Bolkonskaya , together with his silence and coldness of late , had all combined to make her decide to release him from his promise and set him completely free . 
It would be too painful to me to think that I might be a cause of sorrow or discord in the family that has been so good to me -LRB- she wrote -RRB- , and my love has no aim but the happiness of those I love ; so , Nicholas , I beg you to consider yourself free , and to be assured that , in spite of everything , no one can love you more than does Your Sonya Both letters were written from Troitsa . 
The other , from the countess , described their last days in Moscow , their departure , the fire , and the destruction of all their property . 
In this letter the countess also mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them ; his state was very critical , but the doctor said there was now more hope . 
Sonya and Natasha were nursing him . 
Next day Nicholas took his mother 's letter and went to see Princess Mary . 
Neither he nor she said a word about what `` Natasha nursing him '' might mean , but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as intimate with the princess as if they were relations . 
The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslavl , and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment . 
