During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow and the Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino , a change had taken place in the relative strength of the two armies -- both in spirit and in number -- as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russian side . 
Though the condition and numbers of the French army were unknown to the Russians , as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking at once showed itself by countless signs . 
These signs were : Lauriston 's mission ; the abundance of provisions at Tarutino ; the reports coming in from all sides of the inactivity and disorder of the French ; the flow of recruits to our regiments ; the fine weather ; the long rest the Russian soldiers had enjoyed , and the impatience to do what they had been assembled for , which usually shows itself in an army that has been resting ; curiosity as to what the French army , so long lost sight of , was doing ; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up to the French stationed at Tarutino ; the news of easy successes gained by peasants and guerrilla troops over the French , the envy aroused by this ; the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long as the French were in Moscow , and -LRB- above all -RRB- a dim consciousness in every soldier 's mind that the relative strength of the armies had changed and that the advantage was now on our side . 
There was a substantial change in the relative strength , and an advance had become inevitable . 
And at once , as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as the minute hand has completed a full circle , this change was shown by an increased activity , whirring , and chiming in the higher spheres . 
The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff , and also by the Emperor from Petersburg . 
Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow had been received in Petersburg , a detailed plan of the whole campaign had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance . 
Though this plan had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands , it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action . 
Kutuzov only replied that movements arranged from a distance were always difficult to execute . 
So fresh instructions were sent for the solution of difficulties that might be encountered , as well as fresh people who were to watch Kutuzov 's actions and report upon them . 
