Now thousands of feet and bayonets moved and halted at the officers ' command , turned with banners flying , formed up at intervals , and wheeled round other similar masses of infantry in different uniforms ; now was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofs and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue , red , and green braided uniforms , with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black , roan , or gray horses ; then again , spreading out with the brazen clatter of the polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with the smell of linstocks , came the artillery which crawled between the infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position . 
Not only the generals in full parade uniforms , with their thin or thick waists drawn in to the utmost , their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars , and wearing scarves and all their decorations , not only the elegant , pomaded officers , but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and his weapons clean and polished to the utmost , and every horse groomed till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay smooth - felt that no small matter was happening , but an important and solemn affair . 
Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own insignificance , aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men , and yet at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of that enormous whole . 
From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten o'clock all had been brought into due order . 
The ranks were drown up on the vast field . 
The whole army was extended in three lines : the cavalry in front , behind it the artillery , and behind that again the infantry . 
A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops . 
The three parts of that army were sharply distinguished : Kutuzov 's fighting army -LRB- with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front -RRB- ; those recently arrived from Russia , both Guards and regiments of the line ; and the Austrian troops . 
But they all stood in the same lines , under one command , and in a like order . 
Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper : `` They 're coming ! 
