But when he came across a man of position his instinct immediately told him that this man could be useful , and without any premeditation Prince Vasili took the first opportunity to gain his confidence , flatter him , become intimate with him , and finally make his request . 
He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as Gentleman of the Bedchamber , which at that time conferred the status of Councilor of State , and insisted on the young man accompanying him to Petersburg and staying at his house . 
With apparent absent-mindedness , yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing , Prince Vasili did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter . 
Had he thought out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural and shown such unaffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody both above and below him in social standing . 
Something always drew him toward those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in seizing the most opportune moment for making use of people . 
Pierre , on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man , felt himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself . 
He had to sign papers , to present himself at government offices , the purpose of which was not clear to him , to question his chief steward , to visit his estate near Moscow , and to receive many people who formerly did not even wish to know of his existence but would now have been offended and grieved had he chosen not to see them . 
These different people -- businessmen , relations , and acquaintances alike -- were all disposed to treat the young heir in the most friendly and flattering manner : they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre 's noble qualities . 
He was always hearing such words as : `` With your remarkable kindness , '' or , `` With your excellent heart , '' `` You are yourself so honorable Count , '' or , `` Were he as clever as you , '' and so on , till he began sincerely to believe in his own exceptional kindness and extraordinary intelligence , the more so as in the depth of his heart it had always seemed to him that he really was very kind and intelligent . 
Even people who had formerly been spiteful toward him and evidently unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate . 
