But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of what they were doing , though they would have been glad to leave off , some incomprehensible , mysterious power continued to control them , and they still brought up the charges , loaded , aimed , and applied the match , though only one artilleryman survived out of every three , and though they stumbled and panted with fatigue , perspiring and stained with blood and powder . 
The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both sides , crushing human bodies , and that terrible work which was not done by the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worlds continued . 
Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would have said that , if only the French made one more slight effort , it would disappear ; and anyone looking at the rear of the French army would have said that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and the French would be destroyed . 
But neither the French nor the Russians made that effort , and the flame of battle burned slowly out . 
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking the French . 
At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the beginning . 
But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the French from their positions , they could not have made this last effort , for all the Russian troops had been broken up , there was no part of the Russian army that had not suffered in the battle , and though still holding their positions they had lost ONE HALF of their army . 
The French , with the memory of all their former victories during fifteen years , with the assurance of Napoleon 's invincibility , with the consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had lost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guards intact , twenty thousand strong , might easily have made that effort . 
The French had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position ought to have made that effort , for as long as the Russians continued to block the road to Moscow as before , the aim of the French had not been attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain . 
But the French did not make that effort . 
