The French doctor held no taper ; he was leaning against one of the columns in a respectful attitude implying that he , a foreigner , in spite of all differences of faith , understood the full importance of the rite now being performed and even approved of it . 
He now approached the sick man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor of life , with his delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the hand that was free , and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment . 
The sick man was given something to drink , there was a stir around him , then the people resumed their places and the service continued . 
During this interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he had been leaning , and -- with air which intimated that he knew what he was about and if others did not understand him it was so much the worse for them -- did not go up to the dying man , but passed by him , joined the eldest princess , and moved with her to the side of the room where stood the high bedstead with its silken hangings . 
On leaving the bed both Prince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door , but returned to their places one after the other before the service was concluded . 
Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest of what went on , having made up his mind once for all that what he saw happening around him that evening was in some way essential . 
The chanting of the service ceased , and the voice of the priest was heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the sacrament . 
The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before . 
Around him everyone began to stir : steps were audible and whispers , among which Anna Mikhaylovna 's was the most distinct . 
Pierre heard her say : `` Certainly he must be moved onto the bed ; here it will be impossible ... '' The sick man was so surrounded by doctors , princesses , and servants that Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray mane -- which , though he saw other faces as well , he had not lost sight of for a single moment during the whole service . 
