The chief steward , a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectly through the naive and intelligent count and played with him as with a toy , seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre , pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all the uselessness of freeing the serfs , who were quite happy as it was . 
Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would be difficult to imagine happier people , and that God only knew what would happen to them when they were free , but he insisted , though reluctantly , on what he thought right . 
The steward promised to do all in his power to carry out the count 's wishes , seeing clearly that not only would the count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank , but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued to give in money and work all that other people 's serfs gave -- that is to say , all that could be got out of them . 
Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state of mind , Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting his friend Bolkonski , whom he had not seen for two years . 
Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fields and forests of fir and birch , which were partly cut down . 
The house lay behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and with banks still bare of grass . 
It was at the end of a village that stretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were a few fir trees . 
The homestead consisted of a threshing floor , outhouses , stables , a bathhouse , a lodge , and a large brick house with semicircular facade still in course of construction . 
Round the house was a garden newly laid out . 
The fences and gates were new and solid ; two fire pumps and a water cart , painted green , stood in a shed ; the paths were straight , the bridges were strong and had handrails . 
