Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there were hundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow . 
How horrified he would have been seven years before , when he first arrived from abroad , had he been told that there was no need for him to seek or plan anything , that his rut had long been shaped , eternally predetermined , and that wriggle as he might , he would be what all in his position were . 
He could not have believed it ! 
Had he not at one time longed with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia ; then himself to be a Napoleon ; then to be a philosopher ; and then a strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon ? 
Had he not seen the possibility of , and passionately desired , the regeneration of the sinful human race , and his own progress to the highest degree of perfection ? 
Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs ? 
But instead of all that -- here he was , the wealthy husband of an unfaithful wife , a retired gentleman-in-waiting , fond of eating and drinking and , as he unbuttoned his waistcoat , of abusing the government a bit , a member of the Moscow English Club , and a universal favorite in Moscow society . 
For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the idea that he was one of those same retired Moscow gentlemen-in-waiting he had so despised seven years before . 
Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only living this life temporarily ; but then he was shocked by the thought of how many , like himself , had entered that life and that Club temporarily , with all their teeth and hair , and had only left it when not a single tooth or hair remained . 
In moments of pride , when he thought of his position it seemed to him that he was quite different and distinct from those other retired gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised : they were empty , stupid , contented fellows , satisfied with their position , `` while I am still discontented and want to do something for mankind . 
