If we examined simple actions and had a vast number of such actions under observation , our conception of their inevitability would be still greater . 
The dishonest conduct of the son of a dishonest father , the misconduct of a woman who had fallen into bad company , a drunkard 's relapse into drunkenness , and so on are actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause . 
If the man whose actions we are considering is on a very low stage of mental development , like a child , a madman , or a simpleton -- then , knowing the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character and intelligence in question , we see so large an element of necessity and so little free will that as soon as we know the cause prompting the action we can foretell the result . 
On these three considerations alone is based the conception of irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admitted by all legislative codes . 
The responsibility appears greater or less according to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances in which the man was placed whose action is being judged , and according to the greater or lesser interval of time between the commission of the action and its investigation , and according to the greater or lesser understanding of the causes that led to the action . 
Thus our conception of free will and inevitability gradually diminishes or increases according to the greater or lesser connection with the external world , the greater or lesser remoteness of time , and the greater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we contemplate a man 's life . 
So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with the external world is well known , where the time between the action and its examination is great , and where the causes of the action are most accessible , we get the conception of a maximum of inevitability and a minimum of free will . 
If we examine a man little dependent on external conditions , whose action was performed very recently , and the causes of whose action are beyond our ken , we get the conception of a minimum of inevitability and a maximum of freedom . 
In neither case -- however we may change our point of view , however plain we may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the external world , however inaccessible it may be to us , however long or short the period of time , however intelligible or incomprehensible the causes of the action may be -- can we ever conceive either complete freedom or complete necessity . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from the influence of the external world , we never get a conception of freedom in space . 
