In August he was at Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther , though as we now see that advance was evidently ruinous to him . 
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the advance on Moscow , nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then think of luring Napoleon on , but quite the contrary . 
The luring of Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan , for no one believed it to be possible ; it resulted from a most complex interplay of intrigues , aims , and wishes among those who took part in the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable , or of the one way of saving Russia . 
Everything came about fortuitously . 
The armies were divided at the commencement of the campaign . 
We tried to unite them , with the evident intention of giving battle and checking the enemy 's advance , and by this effort to unite them while avoiding battle with a much stronger enemy , and necessarily withdrawing the armies at an acute angle -- we led the French on to Smolensk . 
But we withdrew at an acute angle not only because the French advanced between our two armies ; the angle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther , because Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner disliked by Bagration -LRB- who would come his command -RRB- , and Bagration -- being in command of the second army -- tried to postpone joining up and coming under Barclay 's command as long as he could . 
Bagration was slow in effecting the junction -- though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters -- because , as he alleged , he exposed his army to danger on this march , and it was best for him to retire more to the left and more to the south , worrying the enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for his army ; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under the command of the detested foreigner Barclay , whose rank was inferior to his own . 
The Emperor was with the army to encourage it , but his presence and ignorance of what steps to take , and the enormous number of advisers and plans , destroyed the first army 's energy and it retired . 
The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp , but Paulucci , aiming at becoming commander in chief , unexpectedly employed his energy to influence Alexander , and Pfuel 's whole plan was abandoned and the command entrusted to Barclay . 
