In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to , no one to whom to confide her sorrow , and much sorrow fell to her lot just then . 
The time for Prince Andrew 's return and marriage was approaching , but his request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out ; in fact , it seemed as if matters were quite hopeless , for at every mention of the young Countess Rostova the old prince -LRB- who apart from that was usually in a bad temper -RRB- lost control of himself . 
Another lately added sorrow arose from the lessons she gave her six year-old nephew . 
To her consternation she detected in herself in relation to little Nicholas some symptoms of her father 's irritability . 
However often she told herself that she must not get irritable when teaching her nephew , almost every time that , pointer in hand , she sat down to show him the French alphabet , she so longed to pour her own knowledge quickly and easily into the child -- who was already afraid that Auntie might at any moment get angry -- that at his slightest inattention she trembled , became flustered and heated , raised her voice , and sometimes pulled him by the arm and put him in the corner . 
Having put him in the corner she would herself begin to cry over her cruel , evil nature , and little Nicholas , following her example , would sob , and without permission would leave his corner , come to her , pull her wet hands from her face , and comfort her . 
But what distressed the princess most of all was her father 's irritability , which was always directed against her and had of late amounted to cruelty . 
Had he forced her to prostrate herself to the ground all night , had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water , it would never have entered her mind to think her position hard ; but this loving despot -- the more cruel because he loved her and for that reason tormented himself and her -- knew how not merely to hurt and humiliate her deliberately , but to show her that she was always to blame for everything . 
Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess Mary more than anything else ; this was his ever-increasing intimacy with Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
The idea that at the first moment of receiving the news of his son 's intentions had occurred to him in jest -- that if Andrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne -- had evidently pleased him , and latterly he had persistently , and as it seemed to Princess Mary merely to offend her , shown special endearments to the companion and expressed his dissatisfaction with his daughter by demonstrations of love of Bourienne . 
