Before the end of the fast of St. Peter , Agrafena Ivanovna Belova , a country neighbor of the Rostovs , came to Moscow to pay her devotions at the shrines of the Moscow saints . 
She suggested that Natasha should fast and prepare for Holy Communion , and Natasha gladly welcomed the idea . 
Despite the doctor 's orders that she should not go out early in the morning , Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for the sacrament , not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostov family by attending three services in their own house , but as Agrafena Ivanovna did , by going to church every day for a week and not once missing Vespers , Matins , or Mass. . 
The countess was pleased with Natasha 's zeal ; after the poor results of the medical treatment , in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer might help her daughter more than medicines and , though not without fear and concealing it from the doctor , she agreed to Natasha 's wish and entrusted her to Belova . 
Agrafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natasha at three in the morning , but generally found her already awake . 
She was afraid of being late for Matins . 
Hastily washing , and meekly putting on her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla , Natasha , shivering in the fresh air , went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn . 
By Agrafena Ivanovna 's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their own parish , but at a church where , according to the devout Agrafena Ivanovna , the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life . 
There were never many people in the church ; Natasha always stood beside Belova in the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin , let into the screen before the choir on the left side , and a feeling , new to her , of humility before something great and incomprehensible , seized her when at that unusual morning hour , gazing at the dark face of the Virgin illuminated by the candles burning before it and by the morning light falling from the window , she listened to the words of the service which she tried to follow with understanding . 
When she understood them her personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its own . 
