Some see it as a force directly inherent in heroes , as the peasant sees the devil in the locomotive ; others as a force resulting from several other forces , like the movement of the wheels ; others again as an intellectual influence , like the smoke that is blown away . 
So long as histories are written of separate individuals , whether Caesars , Alexanders , Luthers , or Voltaires , and not the histories of all , absolutely all those who take part in an event , it is quite impossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conception of a force compelling men to direct their activity toward a certain end . 
And the only such conception known to historians is that of power . 
This conception is the one handle by means of which the material of history , as at present expounded , can be dealt with , and anyone who breaks that handle off , as Buckle did , without finding some other method of treating historical material , merely deprives himself of the one possible way of dealing with it . 
The necessity of the conception of power as an explanation of historical events is best demonstrated by the universal historians and historians of culture themselves , for they professedly reject that conception but inevitably have recourse to it at every step . 
In dealing with humanity 's inquiry , the science of history up to now is like money in circulation -- paper money and coin . 
The biographies and special national histories are like paper money . 
They can be used and can circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm to anyone and even advantageously , as long as no one asks what is the security behind them . 
You need only forget to ask how the will of heroes produces events , and such histories as Thiers ' will be interesting and instructive and may perhaps even possess a tinge of poetry . 
But just as doubts of the real value of paper money arise either because , being easy to make , too much of it gets made or because people try to exchange it for gold , so also doubts concerning the real value of such histories arise either because too many of them are written or because in his simplicity of heart someone inquires : by what force did Napoleon do this ? 
