But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from where he was standing down below , or from the knoll above on which some of his generals had taken their stand , but even from the fleches themselves -- in which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers , alternately or together , dead , wounded , alive , frightened , or maddened -- even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out what was taking place . 
There for several hours amid incessant cannon and musketry fire , now Russians were seen alone , now Frenchmen alone , now infantry , and now cavalry : they appeared , fired , fell , collided , not knowing what to do with one another , screamed , and ran back again . 
From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out , and orderlies from his marshals , kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress of the action , but all these reports were false , both because it was impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at any given moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual place of conflict but reported what they had heard from others ; and also because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleon circumstances changed and the news he brought was already becoming false . 
Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings that Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in the hands of the French . 
The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the troops to cross it ? 
Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form up on the farther side and wait . 
But before that order was given - almost as soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino -- the bridge had been retaken by the Russians and burned , in the very skirmish at which Pierre had been present at the beginning of the battle . 
An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened face and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed , Campan wounded , and Davout killed ; yet at the very time the adjutant had been told that the French had been repulsed , the fleches had in fact been recaptured by other French troops , and Davout was alive and only slightly bruised . 
On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders , which had either been executed before he gave them or could not be and were not executed . 
The marshals and generals , who were nearer to the field of battle but , like Napoleon , did not take part in the actual fighting and only occasionally went within musket range , made their own arrangements without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to fire and where cavalry should gallop and infantry should run . 
