That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to reason . 
If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent source of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and to experience , but in fact such subjection does not exist and is inconceivable . 
A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he , as an object of observation , is subject to certain laws , and man submits to them and never resists the laws of gravity or impermeability once he has become acquainted with them . 
But the same series of experiments and arguments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he is conscious in himself is impossible , and that his every action depends on his organization , his character , and the motives acting upon him ; yet man never submits to the deductions of these experiments and arguments . 
Having learned from experiment and argument that a stone falls downwards , a man indubitably believes this and always expects the law that he has learned to be fulfilled . 
But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws , he does not and can not believe this . 
However often experiment and reasoning may show a man that under the same conditions and with the same character he will do the same thing as before , yet when under the same conditions and with the same character he approaches for the thousandth time the action that always ends in the same way , he feels as certainly convinced as before the experiment that he can act as he pleases . 
Every man , savage or sage , however incontestably reason and experiment may prove to him that it is impossible to imagine two different courses of action in precisely the same conditions , feels that without this irrational conception -LRB- which constitutes the essence of freedom -RRB- he can not imagine life . 
He feels that however impossible it may be , it is so , for without this conception of freedom not only would he be unable to understand life , but he would be unable to live for a single moment . 
He could not live , because all man 's efforts , all his impulses to life , are only efforts to increase freedom . 
