... '' Natasha began , and without replying to Sonya 's words of comfort she got into bed , and long after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless , gazing at the moonlight through the frosty windowpanes . 
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love for Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her . 
The countess , who had long noticed what was going on between them and was expecting this declaration , listened to him in silence and then told her son that he might marry whom he pleased , but that neither she nor his father would give their blessing to such a marriage . 
Nicholas , for the first time , felt that his mother was displeased with him and that , despite her love for him , she would not give way . 
Coldly , without looking at her son , she sent for her husband and , when he came , tried briefly and coldly to inform him of the facts , in her son 's presence , but unable to restrain herself she burst into tears of vexation and left the room . 
The old count began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his purpose . 
Nicholas replied that he could not go back on his word , and his father , sighing and evidently disconcerted , very soon became silent and went in to the countess . 
In all his encounters with his son , the count was always conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted the family fortune , and so he could not be angry with him for refusing to marry an heiress and choosing the dowerless Sonya . 
On this occasion , he was only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had not been in disorder , no better wife for Nicholas than Sonya could have been wished for , and that no one but himself with his Mitenka and his uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the family finances . 
The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their son again , but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and , with a cruelty neither of them expected , reproached her niece for trying to catch Nicholas and for ingratitude . 
