What would have happened if on approaching Tarutino , Napoleon had attacked the Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when he attacked them at Smolensk ? 
What would have happened had the French moved on Petersburg ? 
... In any of these eventualities the flank march that brought salvation might have proved disastrous . 
The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studying history deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march can not be attributed to any one man , that no one ever foresaw it , and that in reality , like the retreat from Fili , it did not suggest itself to anyone in its entirety , but resulted -- moment by moment , step by step , event by event -- from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was only seen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and belonged to the past . 
At the council at Fili the prevailing thought in the minds of the Russian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself , namely , a direct retreat by the Nizhni road . 
In proof of this there is the fact that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat , and above all there is the well-known conversation after the council , between the commander in chief and Lanskoy , who was in charge of the commissariat department . 
Lanskoy informed the commander in chief that the army supplies were for the most part stored along the Oka in the Tula and Ryazan provinces , and that if they retreated on Nizhni the army would be separated from its supplies by the broad river Oka , which can not be crossed early in winter . 
This was the first indication of the necessity of deviating from what had previously seemed the most natural course -- a direct retreat on Nizhni-Novgorod . 
The army turned more to the south , along the Ryazan road and nearer to its supplies . 
Subsequently the inactivity of the French -LRB- who even lost sight of the Russian army -RRB- , concern for the safety of the arsenal at Tula , and especially the advantages of drawing nearer to its supplies caused the army to turn still further south to the Tula road . 
