The dispositions cited above are not at all worse , but are even better , than previous dispositions by which he had won victories . 
His pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse than formerly , but much the same as usual . 
These dispositions and orders only seem worse than previous ones because the battle of Borodino was the first Napoleon did not win . 
The profoundest and most excellent dispositions and orders seem very bad , and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks of importance , when they relate to a battle that has been lost , and the very worst dispositions and orders seem very good , and serious people fill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits , when they relate to a battle that has been won . 
The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were a model of perfection for that kind of composition , but still they were criticized -- criticized for their very perfection , for their excessive minuteness . 
Napoleon at the battle of Borodino fulfilled his office as representative of authority as well as , and even better than , at other battles . 
He did nothing harmful to the progress of the battle ; he inclined to the most reasonable opinions , he made no confusion , did not contradict himself , did not get frightened or run away from the field of battle , but with his great tact and military experience carried out his role of appearing to command , calmly and with dignity . 
On returning from a second inspection of the lines , Napoleon remarked : `` The chessmen are set up , the game will begin tomorrow ! '' 
Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset , he began to talk to him about Paris and about some changes he meant to make the Empress ' household , surprising the prefect by his memory of minute details relating to the court . 
He showed an interest in trifles , joked about de Beausset 's love of travel , and chatted carelessly , as a famous , self-confident surgeon who knows his job does when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apron while a patient is being strapped to the operating table . 
