The Emperor , moreover , had with him not a commander in chief 's staff but the imperial headquarters staff . 
In attendance on him was the head of the imperial staff , Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski , as well as generals , imperial aides-de-camp , diplomatic officials , and a large number of foreigners , but not the army staff . 
Besides these , there were in attendance on the Emperor without any definite appointments : Arakcheev , the ex-Minister of War ; Count Bennigsen , the senior general in rank ; the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich ; Count Rumyantsev , the Chancellor ; Stein , a former Prussian minister ; Armfeldt , a Swedish general ; Pfuel , the chief author of the plan of campaign ; Paulucci , an adjutant general and Sardinian emigre ; Wolzogen -- and many others . 
Though these men had no military appointment in the army , their position gave them influence , and often a corps commander , or even the commander in chief , did not know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen , the Grand Duke , Arakcheev , or Prince Volkonski , or was given this or that advice and did not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanated from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to be executed or not . 
But this was only the external condition ; the essential significance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people , from a courtier 's point of view -LRB- and in an Emperor 's vicinity all became courtiers -RRB- , was clear to everyone . 
It was this : the Emperor did not assume the title of commander in chief , but disposed of all the armies ; the men around him were his assistants . 
Arakcheev was a faithful custodian to enforce order and acted as the sovereign 's bodyguard . 
Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be doing the honors of the district , but was in reality a good general , useful as an adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay . 
The Grand Duke was there because it suited him to be . 
The ex-Minister Stein was there because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high esteem personally . 
