When returning from his leave , Rostov felt , for the first time , how close was the bond that united him to Denisov and and the whole regiment . 
On approaching it , Rostov felt as he had done when approaching his home in Moscow . 
When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform of his regiment , when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and saw the picket ropes of the roan horses , when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to his master , `` The count has come ! '' 
and Denisov , who had been asleep on his bed , ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him , and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival , Rostov experienced the same feeling his mother , his father , and his sister had embraced him , and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak . 
The regiment was also a home , and as unalterably dear and precious as his parents ' house . 
When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and had been reassigned to his former squadron , had been on duty and had gone out foraging , when he had again entered into all the little interests of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one narrow , unchanging frame , he experienced the same sense of peace , of moral support , and the same sense being at home here in his own place , as he had felt under the parental roof . 
But here was none of all that turmoil of the world at large , where he did not know his right place and took mistaken decisions ; here was no Sonya with whom he ought , or ought not , to have an explanation ; here was no possibility of going there or not going there ; here there were not twenty-four hours in the day which could be spent in such a variety of ways ; there was not that innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or farther from him than another ; there were none of those uncertain and undefined money relations with his father , and nothing to recall that terrible loss to Dolokhov . 
Here , in the regiment , all was clear and simple . 
The whole world was divided into two unequal parts : one , our Pavlograd regiment ; the other , all the rest . 
And the rest was no concern of his . 
