In the troubled waters of conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor 's headquarters , it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at other times . 
A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post would today agree with Pfuel , tomorrow with his opponent , and the day after , merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor , would declare that he had no opinion at all on the matter . 
Another who wished to gain some advantage would attract the Emperor 's attention by loudly advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before , and would dispute and shout at the council , beating his breast and challenging those who did not agree with him to duels , thereby proving that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good . 
A third , in the absence of opponents , between two councils would simply solicit a special gratuity for his faithful services , well knowing that at that moment people would be too busy to refuse him . 
A fourth while seemingly overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor 's eye . 
A fifth , to achieve his long-cherished aim of dining with the Emperor , would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some newly emerging opinion and for this object would produce arguments more or less forcible and correct . 
All the men of this party were fishing for rubles , decorations , and promotions , and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperial favor , and directly they noticed it turning in any direction , this whole drone population of the army began blowing hard that way , so that it was all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere . 
Amid the uncertainties of the position , with the menace of serious danger giving a peculiarly threatening character to everything , amid this vortex of intrigue , egotism , conflict of views and feelings , and the diversity of race among these people -- this eighth and largest party of those preoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion and obscurity to the common task . 
Whatever question arose , a swarm of these drones , without having finished their buzzing on a previous theme , flew over to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of those who were disputing honestly . 
From among all these parties , just at the time Prince Andrew reached the army , another , a ninth party , was being formed and was beginning to raise its voice . 
