There was still the hunting establishment which Nicholas had even enlarged , the same fifty horses and fifteen grooms in the stables , the same expensive presents and dinner parties to the whole district on name days ; there were still the count 's games of whist and boston , at which - spreading out his cards so that everybody could see them -- he let himself be plundered of hundreds of rubles every day by his neighbors , who looked upon an opportunity to play a rubber with Count Rostov as a most profitable source of income . 
The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net , trying not to believe that he was entangled but becoming more and more so at every step , and feeling too feeble to break the meshes or to set to work carefully and patiently to disentangle them . 
The countess , with her loving heart , felt that her children were being ruined , that it was not the count 's fault for he could not help being what he was -- that -LRB- though he tried to hide it -RRB- he himself suffered from the consciousness of his own and his children 's ruin , and she tried to find means of remedying the position . 
From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution , namely , for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress . 
She felt this to be their last hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found for him , she would have to abandon the hope of ever getting matters right . 
This match was with Julie Karagina , the daughter of excellent and virtuous parents , a girl the Rostovs had known from childhood , and who had now become a wealthy heiress through the death of the last of her brothers . 
The countess had written direct to Julie 's mother in Moscow suggesting a marriage between their children and had received a favorable answer from her . 
Karagina had replied that for her part she was agreeable , and everything depend on her daughter 's inclination . 
She invited Nicholas to come to Moscow . 
Several times the countess , with tears in her eyes , told her son that now both her daughters were settled , her only wish was to see him married . 
