Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch , its walls hung round with Persian carpets . 
The part of the room behind the columns , with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and on the other an immense case containing icons , was brightly illuminated with red light like a Russian church during evening service . 
Under the gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair , and in that chair on snowy-white smooth pillows , evidently freshly changed , Pierre saw -- covered to the waist by a bright green quilt -- the familiar , majestic figure of his father , Count Bezukhov , with that gray mane of hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of a lion , and the deep characteristically noble wrinkles of his handsome , ruddy face . 
He lay just under the icons ; his large thick hands outside the quilt . 
Into the right hand , which was lying palm downwards , a wax taper had been thrust between forefinger and thumb , and an old servant , bending over from behind the chair , held it in position . 
By the chair stood the priests , their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments , with lighted tapers in their hands , slowly and solemnly conducting the service . 
A little behind them stood the two younger princesses holding handkerchiefs to their eyes , and just in front of them their eldest sister , Catiche , with a vicious and determined look steadily fixed on the icons , as though declaring to all that she could not answer for herself should she glance round . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , with a meek , sorrowful , and all-forgiving expression on her face , stood by the door near the strange lady . 
Prince Vasili in front of the door , near the invalid chair , a wax taper in his left hand , was leaning his left arm on the carved back of a velvet chair he had turned round for the purpose , and was crossing himself with his right hand , turning his eyes upward each time he touched his forehead . 
His face wore a calm look of piety and resignation to the will of God . 
