Who has not asked himself how it is that the French were not all captured or destroyed when our three armies surrounded them in superior numbers , when the disordered French , hungry and freezing , surrendered in crowds , and when -LRB- as the historians relate -RRB- the aim of the Russians was to stop the French , to cut them off , and capture them all ? 
How was it that the Russian army , which when numerically weaker than the French had given battle at Borodino , did not achieve its purpose when it had surrounded the French on three sides and when its aim was to capture them ? 
Can the French be so enormously superior to us that when we had surrounded them with superior forces we could not beat them ? 
How could that happen ? 
History -LRB- or what is called by that name -RRB- replying to these questions says that this occurred because Kutuzov and Tormasov and Chichagov , and this man and that man , did not execute such and such maneuvers ... But why did they not execute those maneuvers ? 
And why if they were guilty of not carrying out a prearranged plan were they not tried and punished ? 
But even if we admitted that Kutuzov , Chichagov , and others were the cause of the Russian failures , it is still incomprehensible why , the position of the Russian army being what it was at Krasnoe and at the Berezina -LRB- in both cases we had superior forces -RRB- , the French army with its marshals , kings , and Emperor was not captured , if that was what the Russians aimed at . 
The explanation of this strange fact given by Russian military historians -LRB- to the effect that Kutuzov hindered an attack -RRB- is unfounded , for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attacking at Vyazma and Tarutino . 
Why was the Russian army -- which with inferior forces had withstood the enemy in full strength at Borodino -- defeated at Krasnoe and the Berezina by the disorganized crowds of the French when it was numerically superior ? 
If the aim of the Russians consisted in cutting off and capturing Napoleon and his marshals -- and that aim was not merely frustrated but all attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled -- then this last period of the campaign is quite rightly considered by the French to be a series of victories , and quite wrongly considered victorious by Russian historians . 
