A general does nothing but command the troops , indicates the objective , and hardly ever uses a weapon himself . 
The commander in chief never takes direct part in the action itself , but only gives general orders concerning the movement of the mass of the troops . 
A similar relation of people to one another is seen in every combination of men for common activity -- in agriculture , trade , and every administration . 
And so without particularly analyzing all the contiguous sections of a cone and of the ranks of an army , or the ranks and positions in any administrative or public business whatever from the lowest to the highest , we see a law by which men , to take associated action , combine in such relations that the more directly they participate in performing the action the less they can command and the more numerous they are , while the less their direct participation in the action itself , the more they command and the fewer of them there are ; rising in this way from the lowest ranks to the man at the top , who takes the least direct share in the action and directs his activity chiefly to commanding . 
This relation of the men who command to those they command is what constitutes the essence of the conception called power . 
Having restored the condition of time under which all events occur , find that a command is executed only when it is related to a corresponding series of events . 
Restoring the essential condition of relation between those who command and those who execute , we find that by the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest part in the action itself and that their activity is exclusively directed to commanding . 
When an event is taking place people express their opinions and wishes about it , and as the event results from the collective activity of many people , some one of the opinions or wishes expressed is sure to be fulfilled if but approximately . 
When one of the opinions expressed is fulfilled , that opinion gets connected with the event as a command preceding it . 
Men are hauling a log . 
