Besides being advocates of bold action , this section also represented nationalism , which made them still more one-sided in the dispute . 
They were Russians : Bagration , Ermolov -LRB- who was beginning to come to the front -RRB- , and others . 
At that time a famous joke of Ermolov 's was being circulated , that as a great favor he had petitioned the Emperor to make him a German . 
The men of that party , remembering Suvorov , said that what one had to do was not to reason , or stick pins into maps , but to fight , beat the enemy , keep him out of Russia , and not let the army get discouraged . 
To the third party -- in which the Emperor had most confidence - belonged the courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two . 
The members of this party , chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheev belonged , thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish to seem to have some generally say . 
They said that undoubtedly war , particularly against such a genius as Bonaparte -LRB- they called him Bonaparte now -RRB- , needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientific knowledge and in that respect Pfuel was a genius , but at the same time it had to be acknowledged that the theorists are often one sided , and therefore one should not trust them absolutely , but should also listen to what Pfuel 's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare had to say , and then choose a middle course . 
They insisted on the retention of the camp at Drissa , according to Pfuel 's plan , but on changing the movements of the other armies . 
Though , by this course , neither one aim nor the other could be attained , yet it seemed best to the adherents of this third party . 
Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was the Tsarevich , who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz , where he had ridden out at the head of the Guards , in his casque and cavalry uniform as to a review , expecting to crush the French gallantly ; but unexpectedly finding himself in the front line had narrowly escaped amid the general confusion . 
