Not only could he no longer think the thoughts that had first come to him as he lay gazing at the sky on the field of Austerlitz and had later enlarged upon with Pierre , and which had filled his solitude at Bogucharovo and then in Switzerland and Rome , but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizons they had revealed . 
He was now concerned only with the nearest practical matters unrelated to his past interests , and he seized on these the more eagerly the more those past interests were closed to him . 
It was as if that lofty , infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered above him had suddenly turned into a low , solid vault that weighed him down , in which all was clear , but nothing eternal or mysterious . 
Of the activities that presented themselves to him , army service was the simplest and most familiar . 
As a general on duty on Kutuzov 's staff , he applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised Kutuzov by his willingness and accuracy in work . 
Not having found Kuragin in Turkey , Prince Andrew did not think it necessary to rush back to Russia after him , but all the same he knew that however long it might be before he met Kuragin , despite his contempt for him and despite all the proofs he deduced to convince himself that it was not worth stooping to a conflict with him -- he knew that when he did meet him he would not be able to resist calling him out , any more than a ravenous man can help snatching at food . 
And the consciousness that the insult was not yet avenged , that his rancor was still unspent , weighed on his heart and poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain in Turkey by means of restless , plodding , and rather vainglorious and ambitious activity . 
In the year 1812 , when news of the war with Napoleon reached Bucharest -- where Kutuzov had been living for two months , passing his days and nights with a Wallachian woman -- Prince Andrew asked Kutuzov to transfer him to the Western Army . 
Kutuzov , who was already weary of Bolkonski 's activity which seemed to reproach his own idleness , very readily let him go and gave him a mission to Barclay de Tolly . 
Before joining the Western Army which was then , in May , encamped at Drissa , Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way , being only two miles off the Smolensk highroad . 
