`` Let them have it ! '' 
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire , and for which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him , was being done . 
And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginary greatness , and again -- as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing something for itself -- he submissively fulfilled the cruel , sad , gloomy , and inhuman role predestined for him . 
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening lay more than on all the others who took part in it . 
Never to the end of his life could he understand goodness , beauty , or truth , or the significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and truth , too remote from everything human , for him ever to be able to grasp their meaning . 
He could not disavow his actions , belauded as they were by half the world , and so he had to repudiate truth , goodness , and all humanity . 
Not only on that day , as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men killed and maimed -LRB- by his will as he believed -RRB- , did he reckon as he looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and , deceiving himself , find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that there were five Russians for every Frenchman . 
Not on that day alone did he write in a letter to Paris that `` the battle field was superb , '' because fifty thousand corpses lay there , but even on the island of St. Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done , he wrote : The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times : it was a war of good sense , for real interests , for the tranquillity and security of all ; it was purely pacific and conservative . 
It was a war for a great cause , the end of uncertainties and the beginning of security . 
A new horizon and new labors were opening out , full of well-being and prosperity for all . 
