The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us now . 
No one will deny that that cause was , on the one hand , its advance into the heart of Russia late in the season without any preparation for a winter campaign and , on the other , the character given to the war by the burning of Russian towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused among the Russian people . 
But no one at the time foresaw -LRB- what now seems so evident -RRB- that this was the only way an army of eight hundred thousand men -- the best in the world and led by the best general -- could be destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength , and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was . 
Not only did no one see this , but on the Russian side every effort was made to hinder the only thing that could save Russia , while on the French side , despite Napoleon 's experience and so-called military genius , every effort was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer , that is , to doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction . 
In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of saying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line , that he sought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk , and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the campaign was even then understood . 
Russian authors are still fonder of telling us that from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian war plan was adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia , and this plan some of them attribute to Pfuel , others to a certain Frenchman , others to Toll , and others again to Alexander himself - pointing to notes , projects , and letters which contain hints of such a line of action . 
But all these hints at what happened , both from the French side and the Russian , are advanced only because they fit in with the event . 
Had that event not occurred these hints would have been forgotten , as we have forgotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the contrary which were current then but have now been forgotten because the event falsified them . 
There are always so many conjectures as to the issue of any event that however it may end there will always be people to say : `` I said then that it would be so , '' quite forgetting that amid their innumerable conjectures many were to quite the contrary effect . 
Conjectures as to Napoleon 's awareness of the danger of extending his line , and -LRB- on the Russian side -RRB- as to luring the enemy into the depths of Russia , are evidently of that kind , and only by much straining can historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals , or such plans to the Russian commanders . 
