Besides his height and stoutness , and the strange morose look of suffering in his face and whole figure , the Russians stared at Pierre because they could not make out to what class he could belong . 
The French followed him with astonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre , unlike all the other Russians who gazed at the French with fear and curiosity , paid no attention to them . 
At the gate of one house three Frenchmen , who were explaining something to some Russians who did not understand them , stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French . 
Pierre shook his head and went on . 
In another side street a sentinel standing beside a green caisson shouted at him , but only when the shout was threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man 's musket as he raised it did Pierre understand that he had to pass on the other side of the street . 
He heard nothing and saw nothing of what went on around him . 
He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste , like something dreadful and alien to him , for , after the previous night 's experience , he was afraid of losing it . 
But he was not destined to bring his mood safely to his destination . 
And even had he not been hindered by anything on the way , his intention could not now have been carried out , for Napoleon had passed the Arbat more than four hours previously on his way from the Dorogomilov suburb to the Kremlin , and was now sitting in a very gloomy frame of mind in a royal study in the Kremlin , giving detailed and exact orders as to measures to be taken immediately to extinguish the fire , to prevent looting , and to reassure the inhabitants . 
But Pierre did not know this ; he was entirely absorbed in what lay before him , and was tortured -- as those are who obstinately undertake a task that is impossible for them not because of its difficulty but because of its incompatibility with their natures -- by the fear of weakening at the decisive moment and so losing his self-esteem . 
