Despite the un-Russian appearance of the locality and surroundings -- fruit gardens , stone fences , tiled roofs , and hills in the distance -- and despite the fact that the inhabitants -LRB- who gazed with curiosity at the soldiers -RRB- were not Russians , the regiment had just the appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for an inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia . 
On the evening of the last day 's march an order had been received that the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march . 
Though the words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander , and the question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or not , it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders to present the regiment in parade order , on the principle that it is always better to `` bow too low than not bow low enough . '' 
So the soldiers , after a twenty-mile march , were kept mending and cleaning all night long without closing their eyes , while the adjutants and company commanders calculated and reckoned , and by morning the regiment -- instead of the straggling , disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the day before -- presented a well-ordered array of two thousand men each of whom knew his place and his duty , had every button and every strap in place , and shone with cleanliness . 
And not only externally was all in order , but had it pleased the commander in chief to look under the uniforms he would have found on every man a clean shirt , and in every knapsack the appointed number of articles , `` awl , soap , and all , '' as the soldiers say . 
There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at ease . 
It was the state of the soldiers ' boots . 
More than half the men 's boots were in holes . 
But this defect was not due to any fault of the regimental commander , for in spite of repeated demands boots had not been issued by the Austrian commissariat , and the regiment had marched some seven hundred miles . 
The commander of the regiment was an elderly , choleric , stout , and thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers , and wider from chest to back than across the shoulders . 
