Then , as Thiers eloquently recounts , he ordered his soldiers to be paid in forged Russian money which he had prepared : `` Raising the use of these means by an act worthy of himself and of the French army , he let relief be distributed to those who had been burned out . 
But as food was too precious to be given to foreigners , who were for the most part enemies , Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food from outside , and had paper rubles distributed to them . '' 
With reference to army discipline , orders were continually being issued to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military duties and to suppress robbery . 
But strange to say , all these measures , efforts , and plans -- which were not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances -- did not affect the essence of the matter but , like the hands of a clock detached from the mechanism , swung about in an arbitrary and aimless way without engaging the cogwheels . 
With reference to the military side -- the plan of campaign -- that work of genius of which Thiers remarks that , `` His genius never devised anything more profound , more skillful , or more admirable , '' and enters into a polemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of genius must be referred not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October - that plan never was or could be executed , for it was quite out of touch with the facts of the case . 
The fortifying of the Kremlin , for which la Mosquee -LRB- as Napoleon termed the church of Basil the Beatified -RRB- was to have been razed to the ground , proved quite useless . 
The mining of the Kremlin only helped toward fulfilling Napoleon 's wish that it should be blown up when he left Moscow -- as a child wants the floor on which he has hurt himself to be beaten . 
The pursuit of the Russian army , about which Napoleon was so concerned , produced an unheard-of result . 
The French generals lost touch with the Russian army of sixty thousand men , and according to Thiers it was only eventually found , like a lost pin , by the skill -- and apparently the genius -- of Murat . 
With reference to diplomacy , all Napoleon 's arguments as to his magnanimity and justice , both to Tutolmin and to Yakovlev -LRB- whose chief concern was to obtain a greatcoat and a conveyance -RRB- , proved useless ; Alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to their embassage . 
