But people who talk like that either do not know what they are talking about or deliberately deceive themselves . 
No battle -- Tarutino , Borodino , or Austerlitz -- takes place as those who planned it anticipated . 
That is an essential condition . 
A countless number of free forces -LRB- for nowhere is man freer than during a battle , where it is a question of life and death -RRB- influence the course taken by the fight , and that course never can be known in advance and never coincides with the direction of any one force . 
If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a given body , the direction of its motion can not coincide with any one of those forces , but will always be a mean -- what in mechanics is represented by the diagonal of a parallelogram of forces . 
If in the descriptions given by historians , especially French ones , we find their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previously formed plans , the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptions are false . 
The battle of Tarutino obviously did not attain the aim Toll had in view -- to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by the dispositions ; nor that which Count Orlov-Denisov may have had in view - to take Murat prisoner ; nor the result of immediately destroying the whole corps , which Bennigsen and others may have had in view ; nor the aim of the officer who wished to go into action to distinguish himself ; nor that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he got , and so on . 
But if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what all the Russians of that day desired -- to drive the French out of Russia and destroy their army -- it is quite clear that the battle of Tarutino , just because of its incongruities , was exactly what was wanted at that stage of the campaign . 
It would be difficult and even impossible to imagine any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this battle . 
With a minimum of effort and insignificant losses , despite the greatest confusion , the most important results of the whole campaign were attained : the transition from retreat to advance , an exposure of the weakness of the French , and the administration of that shock which Napoleon 's army had only awaited to begin its flight . 
