All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free will to inevitability , that is , of consciousness to the laws of reason . 
All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certain relation of the forces of nature to inevitability , or of the essence of life to the laws of reason . 
The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious of them ; we call those forces gravitation , inertia , electricity , animal force , and so on , but we are conscious of the force of life in man and we call that freedom . 
But just as the force of gravitation , incomprehensible in itself but felt by every man , is understood by us only to the extent to which we know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject -LRB- from the first knowledge that all bodies have weight , up to Newton 's law -RRB- , so too the force of free will , incomprehensible in itself but of which everyone is conscious , is intelligible to us only in as far as we know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject -LRB- from the fact that every man dies , up to the knowledge of the most complex economic and historic laws -RRB- . 
All knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under the laws of reason . 
Man 's free will differs from every other force in that man is directly conscious of it , but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from any other force . 
The forces of gravitation , electricity , or chemical affinity are only distinguished from one another in that they are differently defined by reason . 
Just so the force of man 's free will is distinguished by reason from the other forces of nature only by the definition reason gives it . 
Freedom , apart from necessity , that is , apart from the laws of reason that define it , differs in no way from gravitation , or heat , or the force that makes things grow ; for reason , it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life . 
And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies , the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity , or of chemical affinity , or of the vital force , forms the content of astronomy , physics , chemistry , botany , zoology , and so on , just in the same way does the force of free will form the content of history . 
