Her slender bare arms and neck were not beautiful -- compared to Helene 's her shoulders looked thin and her bosom undeveloped . 
But Helene seemed , as it were , hardened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had scanned her person , while Natasha was like a girl exposed for the first time , who would have felt very much ashamed had she not been assured that this was absolutely necessary . 
Prince Andrew liked dancing , and wishing to escape as quickly as possible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed to him , wishing also to break up the circle of restraint he disliked , caused by the Emperor 's presence , he danced , and had chosen Natasha because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the first pretty girl who caught his eye ; but scarcely had he embraced that slender supple figure and felt her stirring so close to him and smiling so near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head , and he felt himself revived and rejuvenated when after leaving her he stood breathing deeply and watching the other dancers . 
After Prince Andrew , Boris came up to ask Natasha for dance , and then the aide-de-camp who had opened the ball , and several other young men , so that , flushed and happy , and passing on her superfluous partners to Sonya , she did not cease dancing all the evening . 
She noticed and saw nothing of what occupied everyone else . 
Not only did she fail to notice that the Emperor talked a long time with the French ambassador , and how particularly gracious he was to a certain lady , or that Prince So-and-so and So-and-so did and said this and that , and that Helene had great success and was honored was by the special attention of So-and-so , but she did not even see the Emperor , and only noticed that he had gone because the ball became livelier after his departure . 
For one of the merry cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was again her partner . 
He reminded her of their first encounter in the Otradnoe avenue , and how she had been unable to sleep that moonlight night , and told her how he had involuntarily overheard her . 
Natasha blushed at that recollection and tried to excuse herself , as if there had been something to be ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard . 
Like all men who have grown up in society , Prince Andrew liked meeting someone there not of the conventional society stamp . 
