That part of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the ground was more open and level than elsewhere . 
It was evident to anyone , military or not , that it was here the French should attack . 
It would seem that not much consideration was needed to reach this conclusion , nor any particular care or trouble on the part of the Emperor and his marshals , nor was there any need of that special and supreme quality called genius that people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon ; yet the historians who described the event later and the men who then surrounded Napoleon , and he himself , thought otherwise . 
Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound air and in silence , nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously , and without communicating to the generals around him the profound course of ideas which guided his decisions merely gave them his final conclusions in the form of commands . 
Having listened to a suggestion from Davout , who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl , to turn the Russian left wing , Napoleon said it should not be done , without explaining why not . 
To a proposal made by General Campan -LRB- who was to attack the fleches -RRB- to lead his division through the woods , Napoleon agreed , though the so-called Duke of Elchingen -LRB- Ney -RRB- ventured to remark that a movement through the woods was dangerous and might disorder the division . 
Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt , Napoleon pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two batteries should be set up by the morrow to act against the Russian entrenchments , and the places where , in line with them , the field artillery should be placed . 
After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent , and the dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation . 
These dispositions , of which the French historians write with enthusiasm and other historians with profound respect , were as follows : At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the plain occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the opposing batteries of the enemy . 
At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps , General Pernetti , with thirty cannon of Campan 's division and all the howitzers of Dessaix 's and Friant 's divisions , will move forward , open fire , and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy 's battery , against which will operate : 24 guns of the artillery of the Guards 30 guns of Campan 's division and 8 guns of Friant 's and Dessaix 's divisions -- in all 62 guns . 
