But drawing from his aged wisdom what they could understand , he told them of the golden bridge , and they laughed at and slandered him , flinging themselves on , rending and exulting over the dying beast . 
Ermolov , Miloradovich , Platov , and others in proximity to the French near Vyazma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up two French corps , and by way of reporting their intention to Kutuzov they sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope . 
And try as Kutuzov might to restrain the troops , our men attacked , trying to bar the road . 
Infantry regiments , we are told , advanced to the attack with music and with drums beating , and killed and lost thousands of men . 
But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army , closing up more firmly at the danger , continued , while steadily melting away , to pursue its fatal path to Smolensk . 
The Battle of Borodino , with the occupation of Moscow that followed it and the flight of the French without further conflicts , is one of the most instructive phenomena in history . 
All historians agree that the external activity of states and nations in their conflicts with one another is expressed in wars , and that as a direct result of greater or less success in war the political strength of states and nations increases or decreases . 
Strange as may be the historical account of how some king or emperor , having quarreled with another , collects an army , fights his enemy 's army , gains a victory by killing three , five , or ten thousand men , and subjugates a kingdom and an entire nation of several millions , all the facts of history -LRB- as far as we know it -RRB- confirm the truth of the statement that the greater or lesser success of one army against another is the cause , or at least an essential indication , of an increase or decrease in the strength of the nation -- even though it is unintelligible why the defeat of an army - a hundredth part of a nation -- should oblige that whole nation to submit . 
An army gains a victory , and at once the rights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of the defeated . 
An army has suffered defeat , and at once a people loses its rights in proportion to the severity of the reverse , and if its army suffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjugated . 
