When my opponent has sixteen men and I have fourteen , I am only one eighth weaker than he , but when I have exchanged thirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am . 
Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the French was about as five to six , but after that battle it was little more than one to two : previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and twenty thousand ; afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a hundred thousand . 
Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the battle , while Napoleon , who was said to be a commander of genius , gave it , losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines of communication still more . 
If it is said that he expected to end the campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by occupying Vienna , there is much evidence to the contrary . 
Napoleon 's historians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards he wished to stop , knew the danger of his extended position , and knew that the occupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campaign , for he had seen at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him , and had not received a single reply to his repeated announcements of his wish to negotiate . 
In giving and accepting battle at Borodino , Kutuzov acted involuntarily and irrationally . 
But later on , to fit what had occurred , the historians provided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius the generals who , of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved and involuntary . 
The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish the whole interest of the story , and we are still unable to accustom ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are meaningless . 
On the other question , how the battle of Borodino and the preceding battle of Shevardino were fought , there also exists a definite and well-known , but quite false , conception . 
All the historians describe the affair as follows : The Russian army , they say , in its retreat from Smolensk sought out for itself the best position for a general engagement and found such a position at Borodino . 
