The commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east . 
For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement to Moscow it was necessary : -LRB- 1 -RRB- that they should form themselves into a military group of a size able to endure a collision with the warlike military group of the east , -LRB- 2 -RRB- that they should abandon all established traditions and customs , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- that during their military movement they should have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to them the deceptions , robberies , and murders which would have to be committed during that movement . 
And beginning with the French Revolution the old inadequately large group was destroyed , as well as the old habits and traditions , and step by step a group was formed of larger dimensions with new customs and traditions , and a man was produced who would stand at the head of the coming movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done . 
A man without convictions , without habits , without traditions , without a name , and not even a Frenchman , emerges -- by what seem the strangest chances -- from among all the seething French parties , and without joining any one of them is borne forward to a prominent position . 
The ignorance of his colleagues , the weakness and insignificance of his opponents , the frankness of his falsehoods , and the dazzling and self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the army . 
The brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy , his opponents ' reluctance to fight , and his own childish audacity and self-confidence secure him military fame . 
Innumerable so called chances accompany him everywhere . 
The disfavor into which he falls with the rulers of France turns to his advantage . 
His attempts to avoid his predestined path are unsuccessful : he is not received into the Russian service , and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothing . 
During the war in Italy he is several times on the verge of destruction and each time is saved in an unexpected manner . 
