At the battle of Borodino , when Bagration was killed and nine tenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of the French artillery fire was directed against it , the man sent there was this same irresolute and undiscerning Dokhturov -- Kutuzov hastening to rectify a mistake he had made by sending someone else there first . 
And the quiet little Dokhturov rode thither , and Borodino became the greatest glory of the Russian army . 
Many heroes have been described to us in verse and prose , but of Dokhturov scarcely a word has been said . 
It was Dokhturov again whom they sent to Forminsk and from there to Malo-Yaroslavets , the place where the last battle with the French was fought and where the obvious disintegration of the French army began ; and we are told of many geniuses and heroes of that period of the campaign , but of Dokhturov nothing or very little is said and that dubiously . 
And this silence about Dokhturov is the clearest testimony to his merit . 
It is natural for a man who does not understand the workings of a machine to imagine that a shaving that has fallen into it by chance and is interfering with its action and tossing about in it is its most important part . 
The man who does not understand the construction of the machine can not conceive that the small connecting cogwheel which revolves quietly is one of the most essential parts of the machine , and not the shaving which merely harms and hinders the working . 
On the tenth of October when Dokhturov had gone halfway to Forminsk and stopped at the village of Aristovo , preparing faithfully to execute the orders he had received , the whole French army having , in its convulsive movement , reached Murat 's position apparently in order to give battle -- suddenly without any reason turned off to the left onto the new Kaluga road and began to enter Forminsk , where only Broussier had been till then . 
At that time Dokhturov had under his command , besides Dorokhov 's detachment , the two small guerrilla detachments of Figner and Seslavin . 
On the evening of October 11 Seslavin came to the Aristovo headquarters with a French guardsman he had captured . 
