When he did so and heard the subdued moaning with which Karataev generally lay down at the halting places , and when he smelled the odor emanating from him which was now stronger than before , Pierre moved farther away and did not think about him . 
While imprisoned in the shed Pierre had learned not with his intellect but with his whole being , by life itself , that man is created for happiness , that happiness is within him , in the satisfaction of simple human needs , and that all unhappiness arises not from privation but from superfluity . 
And now during these last three weeks of the march he had learned still another new , consolatory truth -- that nothing in this world is terrible . 
He had learned that as there is no condition in which man can be happy and entirely free , so there is no condition in which he need be unhappy and lack freedom . 
He learned that suffering and freedom have their limits and that those limits are very near together ; that the person in a bed of roses with one crumpled petal suffered as keenly as he now , sleeping on the bare damp earth with one side growing chilled while the other was warming ; and that when he had put on tight dancing shoes he had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feet that were covered with sores -- his footgear having long since fallen to pieces . 
He discovered that when he had married his wife -- of his own free will as it had seemed to him -- he had been no more free than now when they locked him up at night in a stable . 
Of all that he himself subsequently termed his sufferings , but which at the time he scarcely felt , the worst was the state of his bare , raw , and scab-covered feet . 
-LRB- The horseflesh was appetizing and nourishing , the saltpeter flavor of the gunpowder they used instead of salt was even pleasant ; there was no great cold , it was always warm walking in the daytime , and at night there were the campfires ; the lice that devoured him warmed his body . -RRB- 
The one thing that was at first hard to bear was his feet . 
After the second day 's march Pierre , having examined his feet by the campfire , thought it would be impossible to walk on them ; but when everybody got up he went along , limping , and , when he had warmed up , walked without feeling the pain , though at night his feet were more terrible to look at than before . 
