And the order to retreat carries us past the turn to the Kaluga road . 
And after the adjutant comes the commissary general asking where the stores are to be taken , and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to go , and a courier from Petersburg brings a letter from the sovereign which does not admit of the possibility of abandoning Moscow , and the commander in chief 's rival , the man who is undermining him -LRB- and there are always not merely one but several such -RRB- , presents a new project diametrically opposed to that of turning to the Kaluga road , and the commander in chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his energy and a respectable general who has been overlooked in the distribution of rewards comes to complain , and the inhabitants of the district pray to be defended , and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in and gives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer previously sent ; and a spy , a prisoner , and a general who has been on reconnaissance , all describe the position of the enemy 's army differently . 
People accustomed to misunderstand or to forget these inevitable conditions of a commander in chief 's actions describe to us , for instance , the position of the army at Fili and assume that the commander in chief could , on the first of September , quite freely decide whether to abandon Moscow or defend it ; whereas , with the Russian army less than four miles from Moscow , no such question existed . 
When had that question been settled ? 
At Drissa and at Smolensk and most palpably of all on the twenty-fourth of August at Shevardino and on the twenty-sixth at Borodino , and each day and hour and minute of the retreat from Borodino to Fili . 
When Ermolov , having been sent by Kutuzov to inspect the position , told the field marshal that it was impossible to fight there before Moscow and that they must retreat , Kutuzov looked at him in silence . 
`` Give me your hand , '' said he and , turning it over so as to feel the pulse , added : `` You are not well , my dear fellow . 
Think what you are saying ! '' 
Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscow without a battle . 
On the Poklonny Hill , four miles from the Dorogomilov gate of Moscow , Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside . 
