Even those , fond of intellectual talk and of expressing their feelings , who discussed Russia 's position at the time involuntarily introduced into their conversation either a shade of pretense and falsehood or useless condemnation and anger directed against people accused of actions no one could possibly be guilty of . 
In historic events the rule forbidding us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge is specially applicable . 
Only unconscious action bears fruit , and he who plays a part in an historic event never understands its significance . 
If he tries to realize it his efforts are fruitless . 
The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking place in Russia the less did he realize their significance . 
In Petersburg and in the provinces at a distance from Moscow , ladies , and gentlemen in militia uniforms , wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked of self-sacrifice and so on ; but in the army which retired beyond Moscow there was little talk or thought of Moscow , and when they caught sight of its burned ruins no one swore to be avenged on the French , but they thought about their next pay , their next quarters , of Matreshka the vivandiere , and like matters . 
As the war had caught him in the service , Nicholas Rostov took a close and prolonged part in the defense of his country , but did so casually , without any aim at self-sacrifice , and he therefore looked at what was going on in Russia without despair and without dismally racking his brains over it . 
Had he been asked what he thought of the state of Russia , he would have said that it was not his business to think about it , that Kutuzov and others were there for that purpose , but that he had heard that the regiments were to be made up to their full strength , that fighting would probably go on for a long time yet , and that things being so it was quite likely he might be in command of a regiment in a couple of years ' time . 
As he looked at the matter in this way , he learned that he was being sent to Voronezh to buy remounts for his division , not only without regret at being prevented from taking part in the coming battle , but with the greatest pleasure -- which he did not conceal and which his comrades fully understood . 
A few days before the battle of Borodino , Nicholas received the necessary money and warrants , and having sent some hussars on in advance , he set out with post horses for Voronezh . 
