When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution in the Emperor 's eyes , Michaud -- quoique etranger , russe de coeur et d'ame -- at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that he had heard -LRB- as he used afterwards to say -RRB- , and gave expression to his own feelings and those of the Russian people whose representative he considered himself to be , in the following words : `` Sire ! '' 
said he , `` Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory of the nation and the salvation of Europe ! '' 
With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him . 
It is natural for us who were not living in those days to imagine that when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleeing to distant provinces , and one levy after another was being raised for the defense of the fatherland , all Russians from the greatest to the least were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves , saving their fatherland , or weeping over its downfall . 
The tales and descriptions of that time without exception speak only of the self-sacrifice , patriotic devotion , despair , grief , and the heroism of the Russians . 
But it was not really so . 
It appears so to us because we see only the general historic interest of that time and do not see all the personal human interests that people had . 
Yet in reality those personal interests of the moment so much transcend the general interests that they always prevent the public interest from being felt or even noticed . 
Most of the people at that time paid no attention to the general progress of events but were guided only by their private interests , and they were the very people whose activities at that period were most useful . 
Those who tried to understand the general course of events and to take part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless members of society , they saw everything upside down , and all they did for the common good turned out to be useless and foolish -- like Pierre 's and Mamonov 's regiments which looted Russian villages , and the lint the young ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded , and so on . 
