It was the eve of St. Nicholas , the fifth of December , 1820 . 
Natasha had been staying at her brother 's with her husband and children since early autumn . 
Pierre had gone to Petersburg on business of his own for three weeks as he said , but had remained there nearly seven weeks and was expected back every minute . 
Besides the Bezukhov family , Nicholas ' old friend the retired General Vasili Dmitrich Denisov was staying with the Rostovs this fifth of December . 
On the sixth , which was his name day when the house would be full of visitors , Nicholas knew he would have to exchange his Tartar tunic for a tail coat , and put on narrow boots with pointed toes , and drive to the new church he had built , and then receive visitors who would come to congratulate him , offer them refreshments , and talk about the elections of the nobility ; but he considered himself entitled to spend the eve of that day in his usual way . 
He examined the bailiff 's accounts of the village in Ryazan which belonged to his wife 's nephew , wrote two business letters , and walked over to the granaries , cattle yards and stables before dinner . 
Having taken precautions against the general drunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a great saint 's day , he returned to dinner , and without having time for a private talk with his wife sat down at the long table laid for twenty persons , at which the whole household had assembled . 
At that table were his mother , his mother 's old lady companion Belova , his wife , their three children with their governess and tutor , his wife 's nephew with his tutor , Sonya , Denisov , Natasha , her three children , their governess , and old Michael Ivanovich , the late prince 's architect , who was living on in retirement at Bald Hills . 
Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table . 
When her husband took his place she concluded , from the rapid manner in which after taking up his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglass standing before him , that he was out of humor , as was sometimes the case when he came in to dinner straight from the farm -- especially before the soup . 
