She leaned over to her brother and kissed him , slightly catching the curtain of the cot . 
Each made the other a warning gesture and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishing to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the world . 
Prince Andrew was the first to move away , ruffling his hair against the muslin of the curtain . 
`` Yes , this is the one thing left me now , '' he said with a sigh . 
Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood , Pierre went to the Kiev province , where he had the greatest number of serfs , taking with him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to what he should do on his estates . 
When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office and explained to them his intentions and wishes . 
He told them that steps would be taken immediately to free his serfs -- and that till then they were not to be overburdened with labor , women while nursing their babies were not to be sent to work , assistance was to be given to the serfs , punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal , and hospitals , asylums , and schools were to be established on all the estates . 
Some of the stewards -LRB- there were semiliterate foremen among them -RRB- listened with alarm , supposing these words to mean that the young count was displeased with their management and embezzlement of money , some after their first fright were amused by Pierre 's lisp and the new words they had not heard before , others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked , while the cleverest among them , including the chief steward , understood from this speech how they could best handle the master for their own ends . 
The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre 's intentions , but remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into the general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory . 
Despite Count Bezukhov 's enormous wealth , since he had come into an income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year , Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him an allowance of ten thousand rubles . 
