Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to the Kolocha , and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt but had begun the attack next morning , no one would have doubted that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our and the battle would have taken place where we expected it . 
In that case we should probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt -- our left flank -- still more obstinately . 
We should have attacked Napoleon in the center or on the right , and the engagement would have taken place on the twenty-fifth , in the position we intended and had fortified . 
But as the attack on our left flank took place in the evening after the retreat of our rear guard -LRB- that is , immediately after the fight at Gridneva -RRB- , and as the Russian commanders did not wish , or were not in time , to begin a general engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth , the first and chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on the twenty-fourth , and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on the twenty-sixth . 
After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt , we found ourselves on the morning of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank , and were forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to be . 
Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak , unfinished entrenchments , but the disadvantage of that position was increased by the fact that the Russian commanders -- not having fully realized what had happened , namely the loss of our position on the left flank and the shifting of the whole field of the forthcoming battle from right to left -- maintained their extended position from the village of Novoe to Utitsa , and consequently had to move their forces from right to left during the battle . 
So it happened that throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed the entire French army launched against our left flank with but half as many men . 
-LRB- Poniatowski 's action against Utitsa , and Uvarov 's on the right flank against the French , were actions distinct from the main course of the battle . -RRB- 
So the battle of Borodino did not take place at all as -LRB- in an effort to conceal our commanders ' mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian army and people -RRB- it has been described . 
The battle of Borodino was not fought on a chosen and entrenched position with forces only slightly weaker than those of the enemy , but , as a result of the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt , the Russians fought the battle of Borodino on an open and almost unentrenched position , with forces only half as numerous as the French ; that is to say , under conditions in which it was not merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive result , but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete disintegration and flight . 
