Kutuzov felt and knew -- not by reasoning or science but with the whole of his Russian being -- what every Russian soldier felt : that the French were beaten , that the enemy was flying and must be driven out ; but at the same time he like the soldiers realized all the hardship of this march , the rapidity of which was unparalleled for such a time of the year . 
But to the generals , especially the foreign ones in the Russian army , who wished to distinguish themselves , to astonish somebody , and for some reason to capture a king or a duke -- it seemed that now - when any battle must be horrible and senseless -- was the very time to fight and conquer somebody . 
Kutuzov merely shrugged his shoulders when one after another they presented projects of maneuvers to be made with those soldiers -- ill-shod , insufficiently clad , and half starved -- who within a month and without fighting a battle had dwindled to half their number , and who at the best if the flight continued would have to go a greater distance than they had already traversed , before they reached the frontier . 
This longing to distinguish themselves , to maneuver , to overthrow , and to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russians stumbled on the French army . 
So it was at Krasnoe , where they expected to find one of the three French columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteen thousand men . 
Despite all Kutuzov 's efforts to avoid that ruinous encounter and to preserve his troops , the massacre of the broken mob of French soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krasnoe for three days . 
Toll wrote a disposition : `` The first column will march to so and so , '' etc. . 
And as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition . 
Prince Eugene of Wurttemberg fired from a hill over the French crowds that were running past , and demanded reinforcements which did not arrive . 
The French , avoiding the Russians , dispersed and hid themselves in the forest by night , making their way round as best they could , and continued their flight . 
