He was completely obsessed by one persistent thought . 
He did not know how or when this thought had taken such possession of him , but he remembered nothing of the past , understood nothing of the present , and all he saw and heard appeared to him like a dream . 
He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life 's demands that enmeshed him , and which in his present condition he was unable to unravel . 
He had gone to Joseph Alexeevich 's house , on the plea of sorting the deceased 's books and papers , only in search of rest from life 's turmoil , for in his mind the memory of Joseph Alexeevich was connected with a world of eternal , solemn , and calm thoughts , quite contrary to the restless confusion into which he felt himself being drawn . 
He sought a quiet refuge , and in Joseph Alexeevich 's study he really found it . 
When he sat with his elbows on the dusty writing table in the deathlike stillness of the study , calm and significant memories of the last few days rose one after another in his imagination , particularly of the battle of Borodino and of that vague sense of his own insignificance and insincerity compared with the truth , simplicity , and strength of the class of men he mentally classed as they . 
When Gerasim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of taking part in the popular defense of Moscow which he knew was projected . 
And with that object he had asked Gerasim to get him a peasant 's coat and a pistol , confiding to him his intentions of remaining in Joseph Alexeevich 's house and keeping his name secret . 
Then during the first day spent in inaction and solitude -LRB- he tried several times to fix his attention on the Masonic manuscripts , but was unable to do so -RRB- the idea that had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic significance of his name in connection with Bonaparte 's more than once vaguely presented itself . 
But the idea that he , L'russe Besuhof , was destined to set a limit to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies that often passed through his mind and left no trace behind . 
