`` Not if I can help it . 
This occasion shall not entirely pass without that affability on your part . 
-- May I , as an old friend and well-wisher ? 
May I ? '' 
We shook hands for the hundredth time at least , and he ordered a young carter out of my way with the greatest indignation . 
Then , he blessed me and stood waving his hand to me until I had passed the crook in the road ; and then I turned into a field and had a long nap under a hedge before I pursued my way home . 
I had scant luggage to take with me to London , for little of the little I possessed was adapted to my new station . 
But I began packing that same afternoon , and wildly packed up things that I knew I should want next morning , in a fiction that there was not a moment to be lost . 
So , Tuesday , Wednesday , and Thursday , passed ; and on Friday morning I went to Mr. Pumblechook 's , to put on my new clothes and pay my visit to Miss Havisham . 
Mr. Pumblechook 's own room was given up to me to dress in , and was decorated with clean towels expressly for the event . 
My clothes were rather a disappointment , of course . 
Probably every new and eagerly expected garment ever put on since clothes came in , fell a trifle short of the wearer 's expectation . 
But after I had had my new suit on some half an hour , and had gone through an immensity of posturing with Mr. Pumblechook 's very limited dressing-glass , in the futile endeavor to see my legs , it seemed to fit me better . 
It being market morning at a neighboring town some ten miles off , Mr. Pumblechook was not at home . 
I had not told him exactly when I meant to leave , and was not likely to shake hands with him again before departing . 
This was all as it should be , and I went out in my new array , fearfully ashamed of having to pass the shopman , and suspicious after all that I was at a personal disadvantage , something like Joe 's in his Sunday suit . 
I went circuitously to Miss Havisham 's by all the back ways , and rang at the bell constrainedly , on account of the stiff long fingers of my gloves . 
Sarah Pocket came to the gate , and positively reeled back when she saw me so changed ; her walnut-shell countenance likewise turned from brown to green and yellow . 
`` You ? '' 
said she . 
`` You ? 
Good gracious ! 
What do you want ? '' 
`` I am going to London , Miss Pocket , '' said I , `` and want to say good-bye to Miss Havisham . '' 
I was not expected , for she left me locked in the yard , while she went to ask if I were to be admitted . 
After a very short delay , she returned and took me up , staring at me all the way . 
Miss Havisham was taking exercise in the room with the long spread table , leaning on her crutch stick . 
The room was lighted as of yore , and at the sound of our entrance , she stopped and turned . 
She was then just abreast of the rotted bride-cake . 
`` Do n't go , Sarah , '' she said . 
`` Well , Pip ? '' 
`` I start for London , Miss Havisham , to-morrow , '' I was exceedingly careful what I said , `` and I thought you would kindly not mind my taking leave of you . '' 
`` This is a gay figure , Pip , '' said she , making her crutch stick play round me , as if she , the fairy godmother who had changed me , were bestowing the finishing gift . 
`` I have come into such good fortune since I saw you last , Miss Havisham , '' I murmured . 
`` And I am so grateful for it , Miss Havisham ! '' 
`` Ay , ay ! '' 
said she , looking at the discomfited and envious Sarah , with delight . 
`` I have seen Mr. Jaggers . 
I have heard about it , Pip . 
So you go to-morrow ? '' 
`` Yes , Miss Havisham . '' 
`` And you are adopted by a rich person ? '' 
`` Yes , Miss Havisham . '' 
`` Not named ? '' 
`` No , Miss Havisham . '' 
`` And Mr. Jaggers is made your guardian ? '' 
`` Yes , Miss Havisham . '' 
She quite gloated on these questions and answers , so keen was her enjoyment of Sarah Pocket 's jealous dismay . 
`` Well ! '' 
she went on ; `` you have a promising career before you . 
Be good -- deserve it -- and abide by Mr. Jaggers 's instructions . '' 
She looked at me , and looked at Sarah , and Sarah 's countenance wrung out of her watchful face a cruel smile . 
`` Good-bye , Pip ! 
-- you will always keep the name of Pip , you know . '' 
`` Yes , Miss Havisham . '' 
`` Good-bye , Pip ! '' 
She stretched out her hand , and I went down on my knee and put it to my lips . 
I had not considered how I should take leave of her ; it came naturally to me at the moment to do this . 
She looked at Sarah Pocket with triumph in her weird eyes , and so I left my fairy godmother , with both her hands on her crutch stick , standing in the midst of the dimly lighted room beside the rotten bride-cake that was hidden in cobwebs . 
Sarah Pocket conducted me down , as if I were a ghost who must be seen out . 
She could not get over my appearance , and was in the last degree confounded . 
I said `` Good-bye , Miss Pocket ; '' but she merely stared , and did not seem collected enough to know that I had spoken . 
Clear of the house , I made the best of my way back to Pumblechook 's , took off my new clothes , made them into a bundle , and went back home in my older dress , carrying it -- to speak the truth -- much more at my ease too , though I had the bundle to carry . 
And now , those six days which were to have run out so slowly , had run out fast and were gone , and to-morrow looked me in the face more steadily than I could look at it . 
As the six evenings had dwindled away , to five , to four , to three , to two , I had become more and more appreciative of the society of Joe and Biddy . 
On this last evening , I dressed my self out in my new clothes for their delight , and sat in my splendor until bedtime . 
We had a hot supper on the occasion , graced by the inevitable roast fowl , and we had some flip to finish with . 
We were all very low , and none the higher for pretending to be in spirits . 
I was to leave our village at five in the morning , carrying my little hand-portmanteau , and I had told Joe that I wished to walk away all alone . 
I am afraid -- sore afraid -- that this purpose originated in my sense of the contrast there would be between me and Joe , if we went to the coach together . 
I had pretended with myself that there was nothing of this taint in the arrangement ; but when I went up to my little room on this last night , I felt compelled to admit that it might be so , and had an impulse upon me to go down again and entreat Joe to walk with me in the morning . 
I did not . 
All night there were coaches in my broken sleep , going to wrong places instead of to London , and having in the traces , now dogs , now cats , now pigs , now men , -- never horses . 
Fantastic failures of journeys occupied me until the day dawned and the birds were singing . 
Then , I got up and partly dressed , and sat at the window to take a last look out , and in taking it fell asleep . 
Biddy was astir so early to get my breakfast , that , although I did not sleep at the window an hour , I smelt the smoke of the kitchen fire when I started up with a terrible idea that it must be late in the afternoon . 
But long after that , and long after I had heard the clinking of the teacups and was quite ready , I wanted the resolution to go downstairs . 
After all , I remained up there , repeatedly unlocking and unstrapping my small portmanteau and locking and strapping it up again , until Biddy called to me that I was late . 
It was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it . 
I got up from the meal , saying with a sort of briskness , as if it had only just occurred to me , `` Well ! 
I suppose I must be off ! '' 
and then I kissed my sister who was laughing and nodding and shaking in her usual chair , and kissed Biddy , and threw my arms around Joe 's neck . 
Then I took up my little portmanteau and walked out . 
The last I saw of them was , when I presently heard a scuffle behind me , and looking back , saw Joe throwing an old shoe after me and Biddy throwing another old shoe . 
I stopped then , to wave my hat , and dear old Joe waved his strong right arm above his head , crying huskily `` Hooroar ! '' 
and Biddy put her apron to her face . 
I walked away at a good pace , thinking it was easier to go than I had supposed it would be , and reflecting that it would never have done to have had an old shoe thrown after the coach , in sight of all the High Street . 
I whistled and made nothing of going . 
But the village was very peaceful and quiet , and the light mists were solemnly rising , as if to show me the world , and I had been so innocent and little there , and all beyond was so unknown and great , that in a moment with a strong heave and sob I broke into tears . 
It was by the finger-post at the end of the village , and I laid my hand upon it , and said , `` Good-bye , O my dear , dear friend ! '' 
Heaven knows we need never be ashamed of our tears , for they are rain upon the blinding dust of earth , overlying our hard hearts . 
I was better after I had cried than before , -- more sorry , more aware of my own ingratitude , more gentle . 
If I had cried before , I should have had Joe with me then . 
So subdued I was by those tears , and by their breaking out again in the course of the quiet walk , that when I was on the coach , and it was clear of the town , I deliberated with an aching heart whether I would not get down when we changed horses and walk back , and have another evening at home , and a better parting . 
We changed , and I had not made up my mind , and still reflected for my comfort that it would be quite practicable to get down and walk back , when we changed again . 
And while I was occupied with these deliberations , I would fancy an exact resemblance to Joe in some man coming along the road towards us , and my heart would beat high . 
-- As if he could possibly be there ! 
We changed again , and yet again , and it was now too late and too far to go back , and I went on . 
And the mists had all solemnly risen now , and the world lay spread before me . 
This is the end of the first stage of Pip 's expectations . 
The journey from our town to the metropolis was a journey of about five hours . 
It was a little past midday when the four-horse stage-coach by which I was a passenger , got into the ravel of traffic frayed out about the Cross Keys , Wood Street , Cheapside , London . 
We Britons had at that time particularly settled that it was treasonable to doubt our having and our being the best of everything : otherwise , while I was scared by the immensity of London , I think I might have had some faint doubts whether it was not rather ugly , crooked , narrow , and dirty . 
Mr. Jaggers had duly sent me his address ; it was , Little Britain , and he had written after it on his card , `` just out of Smithfield , and close by the coach-office . '' 
Nevertheless , a hackney-coachman , who seemed to have as many capes to his greasy great-coat as he was years old , packed me up in his coach and hemmed me in with a folding and jingling barrier of steps , as if he were going to take me fifty miles . 
His getting on his box , which I remember to have been decorated with an old weather-stained pea-green hammercloth moth-eaten into rags , was quite a work of time . 
It was a wonderful equipage , with six great coronets outside , and ragged things behind for I do n't know how many footmen to hold on by , and a harrow below them , to prevent amateur footmen from yielding to the temptation . 
I had scarcely had time to enjoy the coach and to think how like a straw-yard it was , and yet how like a rag-shop , and to wonder why the horses ' nose-bags were kept inside , when I observed the coachman beginning to get down , as if we were going to stop presently . 
And stop we presently did , in a gloomy street , at certain offices with an open door , whereon was painted MR. JAGGERS . 
`` How much ? '' 
I asked the coachman . 
The coachman answered , `` A shilling -- unless you wish to make it more . '' 
I naturally said I had no wish to make it more . 
`` Then it must be a shilling , '' observed the coachman . 
`` I do n't want to get into trouble . 
I know him ! '' 
He darkly closed an eye at Mr. Jaggers 's name , and shook his head . 
When he had got his shilling , and had in course of time completed the ascent to his box , and had got away -LRB- which appeared to relieve his mind -RRB- , I went into the front office with my little portmanteau in my hand and asked , Was Mr. Jaggers at home ? 
`` He is not , '' returned the clerk . 
`` He is in Court at present . 
Am I addressing Mr. Pip ? '' 
I signified that he was addressing Mr. Pip . 
`` Mr. Jaggers left word , would you wait in his room . 
He could n't say how long he might be , having a case on . 
But it stands to reason , his time being valuable , that he wo n't be longer than he can help . '' 
With those words , the clerk opened a door , and ushered me into an inner chamber at the back . 
Here , we found a gentleman with one eye , in a velveteen suit and knee-breeches , who wiped his nose with his sleeve on being interrupted in the perusal of the newspaper . 
`` Go and wait outside , Mike , '' said the clerk . 
I began to say that I hoped I was not interrupting , when the clerk shoved this gentleman out with as little ceremony as I ever saw used , and tossing his fur cap out after him , left me alone . 
Mr. Jaggers 's room was lighted by a skylight only , and was a most dismal place ; the skylight , eccentrically pitched like a broken head , and the distorted adjoining houses looking as if they had twisted themselves to peep down at me through it . 
There were not so many papers about , as I should have expected to see ; and there were some odd objects about , that I should not have expected to see , -- such as an old rusty pistol , a sword in a scabbard , several strange-looking boxes and packages , and two dreadful casts on a shelf , of faces peculiarly swollen , and twitchy about the nose . 
Mr. Jaggers 's own high-backed chair was of deadly black horsehair , with rows of brass nails round it , like a coffin ; and I fancied I could see how he leaned back in it , and bit his forefinger at the clients . 
The room was but small , and the clients seemed to have had a habit of backing up against the wall ; the wall , especially opposite to Mr. Jaggers 's chair , being greasy with shoulders . 
I recalled , too , that the one-eyed gentleman had shuffled forth against the wall when I was the innocent cause of his being turned out . 
I sat down in the cliental chair placed over against Mr. Jaggers 's chair , and became fascinated by the dismal atmosphere of the place . 
I called to mind that the clerk had the same air of knowing something to everybody else 's disadvantage , as his master had . 
I wondered how many other clerks there were upstairs , and whether they all claimed to have the same detrimental mastery of their fellow-creatures . 
I wondered what was the history of all the odd litter about the room , and how it came there . 
I wondered whether the two swollen faces were of Mr. Jaggers 's family , and , if he were so unfortunate as to have had a pair of such ill-looking relations , why he stuck them on that dusty perch for the blacks and flies to settle on , instead of giving them a place at home . 
Of course I had no experience of a London summer day , and my spirits may have been oppressed by the hot exhausted air , and by the dust and grit that lay thick on everything . 
But I sat wondering and waiting in Mr. Jaggers 's close room , until I really could not bear the two casts on the shelf above Mr. Jaggers 's chair , and got up and went out . 
When I told the clerk that I would take a turn in the air while I waited , he advised me to go round the corner and I should come into Smithfield . 
So I came into Smithfield ; and the shameful place , being all asmear with filth and fat and blood and foam , seemed to stick to me . 
So , I rubbed it off with all possible speed by turning into a street where I saw the great black dome of Saint Paul 's bulging at me from behind a grim stone building which a bystander said was Newgate Prison . 
Following the wall of the jail , I found the roadway covered with straw to deaden the noise of passing vehicles ; and from this , and from the quantity of people standing about smelling strongly of spirits and beer , I inferred that the trials were on . 
While I looked about me here , an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk minister of justice asked me if I would like to step in and hear a trial or so : informing me that he could give me a front place for half a crown , whence I should command a full view of the Lord Chief Justice in his wig and robes , -- mentioning that awful personage like waxwork , and presently offering him at the reduced price of eighteen-pence . 
As I declined the proposal on the plea of an appointment , he was so good as to take me into a yard and show me where the gallows was kept , and also where people were publicly whipped , and then he showed me the Debtors ' Door , out of which culprits came to be hanged ; heightening the interest of that dreadful portal by giving me to understand that `` four on 'em '' would come out at that door the day after to-morrow at eight in the morning , to be killed in a row . 
This was horrible , and gave me a sickening idea of London ; the more so as the Lord Chief Justice 's proprietor wore -LRB- from his hat down to his boots and up again to his pocket-handkerchief inclusive -RRB- mildewed clothes which had evidently not belonged to him originally , and which I took it into my head he had bought cheap of the executioner . 
Under these circumstances I thought myself well rid of him for a shilling . 
I dropped into the office to ask if Mr. Jaggers had come in yet , and I found he had not , and I strolled out again . 
This time , I made the tour of Little Britain , and turned into Bartholomew Close ; and now I became aware that other people were waiting about for Mr. Jaggers , as well as I . 
There were two men of secret appearance lounging in Bartholomew Close , and thoughtfully fitting their feet into the cracks of the pavement as they talked together , one of whom said to the other when they first passed me , that `` Jaggers would do it if it was to be done . '' 
There was a knot of three men and two women standing at a corner , and one of the women was crying on her dirty shawl , and the other comforted her by saying , as she pulled her own shawl over her shoulders , `` Jaggers is for him , ` Melia , and what more could you have ? '' 
There was a red-eyed little Jew who came into the Close while I was loitering there , in company with a second little Jew whom he sent upon an errand ; and while the messenger was gone , I remarked this Jew , who was of a highly excitable temperament , performing a jig of anxiety under a lamp-post and accompanying himself , in a kind of frenzy , with the words , `` O Jaggerth , Jaggerth , Jaggerth ! 
all otherth ith Cag-Maggerth , give me Jaggerth ! '' 
These testimonies to the popularity of my guardian made a deep impression on me , and I admired and wondered more than ever . 
At length , as I was looking out at the iron gate of Bartholomew Close into Little Britain , I saw Mr. Jaggers coming across the road towards me . 
All the others who were waiting saw him at the same time , and there was quite a rush at him . 
Mr. Jaggers , putting a hand on my shoulder and walking me on at his side without saying anything to me , addressed himself to his followers . 
First , he took the two secret men . 
`` Now , I have nothing to say to you , '' said Mr. Jaggers , throwing his finger at them . 
`` I want to know no more than I know . 
As to the result , it 's a toss-up . 
I told you from the first it was a toss-up . 
Have you paid Wemmick ? '' 
`` We made the money up this morning , sir , '' said one of the men , submissively , while the other perused Mr. Jaggers 's face . 
`` I do n't ask you when you made it up , or where , or whether you made it up at all . 
Has Wemmick got it ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said both the men together . 
`` Very well ; then you may go . 
Now , I wo n't have it ! '' 
said Mr Jaggers , waving his hand at them to put them behind him . 
`` If you say a word to me , I 'll throw up the case . '' 
`` We thought , Mr. Jaggers -- '' one of the men began , pulling off his hat . 
`` That 's what I told you not to do , '' said Mr. Jaggers . 
`` You thought ! 
I think for you ; that 's enough for you . 
If I want you , I know where to find you ; I do n't want you to find me . 
Now I wo n't have it . 
I wo n't hear a word . '' 
The two men looked at one another as Mr. Jaggers waved them behind again , and humbly fell back and were heard no more . 
`` And now you ! '' 
said Mr. Jaggers , suddenly stopping , and turning on the two women with the shawls , from whom the three men had meekly separated , -- `` Oh ! 
Amelia , is it ? '' 
`` Yes , Mr. Jaggers . '' 
`` And do you remember , '' retorted Mr. Jaggers , `` that but for me you would n't be here and could n't be here ? '' 
`` O yes , sir ! '' 
exclaimed both women together . 
`` Lord bless you , sir , well we knows that ! '' 
`` Then why , '' said Mr. Jaggers , `` do you come here ? '' 
`` My Bill , sir ! '' 
the crying woman pleaded . 
`` Now , I tell you what ! '' 
said Mr. Jaggers . 
`` Once for all . 
If you do n't know that your Bill 's in good hands , I know it . 
And if you come here bothering about your Bill , I 'll make an example of both your Bill and you , and let him slip through my fingers . 
Have you paid Wemmick ? '' 
`` O yes , sir ! 
Every farden . '' 
`` Very well . 
Then you have done all you have got to do . 
Say another word -- one single word -- and Wemmick shall give you your money back . '' 
This terrible threat caused the two women to fall off immediately . 
No one remained now but the excitable Jew , who had already raised the skirts of Mr. Jaggers 's coat to his lips several times . 
`` I do n't know this man ! '' 
said Mr. Jaggers , in the same devastating strain : `` What does this fellow want ? '' 
`` Ma thear Mithter Jaggerth . 
Hown brother to Habraham Latharuth ? '' 
`` Who 's he ? '' 
said Mr. Jaggers . 
`` Let go of my coat . '' 
The suitor , kissing the hem of the garment again before relinquishing it , replied , `` Habraham Latharuth , on thuthpithion of plate . '' 
`` You 're too late , '' said Mr. Jaggers . 
`` I am over the way . '' 
`` Holy father , Mithter Jaggerth ! '' 
cried my excitable acquaintance , turning white , `` do n't thay you 're again Habraham Latharuth ! '' 
`` I am , '' said Mr. Jaggers , `` and there 's an end of it . 
Get out of the way . '' 
`` Mithter Jaggerth ! 
Half a moment ! 
My hown cuthe n'th gone to Mithter Wemmick at thith prethent minute , to hoffer him hany termth . 
Mithter Jaggerth ! 
Half a quarter of a moment ! 
If you 'd have the condethenthun to be bought off from the t ` other thide -- at hany thuperior prithe ! 
-- money no object ! 
-- Mithter Jaggerth -- Mithter -- ! '' 
My guardian threw his supplicant off with supreme indifference , and left him dancing on the pavement as if it were red hot . 
Without further interruption , we reached the front office , where we found the clerk and the man in velveteen with the fur cap . 
`` Here 's Mike , '' said the clerk , getting down from his stool , and approaching Mr. Jaggers confidentially . 
`` Oh ! '' 
said Mr. Jaggers , turning to the man , who was pulling a lock of hair in the middle of his forehead , like the Bull in Cock Robin pulling at the bell-rope ; `` your man comes on this afternoon . 
Well ? '' 
`` Well , Mas ' r Jaggers , '' returned Mike , in the voice of a sufferer from a constitutional cold ; `` arter a deal o ' trouble , I 've found one , sir , as might do . '' 
`` What is he prepared to swear ? '' 
`` Well , Mas ' r Jaggers , '' said Mike , wiping his nose on his fur cap this time ; `` in a general way , anythink . '' 
Mr. Jaggers suddenly became most irate . 
`` Now , I warned you before , '' said he , throwing his forefinger at the terrified client , `` that if you ever presumed to talk in that way here , I 'd make an example of you . 
You infernal scoundrel , how dare you tell ME that ? '' 
The client looked scared , but bewildered too , as if he were unconscious what he had done . 
`` Spooney ! '' 
said the clerk , in a low voice , giving him a stir with his elbow . 
`` Soft Head ! 
Need you say it face to face ? '' 
`` Now , I ask you , you blundering booby , '' said my guardian , very sternly , `` once more and for the last time , what the man you have brought here is prepared to swear ? '' 
Mike looked hard at my guardian , as if he were trying to learn a lesson from his face , and slowly replied , `` Ayther to character , or to having been in his company and never left him all the night in question . '' 
`` Now , be careful . 
In what station of life is this man ? '' 
Mike looked at his cap , and looked at the floor , and looked at the ceiling , and looked at the clerk , and even looked at me , before beginning to reply in a nervous manner , `` We 've dressed him up like -- '' when my guardian blustered out , -- `` What ? 
You WILL , will you ? '' 
-LRB- `` Spooney ! '' 
added the clerk again , with another stir . -RRB- 
After some helpless casting about , Mike brightened and began again : -- `` He is dressed like a ` spectable pieman . 
A sort of a pastry-cook . '' 
`` Is he here ? '' 
asked my guardian . 
`` I left him , '' said Mike , `` a setting on some doorsteps round the corner . '' 
`` Take him past that window , and let me see him . '' 
The window indicated was the office window . 
We all three went to it , behind the wire blind , and presently saw the client go by in an accidental manner , with a murderous-looking tall individual , in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap . 
This guileless confectioner was not by any means sober , and had a black eye in the green stage of recovery , which was painted over . 
`` Tell him to take his witness away directly , '' said my guardian to the clerk , in extreme disgust , `` and ask him what he means by bringing such a fellow as that . '' 
My guardian then took me into his own room , and while he lunched , standing , from a sandwich-box and a pocket-flask of sherry -LRB- he seemed to bully his very sandwich as he ate it -RRB- , informed me what arrangements he had made for me . 
I was to go to `` Barnard 's Inn , '' to young Mr. Pocket 's rooms , where a bed had been sent in for my accommodation ; I was to remain with young Mr. Pocket until Monday ; on Monday I was to go with him to his father 's house on a visit , that I might try how I liked it . 
Also , I was told what my allowance was to be , -- it was a very liberal one , -- and had handed to me from one of my guardian 's drawers , the cards of certain tradesmen with whom I was to deal for all kinds of clothes , and such other things as I could in reason want . 
`` You will find your credit good , Mr. Pip , '' said my guardian , whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful , as he hastily refreshed himself , `` but I shall by this means be able to check your bills , and to pull you up if I find you outrunning the constable . 
Of course you 'll go wrong somehow , but that 's no fault of mine . '' 
After I had pondered a little over this encouraging sentiment , I asked Mr. Jaggers if I could send for a coach ? 
He said it was not worth while , I was so near my destination ; Wemmick should walk round with me , if I pleased . 
I then found that Wemmick was the clerk in the next room . 
Another clerk was rung down from upstairs to take his place while he was out , and I accompanied him into the street , after shaking hands with my guardian . 
We found a new set of people lingering outside , but Wemmick made a way among them by saying coolly yet decisively , `` I tell you it 's no use ; he wo n't have a word to say to one of you ; '' and we soon got clear of them , and went on side by side . 
Casting my eyes on Mr. Wemmick as we went along , to see what he was like in the light of day , I found him to be a dry man , rather short in stature , with a square wooden face , whose expression seemed to have been imperfectly chipped out with a dull-edged chisel . 
There were some marks in it that might have been dimples , if the material had been softer and the instrument finer , but which , as it was , were only dints . 
The chisel had made three or four of these attempts at embellishment over his nose , but had given them up without an effort to smooth them off . 
I judged him to be a bachelor from the frayed condition of his linen , and he appeared to have sustained a good many bereavements ; for he wore at least four mourning rings , besides a brooch representing a lady and a weeping willow at a tomb with an urn on it . 
I noticed , too , that several rings and seals hung at his watch-chain , as if he were quite laden with remembrances of departed friends . 
He had glittering eyes , -- small , keen , and black , -- and thin wide mottled lips . 
He had had them , to the best of my belief , from forty to fifty years . 
`` So you were never in London before ? '' 
said Mr. Wemmick to me . 
`` No , '' said I. `` I was new here once , '' said Mr. Wemmick . 
`` Rum to think of now ! '' 
`` You are well acquainted with it now ? '' 
`` Why , yes , '' said Mr. Wemmick . 
`` I know the moves of it . '' 
`` Is it a very wicked place ? '' 
I asked , more for the sake of saying something than for information . 
`` You may get cheated , robbed , and murdered in London . 
But there are plenty of people anywhere , who 'll do that for you . '' 
`` If there is bad blood between you and them , '' said I , to soften it off a little . 
`` O ! 
I do n't know about bad blood , '' returned Mr. Wemmick ; `` there 's not much bad blood about . 
They 'll do it , if there 's anything to be got by it . '' 
`` That makes it worse . '' 
`` You think so ? '' 
returned Mr. Wemmick . 
`` Much about the same , I should say . '' 
He wore his hat on the back of his head , and looked straight before him : walking in a self-contained way as if there were nothing in the streets to claim his attention . 
His mouth was such a post-office of a mouth that he had a mechanical appearance of smiling . 
We had got to the top of Holborn Hill before I knew that it was merely a mechanical appearance , and that he was not smiling at all . 
`` Do you know where Mr. Matthew Pocket lives ? '' 
I asked Mr. Wemmick . 
`` Yes , '' said he , nodding in the direction . 
`` At Hammersmith , west of London . '' 
`` Is that far ? '' 
`` Well ! 
Say five miles . '' 
`` Do you know him ? '' 
`` Why , you 're a regular cross-examiner ! '' 
said Mr. Wemmick , looking at me with an approving air . 
`` Yes , I know him . 
I know him ! '' 
There was an air of toleration or depreciation about his utterance of these words that rather depressed me ; and I was still looking sideways at his block of a face in search of any encouraging note to the text , when he said here we were at Barnard 's Inn . 
My depression was not alleviated by the announcement , for , I had supposed that establishment to be an hotel kept by Mr. Barnard , to which the Blue Boar in our town was a mere public-house . 
Whereas I now found Barnard to be a disembodied spirit , or a fiction , and his inn the dingiest collection of shabby buildings ever squeezed together in a rank corner as a club for Tom-cats . 
We entered this haven through a wicket-gate , and were disgorged by an introductory passage into a melancholy little square that looked to me like a flat burying-ground . 
I thought it had the most dismal trees in it , and the most dismal sparrows , and the most dismal cats , and the most dismal houses -LRB- in number half a dozen or so -RRB- , that I had ever seen . 
I thought the windows of the sets of chambers into which those houses were divided were in every stage of dilapidated blind and curtain , crippled flower-pot , cracked glass , dusty decay , and miserable makeshift ; while To Let , To Let , To Let , glared at me from empty rooms , as if no new wretches ever came there , and the vengeance of the soul of Barnard were being slowly appeased by the gradual suicide of the present occupants and their unholy interment under the gravel . 
A frowzy mourning of soot and smoke attired this forlorn creation of Barnard , and it had strewn ashes on its head , and was undergoing penance and humiliation as a mere dust-hole . 
Thus far my sense of sight ; while dry rot and wet rot and all the silent rots that rot in neglected roof and cellar , -- rot of rat and mouse and bug and coaching-stables near at hand besides -- addressed themselves faintly to my sense of smell , and moaned , `` Try Barnard 's Mixture . '' 
So imperfect was this realization of the first of my great expectations , that I looked in dismay at Mr. Wemmick . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said he , mistaking me ; `` the retirement reminds you of the country . 
So it does me . '' 
He led me into a corner and conducted me up a flight of stairs , -- which appeared to me to be slowly collapsing into sawdust , so that one of those days the upper lodgers would look out at their doors and find themselves without the means of coming down , -- to a set of chambers on the top floor . 
MR. POCKET , JUN. , was painted on the door , and there was a label on the letter-box , `` Return shortly . '' 
`` He hardly thought you 'd come so soon , '' Mr. Wemmick explained . 
`` You do n't want me any more ? '' 
`` No , thank you , '' said I. `` As I keep the cash , '' Mr. Wemmick observed , `` we shall most likely meet pretty often . 
Good day . '' 
`` Good day . '' 
I put out my hand , and Mr. Wemmick at first looked at it as if he thought I wanted something . 
Then he looked at me , and said , correcting himself , -- `` To be sure ! 
Yes . 
You 're in the habit of shaking hands ? '' 
I was rather confused , thinking it must be out of the London fashion , but said yes . 
`` I have got so out of it ! '' 
said Mr. Wemmick , -- `` except at last . 
Very glad , I 'm sure , to make your acquaintance . 
Good day ! '' 
When we had shaken hands and he was gone , I opened the staircase window and had nearly beheaded myself , for , the lines had rotted away , and it came down like the guillotine . 
Happily it was so quick that I had not put my head out . 
After this escape , I was content to take a foggy view of the Inn through the window 's encrusting dirt , and to stand dolefully looking out , saying to myself that London was decidedly overrated . 
Mr. Pocket , Junior 's , idea of Shortly was not mine , for I had nearly maddened myself with looking out for half an hour , and had written my name with my finger several times in the dirt of every pane in the window , before I heard footsteps on the stairs . 
Gradually there arose before me the hat , head , neckcloth , waistcoat , trousers , boots , of a member of society of about my own standing . 
He had a paper-bag under each arm and a pottle of strawberries in one hand , and was out of breath . 
`` Mr. Pip ? '' 
said he . 
`` Mr. Pocket ? '' 
said I. `` Dear me ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` I am extremely sorry ; but I knew there was a coach from your part of the country at midday , and I thought you would come by that one . 
The fact is , I have been out on your account , -- not that that is any excuse , -- for I thought , coming from the country , you might like a little fruit after dinner , and I went to Covent Garden Market to get it good . '' 
For a reason that I had , I felt as if my eyes would start out of my head . 
I acknowledged his attention incoherently , and began to think this was a dream . 
`` Dear me ! '' 
said Mr. Pocket , Junior . 
`` This door sticks so ! '' 
As he was fast making jam of his fruit by wrestling with the door while the paper-bags were under his arms , I begged him to allow me to hold them . 
He relinquished them with an agreeable smile , and combated with the door as if it were a wild beast . 
It yielded so suddenly at last , that he staggered back upon me , and I staggered back upon the opposite door , and we both laughed . 
But still I felt as if my eyes must start out of my head , and as if this must be a dream . 
`` Pray come in , '' said Mr. Pocket , Junior . 
`` Allow me to lead the way . 
I am rather bare here , but I hope you 'll be able to make out tolerably well till Monday . 
My father thought you would get on more agreeably through to-morrow with me than with him , and might like to take a walk about London . 
I am sure I shall be very happy to show London to you . 
As to our table , you wo n't find that bad , I hope , for it will be supplied from our coffee-house here , and -LRB- it is only right I should add -RRB- at your expense , such being Mr. Jaggers 's directions . 
As to our lodging , it 's not by any means splendid , because I have my own bread to earn , and my father has n't anything to give me , and I should n't be willing to take it , if he had . 
This is our sitting-room , -- just such chairs and tables and carpet and so forth , you see , as they could spare from home . 
You must n't give me credit for the tablecloth and spoons and castors , because they come for you from the coffee-house . 
This is my little bedroom ; rather musty , but Barnard 's is musty . 
This is your bedroom ; the furniture 's hired for the occasion , but I trust it will answer the purpose ; if you should want anything , I 'll go and fetch it . 
The chambers are retired , and we shall be alone together , but we sha n't fight , I dare say . 
But dear me , I beg your pardon , you 're holding the fruit all this time . 
Pray let me take these bags from you . 
I am quite ashamed . '' 
As I stood opposite to Mr. Pocket , Junior , delivering him the bags , One , Two , I saw the starting appearance come into his own eyes that I knew to be in mine , and he said , falling back , -- `` Lord bless me , you 're the prowling boy ! '' 
`` And you , '' said I , `` are the pale young gentleman ! '' 
The pale young gentleman and I stood contemplating one another in Barnard 's Inn , until we both burst out laughing . 
`` The idea of its being you ! '' 
said he . 
`` The idea of its being you ! '' 
said I. And then we contemplated one another afresh , and laughed again . 
`` Well ! '' 
said the pale young gentleman , reaching out his hand good-humoredly , `` it 's all over now , I hope , and it will be magnanimous in you if you 'll forgive me for having knocked you about so . '' 
I derived from this speech that Mr. Herbert Pocket -LRB- for Herbert was the pale young gentleman 's name -RRB- still rather confounded his intention with his execution . 
But I made a modest reply , and we shook hands warmly . 
`` You had n't come into your good fortune at that time ? '' 
said Herbert Pocket . 
`` No , '' said I. `` No , '' he acquiesced : `` I heard it had happened very lately . 
I was rather on the lookout for good fortune then . '' 
`` Indeed ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Miss Havisham had sent for me , to see if she could take a fancy to me . 
But she could n't , -- at all events , she did n't . '' 
I thought it polite to remark that I was surprised to hear that . 
`` Bad taste , '' said Herbert , laughing , `` but a fact . 
Yes , she had sent for me on a trial visit , and if I had come out of it successfully , I suppose I should have been provided for ; perhaps I should have been what-you-may-called it to Estella . '' 
