You can break his heart . '' 
`` What do you play , boy ? '' 
asked Estella of myself , with the greatest disdain . 
`` Nothing but beggar my neighbor , miss . '' 
`` Beggar him , '' said Miss Havisham to Estella . 
So we sat down to cards . 
It was then I began to understand that everything in the room had stopped , like the watch and the clock , a long time ago . 
I noticed that Miss Havisham put down the jewel exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up . 
As Estella dealt the cards , I glanced at the dressing-table again , and saw that the shoe upon it , once white , now yellow , had never been worn . 
I glanced down at the foot from which the shoe was absent , and saw that the silk stocking on it , once white , now yellow , had been trodden ragged . 
Without this arrest of everything , this standing still of all the pale decayed objects , not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed form could have looked so like grave-clothes , or the long veil so like a shroud . 
So she sat , corpse-like , as we played at cards ; the frillings and trimmings on her bridal dress , looking like earthy paper . 
I knew nothing then of the discoveries that are occasionally made of bodies buried in ancient times , which fall to powder in the moment of being distinctly seen ; but , I have often thought since , that she must have looked as if the admission of the natural light of day would have struck her to dust . 
`` He calls the knaves Jacks , this boy ! '' 
said Estella with disdain , before our first game was out . 
`` And what coarse hands he has ! 
And what thick boots ! '' 
I had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before ; but I began to consider them a very indifferent pair . 
Her contempt for me was so strong , that it became infectious , and I caught it . 
She won the game , and I dealt . 
I misdealt , as was only natural , when I knew she was lying in wait for me to do wrong ; and she denounced me for a stupid , clumsy laboring-boy . 
`` You say nothing of her , '' remarked Miss Havisham to me , as she looked on . 
`` She says many hard things of you , but you say nothing of her . 
What do you think of her ? '' 
`` I do n't like to say , '' I stammered . 
`` Tell me in my ear , '' said Miss Havisham , bending down . 
`` I think she is very proud , '' I replied , in a whisper . 
`` Anything else ? '' 
`` I think she is very pretty . '' 
`` Anything else ? '' 
`` I think she is very insulting . '' 
-LRB- She was looking at me then with a look of supreme aversion . -RRB- 
`` Anything else ? '' 
`` I think I should like to go home . '' 
`` And never see her again , though she is so pretty ? '' 
`` I am not sure that I should n't like to see her again , but I should like to go home now . '' 
`` You shall go soon , '' said Miss Havisham , aloud . 
`` Play the game out . '' 
Saving for the one weird smile at first , I should have felt almost sure that Miss Havisham 's face could not smile . 
It had dropped into a watchful and brooding expression , -- most likely when all the things about her had become transfixed , -- and it looked as if nothing could ever lift it up again . 
Her chest had dropped , so that she stooped ; and her voice had dropped , so that she spoke low , and with a dead lull upon her ; altogether , she had the appearance of having dropped body and soul , within and without , under the weight of a crushing blow . 
I played the game to an end with Estella , and she beggared me . 
She threw the cards down on the table when she had won them all , as if she despised them for having been won of me . 
`` When shall I have you here again ? '' 
said Miss Havisham . 
`` Let me think . '' 
I was beginning to remind her that to-day was Wednesday , when she checked me with her former impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand . 
`` There , there ! 
I know nothing of days of the week ; I know nothing of weeks of the year . 
Come again after six days . 
You hear ? '' 
`` Yes , ma'am . '' 
`` Estella , take him down . 
Let him have something to eat , and let him roam and look about him while he eats . 
Go , Pip . '' 
I followed the candle down , as I had followed the candle up , and she stood it in the place where we had found it . 
Until she opened the side entrance , I had fancied , without thinking about it , that it must necessarily be night-time . 
The rush of the daylight quite confounded me , and made me feel as if I had been in the candlelight of the strange room many hours . 
`` You are to wait here , you boy , '' said Estella ; and disappeared and closed the door . 
I took the opportunity of being alone in the courtyard to look at my coarse hands and my common boots . 
My opinion of those accessories was not favorable . 
They had never troubled me before , but they troubled me now , as vulgar appendages . 
I determined to ask Joe why he had ever taught me to call those picture-cards Jacks , which ought to be called knaves . 
I wished Joe had been rather more genteelly brought up , and then I should have been so too . 
She came back , with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer . 
She put the mug down on the stones of the yard , and gave me the bread and meat without looking at me , as insolently as if I were a dog in disgrace . 
I was so humiliated , hurt , spurned , offended , angry , sorry , -- I can not hit upon the right name for the smart -- God knows what its name was , -- that tears started to my eyes . 
The moment they sprang there , the girl looked at me with a quick delight in having been the cause of them . 
This gave me power to keep them back and to look at her : so , she gave a contemptuous toss -- but with a sense , I thought , of having made too sure that I was so wounded -- and left me . 
But when she was gone , I looked about me for a place to hide my face in , and got behind one of the gates in the brewery-lane , and leaned my sleeve against the wall there , and leaned my forehead on it and cried . 
As I cried , I kicked the wall , and took a hard twist at my hair ; so bitter were my feelings , and so sharp was the smart without a name , that needed counteraction . 
My sister 's bringing up had made me sensitive . 
In the little world in which children have their existence whosoever brings them up , there is nothing so finely perceived and so finely felt as injustice . 
It may be only small injustice that the child can be exposed to ; but the child is small , and its world is small , and its rocking-horse stands as many hands high , according to scale , as a big-boned Irish hunter . 
Within myself , I had sustained , from my babyhood , a perpetual conflict with injustice . 
I had known , from the time when I could speak , that my sister , in her capricious and violent coercion , was unjust to me . 
I had cherished a profound conviction that her bringing me up by hand gave her no right to bring me up by jerks . 
Through all my punishments , disgraces , fasts , and vigils , and other penitential performances , I had nursed this assurance ; and to my communing so much with it , in a solitary and unprotected way , I in great part refer the fact that I was morally timid and very sensitive . 
I got rid of my injured feelings for the time by kicking them into the brewery wall , and twisting them out of my hair , and then I smoothed my face with my sleeve , and came from behind the gate . 
The bread and meat were acceptable , and the beer was warming and tingling , and I was soon in spirits to look about me . 
To be sure , it was a deserted place , down to the pigeon-house in the brewery-yard , which had been blown crooked on its pole by some high wind , and would have made the pigeons think themselves at sea , if there had been any pigeons there to be rocked by it . 
But there were no pigeons in the dove-cot , no horses in the stable , no pigs in the sty , no malt in the storehouse , no smells of grains and beer in the copper or the vat . 
All the uses and scents of the brewery might have evaporated with its last reek of smoke . 
In a by-yard , there was a wilderness of empty casks , which had a certain sour remembrance of better days lingering about them ; but it was too sour to be accepted as a sample of the beer that was gone , -- and in this respect I remember those recluses as being like most others . 
Behind the furthest end of the brewery , was a rank garden with an old wall ; not so high but that I could struggle up and hold on long enough to look over it , and see that the rank garden was the garden of the house , and that it was overgrown with tangled weeds , but that there was a track upon the green and yellow paths , as if some one sometimes walked there , and that Estella was walking away from me even then . 
But she seemed to be everywhere . 
For when I yielded to the temptation presented by the casks , and began to walk on them , I saw her walking on them at the end of the yard of casks . 
She had her back towards me , and held her pretty brown hair spread out in her two hands , and never looked round , and passed out of my view directly . 
So , in the brewery itself , -- by which I mean the large paved lofty place in which they used to make the beer , and where the brewing utensils still were . 
When I first went into it , and , rather oppressed by its gloom , stood near the door looking about me , I saw her pass among the extinguished fires , and ascend some light iron stairs , and go out by a gallery high overhead , as if she were going out into the sky . 
It was in this place , and at this moment , that a strange thing happened to my fancy . 
I thought it a strange thing then , and I thought it a stranger thing long afterwards . 
I turned my eyes -- a little dimmed by looking up at the frosty light -- towards a great wooden beam in a low nook of the building near me on my right hand , and I saw a figure hanging there by the neck . 
A figure all in yellow white , with but one shoe to the feet ; and it hung so , that I could see that the faded trimmings of the dress were like earthy paper , and that the face was Miss Havisham 's , with a movement going over the whole countenance as if she were trying to call to me . 
In the terror of seeing the figure , and in the terror of being certain that it had not been there a moment before , I at first ran from it , and then ran towards it . 
And my terror was greatest of all when I found no figure there . 
Nothing less than the frosty light of the cheerful sky , the sight of people passing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate , and the reviving influence of the rest of the bread and meat and beer , would have brought me round . 
Even with those aids , I might not have come to myself as soon as I did , but that I saw Estella approaching with the keys , to let me out . 
She would have some fair reason for looking down upon me , I thought , if she saw me frightened ; and she would have no fair reason . 
She gave me a triumphant glance in passing me , as if she rejoiced that my hands were so coarse and my boots were so thick , and she opened the gate , and stood holding it . 
I was passing out without looking at her , when she touched me with a taunting hand . 
`` Why do n't you cry ? '' 
`` Because I do n't want to . '' 
`` You do , '' said she . 
`` You have been crying till you are half blind , and you are near crying again now . '' 
She laughed contemptuously , pushed me out , and locked the gate upon me . 
I went straight to Mr. Pumblechook 's , and was immensely relieved to find him not at home . 
So , leaving word with the shopman on what day I was wanted at Miss Havisham 's again , I set off on the four-mile walk to our forge ; pondering , as I went along , on all I had seen , and deeply revolving that I was a common laboring-boy ; that my hands were coarse ; that my boots were thick ; that I had fallen into a despicable habit of calling knaves Jacks ; that I was much more ignorant than I had considered myself last night , and generally that I was in a low-lived bad way . 
When I reached home , my sister was very curious to know all about Miss Havisham 's , and asked a number of questions . 
And I soon found myself getting heavily bumped from behind in the nape of the neck and the small of the back , and having my face ignominiously shoved against the kitchen wall , because I did not answer those questions at sufficient length . 
If a dread of not being understood be hidden in the breasts of other young people to anything like the extent to which it used to be hidden in mine , -- which I consider probable , as I have no particular reason to suspect myself of having been a monstrosity , -- it is the key to many reservations . 
I felt convinced that if I described Miss Havisham 's as my eyes had seen it , I should not be understood . 
Not only that , but I felt convinced that Miss Havisham too would not be understood ; and although she was perfectly incomprehensible to me , I entertained an impression that there would be something coarse and treacherous in my dragging her as she really was -LRB- to say nothing of Miss Estella -RRB- before the contemplation of Mrs. Joe . 
Consequently , I said as little as I could , and had my face shoved against the kitchen wall . 
The worst of it was that that bullying old Pumblechook , preyed upon by a devouring curiosity to be informed of all I had seen and heard , came gaping over in his chaise-cart at tea-time , to have the details divulged to him . 
And the mere sight of the torment , with his fishy eyes and mouth open , his sandy hair inquisitively on end , and his waistcoat heaving with windy arithmetic , made me vicious in my reticence . 
`` Well , boy , '' Uncle Pumblechook began , as soon as he was seated in the chair of honor by the fire . 
`` How did you get on up town ? '' 
I answered , `` Pretty well , sir , '' and my sister shook her fist at me . 
`` Pretty well ? '' 
Mr. Pumblechook repeated . 
`` Pretty well is no answer . 
Tell us what you mean by pretty well , boy ? '' 
Whitewash on the forehead hardens the brain into a state of obstinacy perhaps . 
Anyhow , with whitewash from the wall on my forehead , my obstinacy was adamantine . 
I reflected for some time , and then answered as if I had discovered a new idea , `` I mean pretty well . '' 
My sister with an exclamation of impatience was going to fly at me , -- I had no shadow of defence , for Joe was busy in the forge , -- when Mr. Pumblechook interposed with `` No ! 
Do n't lose your temper . 
Leave this lad to me , ma'am ; leave this lad to me . '' 
Mr. Pumblechook then turned me towards him , as if he were going to cut my hair , and said , -- `` First -LRB- to get our thoughts in order -RRB- : Forty-three pence ? '' 
I calculated the consequences of replying `` Four Hundred Pound , '' and finding them against me , went as near the answer as I could -- which was somewhere about eightpence off . 
Mr. Pumblechook then put me through my pence-table from `` twelve pence make one shilling , '' up to `` forty pence make three and fourpence , '' and then triumphantly demanded , as if he had done for me , `` Now ! 
How much is forty-three pence ? '' 
To which I replied , after a long interval of reflection , `` I do n't know . '' 
And I was so aggravated that I almost doubt if I did know . 
Mr. Pumblechook worked his head like a screw to screw it out of me , and said , `` Is forty-three pence seven and sixpence three fardens , for instance ? '' 
`` Yes ! '' 
said I. And although my sister instantly boxed my ears , it was highly gratifying to me to see that the answer spoilt his joke , and brought him to a dead stop . 
`` Boy ! 
What like is Miss Havisham ? '' 
Mr. Pumblechook began again when he had recovered ; folding his arms tight on his chest and applying the screw . 
`` Very tall and dark , '' I told him . 
`` Is she , uncle ? '' 
asked my sister . 
Mr. Pumblechook winked assent ; from which I at once inferred that he had never seen Miss Havisham , for she was nothing of the kind . 
`` Good ! '' 
said Mr. Pumblechook conceitedly . 
-LRB- `` This is the way to have him ! 
We are beginning to hold our own , I think , Mum ? '' -RRB- 
`` I am sure , uncle , '' returned Mrs. Joe , `` I wish you had him always ; you know so well how to deal with him . '' 
`` Now , boy ! 
What was she a doing of , when you went in today ? '' 
asked Mr. Pumblechook . 
`` She was sitting , '' I answered , `` in a black velvet coach . '' 
Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another -- as they well might -- and both repeated , `` In a black velvet coach ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said I. `` And Miss Estella -- that 's her niece , I think -- handed her in cake and wine at the coach-window , on a gold plate . 
And we all had cake and wine on gold plates . 
And I got up behind the coach to eat mine , because she told me to . '' 
`` Was anybody else there ? '' 
asked Mr. Pumblechook . 
`` Four dogs , '' said I. `` Large or small ? '' 
`` Immense , '' said I. `` And they fought for veal-cutlets out of a silver basket . '' 
Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another again , in utter amazement . 
I was perfectly frantic , -- a reckless witness under the torture , -- and would have told them anything . 
`` Where was this coach , in the name of gracious ? '' 
asked my sister . 
`` In Miss Havisham 's room . '' 
They stared again . 
`` But there were n't any horses to it . '' 
I added this saving clause , in the moment of rejecting four richly caparisoned coursers which I had had wild thoughts of harnessing . 
`` Can this be possible , uncle ? '' 
asked Mrs. Joe . 
`` What can the boy mean ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you , Mum , '' said Mr. Pumblechook . 
`` My opinion is , it 's a sedan-chair . 
She 's flighty , you know , -- very flighty , -- quite flighty enough to pass her days in a sedan-chair . '' 
`` Did you ever see her in it , uncle ? '' 
asked Mrs. Joe . 
`` How could I , '' he returned , forced to the admission , `` when I never see her in my life ? 
Never clapped eyes upon her ! '' 
`` Goodness , uncle ! 
And yet you have spoken to her ? '' 
`` Why , do n't you know , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , testily , `` that when I have been there , I have been took up to the outside of her door , and the door has stood ajar , and she has spoke to me that way . 
Do n't say you do n't know that , Mum . 
Howsever , the boy went there to play . 
What did you play at , boy ? '' 
`` We played with flags , '' I said . 
-LRB- I beg to observe that I think of myself with amazement , when I recall the lies I told on this occasion . -RRB- 
`` Flags ! '' 
echoed my sister . 
`` Yes , '' said I. `` Estella waved a blue flag , and I waved a red one , and Miss Havisham waved one sprinkled all over with little gold stars , out at the coach-window . 
And then we all waved our swords and hurrahed . '' 
`` Swords ! '' 
repeated my sister . 
`` Where did you get swords from ? '' 
`` Out of a cupboard , '' said I. `` And I saw pistols in it , -- and jam , -- and pills . 
And there was no daylight in the room , but it was all lighted up with candles . '' 
`` That 's true , Mum , '' said Mr. Pumblechook , with a grave nod . 
`` That 's the state of the case , for that much I 've seen myself . '' 
And then they both stared at me , and I , with an obtrusive show of artlessness on my countenance , stared at them , and plaited the right leg of my trousers with my right hand . 
If they had asked me any more questions , I should undoubtedly have betrayed myself , for I was even then on the point of mentioning that there was a balloon in the yard , and should have hazarded the statement but for my invention being divided between that phenomenon and a bear in the brewery . 
They were so much occupied , however , in discussing the marvels I had already presented for their consideration , that I escaped . 
The subject still held them when Joe came in from his work to have a cup of tea . 
To whom my sister , more for the relief of her own mind than for the gratification of his , related my pretended experiences . 
Now , when I saw Joe open his blue eyes and roll them all round the kitchen in helpless amazement , I was overtaken by penitence ; but only as regarded him , -- not in the least as regarded the other two . 
Towards Joe , and Joe only , I considered myself a young monster , while they sat debating what results would come to me from Miss Havisham 's acquaintance and favor . 
They had no doubt that Miss Havisham would `` do something '' for me ; their doubts related to the form that something would take . 
My sister stood out for `` property . '' 
Mr. Pumblechook was in favor of a handsome premium for binding me apprentice to some genteel trade , -- say , the corn and seed trade , for instance . 
Joe fell into the deepest disgrace with both , for offering the bright suggestion that I might only be presented with one of the dogs who had fought for the veal-cutlets . 
`` If a fool 's head ca n't express better opinions than that , '' said my sister , `` and you have got any work to do , you had better go and do it . '' 
So he went . 
After Mr. Pumblechook had driven off , and when my sister was washing up , I stole into the forge to Joe , and remained by him until he had done for the night . 
Then I said , `` Before the fire goes out , Joe , I should like to tell you something . '' 
`` Should you , Pip ? '' 
said Joe , drawing his shoeing-stool near the forge . 
`` Then tell us . 
What is it , Pip ? '' 
`` Joe , '' said I , taking hold of his rolled-up shirt sleeve , and twisting it between my finger and thumb , `` you remember all that about Miss Havisham 's ? '' 
`` Remember ? '' 
said Joe . 
`` I believe you ! 
Wonderful ! '' 
`` It 's a terrible thing , Joe ; it ai n't true . '' 
`` What are you telling of , Pip ? '' 
cried Joe , falling back in the greatest amazement . 
`` You do n't mean to say it 's -- '' `` Yes I do ; it 's lies , Joe . '' 
`` But not all of it ? 
Why sure you do n't mean to say , Pip , that there was no black welwet co -- eh ? '' 
For , I stood shaking my head . 
`` But at least there was dogs , Pip ? 
Come , Pip , '' said Joe , persuasively , `` if there war n't no weal-cutlets , at least there was dogs ? '' 
`` No , Joe . '' 
`` A dog ? '' 
said Joe . 
`` A puppy ? 
Come ? '' 
`` No , Joe , there was nothing at all of the kind . '' 
As I fixed my eyes hopelessly on Joe , Joe contemplated me in dismay . 
`` Pip , old chap ! 
This wo n't do , old fellow ! 
I say ! 
Where do you expect to go to ? '' 
`` It 's terrible , Joe ; ai n't it ? '' 
`` Terrible ? '' 
cried Joe . 
`` Awful ! 
What possessed you ? '' 
`` I do n't know what possessed me , Joe , '' I replied , letting his shirt sleeve go , and sitting down in the ashes at his feet , hanging my head ; `` but I wish you had n't taught me to call Knaves at cards Jacks ; and I wish my boots were n't so thick nor my hands so coarse . '' 
And then I told Joe that I felt very miserable , and that I had n't been able to explain myself to Mrs. Joe and Pumblechook , who were so rude to me , and that there had been a beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham 's who was dreadfully proud , and that she had said I was common , and that I knew I was common , and that I wished I was not common , and that the lies had come of it somehow , though I did n't know how . 
This was a case of metaphysics , at least as difficult for Joe to deal with as for me . 
But Joe took the case altogether out of the region of metaphysics , and by that means vanquished it . 
`` There 's one thing you may be sure of , Pip , '' said Joe , after some rumination , `` namely , that lies is lies . 
Howsever they come , they did n't ought to come , and they come from the father of lies , and work round to the same . 
Do n't you tell no more of 'em , Pip . 
That ai n't the way to get out of being common , old chap . 
And as to being common , I do n't make it out at all clear . 
You are oncommon in some things . 
You 're oncommon small . 
Likewise you 're a oncommon scholar . '' 
`` No , I am ignorant and backward , Joe . '' 
`` Why , see what a letter you wrote last night ! 
Wrote in print even ! 
I 've seen letters -- Ah ! 
and from gentlefolks ! 
-- that I 'll swear were n't wrote in print , '' said Joe . 
`` I have learnt next to nothing , Joe . 
You think much of me . 
It 's only that . '' 
`` Well , Pip , '' said Joe , `` be it so or be it so n't , you must be a common scholar afore you can be a oncommon one , I should hope ! 
The king upon his throne , with his crown upon his ed , ca n't sit and write his acts of Parliament in print , without having begun , when he were a unpromoted Prince , with the alphabet . 
-- Ah ! '' 
added Joe , with a shake of the head that was full of meaning , `` and begun at A too , and worked his way to Z. And I know what that is to do , though I ca n't say I 've exactly done it . '' 
There was some hope in this piece of wisdom , and it rather encouraged me . 
`` Whether common ones as to callings and earnings , '' pursued Joe , reflectively , `` might n't be the better of continuing for to keep company with common ones , instead of going out to play with oncommon ones , -- which reminds me to hope that there were a flag , perhaps ? '' 
`` No , Joe . '' '' 
-LRB- I 'm sorry there were n't a flag , Pip -RRB- . 
Whether that might be or might n't be , is a thing as ca n't be looked into now , without putting your sister on the Rampage ; and that 's a thing not to be thought of as being done intentional . 
Lookee here , Pip , at what is said to you by a true friend . 
Which this to you the true friend say . 
If you ca n't get to be oncommon through going straight , you 'll never get to do it through going crooked . 
So do n't tell no more on 'em , Pip , and live well and die happy . '' 
`` You are not angry with me , Joe ? '' 
`` No , old chap . 
But bearing in mind that them were which I meantersay of a stunning and outdacious sort , -- alluding to them which bordered on weal-cutlets and dog-fighting , -- a sincere well-wisher would adwise , Pip , their being dropped into your meditations , when you go upstairs to bed . 
That 's all , old chap , and do n't never do it no more . '' 
When I got up to my little room and said my prayers , I did not forget Joe 's recommendation , and yet my young mind was in that disturbed and unthankful state , that I thought long after I laid me down , how common Estella would consider Joe , a mere blacksmith ; how thick his boots , and how coarse his hands . 
I thought how Joe and my sister were then sitting in the kitchen , and how I had come up to bed from the kitchen , and how Miss Havisham and Estella never sat in a kitchen , but were far above the level of such common doings . 
I fell asleep recalling what I `` used to do '' when I was at Miss Havisham 's ; as though I had been there weeks or months , instead of hours ; and as though it were quite an old subject of remembrance , instead of one that had arisen only that day . 
That was a memorable day to me , for it made great changes in me . 
But it is the same with any life . 
Imagine one selected day struck out of it , and think how different its course would have been . 
Pause you who read this , and think for a moment of the long chain of iron or gold , of thorns or flowers , that would never have bound you , but for the formation of the first link on one memorable day . 
The felicitous idea occurred to me a morning or two later when I woke , that the best step I could take towards making myself uncommon was to get out of Biddy everything she knew . 
In pursuance of this luminous conception I mentioned to Biddy when I went to Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt 's at night , that I had a particular reason for wishing to get on in life , and that I should feel very much obliged to her if she would impart all her learning to me . 
Biddy , who was the most obliging of girls , immediately said she would , and indeed began to carry out her promise within five minutes . 
The Educational scheme or Course established by Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt may be resolved into the following synopsis . 
The pupils ate apples and put straws down one another 's backs , until Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt collected her energies , and made an indiscriminate totter at them with a birch-rod . 
After receiving the charge with every mark of derision , the pupils formed in line and buzzingly passed a ragged book from hand to hand . 
The book had an alphabet in it , some figures and tables , and a little spelling , -- that is to say , it had had once . 
As soon as this volume began to circulate , Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt fell into a state of coma , arising either from sleep or a rheumatic paroxysm . 
The pupils then entered among themselves upon a competitive examination on the subject of Boots , with the view of ascertaining who could tread the hardest upon whose toes . 
This mental exercise lasted until Biddy made a rush at them and distributed three defaced Bibles -LRB- shaped as if they had been unskilfully cut off the chump end of something -RRB- , more illegibly printed at the best than any curiosities of literature I have since met with , speckled all over with ironmould , and having various specimens of the insect world smashed between their leaves . 
This part of the Course was usually lightened by several single combats between Biddy and refractory students . 
When the fights were over , Biddy gave out the number of a page , and then we all read aloud what we could , -- or what we could n't -- in a frightful chorus ; Biddy leading with a high , shrill , monotonous voice , and none of us having the least notion of , or reverence for , what we were reading about . 
When this horrible din had lasted a certain time , it mechanically awoke Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt , who staggered at a boy fortuitously , and pulled his ears . 
This was understood to terminate the Course for the evening , and we emerged into the air with shrieks of intellectual victory . 
It is fair to remark that there was no prohibition against any pupil 's entertaining himself with a slate or even with the ink -LRB- when there was any -RRB- , but that it was not easy to pursue that branch of study in the winter season , on account of the little general shop in which the classes were holden -- and which was also Mr. Wopsle 's great-aunt 's sitting-room and bedchamber -- being but faintly illuminated through the agency of one low-spirited dip-candle and no snuffers . 
It appeared to me that it would take time to become uncommon , under these circumstances : nevertheless , I resolved to try it , and that very evening Biddy entered on our special agreement , by imparting some information from her little catalogue of Prices , under the head of moist sugar , and lending me , to copy at home , a large old English D which she had imitated from the heading of some newspaper , and which I supposed , until she told me what it was , to be a design for a buckle . 
Of course there was a public-house in the village , and of course Joe liked sometimes to smoke his pipe there . 
I had received strict orders from my sister to call for him at the Three Jolly Bargemen , that evening , on my way from school , and bring him home at my peril . 
To the Three Jolly Bargemen , therefore , I directed my steps . 
There was a bar at the Jolly Bargemen , with some alarmingly long chalk scores in it on the wall at the side of the door , which seemed to me to be never paid off . 
They had been there ever since I could remember , and had grown more than I had . 
But there was a quantity of chalk about our country , and perhaps the people neglected no opportunity of turning it to account . 
It being Saturday night , I found the landlord looking rather grimly at these records ; but as my business was with Joe and not with him , I merely wished him good evening , and passed into the common room at the end of the passage , where there was a bright large kitchen fire , and where Joe was smoking his pipe in company with Mr. Wopsle and a stranger . 
Joe greeted me as usual with `` Halloa , Pip , old chap ! '' 
and the moment he said that , the stranger turned his head and looked at me . 
He was a secret-looking man whom I had never seen before . 
His head was all on one side , and one of his eyes was half shut up , as if he were taking aim at something with an invisible gun . 
He had a pipe in his mouth , and he took it out , and , after slowly blowing all his smoke away and looking hard at me all the time , nodded . 
So , I nodded , and then he nodded again , and made room on the settle beside him that I might sit down there . 
But as I was used to sit beside Joe whenever I entered that place of resort , I said `` No , thank you , sir , '' and fell into the space Joe made for me on the opposite settle . 
The strange man , after glancing at Joe , and seeing that his attention was otherwise engaged , nodded to me again when I had taken my seat , and then rubbed his leg -- in a very odd way , as it struck me . 
`` You was saying , '' said the strange man , turning to Joe , `` that you was a blacksmith . '' 
`` Yes . 
I said it , you know , '' said Joe . 
`` What 'll you drink , Mr. -- ? 
You did n't mention your name , by the bye . '' 
Joe mentioned it now , and the strange man called him by it . 
`` What 'll you drink , Mr. Gargery ? 
At my expense ? 
To top up with ? '' 
`` Well , '' said Joe , `` to tell you the truth , I ai n't much in the habit of drinking at anybody 's expense but my own . '' 
`` Habit ? 
No , '' returned the stranger , `` but once and away , and on a Saturday night too . 
Come ! 
Put a name to it , Mr. Gargery . '' 
`` I would n't wish to be stiff company , '' said Joe . 
`` Rum . '' 
`` Rum , '' repeated the stranger . 
`` And will the other gentleman originate a sentiment . '' 
`` Rum , '' said Mr. Wopsle . 
`` Three Rums ! '' 
cried the stranger , calling to the landlord . 
`` Glasses round ! '' 
`` This other gentleman , '' observed Joe , by way of introducing Mr. Wopsle , `` is a gentleman that you would like to hear give it out . 
Our clerk at church . '' 
`` Aha ! '' 
said the stranger , quickly , and cocking his eye at me . 
`` The lonely church , right out on the marshes , with graves round it ! '' 
`` That 's it , '' said Joe . 
The stranger , with a comfortable kind of grunt over his pipe , put his legs up on the settle that he had to himself . 
He wore a flapping broad-brimmed traveller 's hat , and under it a handkerchief tied over his head in the manner of a cap : so that he showed no hair . 
As he looked at the fire , I thought I saw a cunning expression , followed by a half-laugh , come into his face . 
`` I am not acquainted with this country , gentlemen , but it seems a solitary country towards the river . '' 
`` Most marshes is solitary , '' said Joe . 
`` No doubt , no doubt . 
Do you find any gypsies , now , or tramps , or vagrants of any sort , out there ? '' 
`` No , '' said Joe ; `` none but a runaway convict now and then . 
And we do n't find them , easy . 
Eh , Mr. Wopsle ? '' 
Mr. Wopsle , with a majestic remembrance of old discomfiture , assented ; but not warmly . 
`` Seems you have been out after such ? '' 
asked the stranger . 
`` Once , '' returned Joe . 
`` Not that we wanted to take them , you understand ; we went out as lookers on ; me , and Mr. Wopsle , and Pip . 
Did n't us , Pip ? '' 
`` Yes , Joe . '' 
The stranger looked at me again , -- still cocking his eye , as if he were expressly taking aim at me with his invisible gun , -- and said , `` He 's a likely young parcel of bones that . 
What is it you call him ? '' 
`` Pip , '' said Joe . 
`` Christened Pip ? '' 
`` No , not christened Pip . '' 
`` Surname Pip ? '' 
`` No , '' said Joe , `` it 's a kind of family name what he gave himself when a infant , and is called by . '' 
`` Son of yours ? '' 
`` Well , '' said Joe , meditatively , not , of course , that it could be in anywise necessary to consider about it , but because it was the way at the Jolly Bargemen to seem to consider deeply about everything that was discussed over pipes , -- `` well -- no . 
No , he ai n't . '' 
`` Nevvy ? '' 
said the strange man . 
`` Well , '' said Joe , with the same appearance of profound cogitation , `` he is not -- no , not to deceive you , he is not -- my nevvy . '' 
`` What the Blue Blazes is he ? '' 
asked the stranger . 
Which appeared to me to be an inquiry of unnecessary strength . 
Mr. Wopsle struck in upon that ; as one who knew all about relationships , having professional occasion to bear in mind what female relations a man might not marry ; and expounded the ties between me and Joe . 
Having his hand in , Mr. Wopsle finished off with a most terrifically snarling passage from Richard the Third , and seemed to think he had done quite enough to account for it when he added , '' -- as the poet says . '' 
And here I may remark that when Mr. Wopsle referred to me , he considered it a necessary part of such reference to rumple my hair and poke it into my eyes . 
I can not conceive why everybody of his standing who visited at our house should always have put me through the same inflammatory process under similar circumstances . 
Yet I do not call to mind that I was ever in my earlier youth the subject of remark in our social family circle , but some large-handed person took some such ophthalmic steps to patronize me . 
All this while , the strange man looked at nobody but me , and looked at me as if he were determined to have a shot at me at last , and bring me down . 
But he said nothing after offering his Blue Blazes observation , until the glasses of rum and water were brought ; and then he made his shot , and a most extraordinary shot it was . 
It was not a verbal remark , but a proceeding in dumb-show , and was pointedly addressed to me . 
He stirred his rum and water pointedly at me , and he tasted his rum and water pointedly at me . 
And he stirred it and he tasted it ; not with a spoon that was brought to him , but with a file . 
He did this so that nobody but I saw the file ; and when he had done it he wiped the file and put it in a breast-pocket . 
I knew it to be Joe 's file , and I knew that he knew my convict , the moment I saw the instrument . 
I sat gazing at him , spell-bound . 
But he now reclined on his settle , taking very little notice of me , and talking principally about turnips . 
There was a delicious sense of cleaning-up and making a quiet pause before going on in life afresh , in our village on Saturday nights , which stimulated Joe to dare to stay out half an hour longer on Saturdays than at other times . 
