`` What 's that ? '' 
I asked , with sudden gravity . 
He was arranging his fruit in plates while we talked , which divided his attention , and was the cause of his having made this lapse of a word . 
`` Affianced , '' he explained , still busy with the fruit . 
`` Betrothed . 
Engaged . 
What 's - his-named . 
Any word of that sort . '' 
`` How did you bear your disappointment ? '' 
I asked . 
`` Pooh ! '' 
said he , `` I did n't care much for it . 
She 's a Tartar . '' 
`` Miss Havisham ? '' 
`` I do n't say no to that , but I meant Estella . 
That girl 's hard and haughty and capricious to the last degree , and has been brought up by Miss Havisham to wreak revenge on all the male sex . '' 
`` What relation is she to Miss Havisham ? '' 
`` None , '' said he . 
`` Only adopted . '' 
`` Why should she wreak revenge on all the male sex ? 
What revenge ? '' 
`` Lord , Mr. Pip ! '' 
said he . 
`` Do n't you know ? '' 
`` No , '' said I. `` Dear me ! 
It 's quite a story , and shall be saved till dinner-time . 
And now let me take the liberty of asking you a question . 
How did you come there , that day ? '' 
I told him , and he was attentive until I had finished , and then burst out laughing again , and asked me if I was sore afterwards ? 
I did n't ask him if he was , for my conviction on that point was perfectly established . 
`` Mr. Jaggers is your guardian , I understand ? '' 
he went on . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You know he is Miss Havisham 's man of business and solicitor , and has her confidence when nobody else has ? '' 
This was bringing me -LRB- I felt -RRB- towards dangerous ground . 
I answered with a constraint I made no attempt to disguise , that I had seen Mr. Jaggers in Miss Havisham 's house on the very day of our combat , but never at any other time , and that I believed he had no recollection of having ever seen me there . 
`` He was so obliging as to suggest my father for your tutor , and he called on my father to propose it . 
Of course he knew about my father from his connection with Miss Havisham . 
My father is Miss Havisham 's cousin ; not that that implies familiar intercourse between them , for he is a bad courtier and will not propitiate her . '' 
Herbert Pocket had a frank and easy way with him that was very taking . 
I had never seen any one then , and I have never seen any one since , who more strongly expressed to me , in every look and tone , a natural incapacity to do anything secret and mean . 
There was something wonderfully hopeful about his general air , and something that at the same time whispered to me he would never be very successful or rich . 
I do n't know how this was . 
I became imbued with the notion on that first occasion before we sat down to dinner , but I can not define by what means . 
He was still a pale young gentleman , and had a certain conquered languor about him in the midst of his spirits and briskness , that did not seem indicative of natural strength . 
He had not a handsome face , but it was better than handsome : being extremely amiable and cheerful . 
His figure was a little ungainly , as in the days when my knuckles had taken such liberties with it , but it looked as if it would always be light and young . 
Whether Mr. Trabb 's local work would have sat more gracefully on him than on me , may be a question ; but I am conscious that he carried off his rather old clothes much better than I carried off my new suit . 
As he was so communicative , I felt that reserve on my part would be a bad return unsuited to our years . 
I therefore told him my small story , and laid stress on my being forbidden to inquire who my benefactor was . 
I further mentioned that as I had been brought up a blacksmith in a country place , and knew very little of the ways of politeness , I would take it as a great kindness in him if he would give me a hint whenever he saw me at a loss or going wrong . 
`` With pleasure , '' said he , `` though I venture to prophesy that you 'll want very few hints . 
I dare say we shall be often together , and I should like to banish any needless restraint between us . 
Will you do me the favour to begin at once to call me by my Christian name , Herbert ? '' 
I thanked him and said I would . 
I informed him in exchange that my Christian name was Philip . 
`` I do n't take to Philip , '' said he , smiling , `` for it sounds like a moral boy out of the spelling-book , who was so lazy that he fell into a pond , or so fat that he could n't see out of his eyes , or so avaricious that he locked up his cake till the mice ate it , or so determined to go a bird 's - nesting that he got himself eaten by bears who lived handy in the neighborhood . 
I tell you what I should like . 
We are so harmonious , and you have been a blacksmith , -- would you mind it ? '' 
`` I should n't mind anything that you propose , '' I answered , `` but I do n't understand you . '' 
`` Would you mind Handel for a familiar name ? 
There 's a charming piece of music by Handel , called the Harmonious Blacksmith . '' 
`` I should like it very much . '' 
`` Then , my dear Handel , '' said he , turning round as the door opened , `` here is the dinner , and I must beg of you to take the top of the table , because the dinner is of your providing . '' 
This I would not hear of , so he took the top , and I faced him . 
It was a nice little dinner , -- seemed to me then a very Lord Mayor 's Feast , -- and it acquired additional relish from being eaten under those independent circumstances , with no old people by , and with London all around us . 
This again was heightened by a certain gypsy character that set the banquet off ; for while the table was , as Mr. Pumblechook might have said , the lap of luxury , -- being entirely furnished forth from the coffee-house , -- the circumjacent region of sitting-room was of a comparatively pastureless and shifty character ; imposing on the waiter the wandering habits of putting the covers on the floor -LRB- where he fell over them -RRB- , the melted butter in the arm-chair , the bread on the bookshelves , the cheese in the coal-scuttle , and the boiled fowl into my bed in the next room , -- where I found much of its parsley and butter in a state of congelation when I retired for the night . 
All this made the feast delightful , and when the waiter was not there to watch me , my pleasure was without alloy . 
We had made some progress in the dinner , when I reminded Herbert of his promise to tell me about Miss Havisham . 
`` True , '' he replied . 
`` I 'll redeem it at once . 
Let me introduce the topic , Handel , by mentioning that in London it is not the custom to put the knife in the mouth , -- for fear of accidents , -- and that while the fork is reserved for that use , it is not put further in than necessary . 
It is scarcely worth mentioning , only it 's as well to do as other people do . 
Also , the spoon is not generally used over-hand , but under . 
This has two advantages . 
You get at your mouth better -LRB- which after all is the object -RRB- , and you save a good deal of the attitude of opening oysters , on the part of the right elbow . '' 
He offered these friendly suggestions in such a lively way , that we both laughed and I scarcely blushed . 
`` Now , '' he pursued , `` concerning Miss Havisham . 
Miss Havisham , you must know , was a spoilt child . 
Her mother died when she was a baby , and her father denied her nothing . 
Her father was a country gentleman down in your part of the world , and was a brewer . 
I do n't know why it should be a crack thing to be a brewer ; but it is indisputable that while you can not possibly be genteel and bake , you may be as genteel as never was and brew . 
You see it every day . '' 
`` Yet a gentleman may not keep a public-house ; may he ? '' 
said I. `` Not on any account , '' returned Herbert ; `` but a public-house may keep a gentleman . 
Well ! 
Mr. Havisham was very rich and very proud . 
So was his daughter . '' 
`` Miss Havisham was an only child ? '' 
I hazarded . 
`` Stop a moment , I am coming to that . 
No , she was not an only child ; she had a half-brother . 
Her father privately married again -- his cook , I rather think . '' 
`` I thought he was proud , '' said I. `` My good Handel , so he was . 
He married his second wife privately , because he was proud , and in course of time she died . 
When she was dead , I apprehend he first told his daughter what he had done , and then the son became a part of the family , residing in the house you are acquainted with . 
As the son grew a young man , he turned out riotous , extravagant , undutiful , -- altogether bad . 
At last his father disinherited him ; but he softened when he was dying , and left him well off , though not nearly so well off as Miss Havisham . 
-- Take another glass of wine , and excuse my mentioning that society as a body does not expect one to be so strictly conscientious in emptying one 's glass , as to turn it bottom upwards with the rim on one 's nose . '' 
I had been doing this , in an excess of attention to his recital . 
I thanked him , and apologized . 
He said , `` Not at all , '' and resumed . 
`` Miss Havisham was now an heiress , and you may suppose was looked after as a great match . 
Her half-brother had now ample means again , but what with debts and what with new madness wasted them most fearfully again . 
There were stronger differences between him and her than there had been between him and his father , and it is suspected that he cherished a deep and mortal grudge against her as having influenced the father 's anger . 
Now , I come to the cruel part of the story , -- merely breaking off , my dear Handel , to remark that a dinner-napkin will not go into a tumbler . '' 
Why I was trying to pack mine into my tumbler , I am wholly unable to say . 
I only know that I found myself , with a perseverance worthy of a much better cause , making the most strenuous exertions to compress it within those limits . 
Again I thanked him and apologized , and again he said in the cheerfullest manner , `` Not at all , I am sure ! '' 
and resumed . 
`` There appeared upon the scene -- say at the races , or the public balls , or anywhere else you like -- a certain man , who made love to Miss Havisham . 
I never saw him -LRB- for this happened five-and-twenty years ago , before you and I were , Handel -RRB- , but I have heard my father mention that he was a showy man , and the kind of man for the purpose . 
But that he was not to be , without ignorance or prejudice , mistaken for a gentleman , my father most strongly asseverates ; because it is a principle of his that no man who was not a true gentleman at heart ever was , since the world began , a true gentleman in manner . 
He says , no varnish can hide the grain of the wood ; and that the more varnish you put on , the more the grain will express itself . 
Well ! 
This man pursued Miss Havisham closely , and professed to be devoted to her . 
I believe she had not shown much susceptibility up to that time ; but all the susceptibility she possessed certainly came out then , and she passionately loved him . 
There is no doubt that she perfectly idolized him . 
He practised on her affection in that systematic way , that he got great sums of money from her , and he induced her to buy her brother out of a share in the brewery -LRB- which had been weakly left him by his father -RRB- at an immense price , on the plea that when he was her husband he must hold and manage it all . 
Your guardian was not at that time in Miss Havisham 's counsels , and she was too haughty and too much in love to be advised by any one . 
Her relations were poor and scheming , with the exception of my father ; he was poor enough , but not time-serving or jealous . 
The only independent one among them , he warned her that she was doing too much for this man , and was placing herself too unreservedly in his power . 
She took the first opportunity of angrily ordering my father out of the house , in his presence , and my father has never seen her since . '' 
I thought of her having said , `` Matthew will come and see me at last when I am laid dead upon that table ; '' and I asked Herbert whether his father was so inveterate against her ? 
`` It 's not that , '' said he , `` but she charged him , in the presence of her intended husband , with being disappointed in the hope of fawning upon her for his own advancement , and , if he were to go to her now , it would look true -- even to him -- and even to her . 
To return to the man and make an end of him . 
The marriage day was fixed , the wedding dresses were bought , the wedding tour was planned out , the wedding guests were invited . 
The day came , but not the bridegroom . 
He wrote her a letter -- '' `` Which she received , '' I struck in , `` when she was dressing for her marriage ? 
At twenty minutes to nine ? '' 
`` At the hour and minute , '' said Herbert , nodding , `` at which she afterwards stopped all the clocks . 
What was in it , further than that it most heartlessly broke the marriage off , I ca n't tell you , because I do n't know . 
When she recovered from a bad illness that she had , she laid the whole place waste , as you have seen it , and she has never since looked upon the light of day . '' 
`` Is that all the story ? '' 
I asked , after considering it . 
`` All I know of it ; and indeed I only know so much , through piecing it out for myself ; for my father always avoids it , and , even when Miss Havisham invited me to go there , told me no more of it than it was absolutely requisite I should understand . 
But I have forgotten one thing . 
It has been supposed that the man to whom she gave her misplaced confidence acted throughout in concert with her half-brother ; that it was a conspiracy between them ; and that they shared the profits . '' 
`` I wonder he did n't marry her and get all the property , '' said I. `` He may have been married already , and her cruel mortification may have been a part of her half-brother 's scheme , '' said Herbert . 
`` Mind ! 
I do n't know that . '' 
`` What became of the two men ? '' 
I asked , after again considering the subject . 
`` They fell into deeper shame and degradation -- if there can be deeper -- and ruin . '' 
`` Are they alive now ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` You said just now that Estella was not related to Miss Havisham , but adopted . 
When adopted ? '' 
Herbert shrugged his shoulders . 
`` There has always been an Estella , since I have heard of a Miss Havisham . 
I know no more . 
And now , Handel , '' said he , finally throwing off the story as it were , `` there is a perfectly open understanding between us . 
All that I know about Miss Havisham , you know . '' 
`` And all that I know , '' I retorted , `` you know . '' 
`` I fully believe it . 
So there can be no competition or perplexity between you and me . 
And as to the condition on which you hold your advancement in life , -- namely , that you are not to inquire or discuss to whom you owe it , -- you may be very sure that it will never be encroached upon , or even approached , by me , or by any one belonging to me . '' 
In truth , he said this with so much delicacy , that I felt the subject done with , even though I should be under his father 's roof for years and years to come . 
Yet he said it with so much meaning , too , that I felt he as perfectly understood Miss Havisham to be my benefactress , as I understood the fact myself . 
It had not occurred to me before , that he had led up to the theme for the purpose of clearing it out of our way ; but we were so much the lighter and easier for having broached it , that I now perceived this to be the case . 
We were very gay and sociable , and I asked him , in the course of conversation , what he was ? 
He replied , `` A capitalist , -- an Insurer of Ships . '' 
I suppose he saw me glancing about the room in search of some tokens of Shipping , or capital , for he added , `` In the City . '' 
I had grand ideas of the wealth and importance of Insurers of Ships in the City , and I began to think with awe of having laid a young Insurer on his back , blackened his enterprising eye , and cut his responsible head open . 
But again there came upon me , for my relief , that odd impression that Herbert Pocket would never be very successful or rich . 
`` I shall not rest satisfied with merely employing my capital in insuring ships . 
I shall buy up some good Life Assurance shares , and cut into the Direction . 
I shall also do a little in the mining way . 
None of these things will interfere with my chartering a few thousand tons on my own account . 
I think I shall trade , '' said he , leaning back in his chair , `` to the East Indies , for silks , shawls , spices , dyes , drugs , and precious woods . 
It 's an interesting trade . '' 
`` And the profits are large ? '' 
said I. `` Tremendous ! '' 
said he . 
I wavered again , and began to think here were greater expectations than my own . 
`` I think I shall trade , also , '' said he , putting his thumbs in his waist-coat pockets , `` to the West Indies , for sugar , tobacco , and rum . 
Also to Ceylon , specially for elephants ' tusks . '' 
`` You will want a good many ships , '' said I. `` A perfect fleet , '' said he . 
Quite overpowered by the magnificence of these transactions , I asked him where the ships he insured mostly traded to at present ? 
`` I have n't begun insuring yet , '' he replied . 
`` I am looking about me . '' 
Somehow , that pursuit seemed more in keeping with Barnard 's Inn . 
I said -LRB- in a tone of conviction -RRB- , `` Ah-h ! '' 
`` Yes . 
I am in a counting-house , and looking about me . '' 
`` Is a counting-house profitable ? '' 
I asked . 
`` To -- do you mean to the young fellow who 's in it ? '' 
he asked , in reply . 
`` Yes ; to you . '' 
`` Why , n-no ; not to me . '' 
He said this with the air of one carefully reckoning up and striking a balance . 
`` Not directly profitable . 
That is , it does n't pay me anything , and I have to -- keep myself . '' 
This certainly had not a profitable appearance , and I shook my head as if I would imply that it would be difficult to lay by much accumulative capital from such a source of income . 
`` But the thing is , '' said Herbert Pocket , `` that you look about you . 
That 's the grand thing . 
You are in a counting-house , you know , and you look about you . '' 
It struck me as a singular implication that you could n't be out of a counting-house , you know , and look about you ; but I silently deferred to his experience . 
`` Then the time comes , '' said Herbert , `` when you see your opening . 
And you go in , and you swoop upon it and you make your capital , and then there you are ! 
When you have once made your capital , you have nothing to do but employ it . '' 
This was very like his way of conducting that encounter in the garden ; very like . 
His manner of bearing his poverty , too , exactly corresponded to his manner of bearing that defeat . 
It seemed to me that he took all blows and buffets now with just the same air as he had taken mine then . 
It was evident that he had nothing around him but the simplest necessaries , for everything that I remarked upon turned out to have been sent in on my account from the coffee-house or somewhere else . 
Yet , having already made his fortune in his own mind , he was so unassuming with it that I felt quite grateful to him for not being puffed up . 
It was a pleasant addition to his naturally pleasant ways , and we got on famously . 
In the evening we went out for a walk in the streets , and went half-price to the Theatre ; and next day we went to church at Westminster Abbey , and in the afternoon we walked in the Parks ; and I wondered who shod all the horses there , and wished Joe did . 
On a moderate computation , it was many months , that Sunday , since I had left Joe and Biddy . 
The space interposed between myself and them partook of that expansion , and our marshes were any distance off . 
That I could have been at our old church in my old church-going clothes , on the very last Sunday that ever was , seemed a combination of impossibilities , geographical and social , solar and lunar . 
Yet in the London streets so crowded with people and so brilliantly lighted in the dusk of evening , there were depressing hints of reproaches for that I had put the poor old kitchen at home so far away ; and in the dead of night , the footsteps of some incapable impostor of a porter mooning about Barnard 's Inn , under pretence of watching it , fell hollow on my heart . 
On the Monday morning at a quarter before nine , Herbert went to the counting-house to report himself , -- to look about him , too , I suppose , -- and I bore him company . 
He was to come away in an hour or two to attend me to Hammersmith , and I was to wait about for him . 
It appeared to me that the eggs from which young Insurers were hatched were incubated in dust and heat , like the eggs of ostriches , judging from the places to which those incipient giants repaired on a Monday morning . 
Nor did the counting-house where Herbert assisted , show in my eyes as at all a good Observatory ; being a back second floor up a yard , of a grimy presence in all particulars , and with a look into another back second floor , rather than a look out . 
I waited about until it was noon , and I went upon ` Change , and I saw fluey men sitting there under the bills about shipping , whom I took to be great merchants , though I could n't understand why they should all be out of spirits . 
When Herbert came , we went and had lunch at a celebrated house which I then quite venerated , but now believe to have been the most abject superstition in Europe , and where I could not help noticing , even then , that there was much more gravy on the tablecloths and knives and waiters ' clothes , than in the steaks . 
This collation disposed of at a moderate price -LRB- considering the grease , which was not charged for -RRB- , we went back to Barnard 's Inn and got my little portmanteau , and then took coach for Hammersmith . 
We arrived there at two or three o'clock in the afternoon , and had very little way to walk to Mr. Pocket 's house . 
Lifting the latch of a gate , we passed direct into a little garden overlooking the river , where Mr. Pocket 's children were playing about . 
And unless I deceive myself on a point where my interests or prepossessions are certainly not concerned , I saw that Mr. and Mrs. Pocket 's children were not growing up or being brought up , but were tumbling up . 
Mrs. Pocket was sitting on a garden chair under a tree , reading , with her legs upon another garden chair ; and Mrs. Pocket 's two nurse-maids were looking about them while the children played . 
`` Mamma , '' said Herbert , `` this is young Mr. Pip . '' 
Upon which Mrs. Pocket received me with an appearance of amiable dignity . 
`` Master Alick and Miss Jane , '' cried one of the nurses to two of the children , `` if you go a bouncing up against them bushes you 'll fall over into the river and be drownded , and what 'll your pa say then ? '' 
At the same time this nurse picked up Mrs. Pocket 's handkerchief , and said , `` If that do n't make six times you 've dropped it , Mum ! '' 
Upon which Mrs. Pocket laughed and said , `` Thank you , Flopson , '' and settling herself in one chair only , resumed her book . 
Her countenance immediately assumed a knitted and intent expression as if she had been reading for a week , but before she could have read half a dozen lines , she fixed her eyes upon me , and said , `` I hope your mamma is quite well ? '' 
This unexpected inquiry put me into such a difficulty that I began saying in the absurdest way that if there had been any such person I had no doubt she would have been quite well and would have been very much obliged and would have sent her compliments , when the nurse came to my rescue . 
`` Well ! '' 
she cried , picking up the pocket-handkerchief , `` if that do n't make seven times ! 
What ARE you a doing of this afternoon , Mum ! '' 
Mrs. Pocket received her property , at first with a look of unutterable surprise as if she had never seen it before , and then with a laugh of recognition , and said , `` Thank you , Flopson , '' and forgot me , and went on reading . 
I found , now I had leisure to count them , that there were no fewer than six little Pockets present , in various stages of tumbling up . 
I had scarcely arrived at the total when a seventh was heard , as in the region of air , wailing dolefully . 
`` If there ai n't Baby ! '' 
said Flopson , appearing to think it most surprising . 
`` Make haste up , Millers . '' 
Millers , who was the other nurse , retired into the house , and by degrees the child 's wailing was hushed and stopped , as if it were a young ventriloquist with something in its mouth . 
Mrs. Pocket read all the time , and I was curious to know what the book could be . 
We were waiting , I supposed , for Mr. Pocket to come out to us ; at any rate we waited there , and so I had an opportunity of observing the remarkable family phenomenon that whenever any of the children strayed near Mrs. Pocket in their play , they always tripped themselves up and tumbled over her , -- always very much to her momentary astonishment , and their own more enduring lamentation . 
I was at a loss to account for this surprising circumstance , and could not help giving my mind to speculations about it , until by and by Millers came down with the baby , which baby was handed to Flopson , which Flopson was handing it to Mrs. Pocket , when she too went fairly head foremost over Mrs. Pocket , baby and all , and was caught by Herbert and myself . 
`` Gracious me , Flopson ! '' 
said Mrs. Pocket , looking off her book for a moment , `` everybody 's tumbling ! '' 
`` Gracious you , indeed , Mum ! '' 
returned Flopson , very red in the face ; `` what have you got there ? '' 
`` I got here , Flopson ? '' 
asked Mrs. Pocket . 
`` Why , if it ai n't your footstool ! '' 
cried Flopson . 
`` And if you keep it under your skirts like that , who 's to help tumbling ? 
Here ! 
Take the baby , Mum , and give me your book . '' 
Mrs. Pocket acted on the advice , and inexpertly danced the infant a little in her lap , while the other children played about it . 
This had lasted but a very short time , when Mrs. Pocket issued summary orders that they were all to be taken into the house for a nap . 
Thus I made the second discovery on that first occasion , that the nurture of the little Pockets consisted of alternately tumbling up and lying down . 
Under these circumstances , when Flopson and Millers had got the children into the house , like a little flock of sheep , and Mr. Pocket came out of it to make my acquaintance , I was not much surprised to find that Mr. Pocket was a gentleman with a rather perplexed expression of face , and with his very gray hair disordered on his head , as if he did n't quite see his way to putting anything straight . 
Mr. Pocket said he was glad to see me , and he hoped I was not sorry to see him . 
`` For , I really am not , '' he added , with his son 's smile , `` an alarming personage . '' 
He was a young-looking man , in spite of his perplexities and his very gray hair , and his manner seemed quite natural . 
I use the word natural , in the sense of its being unaffected ; there was something comic in his distraught way , as though it would have been downright ludicrous but for his own perception that it was very near being so . 
When he had talked with me a little , he said to Mrs. Pocket , with a rather anxious contraction of his eyebrows , which were black and handsome , `` Belinda , I hope you have welcomed Mr. Pip ? '' 
And she looked up from her book , and said , `` Yes . '' 
She then smiled upon me in an absent state of mind , and asked me if I liked the taste of orange-flower water ? 
As the question had no bearing , near or remote , on any foregone or subsequent transaction , I consider it to have been thrown out , like her previous approaches , in general conversational condescension . 
I found out within a few hours , and may mention at once , that Mrs. Pocket was the only daughter of a certain quite accidental deceased Knight , who had invented for himself a conviction that his deceased father would have been made a Baronet but for somebody 's determined opposition arising out of entirely personal motives , -- I forget whose , if I ever knew , -- the Sovereign 's , the Prime Minister 's , the Lord Chancellor 's , the Archbishop of Canterbury 's , anybody 's , -- and had tacked himself on to the nobles of the earth in right of this quite supposititious fact . 
I believe he had been knighted himself for storming the English grammar at the point of the pen , in a desperate address engrossed on vellum , on the occasion of the laying of the first stone of some building or other , and for handing some Royal Personage either the trowel or the mortar . 
Be that as it may , he had directed Mrs. Pocket to be brought up from her cradle as one who in the nature of things must marry a title , and who was to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domestic knowledge . 
So successful a watch and ward had been established over the young lady by this judicious parent , that she had grown up highly ornamental , but perfectly helpless and useless . 
With her character thus happily formed , in the first bloom of her youth she had encountered Mr. Pocket : who was also in the first bloom of youth , and not quite decided whether to mount to the Woolsack , or to roof himself in with a mitre . 
As his doing the one or the other was a mere question of time , he and Mrs. Pocket had taken Time by the forelock -LRB- when , to judge from its length , it would seem to have wanted cutting -RRB- , and had married without the knowledge of the judicious parent . 
The judicious parent , having nothing to bestow or withhold but his blessing , had handsomely settled that dower upon them after a short struggle , and had informed Mr. Pocket that his wife was `` a treasure for a Prince . '' 
Mr. Pocket had invested the Prince 's treasure in the ways of the world ever since , and it was supposed to have brought him in but indifferent interest . 
Still , Mrs. Pocket was in general the object of a queer sort of respectful pity , because she had not married a title ; while Mr. Pocket was the object of a queer sort of forgiving reproach , because he had never got one . 
Mr. Pocket took me into the house and showed me my room : which was a pleasant one , and so furnished as that I could use it with comfort for my own private sitting-room . 
He then knocked at the doors of two other similar rooms , and introduced me to their occupants , by name Drummle and Startop . 
Drummle , an old-looking young man of a heavy order of architecture , was whistling . 
Startop , younger in years and appearance , was reading and holding his head , as if he thought himself in danger of exploding it with too strong a charge of knowledge . 
Both Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had such a noticeable air of being in somebody else 's hands , that I wondered who really was in possession of the house and let them live there , until I found this unknown power to be the servants . 
It was a smooth way of going on , perhaps , in respect of saving trouble ; but it had the appearance of being expensive , for the servants felt it a duty they owed to themselves to be nice in their eating and drinking , and to keep a deal of company downstairs . 
They allowed a very liberal table to Mr. and Mrs. Pocket , yet it always appeared to me that by far the best part of the house to have boarded in would have been the kitchen , -- always supposing the boarder capable of self-defence , for , before I had been there a week , a neighboring lady with whom the family were personally unacquainted , wrote in to say that she had seen Millers slapping the baby . 
This greatly distressed Mrs. Pocket , who burst into tears on receiving the note , and said that it was an extraordinary thing that the neighbors could n't mind their own business . 
By degrees I learnt , and chiefly from Herbert , that Mr. Pocket had been educated at Harrow and at Cambridge , where he had distinguished himself ; but that when he had had the happiness of marrying Mrs. Pocket very early in life , he had impaired his prospects and taken up the calling of a Grinder . 
After grinding a number of dull blades , -- of whom it was remarkable that their fathers , when influential , were always going to help him to preferment , but always forgot to do it when the blades had left the Grindstone , -- he had wearied of that poor work and had come to London . 
Here , after gradually failing in loftier hopes , he had `` read '' with divers who had lacked opportunities or neglected them , and had refurbished divers others for special occasions , and had turned his acquirements to the account of literary compilation and correction , and on such means , added to some very moderate private resources , still maintained the house I saw . 
Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had a toady neighbor ; a widow lady of that highly sympathetic nature that she agreed with everybody , blessed everybody , and shed smiles and tears on everybody , according to circumstances . 
This lady 's name was Mrs. Coiler , and I had the honor of taking her down to dinner on the day of my installation . 
She gave me to understand on the stairs , that it was a blow to dear Mrs. Pocket that dear Mr. Pocket should be under the necessity of receiving gentlemen to read with him . 
That did not extend to me , she told me in a gush of love and confidence -LRB- at that time , I had known her something less than five minutes -RRB- ; if they were all like Me , it would be quite another thing . 
`` But dear Mrs. Pocket , '' said Mrs. Coiler , `` after her early disappointment -LRB- not that dear Mr. Pocket was to blame in that -RRB- , requires so much luxury and elegance -- '' `` Yes , ma'am , '' I said , to stop her , for I was afraid she was going to cry . 
`` And she is of so aristocratic a disposition -- '' `` Yes , ma'am , '' I said again , with the same object as before . '' 
-- That it is hard , '' said Mrs. Coiler , `` to have dear Mr. Pocket 's time and attention diverted from dear Mrs. Pocket . '' 
I could not help thinking that it might be harder if the butcher 's time and attention were diverted from dear Mrs. Pocket ; but I said nothing , and indeed had enough to do in keeping a bashful watch upon my company manners . 
It came to my knowledge , through what passed between Mrs. Pocket and Drummle while I was attentive to my knife and fork , spoon , glasses , and other instruments of self-destruction , that Drummle , whose Christian name was Bentley , was actually the next heir but one to a baronetcy . 
It further appeared that the book I had seen Mrs. Pocket reading in the garden was all about titles , and that she knew the exact date at which her grandpapa would have come into the book , if he ever had come at all . 
Drummle did n't say much , but in his limited way -LRB- he struck me as a sulky kind of fellow -RRB- he spoke as one of the elect , and recognized Mrs. Pocket as a woman and a sister . 
No one but themselves and Mrs. Coiler the toady neighbor showed any interest in this part of the conversation , and it appeared to me that it was painful to Herbert ; but it promised to last a long time , when the page came in with the announcement of a domestic affliction . 
It was , in effect , that the cook had mislaid the beef . 
To my unutterable amazement , I now , for the first time , saw Mr. Pocket relieve his mind by going through a performance that struck me as very extraordinary , but which made no impression on anybody else , and with which I soon became as familiar as the rest . 
He laid down the carving-knife and fork , -- being engaged in carving , at the moment , -- put his two hands into his disturbed hair , and appeared to make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it . 
When he had done this , and had not lifted himself up at all , he quietly went on with what he was about . 
Mrs. Coiler then changed the subject and began to flatter me . 
I liked it for a few moments , but she flattered me so very grossly that the pleasure was soon over . 
She had a serpentine way of coming close at me when she pretended to be vitally interested in the friends and localities I had left , which was altogether snaky and fork-tongued ; and when she made an occasional bounce upon Startop -LRB- who said very little to her -RRB- , or upon Drummle -LRB- who said less -RRB- , I rather envied them for being on the opposite side of the table . 
After dinner the children were introduced , and Mrs. Coiler made admiring comments on their eyes , noses , and legs , -- a sagacious way of improving their minds . 
There were four little girls , and two little boys , besides the baby who might have been either , and the baby 's next successor who was as yet neither . 
They were brought in by Flopson and Millers , much as though those two non-commissioned officers had been recruiting somewhere for children and had enlisted these , while Mrs. Pocket looked at the young Nobles that ought to have been as if she rather thought she had had the pleasure of inspecting them before , but did n't quite know what to make of them . 
`` Here ! 
Give me your fork , Mum , and take the baby , '' said Flopson . 
`` Do n't take it that way , or you 'll get its head under the table . '' 
Thus advised , Mrs. Pocket took it the other way , and got its head upon the table ; which was announced to all present by a prodigious concussion . 
`` Dear , dear ! 
Give it me back , Mum , '' said Flopson ; `` and Miss Jane , come and dance to baby , do ! '' 
One of the little girls , a mere mite who seemed to have prematurely taken upon herself some charge of the others , stepped out of her place by me , and danced to and from the baby until it left off crying , and laughed . 
Then , all the children laughed , and Mr. Pocket -LRB- who in the meantime had twice endeavored to lift himself up by the hair -RRB- laughed , and we all laughed and were glad . 
Flopson , by dint of doubling the baby at the joints like a Dutch doll , then got it safely into Mrs. Pocket 's lap , and gave it the nut-crackers to play with ; at the same time recommending Mrs. Pocket to take notice that the handles of that instrument were not likely to agree with its eyes , and sharply charging Miss Jane to look after the same . 
Then , the two nurses left the room , and had a lively scuffle on the staircase with a dissipated page who had waited at dinner , and who had clearly lost half his buttons at the gaming-table . 
I was made very uneasy in my mind by Mrs. Pocket 's falling into a discussion with Drummle respecting two baronetcies , while she ate a sliced orange steeped in sugar and wine , and , forgetting all about the baby on her lap , who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers . 
At length little Jane , perceiving its young brains to be imperilled , softly left her place , and with many small artifices coaxed the dangerous weapon away . 
Mrs. Pocket finishing her orange at about the same time , and not approving of this , said to Jane , -- `` You naughty child , how dare you ? 
Go and sit down this instant ! '' 
`` Mamma dear , '' lisped the little girl , `` baby ood have put hith eyeth out . '' 
`` How dare you tell me so ? '' 
retorted Mrs. Pocket . 
`` Go and sit down in your chair this moment ! '' 
Mrs. Pocket 's dignity was so crushing , that I felt quite abashed , as if I myself had done something to rouse it . 
`` Belinda , '' remonstrated Mr. Pocket , from the other end of the table , `` how can you be so unreasonable ? 
Jane only interfered for the protection of baby . '' 
`` I will not allow anybody to interfere , '' said Mrs. Pocket . 
`` I am surprised , Matthew , that you should expose me to the affront of interference . '' 
`` Good God ! '' 
cried Mr. Pocket , in an outbreak of desolate desperation . 
`` Are infants to be nut-crackered into their tombs , and is nobody to save them ? '' 
`` I will not be interfered with by Jane , '' said Mrs. Pocket , with a majestic glance at that innocent little offender . 
`` I hope I know my poor grandpapa 's position . 
Jane , indeed ! '' 
Mr. Pocket got his hands in his hair again , and this time really did lift himself some inches out of his chair . 
`` Hear this ! '' 
he helplessly exclaimed to the elements . 
`` Babies are to be nut-crackered dead , for people 's poor grandpapa 's positions ! '' 
Then he let himself down again , and became silent . 
We all looked awkwardly at the tablecloth while this was going on . 
A pause succeeded , during which the honest and irrepressible baby made a series of leaps and crows at little Jane , who appeared to me to be the only member of the family -LRB- irrespective of servants -RRB- with whom it had any decided acquaintance . 
`` Mr. Drummle , '' said Mrs. Pocket , `` will you ring for Flopson ? 
Jane , you undutiful little thing , go and lie down . 
Now , baby darling , come with ma ! '' 
The baby was the soul of honor , and protested with all its might . 
It doubled itself up the wrong way over Mrs. Pocket 's arm , exhibited a pair of knitted shoes and dimpled ankles to the company in lieu of its soft face , and was carried out in the highest state of mutiny . 
And it gained its point after all , for I saw it through the window within a few minutes , being nursed by little Jane . 
It happened that the other five children were left behind at the dinner-table , through Flopson 's having some private engagement , and their not being anybody else 's business . 
I thus became aware of the mutual relations between them and Mr. Pocket , which were exemplified in the following manner . 
Mr. Pocket , with the normal perplexity of his face heightened and his hair rumpled , looked at them for some minutes , as if he could n't make out how they came to be boarding and lodging in that establishment , and why they had n't been billeted by Nature on somebody else . 
Then , in a distant Missionary way he asked them certain questions , -- as why little Joe had that hole in his frill , who said , Pa , Flopson was going to mend it when she had time , -- and how little Fanny came by that whitlow , who said , Pa , Millers was going to poultice it when she did n't forget . 
Then , he melted into parental tenderness , and gave them a shilling apiece and told them to go and play ; and then as they went out , with one very strong effort to lift himself up by the hair he dismissed the hopeless subject . 
In the evening there was rowing on the river . 
As Drummle and Startop had each a boat , I resolved to set up mine , and to cut them both out . 
I was pretty good at most exercises in which country boys are adepts , but as I was conscious of wanting elegance of style for the Thames , -- not to say for other waters , -- I at once engaged to place myself under the tuition of the winner of a prize-wherry who plied at our stairs , and to whom I was introduced by my new allies . 
This practical authority confused me very much by saying I had the arm of a blacksmith . 
If he could have known how nearly the compliment lost him his pupil , I doubt if he would have paid it . 
There was a supper-tray after we got home at night , and I think we should all have enjoyed ourselves , but for a rather disagreeable domestic occurrence . 
Mr. Pocket was in good spirits , when a housemaid came in , and said , `` If you please , sir , I should wish to speak to you . '' 
`` Speak to your master ? '' 
said Mrs. Pocket , whose dignity was roused again . 
`` How can you think of such a thing ? 
Go and speak to Flopson . 
Or speak to me -- at some other time . '' 
`` Begging your pardon , ma'am , '' returned the housemaid , `` I should wish to speak at once , and to speak to master . '' 
Hereupon , Mr. Pocket went out of the room , and we made the best of ourselves until he came back . 
`` This is a pretty thing , Belinda ! '' 
said Mr. Pocket , returning with a countenance expressive of grief and despair . 
`` Here 's the cook lying insensibly drunk on the kitchen floor , with a large bundle of fresh butter made up in the cupboard ready to sell for grease ! '' 
Mrs. Pocket instantly showed much amiable emotion , and said , `` This is that odious Sophia 's doing ! '' 
`` What do you mean , Belinda ? '' 
demanded Mr. Pocket . 
`` Sophia has told you , '' said Mrs. Pocket . 
`` Did I not see her with my own eyes and hear her with my own ears , come into the room just now and ask to speak to you ? '' 
`` But has she not taken me downstairs , Belinda , '' returned Mr. Pocket , `` and shown me the woman , and the bundle too ? '' 
`` And do you defend her , Matthew , '' said Mrs. Pocket , `` for making mischief ? '' 
Mr. Pocket uttered a dismal groan . 
`` Am I , grandpapa 's granddaughter , to be nothing in the house ? '' 
said Mrs. Pocket . 
`` Besides , the cook has always been a very nice respectful woman , and said in the most natural manner when she came to look after the situation , that she felt I was born to be a Duchess . '' 
There was a sofa where Mr. Pocket stood , and he dropped upon it in the attitude of the Dying Gladiator . 
Still in that attitude he said , with a hollow voice , `` Good night , Mr. Pip , '' when I deemed it advisable to go to bed and leave him . 
After two or three days , when I had established myself in my room and had gone backwards and forwards to London several times , and had ordered all I wanted of my tradesmen , Mr. Pocket and I had a long talk together . 
He knew more of my intended career than I knew myself , for he referred to his having been told by Mr. Jaggers that I was not designed for any profession , and that I should be well enough educated for my destiny if I could `` hold my own '' with the average of young men in prosperous circumstances . 
I acquiesced , of course , knowing nothing to the contrary . 
He advised my attending certain places in London , for the acquisition of such mere rudiments as I wanted , and my investing him with the functions of explainer and director of all my studies . 
He hoped that with intelligent assistance I should meet with little to discourage me , and should soon be able to dispense with any aid but his . 
Through his way of saying this , and much more to similar purpose , he placed himself on confidential terms with me in an admirable manner ; and I may state at once that he was always so zealous and honorable in fulfilling his compact with me , that he made me zealous and honorable in fulfilling mine with him . 
If he had shown indifference as a master , I have no doubt I should have returned the compliment as a pupil ; he gave me no such excuse , and each of us did the other justice . 
Nor did I ever regard him as having anything ludicrous about him -- or anything but what was serious , honest , and good -- in his tutor communication with me . 
When these points were settled , and so far carried out as that I had begun to work in earnest , it occurred to me that if I could retain my bedroom in Barnard 's Inn , my life would be agreeably varied , while my manners would be none the worse for Herbert 's society . 
Mr. Pocket did not object to this arrangement , but urged that before any step could possibly be taken in it , it must be submitted to my guardian . 
I felt that this delicacy arose out of the consideration that the plan would save Herbert some expense , so I went off to Little Britain and imparted my wish to Mr. Jaggers . 
`` If I could buy the furniture now hired for me , '' said I , `` and one or two other little things , I should be quite at home there . '' 
`` Go it ! '' 
said Mr. Jaggers , with a short laugh . 
