said Jude impatiently . 
`` Of course I do n't want to reveal your secrets . '' 
`` Whenever I met him out for a walk , he used to say that he was much taken with my looks , and he kept pressing me to marry him . 
I never thought of coming back to England again ; and being out there in Australia , with no home of my own after leaving my father , I at last agreed , and did . '' 
`` What -- marry him ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Regularly -- legally -- in church ? '' 
`` Yes . 
And lived with him till shortly before I left . 
It was stupid , I know ; but I did ! 
There , now I 've told you . 
Do n't round upon me ! 
He talks of coming back to England , poor old chap . 
But if he does , he wo n't be likely to find me . '' 
Jude stood pale and fixed . 
`` Why the devil did n't you tell me last , night ! '' 
he said . 
`` Well -- I did n't ... Wo n't you make it up with me , then ? '' 
`` So in talking of ` your husband ' to the bar gentlemen you meant him , of course -- not me ! '' 
`` Of course ... Come , do n't fuss about it . '' 
`` I have nothing more to say ! '' 
replied Jude . 
`` I have nothing at all to say about the -- crime -- you 've confessed to ! '' 
`` Crime ! 
Pooh . 
They do n't think much of such as that over there ! 
Lots of 'em do it ... Well , if you take it like that I shall go back to him ! 
He was very fond of me , and we lived honourable enough , and as respectable as any married couple in the colony ! 
How did I know where you were ? '' 
`` I wo n't go blaming you . 
I could say a good deal ; but perhaps it would be misplaced . 
What do you wish me to do ? '' 
`` Nothing . 
There was one thing more I wanted to tell you ; but I fancy we 've seen enough of one another for the present ! 
I shall think over what you said about your circumstances , and let you know . '' 
Thus they parted . 
Jude watched her disappear in the direction of the hotel , and entered the railway station close by . 
Finding that it wanted three-quarters of an hour of the time at which he could get a train back to Alfredston , he strolled mechanically into the city as far as to the Fourways , where he stood as he had so often stood before , and surveyed Chief Street stretching ahead , with its college after college , in picturesqueness unrivalled except by such Continental vistas as the Street of Palaces in Genoa ; the lines of the buildings being as distinct in the morning air as in an architectural drawing . 
But Jude was far from seeing or criticizing these things ; they were hidden by an indescribable consciousness of Arabella 's midnight contiguity , a sense of degradation at his revived experiences with her , of her appearance as she lay asleep at dawn , which set upon his motionless face a look as of one accurst . 
If he could only have felt resentment towards her he would have been less unhappy ; but he pitied while he contemned her . 
Jude turned and retraced his steps . 
Drawing again towards the station he started at hearing his name pronounced -- less at the name than at the voice . 
To his great surprise no other than Sue stood like a vision before him -- her look bodeful and anxious as in a dream , her little mouth nervous , and her strained eyes speaking reproachful inquiry . 
`` Oh , Jude -- I am so glad -- to meet you like this ! '' 
she said in quick , uneven accents not far from a sob . 
Then she flushed as she observed his thought that they had not met since her marriage . 
They looked away from each other to hide their emotion , took each other 's hand without further speech , and went on together awhile , till she glanced at him with furtive solicitude . 
`` I arrived at Alfredston station last night , as you asked me to , and there was nobody to meet me ! 
But I reached Marygreen alone , and they told me Aunt was a trifle better . 
I sat up with her , and as you did not come all night I was frightened about you -- I thought that perhaps , when you found yourself back in the old city , you were upset at -- at thinking I was -- married , and not there as I used to be ; and that you had nobody to speak to ; so you had tried to drown your gloom -- as you did at that former time when you were disappointed about entering as a student , and had forgotten your promise to me that you never would again . 
And this , I thought , was why you had n't come to meet me ! '' 
`` And you came to hunt me up , and deliver me , like a good angel ! '' 
`` I thought I would come by the morning train and try to find you -- in case -- in case -- '' `` I did think of my promise to you , dear , continually ! 
I shall never break out again as I did , I am sure . 
I may have been doing nothing better , but I was not doing that -- I loathe the thought of it . '' 
`` I am glad your staying had nothing to do with that . 
But , '' she said , the faintest pout entering into her tone , `` you did n't come back last night and meet me , as you engaged to ! '' 
`` I did n't -- I am sorry to say . 
I had an appointment at nine o'clock -- too late for me to catch the train that would have met yours , or to get home at all . '' 
Looking at his loved one as she appeared to him now , in his tender thought the sweetest and most disinterested comrade that he had ever had , living largely in vivid imaginings , so ethereal a creature that her spirit could be seen trembling through her limbs , he felt heartily ashamed of his earthliness in spending the hours he had spent in Arabella 's company . 
There was something rude and immoral in thrusting these recent facts of his life upon the mind of one who , to him , was so uncarnate as to seem at times impossible as a human wife to any average man . 
And yet she was Phillotson 's . 
How she had become such , how she lived as such , passed his comprehension as he regarded her to-day . 
`` You 'll go back with me ? '' 
he said . 
`` There 's a train just now . 
I wonder how my aunt is by this time ... And so , Sue , you really came on my account all this way ! 
At what an early time you must have started , poor thing ! '' 
`` Yes . 
Sitting up watching alone made me all nerves for you , and instead of going to bed when it got light I started . 
And now you wo n't frighten me like this again about your morals for nothing ? '' 
He was not so sure that she had been frightened about his morals for nothing . 
He released her hand till they had entered the train , -- it seemed the same carriage he had lately got out of with another -- where they sat down side by side , Sue between him and the window . 
He regarded the delicate lines of her profile , and the small , tight , applelike convexities of her bodice , so different from Arabella 's amplitudes . 
Though she knew he was looking at her she did not turn to him , but kept her eyes forward , as if afraid that by meeting his own some troublous discussion would be initiated . 
`` Sue -- you are married now , you know , like me ; and yet we have been in such a hurry that we have not said a word about it ! '' 
`` There 's no necessity , '' she quickly returned . 
`` Oh well -- perhaps not ... But I wish '' `` Jude -- do n't talk about ME -- I wish you would n't ! '' 
she entreated . 
`` It distresses me , rather . 
Forgive my saying it ! 
... Where did you stay last night ? '' 
She had asked the question in perfect innocence , to change the topic . 
He knew that , and said merely , `` At an inn , '' though it would have been a relief to tell her of his meeting with an unexpected one . 
But the latter 's final announcement of her marriage in Australia bewildered him lest what he might say should do his ignorant wife an injury . 
Their talk proceeded but awkwardly till they reached Alfredston . 
That Sue was not as she had been , but was labelled `` Phillotson , '' paralyzed Jude whenever he wanted to commune with her as an individual . 
Yet she seemed unaltered -- he could not say why . 
There remained the five-mile extra journey into the country , which it was just as easy to walk as to drive , the greater part of it being uphill . 
Jude had never before in his life gone that road with Sue , though he had with another . 
It was now as if he carried a bright light which temporarily banished the shady associations of the earlier time . 
Sue talked ; but Jude noticed that she still kept the conversation from herself . 
At length he inquired if her husband were well . 
`` O yes , '' she said . 
`` He is obliged to be in the school all the day , or he would have come with me . 
He is so good and kind that to accompany me he would have dismissed the school for once , even against his principles -- for he is strongly opposed to giving casual holidays -- only I would n't let him . 
I felt it would be better to come alone . 
Aunt Drusilla , I knew , was so very eccentric ; and his being almost a stranger to her now would have made it irksome to both . 
Since it turns out that she is hardly conscious I am glad I did not ask him . '' 
Jude had walked moodily while this praise of Phillotson was being expressed . 
`` Mr. Phillotson obliges you in everything , as he ought , '' he said . 
`` Of course . '' 
`` You ought to be a happy wife . '' 
`` And of course I am . '' 
`` Bride , I might almost have said , as yet . 
It is not so many weeks since I gave you to him , and -- '' `` Yes , I know ! 
I know ! '' 
There was something in her face which belied her late assuring words , so strictly proper and so lifelessly spoken that they might have been taken from a list of model speeches in `` The Wife 's Guide to Conduct . '' 
Jude knew the quality of every vibration in Sue 's voice , could read every symptom of her mental condition ; and he was convinced that she was unhappy , although she had not been a month married . 
But her rushing away thus from home , to see the last of a relative whom she had hardly known in her life , proved nothing ; for Sue naturally did such things as those . 
`` Well , you have my good wishes now as always , Mrs. Phillotson . '' 
She reproached him by a glance . 
`` No , you are not Mrs. Phillotson , '' murmured Jude . 
`` You are dear , free Sue Bridehead , only you do n't know it ! 
Wifedom has not yet squashed up and digested you in its vast maw as an atom which has no further individuality . '' 
Sue put on a look of being offended , till she answered , `` Nor has husbandom you , so far as I can see ! '' 
`` But it has ! '' 
he said , shaking his head sadly . 
When they reached the lone cottage under the firs , between the Brown House and Marygreen , in which Jude and Arabella had lived and quarrelled , he turned to look at it . 
A squalid family lived there now . 
He could not help saying to Sue : `` That 's the house my wife and I occupied the whole of the time we lived together . 
I brought her home to that house . '' 
She looked at it . 
`` That to you was what the school-house at Shaston is to me . '' 
`` Yes ; but I was not very happy there as you are in yours . '' 
She closed her lips in retortive silence , and they walked some way till she glanced at him to see how he was taking it . 
`` Of course I may have exaggerated your happiness -- one never knows , '' he continued blandly . 
`` Do n't think that , Jude , for a moment , even though you may have said it to sting me ! 
He 's as good to me as a man can be , and gives me perfect liberty -- which elderly husbands do n't do in general ... If you think I am not happy because he 's too old for me , you are wrong . '' 
`` I do n't think anything against him -- to you dear . '' 
`` And you wo n't say things to distress me , will you ? '' 
`` I will not . '' 
He said no more , but he knew that , from some cause or other , in taking Phillotson as a husband , Sue felt that she had done what she ought not to have done . 
They plunged into the concave field on the other side of which rose the village -- the field wherein Jude had received a thrashing from the farmer many years earlier . 
On ascending to the village and approaching the house they found Mrs. Edlin standing at the door , who at sight of them lifted her hands deprecatingly . 
`` She 's downstairs , if you 'll believe me ! '' 
cried the widow . 
`` Out o ' bed she got , and nothing could turn her . 
What will come o ' t I do not know ! '' 
On entering , there indeed by the fireplace sat the old woman , wrapped in blankets , and turning upon them a countenance like that of Sebastiano 's Lazarus . 
They must have looked their amazement , for she said in a hollow voice : `` Ah -- sceered ye , have I ! 
I was n't going to bide up there no longer , to please nobody ! 
'T is more than flesh and blood can bear , to be ordered to do this and that by a feller that do n't know half as well as you do yourself ! 
... Ah -- you 'll rue this marrying as well as he ! '' 
she added , turning to Sue . 
`` All our family do -- and nearly all everybody else 's . 
You should have done as I did , you simpleton ! 
And Phillotson the schoolmaster , of all men ! 
What made ` ee marry him ? '' 
`` What makes most women marry , Aunt ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
You mean to say you loved the man ! '' 
`` I do n't meant to say anything definite . '' 
`` Do ye love un ? '' 
`` Do n't ask me , Aunt . '' 
`` I can mind the man very well . 
A very civil , honourable liver ; but Lord ! 
-- I do n't want to wownd your feelings , but -- there be certain men here and there that no woman of any niceness can stomach . 
I should have said he was one . 
I do n't say so NOW , since you must ha ' known better than I -- but that 's what I SHOULD have said ! '' 
Sue jumped up and went out . 
Jude followed her , and found her in the outhouse , crying . 
`` Do n't cry , dear ! '' 
said Jude in distress . 
`` She means well , but is very crusty and queer now , you know . '' 
`` Oh no -- it is n't that ! '' 
said Sue , trying to dry her eyes . 
`` I do n't mind her roughness one bit . '' 
`` What is it , then ? '' 
`` It is that what she says is -- is true ! '' 
`` God -- what -- you do n't like him ? '' 
asked Jude . 
`` I do n't mean that ! '' 
she said hastily . 
`` That I ought -- perhaps I ought not to have married ! '' 
He wondered if she had really been going to say that at first . 
They went back , and the subject was smoothed over , and her aunt took rather kindly to Sue , telling her that not many young women newly married would have come so far to see a sick old crone like her . 
In the afternoon Sue prepared to depart , Jude hiring a neighbour to drive her to Alfredston . 
`` I 'll go with you to the station , if you 'd like ? '' 
he said . 
She would not let him . 
The man came round with the trap , and Jude helped her into it , perhaps with unnecessary attention , for she looked at him prohibitively . 
`` I suppose -- I may come to see you some day , when I am back again at Melchester ? '' 
he half-crossly observed . 
She bent down and said softly : `` No , dear -- you are not to come yet . 
I do n't think you are in a good mood . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Jude . 
`` Good-bye ! '' 
`` Good-bye ! '' 
She waved her hand and was gone . 
`` She 's right ! 
I wo n't go ! '' 
he murmured . 
He passed the evening and following days in mortifying by every possible means his wish to see her , nearly starving himself in attempts to extinguish by fasting his passionate tendency to love her . 
He read sermons on discipline , and hunted up passages in Church history that treated of the Ascetics of the second century . 
Before he had returned from Marygreen to Melchester there arrived a letter from Arabella . 
The sight of it revived a stronger feeling of self-condemnation for his brief return to her society than for his attachment to Sue . 
The letter , he perceived , bore a London postmark instead of the Christminster one . 
Arabella informed him that a few days after their parting in the morning at Christminster , she had been surprised by an affectionate letter from her Australian husband , formerly manager of the hotel in Sydney . 
He had come to England on purpose to find her ; and had taken a free , fully-licensed public , in Lambeth , where he wished her to join him in conducting the business , which was likely to be a very thriving one , the house being situated in an excellent , densely populated , gin-drinking neighbourhood , and already doing a trade of # 200 a month , which could be easily doubled . 
As he had said that he loved her very much still , and implored her to tell him where she was , and as they had only parted in a slight tiff , and as her engagement in Christminster was only temporary , she had just gone to join him as he urged . 
She could not help feeling that she belonged to him more than to Jude , since she had properly married him , and had lived with him much longer than with her first husband . 
In thus wishing Jude good-bye she bore him no ill-will , and trusted he would not turn upon her , a weak woman , and inform against her , and bring her to ruin now that she had a chance of improving her circumstances and leading a genteel life . 
Jude returned to Melchester , which had the questionable recommendation of being only a dozen and a half miles from his Sue 's now permanent residence . 
At first he felt that this nearness was a distinct reason for not going southward at all ; but Christminster was too sad a place to bear , while the proximity of Shaston to Melchester might afford him the glory of worsting the Enemy in a close engagement , such as was deliberately sought by the priests and virgins of the early Church , who , disdaining an ignominious flight from temptation , became even chamber-partners with impunity . 
Jude did not pause to remember that , in the laconic words of the historian , `` insulted Nature sometimes vindicated her rights '' in such circumstances . 
He now returned with feverish desperation to his study for the priesthood -- in the recognition that the single-mindedness of his aims , and his fidelity to the cause , had been more than questionable of late . 
His passion for Sue troubled his soul ; yet his lawful abandonment to the society of Arabella for twelve hours seemed instinctively a worse thing -- even though she had not told him of her Sydney husband till afterwards . 
He had , he verily believed , overcome all tendency to fly to liquor -- which , indeed , he had never done from taste , but merely as an escape from intolerable misery of mind . 
Yet he perceived with despondency that , taken all round , he was a man of too many passions to make a good clergyman ; the utmost he could hope for was that in a life of constant internal warfare between flesh and spirit the former might not always be victorious . 
As a hobby , auxiliary to his readings in Divinity , he developed his slight skill in church-music and thorough-bass , till he could join in part-singing from notation with some accuracy . 
A mile or two from Melchester there was a restored village church , to which Jude had originally gone to fix the new columns and capitals . 
By this means he had become acquainted with the organist , and the ultimate result was that he joined the choir as a bass voice . 
He walked out to this parish twice every Sunday , and sometimes in the week . 
One evening about Easter the choir met for practice , and a new hymn which Jude had heard of as being by a Wessex composer was to be tried and prepared for the following week . 
It turned out to be a strangely emotional composition . 
As they all sang it over and over again its harmonies grew upon Jude , and moved him exceedingly . 
When they had finished he went round to the organist to make inquiries . 
The score was in manuscript , the name of the composer being at the head , together with the title of the hymn : `` The Foot of the Cross . '' 
`` Yes , '' said the organist . 
`` He is a local man . 
He is a professional musician at Kennetbridge -- between here and Christminster . 
The vicar knows him . 
He was brought up and educated in Christminster traditions , which accounts for the quality of the piece . 
I think he plays in the large church there , and has a surpliced choir . 
He comes to Melchester sometimes , and once tried to get the cathedral organ when the post was vacant . 
The hymn is getting about everywhere this Easter . '' 
As he walked humming the air on his way home , Jude fell to musing on its composer , and the reasons why he composed it . 
What a man of sympathies he must be ! 
Perplexed and harassed as he himself was about Sue and Arabella , and troubled as was his conscience by the complication of his position , how he would like to know that man ! 
`` He of all men would understand my difficulties , '' said the impulsive Jude . 
If there were any person in the world to choose as a confidant , this composer would be the one , for he must have suffered , and throbbed , and yearned . 
In brief , ill as he could afford the time and money for the journey , Fawley resolved , like the child that he was , to go to Kennetbridge the very next Sunday . 
He duly started , early in the morning , for it was only by a series of crooked railways that he could get to the town . 
About mid-day he reached it , and crossing the bridge into the quaint old borough he inquired for the house of the composer . 
They told him it was a red brick building some little way further on . 
Also that the gentleman himself had just passed along the street not five minutes before . 
`` Which way ? '' 
asked Jude with alacrity . 
`` Straight along homeward from church . '' 
Jude hastened on , and soon had the pleasure of observing a man in a black coat and a black slouched felt hat no considerable distance ahead . 
Stretching out his legs yet more widely , he stalked after . 
`` A hungry soul in pursuit of a full soul ! '' 
he said . 
`` I must speak to that man ! '' 
He could not , however , overtake the musician before he had entered his own house , and then arose the question if this were an expedient time to call . 
Whether or not he decided to do so there and then , now that he had got here , the distance home being too great for him to wait till late in the afternoon . 
This man of soul would understand scant ceremony , and might be quite a perfect adviser in a case in which an earthly and illegitimate passion had cunningly obtained entrance into his heart through the opening afforded for religion . 
Jude accordingly rang the bell , and was admitted . 
The musician came to him in a moment , and being respectably dressed , good-looking , and frank in manner , Jude obtained a favourable reception . 
He was nevertheless conscious that there would be a certain awkwardness in explaining his errand . 
`` I have been singing in the choir of a little church near Melchester , '' he said . 
`` And we have this week practised ` The Foot of the Cross , ' which I understand , sir , that you composed ? '' 
`` I did -- a year or so ago . '' 
`` I -- like it . 
I think it supremely beautiful ! '' 
`` Ah well -- other people have said so too . 
Yes , there 's money in it , if I could only see about getting it published . 
I have other compositions to go with it , too ; I wish I could bring them out ; for I have n't made a five-pound note out of any of them yet . 
These publishing people -- they want the copyright of an obscure composer 's work , such as mine is , for almost less than I should have to pay a person for making a fair manuscript copy of the score . 
The one you speak of I have lent to various friends about here and Melchester , and so it has got to be sung a little . 
But music is a poor staff to lean on -- I am giving it up entirely . 
You must go into trade if you want to make money nowadays . 
The wine business is what I am thinking of . 
This is my forthcoming list -- it is not issued yet -- but you can take one . '' 
He handed Jude an advertisement list of several pages in booklet shape , ornamentally margined with a red line , in which were set forth the various clarets , champagnes , ports , sherries , and other wines with which he purposed to initiate his new venture . 
It took Jude more than by surprise that the man with the soul was thus and thus ; and he felt that he could not open up his confidences . 
They talked a little longer , but constrainedly , for when the musician found that Jude was a poor man his manner changed from what it had been while Jude 's appearance and address deceived him as to his position and pursuits . 
Jude stammered out something about his feelings in wishing to congratulate the author on such an exalted composition , and took an embarrassed leave . 
All the way home by the slow Sunday train , sitting in the fireless waiting-rooms on this cold spring day , he was depressed enough at his simplicity in taking such a journey . 
But no sooner did he reach his Melchester lodging than he found awaiting him a letter which had arrived that morning a few minutes after he had left the house . 
It was a contrite little note from Sue , in which she said , with sweet humility , that she felt she had been horrid in telling him he was not to come to see her , that she despised herself for having been so conventional ; and that he was to be sure to come by the eleven-forty-five train that very Sunday , and have dinner with them at half-past one . 
Jude almost tore his hair at having missed this letter till it was too late to act upon its contents ; but he had chastened himself considerably of late , and at last his chimerical expedition to Kennetbridge really did seem to have been another special intervention of Providence to keep him away from temptation . 
But a growing impatience of faith , which he had noticed in himself more than once of late , made him pass over in ridicule the idea that God sent people on fools ' errands . 
He longed to see her ; he was angry at having missed her : and he wrote instantly , telling her what had happened , and saying he had not enough patience to wait till the following Sunday , but would come any day in the week that she liked to name . 
Since he wrote a little over-ardently , Sue , as her manner was , delayed her reply till Thursday before Good Friday , when she said he might come that afternoon if he wished , this being the earliest day on which she could welcome him , for she was now assistant-teacher in her husband 's school . 
Jude therefore got leave from the cathedral works at the trifling expense of a stoppage of pay , and went . 
`` Whoso prefers either Matrimony or other Ordinance before the Good of Man and the plain Exigence of Charity , let him profess Papist , or Protestant , or what he will , he is no better than a Pharisee . '' 
-- J. MILTON . 
Shaston , the ancient British Palladour , From whose foundation first such strange reports arise , -LRB- as Drayton sang it -RRB- , was , and is , in itself the city of a dream . 
Vague imaginings of its castle , its three mints , its magnificent apsidal abbey , the chief glory of South Wessex , its twelve churches , its shrines , chantries , hospitals , its gabled freestone mansions -- all now ruthlessly swept away -- throw the visitor , even against his will , into a pensive melancholy , which the stimulating atmosphere and limitless landscape around him can scarcely dispel . 
The spot was the burial-place of a king and a queen , of abbots and abbesses , saints and bishops , knights and squires . 
The bones of King Edward `` the Martyr , '' carefully removed hither for holy preservation , brought Shaston a renown which made it the resort of pilgrims from every part of Europe , and enabled it to maintain a reputation extending far beyond English shores . 
To this fair creation of the great Middle-Age the Dissolution was , as historians tell us , the death-knell . 
With the destruction of the enormous abbey the whole place collapsed in a general ruin : the Martyr 's bones met with the fate of the sacred pile that held them , and not a stone is now left to tell where they lie . 
The natural picturesqueness and singularity of the town still remain ; but strange to say these qualities , which were noted by many writers in ages when scenic beauty is said to have been unappreciated , are passed over in this , and one of the queerest and quaintest spots in England stands virtually unvisited to-day . 
It has a unique position on the summit of a steep and imposing scarp , rising on the north , south , and west sides of the borough out of the deep alluvial Vale of Blackmoor , the view from the Castle Green over three counties of verdant pasture -- South , Mid , and Nether Wessex -- being as sudden a surprise to the unexpectant traveller 's eyes as the medicinal air is to his lungs . 
Impossible to a railway , it can best be reached on foot , next best by light vehicles ; and it is hardly accessible to these but by a sort of isthmus on the north-east , that connects it with the high chalk table-land on that side . 
Such is , and such was , the now world-forgotten Shaston or Palladour . 
Its situation rendered water the great want of the town ; and within living memory , horses , donkeys and men may have been seen toiling up the winding ways to the top of the height , laden with tubs and barrels filled from the wells beneath the mountain , and hawkers retailing their contents at the price of a halfpenny a bucketful . 
This difficulty in the water supply , together with two other odd facts , namely , that the chief graveyard slopes up as steeply as a roof behind the church , and that in former times the town passed through a curious period of corruption , conventual and domestic , gave rise to the saying that Shaston was remarkable for three consolations to man , such as the world afforded not elsewhere . 
It was a place where the churchyard lay nearer heaven than the church steeple , where beer was more plentiful than water , and where there were more wanton women than honest wives and maids . 
It is also said that after the Middle Ages the inhabitants were too poor to pay their priests , and hence were compelled to pull down their churches , and refrain altogether from the public worship of God ; a necessity which they bemoaned over their cups in the settles of their inns on Sunday afternoons . 
In those days the Shastonians were apparently not without a sense of humour . 
There was another peculiarity -- this a modern one -- which Shaston appeared to owe to its site . 
It was the resting-place and headquarters of the proprietors of wandering vans , shows , shooting-galleries , and other itinerant concerns , whose business lay largely at fairs and markets . 
As strange wild birds are seen assembled on some lofty promontory , meditatively pausing for longer flights , or to return by the course they followed thither , so here , in this cliff-town , stood in stultified silence the yellow and green caravans bearing names not local , as if surprised by a change in the landscape so violent as to hinder their further progress ; and here they usually remained all the winter till they turned to seek again their old tracks in the following spring . 
It was to this breezy and whimsical spot that Jude ascended from the nearest station for the first time in his life about four o'clock one afternoon , and entering on the summit of the peak after a toilsome climb , passed the first houses of the aerial town ; and drew towards the school-house . 
The hour was too early ; the pupils were still in school , humming small , like a swarm of gnats ; and he withdrew a few steps along Abbey Walk , whence he regarded the spot which fate had made the home of all he loved best in the world . 
In front of the schools , which were extensive and stone-built , grew two enormous beeches with smooth mouse-coloured trunks , as such trees will only grow on chalk uplands . 
Within the mullioned and transomed windows he could see the black , brown , and flaxen crowns of the scholars over the sills , and to pass the time away he walked down to the level terrace where the abbey gardens once had spread , his heart throbbing in spite of him . 
Unwilling to enter till the children were dismissed he remained here till young voices could be heard in the open air , and girls in white pinafores over red and blue frocks appeared dancing along the paths which the abbess , prioress , subprioress , and fifty nuns had demurely paced three centuries earlier . 
Retracing his steps he found that he had waited too long , and that Sue had gone out into the town at the heels of the last scholar , Mr. Phillotson having been absent all the afternoon at a teachers ' meeting at Shottsford . 
Jude went into the empty schoolroom and sat down , the girl who was sweeping the floor having informed him that Mrs. Phillotson would be back again in a few minutes . 
A piano stood near -- actually the old piano that Phillotson had possessed at Marygreen -- and though the dark afternoon almost prevented him seeing the notes Jude touched them in his humble way , and could not help modulating into the hymn which had so affected him in the previous week . 
A figure moved behind him , and thinking it was still the girl with the broom Jude took no notice , till the person came close and laid her fingers lightly upon his bass hand . 
The imposed hand was a little one he seemed to know , and he turned . 
`` Do n't stop , '' said Sue . 
`` I like it . 
I learnt it before I left Melchester . 
They used to play it in the training school . '' 
`` I ca n't strum before you ! 
Play it for me . '' 
`` Oh well -- I do n't mind . '' 
Sue sat down , and her rendering of the piece , though not remarkable , seemed divine as compared with his own . 
She , like him , was evidently touched -- to her own surprise -- by the recalled air ; and when she had finished , and he moved his hand towards hers , it met his own half-way . 
Jude grasped it -- just as he had done before her marriage . 
`` It is odd , '' she said , in a voice quite changed , `` that I should care about that air ; because -- '' `` Because what ? '' 
`` I am not that sort -- quite . '' 
`` Not easily moved ? '' 
`` I did n't quite mean that . '' 
`` Oh , but you ARE one of that sort , for you are just like me at heart ! '' 
`` But not at head . '' 
She played on and suddenly turned round ; and by an unpremeditated instinct each clasped the other 's hand again . 
She uttered a forced little laugh as she relinquished his quickly . 
`` How funny ! '' 
she said . 
`` I wonder what we both did that for ? '' 
`` I suppose because we are both alike , as I said before . '' 
`` Not in our thoughts ! 
Perhaps a little in our feelings . '' 
`` And they rule thoughts ... Is n't it enough to make one blaspheme that the composer of that hymn is one of the most commonplace men I ever met ! '' 
`` What -- you know him ? '' 
`` I went to see him . '' 
`` Oh , you goose -- to do just what I should have done ! 
Why did you ? '' 
`` Because we are not alike , '' he said drily . 
`` Now we 'll have some tea , '' said Sue . 
`` Shall we have it here instead of in my house ? 
It is no trouble to get the kettle and things brought in . 
We do n't live at the school you know , but in that ancient dwelling across the way called Old-Grove Place . 
It is so antique and dismal that it depresses me dreadfully . 
Such houses are very well to visit , but not to live in -- I feel crushed into the earth by the weight of so many previous lives there spent . 
In a new place like these schools there is only your own life to support . 
Sit down , and I 'll tell Ada to bring the tea-things across . '' 
He waited in the light of the stove , the door of which she flung open before going out , and when she returned , followed by the maiden with tea , they sat down by the same light , assisted by the blue rays of a spirit-lamp under the brass kettle on the stand . 
`` This is one of your wedding-presents to me , '' she said , signifying the latter . 
`` Yes , '' said Jude . 
The kettle of his gift sang with some satire in its note , to his mind ; and to change the subject he said , `` Do you know of any good readable edition of the uncanonical books of the New Testament ? 
You do n't read them in the school I suppose ? '' 
`` Oh dear no ! 
-- ` twould alarm the neighbourhood ... Yes , there is one . 
I am not familiar with it now , though I was interested in it when my former friend was alive . 
Cowper 's Apocryphal Gospels . '' 
`` That sounds like what I want . '' 
His thoughts , however reverted with a twinge to the `` former friend '' -- by whom she meant , as he knew , the university comrade of her earlier days . 
He wondered if she talked of him to Phillotson . 
`` The Gospel of Nicodemus is very nice , '' she went on to keep him from his jealous thoughts , which she read clearly , as she always did . 
Indeed when they talked on an indifferent subject , as now , there was ever a second silent conversation passing between their emotions , so perfect was the reciprocity between them . 
`` It is quite like the genuine article . 
All cut up into verses , too ; so that it is like one of the other evangelists read in a dream , when things are the same , yet not the same . 
But , Jude , do you take an interest in those questions still ? 
Are you getting up Apologetica ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I am reading Divinity harder than ever . '' 
She regarded him curiously . 
`` Why do you look at me like that ? '' 
said Jude . 
`` Oh -- why do you want to know ? '' 
`` I am sure you can tell me anything I may be ignorant of in that subject . 
You must have learnt a lot of everything from your dear dead friend ! '' 
`` We wo n't get on to that now ! '' 
she coaxed . 
`` Will you be carving out at that church again next week , where you learnt the pretty hymn ? '' 
`` Yes , perhaps . '' 
`` That will be very nice . 
Shall I come and see you there ? 
It is in this direction , and I could come any afternoon by train for half an hour ? '' 
`` No . 
Do n't come ! '' 
`` What -- are n't we going to be friends , then , any longer , as we used to be ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I did n't know that . 
I thought you were always going to be kind to me ! '' 
`` No , I am not . '' 
`` What have I done , then ? 
I am sure I thought we two -- '' The tremolo in her voice caused her to break off . 
`` Sue , I sometimes think you are a flirt , '' said he abruptly . 
There was a momentary pause , till she suddenly jumped up ; and to his surprise he saw by the kettle-flame that her face was flushed . 
`` I ca n't talk to you any longer , Jude ! '' 
she said , the tragic contralto note having come back as of old . 
`` It is getting too dark to stay together like this , after playing morbid Good Friday tunes that make one feel what one should n't ! 
... We must n't sit and talk in this way any more . 
Yes -- you must go away , for you mistake me ! 
I am very much the reverse of what you say so cruelly -- Oh , Jude , it WAS cruel to say that ! 
Yet I ca n't tell you the truth -- I should shock you by letting you know how I give way to my impulses , and how much I feel that I should n't have been provided with attractiveness unless it were meant to be exercised ! 
Some women 's love of being loved is insatiable ; and so , often , is their love of loving ; and in the last case they may find that they ca n't give it continuously to the chamber-officer appointed by the bishop 's licence to receive it . 
But you are so straightforward , Jude , that you ca n't understand me ! 
... Now you must go . 
I am sorry my husband is not at home . '' 
