-- you know how I mean ? 
-- I do n't like ` out of charity ' at all ! '' 
It was a question which in the circumstances Sue did not choose to answer . 
`` I suppose she -- your wife -- is -- a very pretty woman , even if she 's wicked ? '' 
she asked quickly . 
`` She 's pretty enough , as far as that goes . '' 
`` Prettier than I am , no doubt ! '' 
`` You are not the least alike . 
And I have never seen her for years ... But she 's sure to come back -- they always do ! '' 
`` How strange of you to stay apart from her like this ! '' 
said Sue , her trembling lip and lumpy throat belying her irony . 
`` You , such a religious man . 
How will the demi-gods in your Pantheon -- I mean those legendary persons you call saints -- intercede for you after this ? 
Now if I had done such a thing it would have been different , and not remarkable , for I at least do n't regard marriage as a sacrament . 
Your theories are not so advanced as your practice ! '' 
`` Sue , you are terribly cutting when you like to be -- a perfect Voltaire ! 
But you must treat me as you will ! '' 
When she saw how wretched he was she softened , and trying to blink away her sympathetic tears said with all the winning reproachfulness of a heart-hurt woman : `` Ah -- you should have told me before you gave me that idea that you wanted to be allowed to love me ! 
I had no feeling before that moment at the railway-station , except -- '' For once Sue was as miserable as he , in her attempts to keep herself free from emotion , and her less than half-success . 
`` Do n't cry , dear ! '' 
he implored . 
`` I am -- not crying -- because I meant to -- love you ; but because of your want of -- confidence ! '' 
They were quite screened from the market-square without , and he could not help putting out his arm towards her waist . 
His momentary desire was the means of her rallying . 
`` No , no ! '' 
she said , drawing back stringently , and wiping her eyes . 
`` Of course not ! 
It would be hypocrisy to pretend that it would be meant as from my cousin ; and it ca n't be in any other way . '' 
They moved on a dozen paces , and she showed herself recovered . 
It was distracting to Jude , and his heart would have ached less had she appeared anyhow but as she did appear ; essentially large-minded and generous on reflection , despite a previous exercise of those narrow womanly humours on impulse that were necessary to give her sex . 
`` I do n't blame you for what you could n't help , '' she said , smiling . 
`` How should I be so foolish ? 
I do blame you a little bit for not telling me before . 
But , after all , it does n't matter . 
We should have had to keep apart , you see , even if this had not been in your life . '' 
`` No , we should n't , Sue ! 
This is the only obstacle . '' 
`` You forget that I must have loved you , and wanted to be your wife , even if there had been no obstacle , '' said Sue , with a gentle seriousness which did not reveal her mind . 
`` And then we are cousins , and it is bad for cousins to marry . 
And -- I am engaged to somebody else . 
As to our going on together as we were going , in a sort of friendly way , the people round us would have made it unable to continue . 
Their views of the relations of man and woman are limited , as is proved by their expelling me from the school . 
Their philosophy only recognizes relations based on animal desire . 
The wide field of strong attachment where desire plays , at least , only a secondary part , is ignored by them -- the part of -- who is it ? 
-- Venus Urania . '' 
Her being able to talk learnedly showed that she was mistress of herself again ; and before they parted she had almost regained her vivacious glance , her reciprocity of tone , her gay manner , and her second-thought attitude of critical largeness towards others of her age and sex . 
He could speak more freely now . 
`` There were several reasons against my telling you rashly . 
One was what I have said ; another , that it was always impressed upon me that I ought not to marry -- that I belonged to an odd and peculiar family -- the wrong breed for marriage . '' 
`` Ah -- who used to say that to you ? '' 
`` My great-aunt . 
She said it always ended badly with us Fawleys . '' 
`` That 's strange . 
My father used to say the same to me ! '' 
They stood possessed by the same thought , ugly enough , even as an assumption : that a union between them , had such been possible , would have meant a terrible intensification of unfitness -- two bitters in one dish . 
`` Oh , but there ca n't be anything in it ! '' 
she said with nervous lightness . 
`` Our family have been unlucky of late years in choosing mates -- that 's all . '' 
And then they pretended to persuade themselves that all that had happened was of no consequence , and that they could still be cousins and friends and warm correspondents , and have happy genial times when they met , even if they met less frequently than before . 
Their parting was in good friendship , and yet Jude 's last look into her eyes was tinged with inquiry , for he felt that he did not even now quite know her mind . 
Tidings from Sue a day or two after passed across Jude like a withering blast . 
Before reading the letter he was led to suspect that its contents were of a somewhat serious kind by catching sight of the signature -- which was in her full name , never used in her correspondence with him since her first note : MY DEAR JUDE , -- I have something to tell you which perhaps you will not be surprised to hear , though certainly it may strike you as being accelerated -LRB- as the railway companies say of their trains -RRB- . 
Mr. Phillotson and I are to be married quite soon -- in three or four weeks . 
We had intended , as you know , to wait till I had gone through my course of training and obtained my certificate , so as to assist him , if necessary , in the teaching . 
But he generously says he does not see any object in waiting , now I am not at the training school . 
It is so good of him , because the awkwardness of my situation has really come about by my fault in getting expelled . 
Wish me joy . 
Remember I say you are to , and you must n't refuse ! 
-- Your affectionate cousin , SUSANNA FLORENCE MARY BRIDEHEAD . 
Jude staggered under the news ; could eat no breakfast ; and kept on drinking tea because his mouth was so dry . 
Then presently he went back to his work and laughed the usual bitter laugh of a man so confronted . 
Everything seemed turning to satire . 
And yet , what could the poor girl do ? 
he asked himself , and felt worse than shedding tears . 
`` O Susanna Florence Mary ! '' 
he said as he worked . 
`` You do n't know what marriage means ! '' 
Could it be possible that his announcement of his own marriage had pricked her on to this , just as his visit to her when in liquor may have pricked her on to her engagement ? 
To be sure , there seemed to exist these other and sufficient reasons , practical and social , for her decision ; but Sue was not a very practical or calculating person ; and he was compelled to think that a pique at having his secret sprung upon her had moved her to give way to Phillotson 's probable representations , that the best course to prove how unfounded were the suspicions of the school authorities would be to marry him off-hand , as in fulfilment of an ordinary engagement . 
Sue had , in fact , been placed in an awkward corner . 
Poor Sue ! 
He determined to play the Spartan ; to make the best of it , and support her ; but he could not write the requested good wishes for a day or two . 
Meanwhile there came another note from his impatient little dear : Jude , will you give me away ? 
I have nobody else who could do it so conveniently as you , being the only married relation I have here on the spot , even if my father were friendly enough to be willing , which he is n't . 
I hope you wo n't think it a trouble ? 
I have been looking at the marriage service in the prayer-book , and it seems to me very humiliating that a giver-away should be required at all . 
According to the ceremony as there printed , my bridegroom chooses me of his own will and pleasure ; but I do n't choose him . 
Somebody GIVES me to him , like a she-ass or she-goat , or any other domestic animal . 
Bless your exalted views of woman , O churchman ! 
But I forget : I am no longer privileged to tease you . 
-- Ever , SUSANNA FLORENCE MARY BRIDEHEAD . 
Jude screwed himself up to heroic key ; and replied : MY DEAR SUE , -- Of course I wish you joy ! 
And also of course I will give you away . 
What I suggest is that , as you have no house of your own , you do not marry from your school friend 's , but from mine . 
It would be more proper , I think , since I am , as you say , the person nearest related to you in this part of the world . 
I do n't see why you sign your letter in such a new and terribly formal way ? 
Surely you care a bit about me still ! 
-- Ever your affectionate , JUDE . 
What had jarred on him even more than the signature was a little sting he had been silent on -- the phrase `` married relation '' -- What an idiot it made him seem as her lover ! 
If Sue had written that in satire , he could hardly forgive her ; if in suffering -- ah , that was another thing ! 
His offer of his lodging must have commended itself to Phillotson at any rate , for the schoolmaster sent him a line of warm thanks , accepting the convenience . 
Sue also thanked him . 
Jude immediately moved into more commodious quarters , as much to escape the espionage of the suspicious landlady who had been one cause of Sue 's unpleasant experience as for the sake of room . 
Then Sue wrote to tell him the day fixed for the wedding ; and Jude decided , after inquiry , that she should come into residence on the following Saturday , which would allow of a ten days ' stay in the city prior to the ceremony , sufficiently representing a nominal residence of fifteen . 
She arrived by the ten o'clock train on the day aforesaid , Jude not going to meet her at the station , by her special request , that he should not lose a morning 's work and pay , she said -LRB- if this were her true reason -RRB- . 
But so well by this time did he know Sue that the remembrance of their mutual sensitiveness at emotional crises might , he thought , have weighed with her in this . 
When he came home to dinner she had taken possession of her apartment . 
She lived in the same house with him , but on a different floor , and they saw each other little , an occasional supper being the only meal they took together , when Sue 's manner was something like that of a scared child . 
What she felt he did not know ; their conversation was mechanical , though she did not look pale or ill . 
Phillotson came frequently , but mostly when Jude was absent . 
On the morning of the wedding , when Jude had given himself a holiday , Sue and her cousin had breakfast together for the first and last time during this curious interval ; in his room -- the parlour -- which he had hired for the period of Sue 's residence . 
Seeing , as women do , how helpless he was in making the place comfortable , she bustled about . 
`` What 's the matter , Jude ? '' 
she said suddenly . 
He was leaning with his elbows on the table and his chin on his hands , looking into a futurity which seemed to be sketched out on the tablecloth . 
`` Oh -- nothing ! '' 
`` You are ` father ' , you know . 
That 's what they call the man who gives you away . '' 
Jude could have said `` Phillotson 's age entitles him to be called that ! '' 
But he would not annoy her by such a cheap retort . 
She talked incessantly , as if she dreaded his indulgence in reflection , and before the meal was over both he and she wished they had not put such confidence in their new view of things , and had taken breakfast apart . 
What oppressed Jude was the thought that , having done a wrong thing of this sort himself , he was aiding and abetting the woman he loved in doing a like wrong thing , instead of imploring and warning her against it . 
It was on his tongue to say , `` You have quite made up your mind ? '' 
After breakfast they went out on an errand together moved by a mutual thought that it was the last opportunity they would have of indulging in unceremonious companionship . 
By the irony of fate , and the curious trick in Sue 's nature of tempting Providence at critical times , she took his arm as they walked through the muddy street -- a thing she had never done before in her life -- and on turning the corner they found themselves close to a grey perpendicular church with a low-pitched roof -- the church of St. Thomas . 
`` That 's the church , '' said Jude . 
`` Where I am going to be married ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Indeed ! '' 
she exclaimed with curiosity . 
`` How I should like to go in and see what the spot is like where I am so soon to kneel and do it . '' 
Again he said to himself , `` She does not realize what marriage means ! '' 
He passively acquiesced in her wish to go in , and they entered by the western door . 
The only person inside the gloomy building was a charwoman cleaning . 
Sue still held Jude 's arm , almost as if she loved him . 
Cruelly sweet , indeed , she had been to him that morning ; but his thoughts of a penance in store for her were tempered by an ache : ... I can find no way How a blow should fall , such as falls on men , Nor prove too much for your womanhood ! 
They strolled undemonstratively up the nave towards the altar railing , which they stood against in silence , turning then and walking down the nave again , her hand still on his arm , precisely like a couple just married . 
The too suggestive incident , entirely of her making , nearly broke down Jude . 
`` I like to do things like this , '' she said in the delicate voice of an epicure in emotions , which left no doubt that she spoke the truth . 
`` I know you do ! '' 
said Jude . 
`` They are interesting , because they have probably never been done before . 
I shall walk down the church like this with my husband in about two hours , sha n't I ! '' 
`` No doubt you will ! '' 
`` Was it like this when you were married ? '' 
`` Good God , Sue -- do n't be so awfully merciless ! 
... There , dear one , I did n't mean it ! '' 
`` Ah -- you are vexed ! '' 
she said regretfully , as she blinked away an access of eye moisture . 
`` And I promised never to vex you ! 
... I suppose I ought not to have asked you to bring me in here . 
Oh , I ought n't ! 
I see it now . 
My curiosity to hunt up a new sensation always leads me into these scrapes . 
Forgive me ! 
... You will , wo n't you , Jude ? '' 
The appeal was so remorseful that Jude 's eyes were even wetter than hers as he pressed her hand for Yes . 
`` Now we 'll hurry away , and I wo n't do it any more ! '' 
she continued humbly ; and they came out of the building , Sue intending to go on to the station to meet Phillotson . 
But the first person they encountered on entering the main street was the schoolmaster himself , whose train had arrived sooner than Sue expected . 
There was nothing really to demur to in her leaning on Jude 's arm ; but she withdrew her hand , and Jude thought that Phillotson had looked surprised . 
`` We have been doing such a funny thing ! '' 
said she , smiling candidly . 
`` We 've been to the church , rehearsing as it were . 
Have n't we , Jude ? '' 
`` How ? '' 
said Phillotson curiously . 
Jude inwardly deplored what he thought to be unnecessary frankness ; but she had gone too far not to explain all , which she accordingly did , telling him how they had marched up to the altar . 
Seeing how puzzled Phillotson seemed , Jude said as cheerfully as he could , `` I am going to buy her another little present . 
Will you both come to the shop with me ? '' 
`` No , '' said Sue , `` I 'll go on to the house with him '' ; and requesting her lover not to be a long time she departed with the schoolmaster . 
Jude soon joined them at his rooms , and shortly after they prepared for the ceremony . 
Phillotson 's hair was brushed to a painful extent , and his shirt collar appeared stiffer than it had been for the previous twenty years . 
Beyond this he looked dignified and thoughtful , and altogether a man of whom it was not unsafe to predict that he would make a kind and considerate husband . 
That he adored Sue was obvious ; and she could almost be seen to feel that she was undeserving his adoration . 
Although the distance was so short he had hired a fly from the Red Lion , and six or seven women and children had gathered by the door when they came out . 
The schoolmaster and Sue were unknown , though Jude was getting to be recognized as a citizen ; and the couple were judged to be some relations of his from a distance , nobody supposing Sue to have been a recent pupil at the training school . 
In the carriage Jude took from his pocket his extra little wedding-present , which turned out to be two or three yards of white tulle , which he threw over her bonnet and all , as a veil . 
`` It looks so odd over a bonnet , '' she said . 
`` I 'll take the bonnet off . '' 
`` Oh no -- let it stay , '' said Phillotson . 
And she obeyed . 
When they had passed up the church and were standing in their places Jude found that the antecedent visit had certainly taken off the edge of this performance , but by the time they were half-way on with the service he wished from his heart that he had not undertaken the business of giving her away . 
How could Sue have had the temerity to ask him to do it -- a cruelty possibly to herself as well as to him ? 
Women were different from men in such matters . 
Was it that they were , instead of more sensitive , as reputed , more callous , and less romantic ; or were they more heroic ? 
Or was Sue simply so perverse that she wilfully gave herself and him pain for the odd and mournful luxury of practising long-suffering in her own person , and of being touched with tender pity for him at having made him practise it ? 
He could perceive that her face was nervously set , and when they reached the trying ordeal of Jude giving her to Phillotson she could hardly command herself ; rather , however , as it seemed , from her knowledge of what her cousin must feel , whom she need not have had there at all , than from self-consideration . 
Possibly she would go on inflicting such pains again and again , and grieving for the sufferer again and again , in all her colossal inconsistency . 
Phillotson seemed not to notice , to be surrounded by a mist which prevented his seeing the emotions of others . 
As soon as they had signed their names and come away , and the suspense was over , Jude felt relieved . 
The meal at his lodging was a very simple affair , and at two o'clock they went off . 
In crossing the pavement to the fly she looked back ; and there was a frightened light in her eyes . 
Could it be that Sue had acted with such unusual foolishness as to plunge into she knew not what for the sake of asserting her independence of him , of retaliating on him for his secrecy ? 
Perhaps Sue was thus venturesome with men because she was childishly ignorant of that side of their natures which wore out women 's hearts and lives . 
When her foot was on the carriage-step she turned round , saying that she had forgotten something . 
Jude and the landlady offered to get it . 
`` No , '' she said , running back . 
`` It is my handkerchief . 
I know where I left it . '' 
Jude followed her back . 
She had found it , and came holding it in her hand . 
She looked into his eyes with her own tearful ones , and her lips suddenly parted as if she were going to avow something . 
But she went on ; and whatever she had meant to say remained unspoken . 
Jude wondered if she had really left her handkerchief behind ; or whether it were that she had miserably wished to tell him of a love that at the last moment she could not bring herself to express . 
He could not stay in his silent lodging when they were gone , and fearing that he might be tempted to drown his misery in alcohol he went upstairs , changed his dark clothes for his white , his thin boots for his thick , and proceeded to his customary work for the afternoon . 
But in the cathedral he seemed to hear a voice behind him , and to be possessed with an idea that she would come back . 
She could not possibly go home with Phillotson , he fancied . 
The feeling grew and stirred . 
The moment that the clock struck the last of his working hours he threw down his tools and rushed homeward . 
`` Has anybody been for me ? '' 
he asked . 
Nobody had been there . 
As he could claim the downstairs sitting-room till twelve o'clock that night he sat in it all the evening ; and even when the clock had struck eleven , and the family had retired , he could not shake off the feeling that she would come back and sleep in the little room adjoining his own in which she had slept so many previous days . 
Her actions were always unpredictable : why should she not come ? 
Gladly would he have compounded for the denial of her as a sweetheart and wife by having her live thus as a fellow-lodger and friend , even on the most distant terms . 
His supper still remained spread , and going to the front door , and softly setting it open , he returned to the room and sat as watchers sit on Old-Midsummer eves , expecting the phantom of the Beloved . 
But she did not come . 
Having indulged in this wild hope he went upstairs , and looked out of the window , and pictured her through the evening journey to London , whither she and Phillotson had gone for their holiday ; their rattling along through the damp night to their hotel , under the same sky of ribbed cloud as that he beheld , through which the moon showed its position rather than its shape , and one or two of the larger stars made themselves visible as faint nebulæ only . 
It was a new beginning of Sue 's history . 
He projected his mind into the future , and saw her with children more or less in her own likeness around her . 
But the consolation of regarding them as a continuation of her identity was denied to him , as to all such dreamers , by the wilfulness of Nature in not allowing issue from one parent alone . 
Every desired renewal of an existence is debased by being half alloy . 
`` If at the estrangement or death of my lost love , I could go and see her child -- hers solely -- there would be comfort in it ! '' 
said Jude . 
And then he again uneasily saw , as he had latterly seen with more and more frequency , the scorn of Nature for man 's finer emotions , and her lack of interest in his aspirations . 
The oppressive strength of his affection for Sue showed itself on the morrow and following days yet more clearly . 
He could no longer endure the light of the Melchester lamps ; the sunshine was as drab paint , and the blue sky as zinc . 
Then he received news that his old aunt was dangerously ill at Marygreen , which intelligence almost coincided with a letter from his former employer at Christminster , who offered him permanent work of a good class if he would come back . 
The letters were almost a relief to him . 
He started to visit Aunt Drusilla , and resolved to go onward to Christminster to see what worth there might be in the builder 's offer . 
Jude found his aunt even worse than the communication from the Widow Edlin had led him to expect . 
There was every possibility of her lingering on for weeks or months , though little likelihood . 
He wrote to Sue informing her of the state of her aunt , and suggesting that she might like to see her aged relative alive . 
He would meet her at Alfredston Road , the following evening , Monday , on his way back from Christminster , if she could come by the up-train which crossed his down-train at that station . 
Next morning , according , he went on to Christminster , intending to return to Alfredston soon enough to keep the suggested appointment with Sue . 
The city of learning wore an estranged look , and he had lost all feeling for its associations . 
Yet as the sun made vivid lights and shades of the mullioned architecture of the façades , and drew patterns of the crinkled battlements on the young turf of the quadrangles , Jude thought he had never seen the place look more beautiful . 
He came to the street in which he had first beheld Sue . 
The chair she had occupied when , leaning over her ecclesiastical scrolls , a hog-hair brush in her hand , her girlish figure had arrested the gaze of his inquiring eyes , stood precisely in its former spot , empty . 
It was as if she were dead , and nobody had been found capable of succeeding her in that artistic pursuit . 
Hers was now the city phantom , while those of the intellectual and devotional worthies who had once moved him to emotion were no longer able to assert their presence there . 
However , here he was ; and in fulfilment of his intention he went on to his former lodging in `` Beersheba , '' near the ritualistic church of St. Silas . 
The old landlady who opened the door seemed glad to see him again , and bringing some lunch informed him that the builder who had employed him had called to inquire his address . 
Jude went on to the stone-yard where he had worked . 
But the old sheds and bankers were distasteful to him ; he felt it impossible to engage himself to return and stay in this place of vanished dreams . 
He longed for the hour of the homeward train to Alfredston , where he might probably meet Sue . 
Then , for one ghastly half-hour of depression caused by these scenes , there returned upon him that feeling which had been his undoing more than once -- that he was not worth the trouble of being taken care of either by himself or others ; and during this half-hour he met Tinker Taylor , the bankrupt ecclesiastical ironmonger , at Fourways , who proposed that they should adjourn to a bar and drink together . 
They walked along the street till they stood before one of the great palpitating centres of Christminster life , the inn wherein he formerly had responded to the challenge to rehearse the Creed in Latin -- now a popular tavern with a spacious and inviting entrance , which gave admittance to a bar that had been entirely renovated and refitted in modern style since Jude 's residence here . 
Tinker Taylor drank off his glass and departed , saying it was too stylish a place now for him to feel at home in unless he was drunker than he had money to be just then . 
Jude was longer finishing his , and stood abstractedly silent in the , for the minute , almost empty place . 
The bar had been gutted and newly arranged throughout , mahogany fixtures having taken the place of the old painted ones , while at the back of the standing-space there were stuffed sofa-benches . 
The room was divided into compartments in the approved manner , between which were screens of ground glass in mahogany framing , to prevent topers in one compartment being put to the blush by the recognitions of those in the next . 
On the inside of the counter two barmaids leant over the white-handled beer-engines , and the row of little silvered taps inside , dripping into a pewter trough . 
Feeling tired , and having nothing more to do till the train left , Jude sat down on one of the sofas . 
At the back of the barmaids rose bevel-edged mirrors , with glass shelves running along their front , on which stood precious liquids that Jude did not know the name of , in bottles of topaz , sapphire , ruby and amethyst . 
The moment was enlivened by the entrance of some customers into the next compartment , and the starting of the mechanical tell-tale of monies received , which emitted a ting-ting every time a coin was put in . 
The barmaid attending to this compartment was invisible to Jude 's direct glance , though a reflection of her back in the glass behind her was occasionally caught by his eyes . 
He had only observed this listlessly , when she turned her face for a moment to the glass to set her hair tidy . 
Then he was amazed to discover that the face was Arabella 's . 
If she had come on to his compartment she would have seen him . 
But she did not , this being presided over by the maiden on the other side . 
Abby was in a black gown , with white linen cuffs and a broad white collar , and her figure , more developed than formerly , was accentuated by a bunch of daffodils that she wore on her left bosom . 
In the compartment she served stood an electro-plated fountain of water over a spirit-lamp , whose blue flame sent a steam from the top , all this being visible to him only in the mirror behind her ; which also reflected the faces of the men she was attending to -- one of them a handsome , dissipated young fellow , possibly an undergraduate , who had been relating to her an experience of some humorous sort . 
`` Oh , Mr. Cockman , now ! 
How can you tell such a tale to me in my innocence ! '' 
she cried gaily . 
`` Mr. Cockman , what do you use to make your moustache curl so beautiful ? '' 
As the young man was clean shaven , the retort provoked a laugh at his expense . 
`` Come ! '' 
said he , `` I 'll have a curaçao ; and a light , please . '' 
She served the liqueur from one of the lovely bottles and striking a match held it to his cigarette with ministering archness while he whiffed . 
`` Well , have you heard from your husband lately , my dear ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Not a sound , '' said she . 
`` Where is he ? '' 
`` I left him in Australia ; and I suppose he 's there still . '' 
Jude 's eyes grew rounder . 
`` What made you part from him ? '' 
`` Do n't you ask questions , and you wo n't hear lies . '' 
`` Come then , give me my change , which you 've been keeping from me for the last quarter of an hour ; and I 'll romantically vanish up the street of this picturesque city . '' 
She handed the change over the counter , in taking which he caught her fingers and held them . 
There was a slight struggle and titter , and he bade her good-bye and left . 
Jude had looked on with the eye of a dazed philosopher . 
It was extraordinary how far removed from his life Arabella now seemed to be . 
He could not realize their nominal closeness . 
And , this being the case , in his present frame of mind he was indifferent to the fact that Arabella was his wife indeed . 
The compartment that she served emptied itself of visitors , and after a brief thought he entered it , and went forward to the counter . 
Arabella did not recognize him for a moment . 
Then their glances met . 
She started ; till a humorous impudence sparkled in her eyes , and she spoke . 
`` Well , I 'm blest ! 
I thought you were underground years ago ! '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
`` I never heard anything of you , or I do n't know that I should have come here . 
But never mind ! 
What shall I treat you to this afternoon ? 
A Scotch and soda ? 
Come , anything that the house will afford , for old acquaintance ' sake ! '' 
`` Thanks , Arabella , '' said Jude without a smile . 
`` But I do n't want anything more than I 've had . '' 
The fact was that her unexpected presence there had destroyed at a stroke his momentary taste for strong liquor as completely as if it had whisked him back to his milk-fed infancy . 
`` That 's a pity , now you could get it for nothing . '' 
`` How long have you been here ? '' 
`` About six weeks . 
I returned from Sydney three months ago . 
I always liked this business , you know . '' 
`` I wonder you came to this place ! '' 
`` Well , as I say , I thought you were gone to glory , and being in London I saw the situation in an advertisement . 
Nobody was likely to know me here , even if I had minded , for I was never in Christminster in my growing up . '' 
`` Why did you return from Australia ? '' 
`` Oh , I had my reasons ... Then you are not a don yet ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Not even a reverend ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Nor so much as a rather reverend dissenting gentleman ? '' 
`` I am as I was . '' 
`` True -- you look so . '' 
She idly allowed her fingers to rest on the pull of the beer-engine as she inspected him critically . 
He observed that her hands were smaller and whiter than when he had lived with her , and that on the hand which pulled the engine she wore an ornamental ring set with what seemed to be real sapphires -- which they were , indeed , and were much admired as such by the young men who frequented the bar . 
`` So you pass as having a living husband , '' he continued . 
`` Yes . 
I thought it might be awkward if I called myself a widow , as I should have liked . '' 
`` True . 
I am known here a little . '' 
`` I did n't mean on that account -- for as I said I did n't expect you . 
It was for other reasons . '' 
`` What were they ? '' 
`` I do n't care to go into them , '' she replied evasively . 
`` I make a very good living , and I do n't know that I want your company . '' 
Here a chappie with no chin , and a moustache like a lady 's eyebrow , came and asked for a curiously compounded drink , and Arabella was obliged to go and attend to him . 
`` We ca n't talk here , '' she said , stepping back a moment . 
`` Ca n't you wait till nine ? 
Say yes , and do n't be a fool . 
I can get off duty two hours sooner than usual , if I ask . 
I am not living in the house at present . '' 
He reflected and said gloomily , `` I 'll come back . 
I suppose we 'd better arrange something . '' 
`` Oh , bother arranging ! 
I 'm not going to arrange anything ! '' 
`` But I must know a thing or two ; and , as you say , we ca n't talk here . 
Very well ; I 'll call for you . '' 
Depositing his unemptied glass he went out and walked up and down the street . 
Here was a rude flounce into the pellucid sentimentality of his sad attachment to Sue . 
Though Arabella 's word was absolutely untrustworthy , he thought there might be some truth in her implication that she had not wished to disturb him , and had really supposed him dead . 
However , there was only one thing now to be done , and that was to play a straightforward part , the law being the law , and the woman between whom and himself there was no more unity than between east and west , being in the eye of the Church one person with him . 
Having to meet Arabella here , it was impossible to meet Sue at Alfredston as he had promised . 
At every thought of this a pang had gone through him ; but the conjuncture could not be helped . 
Arabella was perhaps an intended intervention to punish him for his unauthorized love . 
Passing the evening , therefore , in a desultory waiting about the town wherein he avoided the precincts of every cloister and hall , because he could not bear to behold them , he repaired to the tavern bar while the hundred and one strokes were resounding from the Great Bell of Cardinal College , a coincidence which seemed to him gratuitous irony . 
The inn was now brilliantly lighted up , and the scene was altogether more brisk and gay . 
The faces of the barmaidens had risen in colour , each having a pink flush on her cheek ; their manners were still more vivacious than before -- more abandoned , more excited , more sensuous , and they expressed their sentiments and desires less euphemistically , laughing in a lackadaisical tone , without reserve . 
The bar had been crowded with men of all sorts during the previous hour , and he had heard from without the hubbub of their voices ; but the customers were fewer at last . 
He nodded to Arabella , and told her that she would find him outside the door when she came away . 
`` But you must have something with me first , '' she said with great good humour . 
`` Just an early night-cap : I always do . 
Then you can go out and wait a minute , as it is best we should not be seen going together . '' 
She drew a couple of liqueur glasses of brandy ; and though she had evidently , from her countenance , already taken in enough alcohol either by drinking or , more probably , from the atmosphere she had breathed for so many hours , she finished hers quickly . 
He also drank his , and went outside the house . 
In a few minutes she came , in a thick jacket and a hat with a black feather . 
`` I live quite near , '' she said , taking his arm , `` and can let myself in by a latch-key at any time . 
What arrangement do you want to come to ? '' 
`` Oh -- none in particular , '' he answered , thoroughly sick and tired , his thoughts again reverting to Alfredston , and the train he did not go by ; the probable disappointment of Sue that he was not there when she arrived , and the missed pleasure of her company on the long and lonely climb by starlight up the hills to Marygreen . 
`` I ought to have gone back really ! 
My aunt is on her deathbed , I fear . '' 
`` I 'll go over with you to-morrow morning . 
I think I could get a day off . '' 
There was something particularly uncongenial in the idea of Arabella , who had no more sympathy than a tigress with his relations or him , coming to the bedside of his dying aunt , and meeting Sue . 
Yet he said , `` Of course , if you 'd like to , you can . '' 
`` Well , that we 'll consider ... Now , until we have come to some agreement it is awkward our being together here -- where you are known , and I am getting known , though without any suspicion that I have anything to do with you . 
As we are going towards the station , suppose we take the nine-forty train to Aldbrickham ? 
We shall be there in little more than half an hour , and nobody will know us for one night , and we shall be quite free to act as we choose till we have made up our minds whether we 'll make anything public or not . '' 
`` As you like . '' 
`` Then wait till I get two or three things . 
This is my lodging . 
Sometimes when late I sleep at the hotel where I am engaged , so nobody will think anything of my staying out . '' 
She speedily returned , and they went on to the railway , and made the half-hour 's journey to Aldbrickham , where they entered a third-rate inn near the station in time for a late supper . 
On the morrow between nine and half-past they were journeying back to Christminster , the only two occupants of a compartment in a third-class railway-carriage . 
Having , like Jude , made rather a hasty toilet to catch the train , Arabella looked a little frowsy , and her face was very far from possessing the animation which had characterized it at the bar the night before . 
When they came out of the station she found that she still had half an hour to spare before she was due at the bar . 
They walked in silence a little way out of the town in the direction of Alfredston . 
Jude looked up the far highway . 
`` Ah ... poor feeble me ! '' 
he murmured at last . 
`` What ? '' 
said she . 
`` This is the very road by which I came into Christminster years ago full of plans ! '' 
`` Well , whatever the road is I think my time is nearly up , as I have to be in the bar by eleven o'clock . 
And as I said , I sha n't ask for the day to go with you to see your aunt . 
So perhaps we had better part here . 
I 'd sooner not walk up Chief Street with you , since we 've come to no conclusion at all . '' 
`` Very well . 
But you said when we were getting up this morning that you had something you wished to tell me before I left ? '' 
`` So I had -- two things -- one in particular . 
But you would n't promise to keep it a secret . 
I 'll tell you now if you promise ? 
As an honest woman I wish you to know it ... It was what I began telling you in the night -- about that gentleman who managed the Sydney hotel . '' 
Arabella spoke somewhat hurriedly for her . 
`` You 'll keep it close ? '' 
`` Yes -- yes -- I promise ! '' 
