To make her still more objectionable , she was an artist or designer of some sort in what was called an ecclesiastical warehouse , which was a perfect seed-bed of idolatry , and she was no doubt abandoned to mummeries on that account -- if not quite a Papist . 
-LRB- Miss Drusilla Fawley was of her date , Evangelical . -RRB- 
As Jude was rather on an intellectual track than a theological , this news of Sue 's probable opinions did not much influence him one way or the other , but the clue to her whereabouts was decidedly interesting . 
With an altogether singular pleasure he walked at his earliest spare minutes past the shops answering to his great-aunt 's description ; and beheld in one of them a young girl sitting behind a desk , who was suspiciously like the original of the portrait . 
He ventured to enter on a trivial errand , and having made his purchase lingered on the scene . 
The shop seemed to be kept entirely by women . 
It contained Anglican books , stationery , texts , and fancy goods : little plaster angels on brackets , Gothic-framed pictures of saints , ebony crosses that were almost crucifixes , prayer-books that were almost missals . 
He felt very shy of looking at the girl in the desk ; she was so pretty that he could not believe it possible that she should belong to him . 
Then she spoke to one of the two older women behind the counter ; and he recognized in the accents certain qualities of his own voice ; softened and sweetened , but his own . 
What was she doing ? 
He stole a glance round . 
Before her lay a piece of zinc , cut to the shape of a scroll three or four feet long , and coated with a dead-surface paint on one side . 
Hereon she was designing or illuminating , in characters of Church text , the single word A L L E L U J A `` A sweet , saintly , Christian business , hers ! '' 
thought he . 
Her presence here was now fairly enough explained , her skill in work of this sort having no doubt been acquired from her father 's occupation as an ecclesiastical worker in metal . 
The lettering on which she was engaged was clearly intended to be fixed up in some chancel to assist devotion . 
He came out . 
It would have been easy to speak to her there and then , but it seemed scarcely honourable towards his aunt to disregard her request so incontinently . 
She had used him roughly , but she had brought him up : and the fact of her being powerless to control him lent a pathetic force to a wish that would have been inoperative as an argument . 
So Jude gave no sign . 
He would not call upon Sue just yet . 
He had other reasons against doing so when he had walked away . 
She seemed so dainty beside himself in his rough working-jacket and dusty trousers that he felt he was as yet unready to encounter her , as he had felt about Mr. Phillotson . 
And how possible it was that she had inherited the antipathies of her family , and would scorn him , as far as a Christian could , particularly when he had told her that unpleasant part of his history which had resulted in his becoming enchained to one of her own sex whom she would certainly not admire . 
Thus he kept watch over her , and liked to feel she was there . 
The consciousness of her living presence stimulated him . 
But she remained more or less an ideal character , about whose form he began to weave curious and fantastic day-dreams . 
Between two and three weeks afterwards Jude was engaged with some more men , outside Crozier College in Old-time Street , in getting a block of worked freestone from a waggon across the pavement , before hoisting it to the parapet which they were repairing . 
Standing in position the head man said , `` Spaik when he heave ! 
He-ho ! '' 
And they heaved . 
All of a sudden , as he lifted , his cousin stood close to his elbow , pausing a moment on the bend of her foot till the obstructing object should have been removed . 
She looked right into his face with liquid , untranslatable eyes , that combined , or seemed to him to combine , keenness with tenderness , and mystery with both , their expression , as well as that of her lips , taking its life from some words just spoken to a companion , and being carried on into his face quite unconsciously . 
She no more observed his presence than that of the dust-motes which his manipulations raised into the sunbeams . 
His closeness to her was so suggestive that he trembled , and turned his face away with a shy instinct to prevent her recognizing him , though as she had never once seen him she could not possibly do so ; and might very well never have heard even his name . 
He could perceive that though she was a country-girl at bottom , a latter girlhood of some years in London , and a womanhood here , had taken all rawness out of her . 
When she was gone he continued his work , reflecting on her . 
He had been so caught by her influence that he had taken no count of her general mould and build . 
He remembered now that she was not a large figure , that she was light and slight , of the type dubbed elegant . 
That was about all he had seen . 
There was nothing statuesque in her ; all was nervous motion . 
She was mobile , living , yet a painter might not have called her handsome or beautiful . 
But the much that she was surprised him . 
She was quite a long way removed from the rusticity that was his . 
How could one of his cross-grained , unfortunate , almost accursed stock , have contrived to reach this pitch of niceness ? 
London had done it , he supposed . 
From this moment the emotion which had been accumulating in his breast as the bottled-up effect of solitude and the poetized locality he dwelt in , insensibly began to precipitate itself on this half-visionary form ; and he perceived that , whatever his obedient wish in a contrary direction , he would soon be unable to resist the desire to make himself known to her . 
He affected to think of her quite in a family way , since there were crushing reasons why he should not and could not think of her in any other . 
The first reason was that he was married , and it would be wrong . 
The second was that they were cousins . 
It was not well for cousins to fall in love even when circumstances seemed to favour the passion . 
The third : even were he free , in a family like his own where marriage usually meant a tragic sadness , marriage with a blood-relation would duplicate the adverse conditions , and a tragic sadness might be intensified to a tragic horror . 
Therefore , again , he would have to think of Sue with only a relation 's mutual interest in one belonging to him ; regard her in a practical way as some one to be proud of ; to talk and nod to ; later on , to be invited to tea by , the emotion spent on her being rigorously that of a kinsman and well-wisher . 
So would she be to him a kindly star , an elevating power , a companion in Anglican worship , a tender friend . 
But under the various deterrent influences Jude 's instinct was to approach her timidly , and the next Sunday he went to the morning service in the Cathedral church of Cardinal College to gain a further view of her , for he had found that she frequently attended there . 
She did not come , and he awaited her in the afternoon , which was finer . 
He knew that if she came at all she would approach the building along the eastern side of the great green quadrangle from which it was accessible , and he stood in a corner while the bell was going . 
A few minutes before the hour for service she appeared as one of the figures walking along under the college walls , and at sight of her he advanced up the side opposite , and followed her into the building , more than ever glad that he had not as yet revealed himself . 
To see her , and to be himself unseen and unknown , was enough for him at present . 
He lingered awhile in the vestibule , and the service was some way advanced when he was put into a seat . 
It was a louring , mournful , still afternoon , when a religion of some sort seems a necessity to ordinary practical men , and not only a luxury of the emotional and leisured classes . 
In the dim light and the baffling glare of the clerestory windows he could discern the opposite worshippers indistinctly only , but he saw that Sue was among them . 
He had not long discovered the exact seat that she occupied when the chanting of the 119th Psalm in which the choir was engaged reached its second part , In quo corriget , the organ changing to a pathetic Gregorian tune as the singers gave forth : Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way ? 
It was the very question that was engaging Jude 's attention at this moment . 
What a wicked worthless fellow he had been to give vent as he had done to an animal passion for a woman , and allow it to lead to such disastrous consequences ; then to think of putting an end to himself ; then to go recklessly and get drunk . 
The great waves of pedal music tumbled round the choir , and , nursed on the supernatural as he had been , it is not wonderful that he could hardly believe that the psalm was not specially set by some regardful Providence for this moment of his first entry into the solemn building . 
And yet it was the ordinary psalm for the twenty-fourth evening of the month . 
The girl for whom he was beginning to nourish an extraordinary tenderness was at this time ensphered by the same harmonies as those which floated into his ears ; and the thought was a delight to him . 
She was probably a frequenter of this place , and , steeped body and soul in church sentiment as she must be by occupation and habit , had , no doubt , much in common with him . 
To an impressionable and lonely young man the consciousness of having at last found anchorage for his thoughts , which promised to supply both social and spiritual possibilities , was like the dew of Hermon , and he remained throughout the service in a sustaining atmosphere of ecstasy . 
Though he was loth to suspect it , some people might have said to him that the atmosphere blew as distinctly from Cyprus as from Galilee . 
Jude waited till she had left her seat and passed under the screen before he himself moved . 
She did not look towards him , and by the time he reached the door she was half-way down the broad path . 
Being dressed up in his Sunday suit he was inclined to follow her and reveal himself . 
But he was not quite ready ; and , alas , ought he to do so with the kind of feeling that was awakening in him ? 
For though it had seemed to have an ecclesiastical basis during the service , and he had persuaded himself that such was the case , he could not altogether be blind to the real nature of the magnetism . 
She was such a stranger that the kinship was affectation , and he said , `` It ca n't be ! 
I , a man with a wife , must not know her ! '' 
Still Sue WAS his own kin , and the fact of his having a wife , even though she was not in evidence in this hemisphere , might be a help in one sense . 
It would put all thought of a tender wish on his part out of Sue 's mind , and make her intercourse with him free and fearless . 
It was with some heartache that he saw how little he cared for the freedom and fearlessness that would result in her from such knowledge . 
Some little time before the date of this service in the cathedral the pretty , liquid-eyed , light-footed young woman , Sue Bridehead , had an afternoon 's holiday , and leaving the ecclesiastical establishment in which she not only assisted but lodged , took a walk into the country with a book in her hand . 
It was one of those cloudless days which sometimes occur in Wessex and elsewhere between days of cold and wet , as if intercalated by caprice of the weather-god . 
She went along for a mile or two until she came to much higher ground than that of the city she had left behind her . 
The road passed between green fields , and coming to a stile Sue paused there , to finish the page she was reading , and then looked back at the towers and domes and pinnacles new and old . 
On the other side of the stile , in the footpath , she beheld a foreigner with black hair and a sallow face , sitting on the grass beside a large square board whereon were fixed , as closely as they could stand , a number of plaster statuettes , some of them bronzed , which he was re-arranging before proceeding with them on his way . 
They were in the main reduced copies of ancient marbles , and comprised divinities of a very different character from those the girl was accustomed to see portrayed , among them being a Venus of standard pattern , a Diana , and , of the other sex , Apollo , Bacchus , and Mars . 
Though the figures were many yards away from her the south-west sun brought them out so brilliantly against the green herbage that she could discern their contours with luminous distinctness ; and being almost in a line between herself and the church towers of the city they awoke in her an oddly foreign and contrasting set of ideas by comparison . 
The man rose , and , seeing her , politely took off his cap , and cried , `` I-i-i-mages ! '' 
in an accent that agreed with his appearance . 
In a moment he dexterously lifted upon his knee the great board with its assembled notabilities divine and human , and raised it to the top of his head , bringing them on to her and resting the board on the stile . 
First he offered her his smaller wares -- the busts of kings and queens , then a minstrel , then a winged Cupid . 
She shook her head . 
`` How much are these two ? '' 
she said , touching with her finger the Venus and the Apollo -- the largest figures on the tray . 
He said she should have them for ten shillings . 
`` I can not afford that , '' said Sue . 
She offered considerably less , and to her surprise the image-man drew them from their wire stay and handed them over the stile . 
She clasped them as treasures . 
When they were paid for , and the man had gone , she began to be concerned as to what she should do with them . 
They seemed so very large now that they were in her possession , and so very naked . 
Being of a nervous temperament she trembled at her enterprise . 
When she handled them the white pipeclay came off on her gloves and jacket . 
After carrying them along a little way openly an idea came to her , and , pulling some huge burdock leaves , parsley , and other rank growths from the hedge , she wrapped up her burden as well as she could in these , so that what she carried appeared to be an enormous armful of green stuff gathered by a zealous lover of nature . 
`` Well , anything is better than those everlasting church fallals ! '' 
she said . 
But she was still in a trembling state , and seemed almost to wish she had not bought the figures . 
Occasionally peeping inside the leaves to see that Venus 's arm was not broken , she entered with her heathen load into the most Christian city in the country by an obscure street running parallel to the main one , and round a corner to the side door of the establishment to which she was attached . 
Her purchases were taken straight up to her own chamber , and she at once attempted to lock them in a box that was her very own property ; but finding them too cumbersome she wrapped them in large sheets of brown paper , and stood them on the floor in a corner . 
The mistress of the house , Miss Fontover , was an elderly lady in spectacles , dressed almost like an abbess ; a dab at Ritual , as become one of her business , and a worshipper at the ceremonial church of St. Silas , in the suburb of Beersheba before-mentioned , which Jude also had begun to attend . 
She was the daughter of a clergyman in reduced circumstances , and at his death , which had occurred several years before this date , she boldly avoided penury by taking over a little shop of church requisites and developing it to its present creditable proportions . 
She wore a cross and beads round her neck as her only ornament , and knew the Christian Year by heart . 
She now came to call Sue to tea , and , finding that the girl did not respond for a moment , entered the room just as the other was hastily putting a string round each parcel . 
`` Something you have been buying , Miss Bridehead ? '' 
she asked , regarding the enwrapped objects . 
`` Yes -- just something to ornament my room , '' said Sue . 
`` Well , I should have thought I had put enough here already , '' said Miss Fontover , looking round at the Gothic-framed prints of saints , the Church-text scrolls , and other articles which , having become too stale to sell , had been used to furnish this obscure chamber . 
`` What is it ? 
How bulky ! '' 
She tore a little hole , about as big as a wafer , in the brown paper , and tried to peep in . 
`` Why , statuary ? 
Two figures ? 
Where did you get them ? '' 
`` Oh -- I bought them of a travelling man who sells casts -- '' `` Two saints ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` What ones ? '' 
`` St. Peter and St. -- St. Mary Magdalen . '' 
`` Well -- now come down to tea , and go and finish that organ-text , if there 's light enough afterwards . '' 
These little obstacles to the indulgence of what had been the merest passing fancy created in Sue a great zest for unpacking her objects and looking at them ; and at bedtime , when she was sure of being undisturbed , she unrobed the divinities in comfort . 
Placing the pair of figures on the chest of drawers , a candle on each side of them , she withdrew to the bed , flung herself down thereon , and began reading a book she had taken from her box , which Miss Fontover knew nothing of . 
It was a volume of Gibbon , and she read the chapter dealing with the reign of Julian the Apostate . 
Occasionally she looked up at the statuettes , which appeared strange and out of place , there happening to be a Calvary print hanging between them , and , as if the scene suggested the action , she at length jumped up and withdrew another book from her box -- a volume of verse -- and turned to the familiar poem -- Thou hast conquered , O pale Galilean : The world has grown grey from thy breath ! 
which she read to the end . 
Presently she put out the candles , undressed , and finally extinguished her own light . 
She was of an age which usually sleeps soundly , yet to-night she kept waking up , and every time she opened her eyes there was enough diffused light from the street to show her the white plaster figures , standing on the chest of drawers in odd contrast to their environment of text and martyr , and the Gothic-framed Crucifix-picture that was only discernible now as a Latin cross , the figure thereon being obscured by the shades . 
On one of these occasions the church clocks struck some small hour . 
It fell upon the ears of another person who sat bending over his books at a not very distant spot in the same city . 
Being Saturday night the morrow was one on which Jude had not set his alarm-clock to call him at his usually early time , and hence he had stayed up , as was his custom , two or three hours later than he could afford to do on any other day of the week . 
Just then he was earnestly reading from his Griesbach 's text . 
At the very time that Sue was tossing and staring at her figures , the policeman and belated citizens passing along under his window might have heard , if they had stood still , strange syllables mumbled with fervour within -- words that had for Jude an indescribable enchantment : inexplicable sounds something like these : -- '' All hemin heis Theos ho Pater , ex hou ta panta , kai hemeis eis auton : '' Till the sounds rolled with reverent loudness , as a book was heard to close : -- '' Kai heis Kurios Iesous Christos , di hou ta panta kai hemeis di autou ! '' 
He was a handy man at his trade , an all-round man , as artizans in country-towns are apt to be . 
In London the man who carves the boss or knob of leafage declines to cut the fragment of moulding which merges in that leafage , as if it were a degradation to do the second half of one whole . 
When there was not much Gothic moulding for Jude to run , or much window-tracery on the bankers , he would go out lettering monuments or tombstones , and take a pleasure in the change of handiwork . 
The next time that he saw her was when he was on a ladder executing a job of this sort inside one of the churches . 
There was a short morning service , and when the parson entered Jude came down from his ladder , and sat with the half-dozen people forming the congregation , till the prayer should be ended , and he could resume his tapping . 
He did not observe till the service was half over that one of the women was Sue , who had perforce accompanied the elderly Miss Fontover thither . 
Jude sat watching her pretty shoulders , her easy , curiously nonchalant risings and sittings , and her perfunctory genuflexions , and thought what a help such an Anglican would have been to him in happier circumstances . 
It was not so much his anxiety to get on with his work that made him go up to it immediately the worshipers began to take their leave : it was that he dared not , in this holy spot , confront the woman who was beginning to influence him in such an indescribable manner . 
Those three enormous reasons why he must not attempt intimate acquaintance with Sue Bridehead , now that his interest in her had shown itself to be unmistakably of a sexual kind , loomed as stubbornly as ever . 
But it was also obvious that man could not live by work alone ; that the particular man Jude , at any rate , wanted something to love . 
Some men would have rushed incontinently to her , snatched the pleasure of easy friendship which she could hardly refuse , and have left the rest to chance . 
Not so Jude -- at first . 
But as the days , and still more particularly the lonely evenings , dragged along , he found himself , to his moral consternation , to be thinking more of her instead of thinking less of her , and experiencing a fearful bliss in doing what was erratic , informal , and unexpected . 
Surrounded by her influence all day , walking past the spots she frequented , he was always thinking of her , and was obliged to own to himself that his conscience was likely to be the loser in this battle . 
To be sure she was almost an ideality to him still . 
Perhaps to know her would be to cure himself of this unexpected and unauthorized passion . 
A voice whispered that , though he desired to know her , he did not desire to be cured . 
There was not the least doubt that from his own orthodox point of view the situation was growing immoral . 
For Sue to be the loved one of a man who was licensed by the laws of his country to love Arabella and none other unto his life 's end , was a pretty bad second beginning when the man was bent on such a course as Jude purposed . 
This conviction was so real with him that one day when , as was frequent , he was at work in a neighbouring village church alone , he felt it to be his duty to pray against his weakness . 
But much as he wished to be an exemplar in these things he could not get on . 
It was quite impossible , he found , to ask to be delivered from temptation when your heart 's desire was to be tempted unto seventy times seven . 
So he excused himself . 
`` After all , '' he said , `` it is not altogether an erotolepsy that is the matter with me , as at that first time . 
I can see that she is exceptionally bright ; and it is partly a wish for intellectual sympathy , and a craving for loving-kindness in my solitude . '' 
Thus he went on adoring her , fearing to realize that it was human perversity . 
For whatever Sue 's virtues , talents , or ecclesiastical saturation , it was certain that those items were not at all the cause of his affection for her . 
On an afternoon at this time a young girl entered the stone-mason 's yard with some hesitation , and , lifting her skirts to avoid draggling them in the white dust , crossed towards the office . 
`` That 's a nice girl , '' said one of the men known as Uncle Joe . 
`` Who is she ? '' 
asked another . 
`` I do n't know -- I 've seen her about here and there . 
Why , yes , she 's the daughter of that clever chap Bridehead who did all the wrought ironwork at St. Silas ' ten years ago , and went away to London afterwards . 
I do n't know what he 's doing now -- not much I fancy -- as she 's come back here . '' 
Meanwhile the young woman had knocked at the office door and asked if Mr. Jude Fawley was at work in the yard . 
It so happened that Jude had gone out somewhere or other that afternoon , which information she received with a look of disappointment , and went away immediately . 
When Jude returned they told him , and described her , whereupon he exclaimed , `` Why -- that 's my cousin Sue ! '' 
He looked along the street after her , but she was out of sight . 
He had no longer any thought of a conscientious avoidance of her , and resolved to call upon her that very evening . 
And when he reached his lodging he found a note from her -- a first note -- one of those documents which , simple and commonplace in themselves , are seen retrospectively to have been pregnant with impassioned consequences . 
The very unconsciousness of a looming drama which is shown in such innocent first epistles from women to men , or vice versa , makes them , when such a drama follows , and they are read over by the purple or lurid light of it , all the more impressive , solemn , and in cases , terrible . 
Sue 's was of the most artless and natural kind . 
She addressed him as her dear cousin Jude ; said she had only just learnt by the merest accident that he was living in Christminster , and reproached him with not letting her know . 
They might have had such nice times together , she said , for she was thrown much upon herself , and had hardly any congenial friend . 
But now there was every probability of her soon going away , so that the chance of companionship would be lost perhaps for ever . 
A cold sweat overspread Jude at the news that she was going away . 
That was a contingency he had never thought of , and it spurred him to write all the more quickly to her . 
He would meet her that very evening , he said , one hour from the time of writing , at the cross in the pavement which marked the spot of the Martyrdoms . 
When he had despatched the note by a boy he regretted that in his hurry he should have suggested to her to meet him out of doors , when he might have said he would call upon her . 
It was , in fact , the country custom to meet thus , and nothing else had occurred to him . 
Arabella had been met in the same way , unfortunately , and it might not seem respectable to a dear girl like Sue . 
However , it could not be helped now , and he moved towards the point a few minutes before the hour , under the glimmer of the newly lighted lamps . 
The broad street was silent , and almost deserted , although it was not late . 
He saw a figure on the other side , which turned out to be hers , and they both converged towards the crossmark at the same moment . 
Before either had reached it she called out to him : `` I am not going to meet you just there , for the first time in my life ! 
Come further on . '' 
The voice , though positive and silvery , had been tremulous . 
They walked on in parallel lines , and , waiting her pleasure , Jude watched till she showed signs of closing in , when he did likewise , the place being where the carriers ' carts stood in the daytime , though there was none on the spot then . 
`` I am sorry that I asked you to meet me , and did n't call , '' began Jude with the bashfulness of a lover . 
`` But I thought it would save time if we were going to walk . '' 
`` Oh -- I do n't mind that , '' she said with the freedom of a friend . 
`` I have really no place to ask anybody in to . 
What I meant was that the place you chose was so horrid -- I suppose I ought not to say horrid -- I mean gloomy and inauspicious in its associations ... But is n't it funny to begin like this , when I do n't know you yet ? '' 
She looked him up and down curiously , though Jude did not look much at her . 
`` You seem to know me more than I know you , '' she added . 
`` Yes -- I have seen you now and then . '' 
`` And you knew who I was , and did n't speak ? 
And now I am going away ! '' 
`` Yes . 
That 's unfortunate . 
I have hardly any other friend . 
I have , indeed , one very old friend here somewhere , but I do n't quite like to call on him just yet . 
I wonder if you know anything of him -- Mr. Phillotson ? 
A parson somewhere about the county I think he is . '' 
`` No -- I only know of one Mr. Phillotson . 
He lives a little way out in the country , at Lumsdon . 
He 's a village schoolmaster . '' 
`` Ah ! 
I wonder if he 's the same . 
Surely it is impossible ! 
Only a schoolmaster still ! 
Do you know his Christian name -- is it Richard ? '' 
`` Yes -- it is ; I 've directed books to him , though I 've never seen him . '' 
`` Then he could n't do it ! '' 
Jude 's countenance fell , for how could he succeed in an enterprise wherein the great Phillotson had failed ? 
He would have had a day of despair if the news had not arrived during his sweet Sue 's presence , but even at this moment he had visions of how Phillotson 's failure in the grand university scheme would depress him when she had gone . 
`` As we are going to take a walk , suppose we go and call upon him ? '' 
said Jude suddenly . 
`` It is not late . '' 
She agreed , and they went along up a hill , and through some prettily wooded country . 
Presently the embattled tower and square turret of the church rose into the sky , and then the school-house . 
They inquired of a person in the street if Mr. Phillotson was likely to be at home , and were informed that he was always at home . 
A knock brought him to the school-house door , with a candle in his hand and a look of inquiry on his face , which had grown thin and careworn since Jude last set eyes on him . 
That after all these years the meeting with Mr. Phillotson should be of this homely complexion destroyed at one stroke the halo which had surrounded the school-master 's figure in Jude 's imagination ever since their parting . 
It created in him at the same time a sympathy with Phillotson as an obviously much chastened and disappointed man . 
Jude told him his name , and said he had come to see him as an old friend who had been kind to him in his youthful days . 
`` I do n't remember you in the least , '' said the school-master thoughtfully . 
`` You were one of my pupils , you say ? 
Yes , no doubt ; but they number so many thousands by this time of my life , and have naturally changed so much , that I remember very few except the quite recent ones . '' 
`` It was out at Marygreen , '' said Jude , wishing he had not come . 
`` Yes . 
I was there a short time . 
And is this an old pupil , too ? '' 
`` No -- that 's my cousin ... I wrote to you for some grammars , if you recollect , and you sent them ? '' 
`` Ah -- yes ! 
-- I do dimly recall that incident . '' 
`` It was very kind of you to do it . 
And it was you who first started me on that course . 
On the morning you left Marygreen , when your goods were on the waggon , you wished me good-bye , and said your scheme was to be a university man and enter the Church -- that a degree was the necessary hall-mark of one who wanted to do anything as a theologian or teacher . '' 
`` I remember I thought all that privately ; but I wonder I did not keep my own counsel . 
The idea was given up years ago . '' 
`` I have never forgotten it . 
It was that which brought me to this part of the country , and out here to see you to-night . '' 
`` Come in , '' said Phillotson . 
`` And your cousin , too . '' 
They entered the parlour of the school-house , where there was a lamp with a paper shade , which threw the light down on three or four books . 
Phillotson took it off , so that they could see each other better , and the rays fell on the nervous little face and vivacious dark eyes and hair of Sue , on the earnest features of her cousin , and on the schoolmaster 's own maturer face and figure , showing him to be a spare and thoughtful personage of five-and-forty , with a thin-lipped , somewhat refined mouth , a slightly stooping habit , and a black frock coat , which from continued frictions shone a little at the shoulder-blades , the middle of the back , and the elbows . 
The old friendship was imperceptibly renewed , the schoolmaster speaking of his experiences , and the cousins of theirs . 
He told them that he still thought of the Church sometimes , and that though he could not enter it as he had intended to do in former years he might enter it as a licentiate . 
Meanwhile , he said , he was comfortable in his present position , though he was in want of a pupil-teacher . 
They did not stay to supper , Sue having to be indoors before it grew late , and the road was retraced to Christminster . 
Though they had talked of nothing more than general subjects , Jude was surprised to find what a revelation of woman his cousin was to him . 
She was so vibrant that everything she did seemed to have its source in feeling . 
An exciting thought would make her walk ahead so fast that he could hardly keep up with her ; and her sensitiveness on some points was such that it might have been misread as vanity . 
It was with heart-sickness he perceived that , while her sentiments towards him were those of the frankest friendliness only , he loved her more than before becoming acquainted with her ; and the gloom of the walk home lay not in the night overhead , but in the thought of her departure . 
`` Why must you leave Christminster ? '' 
he said regretfully . 
`` How can you do otherwise than cling to a city in whose history such men as Newman , Pusey , Ward , Keble , loom so large ! '' 
`` Yes -- they do . 
Though how large do they loom in the history of the world ? 
... What a funny reason for caring to stay ! 
I should never have thought of it ! '' 
She laughed . 
`` Well -- I must go , '' she continued . 
`` Miss Fontover , one of the partners whom I serve , is offended with me , and I with her ; and it is best to go . '' 
`` How did that happen ? '' 
`` She broke some statuary of mine . '' 
`` Oh ? 
Wilfully ? '' 
`` Yes . 
She found it in my room , and though it was my property she threw it on the floor and stamped on it , because it was not according to her taste , and ground the arms and the head of one of the figures all to bits with her heel -- a horrid thing ! '' 
`` Too Catholic-Apostolic for her , I suppose ? 
No doubt she called them popish images and talked of the invocation of saints . '' 
`` No ... No , she did n't do that . 
She saw the matter quite differently . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Then I am surprised ! '' 
`` Yes . 
It was for quite some other reason that she did n't like my patron-saints . 
So I was led to retort upon her ; and the end of it was that I resolved not to stay , but to get into an occupation in which I shall be more independent . '' 
`` Why do n't you try teaching again ? 
You once did , I heard . '' 
`` I never thought of resuming it ; for I was getting on as an art-designer . '' 
`` DO let me ask Mr. Phillotson to let you try your hand in his school ? 
If you like it , and go to a training college , and become a first-class certificated mistress , you get twice as large an income as any designer or church artist , and twice as much freedom . '' 
`` Well -- ask him . 
Now I must go in . 
Good-bye , dear Jude ! 
I am so glad we have met at last . 
We need n't quarrel because our parents did , need we ? '' 
Jude did not like to let her see quite how much he agreed with her , and went his way to the remote street in which he had his lodging . 
To keep Sue Bridehead near him was now a desire which operated without regard of consequences , and the next evening he again set out for Lumsdon , fearing to trust to the persuasive effects of a note only . 
The school-master was unprepared for such a proposal . 
`` What I rather wanted was a second year 's transfer , as it is called , '' he said . 
`` Of course your cousin would do , personally ; but she has had no experience . 
Oh -- she has , has she ? 
Does she really think of adopting teaching as a profession ? '' 
Jude said she was disposed to do so , he thought , and his ingenious arguments on her natural fitness for assisting Mr. Phillotson , of which Jude knew nothing whatever , so influenced the schoolmaster that he said he would engage her , assuring Jude as a friend that unless his cousin really meant to follow on in the same course , and regarded this step as the first stage of an apprenticeship , of which her training in a normal school would be the second stage , her time would be wasted quite , the salary being merely nominal . 
The day after this visit Phillotson received a letter from Jude , containing the information that he had again consulted his cousin , who took more and more warmly to the idea of tuition ; and that she had agreed to come . 
It did not occur for a moment to the schoolmaster and recluse that Jude 's ardour in promoting the arrangement arose from any other feelings towards Sue than the instinct of co-operation common among members of the same family . 
The schoolmaster sat in his homely dwelling attached to the school , both being modern erections ; and he looked across the way at the old house in which his teacher Sue had a lodging . 
The arrangement had been concluded very quickly . 
A pupil-teacher who was to have been transferred to Mr. Phillotson 's school had failed him , and Sue had been taken as stop-gap . 
All such provisional arrangements as these could only last till the next annual visit of H.M. Inspector , whose approval was necessary to make them permanent . 
Having taught for some two years in London , though she had abandoned that vocation of late , Miss Bridehead was not exactly a novice , and Phillotson thought there would be no difficulty in retaining her services , which he already wished to do , though she had only been with him three or four weeks . 
He had found her quite as bright as Jude had described her ; and what master-tradesman does not wish to keep an apprentice who saves him half his labour ? 
It was a little over half-past eight o'clock in the morning and he was waiting to see her cross the road to the school , when he would follow . 
At twenty minutes to nine she did cross , a light hat tossed on her head ; and he watched her as a curiosity . 
A new emanation , which had nothing to do with her skill as a teacher , seemed to surround her this morning . 
He went to the school also , and Sue remained governing her class at the other end of the room , all day under his eye . 
She certainly was an excellent teacher . 
It was part of his duty to give her private lessons in the evening , and some article in the Code made it necessary that a respectable , elderly woman should be present at these lessons when the teacher and the taught were of different sexes . 
Richard Phillotson thought of the absurdity of the regulation in this case , when he was old enough to be the girl 's father ; but he faithfully acted up to it ; and sat down with her in a room where Mrs. Hawes , the widow at whose house Sue lodged , occupied herself with sewing . 
The regulation was , indeed , not easy to evade , for there was no other sitting-room in the dwelling . 
Sometimes as she figured -- it was arithmetic that they were working at -- she would involuntarily glance up with a little inquiring smile at him , as if she assumed that , being the master , he must perceive all that was passing in her brain , as right or wrong . 
Phillotson was not really thinking of the arithmetic at all , but of her , in a novel way which somehow seemed strange to him as preceptor . 
Perhaps she knew that he was thinking of her thus . 
For a few weeks their work had gone on with a monotony which in itself was a delight to him . 
Then it happened that the children were to be taken to Christminster to see an itinerant exhibition , in the shape of a model of Jerusalem , to which schools were admitted at a penny a head in the interests of education . 
They marched along the road two and two , she beside her class with her simple cotton sunshade , her little thumb cocked up against its stem ; and Phillotson behind in his long dangling coat , handling his walking-stick genteelly , in the musing mood which had come over him since her arrival . 
The afternoon was one of sun and dust , and when they entered the exhibition room few people were present but themselves . 
The model of the ancient city stood in the middle of the apartment , and the proprietor , with a fine religious philanthropy written on his features , walked round it with a pointer in his hand , showing the young people the various quarters and places known to them by name from reading their Bibles ; Mount Moriah , the Valley of Jehoshaphat , the City of Zion , the walls and the gates , outside one of which there was a large mound like a tumulus , and on the mound a little white cross . 
The spot , he said , was Calvary . 
`` I think , '' said Sue to the schoolmaster , as she stood with him a little in the background , `` that this model , elaborate as it is , is a very imaginary production . 
How does anybody know that Jerusalem was like this in the time of Christ ? 
I am sure this man does n't . '' 
`` It is made after the best conjectural maps , based on actual visits to the city as it now exists . '' 
`` I fancy we have had enough of Jerusalem , '' she said , `` considering we are not descended from the Jews . 
There was nothing first-rate about the place , or people , after all -- as there was about Athens , Rome , Alexandria , and other old cities . '' 
`` But my dear girl , consider what it is to us ! '' 
She was silent , for she was easily repressed ; and then perceived behind the group of children clustered round the model a young man in a white flannel jacket , his form being bent so low in his intent inspection of the Valley of Jehoshaphat that his face was almost hidden from view by the Mount of Olives . 
`` Look at your cousin Jude , '' continued the schoolmaster . 
`` He does n't think we have had enough of Jerusalem ! '' 
`` Ah -- I did n't see him ! '' 
she cried in her quick , light voice . 
`` Jude -- how seriously you are going into it ! '' 
Jude started up from his reverie , and saw her . 
`` Oh -- Sue ! '' 
he said , with a glad flush of embarrassment . 
`` These are your school-children , of course ! 
I saw that schools were admitted in the afternoons , and thought you might come ; but I got so deeply interested that I did n't remember where I was . 
How it carries one back , does n't it ! 
I could examine it for hours , but I have only a few minutes , unfortunately ; for I am in the middle of a job out here . '' 
`` Your cousin is so terribly clever that she criticizes it unmercifully , '' said Phillotson , with good-humoured satire . 
`` She is quite sceptical as to its correctness . '' 
`` No , Mr. Phillotson , I am not -- altogether ! 
I hate to be what is called a clever girl -- there are too many of that sort now ! '' 
answered Sue sensitively . 
`` I only meant -- I do n't know what I meant -- except that it was what you do n't understand ! '' '' 
I know your meaning , '' said Jude ardently -LRB- although he did not -RRB- . 
`` And I think you are quite right . '' 
`` That 's a good Jude -- I know YOU believe in me ! '' 
She impulsively seized his hand , and leaving a reproachful look on the schoolmaster turned away to Jude , her voice revealing a tremor which she herself felt to be absurdly uncalled for by sarcasm so gentle . 
She had not the least conception how the hearts of the twain went out to her at this momentary revelation of feeling , and what a complication she was building up thereby in the futures of both . 
The model wore too much of an educational aspect for the children not to tire of it soon , and a little later in the afternoon they were all marched back to Lumsdon , Jude returning to his work . 
He watched the juvenile flock in their clean frocks and pinafores , filing down the street towards the country beside Phillotson and Sue , and a sad , dissatisfied sense of being out of the scheme of the latters ' lives had possession of him . 
Phillotson had invited him to walk out and see them on Friday evening , when there would be no lessons to give to Sue , and Jude had eagerly promised to avail himself of the opportunity . 
Meanwhile the scholars and teachers moved homewards , and the next day , on looking on the blackboard in Sue 's class , Phillotson was surprised to find upon it , skilfully drawn in chalk , a perspective view of Jerusalem , with every building shown in its place . 
`` I thought you took no interest in the model , and hardly looked at it ? '' 
he said . 
`` I hardly did , '' said she , `` but I remembered that much of it . '' 
`` It is more than I had remembered myself . '' 
Her Majesty 's school-inspector was at that time paying `` surprise-visits '' in this neighbourhood to test the teaching unawares ; and two days later , in the middle of the morning lessons , the latch of the door was softly lifted , and in walked my gentleman , the king of terrors -- to pupil-teachers . 
To Mr. Phillotson the surprise was not great ; like the lady in the story , he had been played that trick too many times to be unprepared . 
But Sue 's class was at the further end of the room , and her back was towards the entrance ; the inspector therefore came and stood behind her and watched her teaching some half-minute before she became aware of his presence . 
She turned , and realized that an oft-dreaded moment had come . 
The effect upon her timidity was such that she uttered a cry of fright . 
Phillotson , with a strange instinct of solicitude quite beyond his control , was at her side just in time to prevent her falling from faintness . 
She soon recovered herself , and laughed ; but when the inspector had gone there was a reaction , and she was so white that Phillotson took her into his room , and gave her some brandy to bring her round . 
She found him holding her hand . 
`` You ought to have told me , '' she gasped petulantly , `` that one of the inspector 's surprise-visits was imminent ! 
Oh , what shall I do ! 
Now he 'll write and tell the managers that I am no good , and I shall be disgraced for ever ! '' 
`` He wo n't do that , my dear little girl . 
You are the best teacher ever I had ! '' 
He looked so gently at her that she was moved , and regretted that she had upbraided him . 
When she was better she went home . 
Jude in the meantime had been waiting impatiently for Friday . 
On both Wednesday and Thursday he had been so much under the influence of his desire to see her that he walked after dark some distance along the road in the direction of the village , and , on returning to his room to read , found himself quite unable to concentrate his mind on the page . 
On Friday , as soon as he had got himself up as he thought Sue would like to see him , and made a hasty tea , he set out , notwithstanding that the evening was wet . 
The trees overhead deepened the gloom of the hour , and they dripped sadly upon him , impressing him with forebodings -- illogical forebodings ; for though he knew that he loved her he also knew that he could not be more to her than he was . 
On turning the corner and entering the village the first sight that greeted his eyes was that of two figures under one umbrella coming out of the vicarage gate . 
He was too far back for them to notice him , but he knew in a moment that they were Sue and Phillotson . 
The latter was holding the umbrella over her head , and they had evidently been paying a visit to the vicar -- probably on some business connected with the school work . 
And as they walked along the wet and deserted lane Jude saw Phillotson place his arm round the girl 's waist ; whereupon she gently removed it ; but he replaced it ; and she let it remain , looking quickly round her with an air of misgiving . 
She did not look absolutely behind her , and therefore did not see Jude , who sank into the hedge like one struck with a blight . 
There he remained hidden till they had reached Sue 's cottage and she had passed in , Phillotson going on to the school hard by . 
`` Oh , he 's too old for her -- too old ! '' 
cried Jude in all the terrible sickness of hopeless , handicapped love . 
He could not interfere . 
