`` I care as much for you as for anybody I ever met . '' 
`` You do n't care MORE ! 
There , I ought not to say that . 
Do n't answer it ! '' 
There was another long silence . 
He felt that she was treating him cruelly , though he could not quite say in what way . 
Her very helplessness seemed to make her so much stronger than he . 
`` I am awfully ignorant on general matters , although I have worked so hard , '' he said , to turn the subject . 
`` I am absorbed in theology , you know . 
And what do you think I should be doing just about now , if you were n't here ? 
I should be saying my evening prayers . 
I suppose you would n't like -- '' `` Oh no , no , '' she answered , `` I would rather not , if you do n't mind . 
I should seem so -- such a hypocrite . '' 
`` I thought you would n't join , so I did n't propose it . 
You must remember that I hope to be a useful minister some day . '' 
`` To be ordained , I think you said ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Then you have n't given up the idea ? 
-- I thought that perhaps you had by this time . '' 
`` Of course not . 
I fondly thought at first that you felt as I do about that , as you were so mixed up in Christminster Anglicanism . 
And Mr. Phillotson -- '' `` I have no respect for Christminster whatever , except , in a qualified degree , on its intellectual side , '' said Sue Bridehead earnestly . 
`` My friend I spoke of took that out of me . 
He was the most irreligious man I ever knew , and the most moral . 
And intellect at Christminster is new wine in old bottles . 
The mediævalism of Christminster must go , be sloughed off , or Christminster itself will have to go . 
To be sure , at times one could n't help having a sneaking liking for the traditions of the old faith , as preserved by a section of the thinkers there in touching and simple sincerity ; but when I was in my saddest , rightest mind I always felt , ' O ghastly glories of saints , dead limbs of gibbeted Gods ! ' '' 
... `` Sue , you are not a good friend of mine to talk like that ! '' 
`` Then I wo n't , dear Jude ! '' 
The emotional throat-note had come back , and she turned her face away . 
`` I still think Christminster has much that is glorious ; though I was resentful because I could n't get there . '' 
He spoke gently , and resisted his impulse to pique her on to tears . 
`` It is an ignorant place , except as to the townspeople , artizans , drunkards , and paupers , '' she said , perverse still at his differing from her . 
`` THEY see life as it is , of course ; but few of the people in the colleges do . 
You prove it in your own person . 
You are one of the very men Christminster was intended for when the colleges were founded ; a man with a passion for learning , but no money , or opportunities , or friends . 
But you were elbowed off the pavement by the millionaires ' sons . '' 
`` Well , I can do without what it confers . 
I care for something higher . '' 
`` And I for something broader , truer , '' she insisted . 
`` At present intellect in Christminster is pushing one way , and religion the other ; and so they stand stock-still , like two rams butting each other . '' 
`` What would Mr. Phillotson -- '' `` It is a place full of fetishists and ghost-seers ! '' 
He noticed that whenever he tried to speak of the schoolmaster she turned the conversation to some generalizations about the offending university . 
Jude was extremely , morbidly , curious about her life as Phillotson 's protégée and betrothed ; yet she would not enlighten him . 
`` Well , that 's just what I am , too , '' he said . 
`` I am fearful of life , spectre-seeing always . '' 
`` But you are good and dear ! '' 
she murmured . 
His heart bumped , and he made no reply . 
`` You are in the Tractarian stage just now , are you not ? '' 
she added , putting on flippancy to hide real feeling , a common trick with her . 
`` Let me see -- when was I there ? 
In the year eighteen hundred and -- '' `` There 's a sarcasm in that which is rather unpleasant to me , Sue . 
Now will you do what I want you to ? 
At this time I read a chapter , and then say prayers , as I told you . 
Now will you concentrate your attention on any book of these you like , and sit with your back to me , and leave me to my custom ? 
You are sure you wo n't join me ? '' 
`` I 'll look at you . '' 
`` No . 
Do n't tease , Sue ! '' 
`` Very well -- I 'll do just as you bid me , and I wo n't vex you , Jude , '' she replied , in the tone of a child who was going to be good for ever after , turning her back upon him accordingly . 
A small Bible other than the one he was using lay near her , and during his retreat she took it up , and turned over the leaves . 
`` Jude , '' she said brightly , when he had finished and come back to her ; `` will you let me make you a NEW New Testament , like the one I made for myself at Christminster ? '' 
`` Oh yes . 
How was that made ? '' 
`` I altered my old one by cutting up all the Epistles and Gospels into separate brochures , and rearranging them in chronological order as written , beginning the book with Thessalonians , following on with the Epistles , and putting the Gospels much further on . 
Then I had the volume rebound . 
My university friend Mr. -- but never mind his name , poor boy -- said it was an excellent idea . 
I know that reading it afterwards made it twice as interesting as before , and twice as understandable . '' 
`` H 'm ! '' 
said Jude , with a sense of sacrilege . 
`` And what a literary enormity this is , '' she said , as she glanced into the pages of Solomon 's Song . 
`` I mean the synopsis at the head of each chapter , explaining away the real nature of that rhapsody . 
You need n't be alarmed : nobody claims inspiration for the chapter headings . 
Indeed , many divines treat them with contempt . 
It seems the drollest thing to think of the four-and-twenty elders , or bishops , or whatever number they were , sitting with long faces and writing down such stuff . '' 
Jude looked pained . 
`` You are quite Voltairean ! '' 
he murmured . 
`` Indeed ? 
Then I wo n't say any more , except that people have no right to falsify the Bible ! 
I HATE such hum-bug as could attempt to plaster over with ecclesiastical abstractions such ecstatic , natural , human love as lies in that great and passionate song ! '' 
Her speech had grown spirited , and almost petulant at his rebuke , and her eyes moist . 
`` I WISH I had a friend here to support me ; but nobody is ever on my side ! '' 
`` But my dear Sue , my very dear Sue , I am not against you ! '' 
he said , taking her hand , and surprised at her introducing personal feeling into mere argument . 
`` Yes you are , yes you are ! '' 
she cried , turning away her face that he might not see her brimming eyes . 
`` You are on the side of the people in the training-school -- at least you seem almost to be ! 
What I insist on is , that to explain such verses as this : ` Whither is thy beloved gone , O thou fairest among women ? ' 
by the note : ' The Church professeth her faith , ' is supremely ridiculous ! '' 
`` Well then , let it be ! 
You make such a personal matter of everything ! 
I am -- only too inclined just now to apply the words profanely . 
You know YOU are fairest among women to me , come to that ! '' 
`` But you are not to say it now ! '' 
Sue replied , her voice changing to its softest note of severity . 
Then their eyes met , and they shook hands like cronies in a tavern , and Jude saw the absurdity of quarrelling on such a hypothetical subject , and she the silliness of crying about what was written in an old book like the Bible . 
`` I wo n't disturb your convictions -- I really wo n't ! '' 
she went on soothingly , for now he was rather more ruffled than she . 
`` But I did want and long to ennoble some man to high aims ; and when I saw you , and knew you wanted to be my comrade , I -- shall I confess it ? 
-- thought that man might be you . 
But you take so much tradition on trust that I do n't know what to say . '' 
`` Well , dear ; I suppose one must take some things on trust . 
Life is n't long enough to work out everything in Euclid problems before you believe it . 
I take Christianity . '' 
`` Well , perhaps you might take something worse . '' 
`` Indeed I might . 
Perhaps I have done so ! '' 
He thought of Arabella . 
`` I wo n't ask what , because we are going to be VERY nice with each other , are n't we , and never , never , vex each other any more ? '' 
She looked up trustfully , and her voice seemed trying to nestle in his breast . 
`` I shall always care for you ! '' 
said Jude . 
`` And I for you . 
Because you are single-hearted , and forgiving to your faulty and tiresome little Sue ! '' 
He looked away , for that epicene tenderness of hers was too harrowing . 
Was it that which had broken the heart of the poor leader-writer ; and was he to be the next one ? 
... But Sue was so dear ! 
... If he could only get over the sense of her sex , as she seemed to be able to do so easily of his , what a comrade she would make ; for their difference of opinion on conjectural subjects only drew them closer together on matters of daily human experience . 
She was nearer to him than any other woman he had ever met , and he could scarcely believe that time , creed , or absence , would ever divide him from her . 
But his grief at her incredulities returned . 
They sat on till she fell asleep again , and he nodded in his chair likewise . 
Whenever he aroused himself he turned her things , and made up the fire anew . 
About six o'clock he awoke completely , and lighting a candle , found that her clothes were dry . 
Her chair being a far more comfortable one than his she still slept on inside his great-coat , looking warm as a new bun and boyish as a Ganymede . 
Placing the garments by her and touching her on the shoulder he went downstairs , and washed himself by starlight in the yard . 
When he returned she was dressed as usual . 
`` Now could I get out without anybody seeing me ? '' 
she asked . 
`` The town is not yet astir . '' 
`` But you have had no breakfast . '' 
`` Oh , I do n't want any ! 
I fear I ought not to have run away from that school ! 
Things seem so different in the cold light of morning , do n't they ? 
What Mr. Phillotson will say I do n't know ! 
It was quite by his wish that I went there . 
He is the only man in the world for whom I have any respect or fear . 
I hope he 'll forgive me ; but he 'll scold me dreadfully , I expect ! '' 
`` I 'll go to him and explain -- '' began Jude . 
`` Oh no , you sha n't . 
I do n't care for him ! 
He may think what he likes -- I shall do just as I choose ! '' 
`` But you just this moment said -- '' `` Well , if I did , I shall do as I like for all him ! 
I have thought of what I shall do -- go to the sister of one of my fellow-students in the training-school , who has asked me to visit her . 
She has a school near Shaston , about eighteen miles from here -- and I shall stay there till this has blown over , and I get back to the training-school again . '' 
At the last moment he persuaded her to let him make her a cup of coffee , in a portable apparatus he kept in his room for use on rising to go to his work every day before the household was astir . 
`` Now a dew-bit to eat with it , '' he said ; `` and off we go . 
You can have a regular breakfast when you get there . '' 
They went quietly out of the house , Jude accompanying her to the station . 
As they departed along the street a head was thrust out of an upper window of his lodging and quickly withdrawn . 
Sue still seemed sorry for her rashness , and to wish she had not rebelled ; telling him at parting that she would let him know as soon as she got re-admitted to the training-school . 
They stood rather miserably together on the platform ; and it was apparent that he wanted to say more . 
`` I want to tell you something -- two things , '' he said hurriedly as the train came up . 
`` One is a warm one , the other a cold one ! '' 
`` Jude , '' she said . 
`` I know one of them . 
And you must n't ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` You must n't love me . 
You are to like me -- that 's all ! '' 
Jude 's face became so full of complicated glooms that hers was agitated in sympathy as she bade him adieu through the carriage window . 
And then the train moved on , and waving her pretty hand to him she vanished away . 
Melchester was a dismal place enough for Jude that Sunday of her departure , and the Close so hateful that he did not go once to the cathedral services . 
The next morning there came a letter from her , which , with her usual promptitude , she had written directly she had reached her friend 's house . 
She told him of her safe arrival and comfortable quarters , and then added : -- What I really write about , dear Jude , is something I said to you at parting . 
You had been so very good and kind to me that when you were out of sight I felt what a cruel and ungrateful woman I was to say it , and it has reproached me ever since . 
IF YOU WANT TO LOVE ME , JUDE , YOU MAY : I do n't mind at all ; and I 'll never say again that you must n't ! 
Now I wo n't write any more about that . 
You do forgive your thoughtless friend for her cruelty ? 
and wo n't make her miserable by saying you do n't ? 
-- Ever , SUE . 
It would be superfluous to say what his answer was ; and how he thought what he would have done had he been free , which should have rendered a long residence with a female friend quite unnecessary for Sue . 
He felt he might have been pretty sure of his own victory if it had come to a conflict between Phillotson and himself for the possession of her . 
Yet Jude was in danger of attaching more meaning to Sue 's impulsive note than it really was intended to bear . 
After the lapse of a few days he found himself hoping that she would write again . 
But he received no further communication ; and in the intensity of his solicitude he sent another note , suggesting that he should pay her a visit some Sunday , the distance being under eighteen miles . 
He expected a reply on the second morning after despatching his missive ; but none came . 
The third morning arrived ; the postman did not stop . 
This was Saturday , and in a feverish state of anxiety about her he sent off three brief lines stating that he was coming the following day , for he felt sure something had happened . 
His first and natural thought had been that she was ill from her immersion ; but it soon occurred to him that somebody would have written for her in such a case . 
Conjectures were put an end to by his arrival at the village school-house near Shaston on the bright morning of Sunday , between eleven and twelve o'clock , when the parish was as vacant as a desert , most of the inhabitants having gathered inside the church , whence their voices could occasionally be heard in unison . 
A little girl opened the door . 
`` Miss Bridehead is up-stairs , '' she said . 
`` And will you please walk up to her ? '' 
`` Is she ill ? '' 
asked Jude hastily . 
`` Only a little -- not very . '' 
Jude entered and ascended . 
On reaching the landing a voice told him which way to turn -- the voice of Sue calling his name . 
He passed the doorway , and found her lying in a little bed in a room a dozen feet square . 
`` Oh , Sue ! '' 
he cried , sitting down beside her and taking her hand . 
`` How is this ! 
You could n't write ? '' 
`` No -- it was n't that ! '' 
she answered . 
`` I did catch a bad cold -- but I could have written . 
Only I would n't ! '' 
`` Why not ? 
-- frightening me like this ! '' 
`` Yes -- that was what I was afraid of ! 
But I had decided not to write to you any more . 
They wo n't have me back at the school -- that 's why I could n't write . 
Not the fact , but the reason ! '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` They not only wo n't have me , but they gave me a parting piece of advice -- '' `` What ? '' 
She did not answer directly . 
`` I vowed I never would tell you , Jude -- it is so vulgar and distressing ! '' 
`` Is it about us ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` But do tell me ! '' 
`` Well -- somebody has sent them baseless reports about us , and they say you and I ought to marry as soon as possible , for the sake of my reputation ! 
... There -- now I have told you , and I wish I had n't ! '' 
`` Oh , poor Sue ! '' 
`` I do n't think of you like that means ! 
It did just OCCUR to me to regard you in the way they think I do , but I had n't begun to . 
I HAVE recognized that the cousinship was merely nominal , since we met as total strangers . 
But my marrying you , dear Jude -- why , of course , if I had reckoned upon marrying you I should n't have come to you so often ! 
And I never supposed you thought of such a thing as marrying me till the other evening ; when I began to fancy you did love me a little . 
Perhaps I ought not to have been so intimate with you . 
It is all my fault . 
Everything is my fault always ! '' 
The speech seemed a little forced and unreal , and they regarded each other with a mutual distress . 
`` I was so blind at first ! '' 
she went on . 
`` I did n't see what you felt at all . 
Oh , you have been unkind to me -- you have -- to look upon me as a sweetheart without saying a word , and leaving me to discover it myself ! 
Your attitude to me has become known ; and naturally they think we 've been doing wrong ! 
I 'll never trust you again ! '' 
`` Yes , Sue , '' he said simply ; `` I am to blame -- more than you think . 
I was quite aware that you did not suspect till within the last meeting or two what I was feeling about you . 
I admit that our meeting as strangers prevented a sense of relationship , and that it was a sort of subterfuge to avail myself of it . 
But do n't you think I deserve a little consideration for concealing my wrong , very wrong , sentiments , since I could n't help having them ? '' 
She turned her eyes doubtfully towards him , and then looked away as if afraid she might forgive him . 
By every law of nature and sex a kiss was the only rejoinder that fitted the mood and the moment , under the suasion of which Sue 's undemonstrative regard of him might not inconceivably have changed its temperature . 
Some men would have cast scruples to the winds , and ventured it , oblivious both of Sue 's declaration of her neutral feelings , and of the pair of autographs in the vestry chest of Arabella 's parish church . 
Jude did not . 
He had , in fact , come in part to tell his own fatal story . 
It was upon his lips ; yet at the hour of this distress he could not disclose it . 
He preferred to dwell upon the recognized barriers between them . 
`` Of course -- I know you do n't -- care about me in any particular way , '' he sorrowed . 
`` You ought not , and you are right . 
You belong to -- Mr. Phillotson . 
I suppose he has been to see you ? '' 
`` Yes , '' she said shortly , her face changing a little . 
`` Though I did n't ask him to come . 
You are glad , of course , that he has been ! 
But I should n't care if he did n't come any more ! '' 
It was very perplexing to her lover that she should be piqued at his honest acquiescence in his rival , if Jude 's feelings of love were deprecated by her . 
He went on to something else . 
`` This will blow over , dear Sue , '' he said . 
`` The training-school authorities are not all the world . 
You can get to be a student in some other , no doubt . '' 
`` I 'll ask Mr. Phillotson , '' she said decisively . 
Sue 's kind hostess now returned from church , and there was no more intimate conversation . 
Jude left in the afternoon , hopelessly unhappy . 
But he had seen her , and sat with her . 
Such intercourse as that would have to content him for the remainder of his life . 
The lesson of renunciation it was necessary and proper that he , as a parish priest , should learn . 
But the next morning when he awoke he felt rather vexed with her , and decided that she was rather unreasonable , not to say capricious . 
Then , in illustration of what he had begun to discern as one of her redeeming characteristics there came promptly a note , which she must have written almost immediately he had gone from her : Forgive me for my petulance yesterday ! 
I was horrid to you ; I know it , and I feel perfectly miserable at my horridness . 
It was so dear of you not to be angry ! 
Jude , please still keep me as your friend and associate , with all my faults . 
I 'll try not to be like it again . 
I am coming to Melchester on Saturday , to get my things away from the T. S. , & c. I could walk with you for half an hour , if you would like ? 
-- Your repentant SUE . 
Jude forgave her straightway , and asked her to call for him at the cathedral works when she came . 
Meanwhile a middle-aged man was dreaming a dream of great beauty concerning the writer of the above letter . 
He was Richard Phillotson , who had recently removed from the mixed village school at Lumsdon near Christminster , to undertake a large boys ' school in his native town of Shaston , which stood on a hill sixty miles to the south-west as the crow flies . 
A glance at the place and its accessories was almost enough to reveal that the schoolmaster 's plans and dreams so long indulged in had been abandoned for some new dream with which neither the Church nor literature had much in common . 
Essentially an unpractical man , he was now bent on making and saving money for a practical purpose -- that of keeping a wife , who , if she chose , might conduct one of the girls ' schools adjoining his own ; for which purpose he had advised her to go into training , since she would not marry him offhand . 
About the time that Jude was removing from Marygreen to Melchester , and entering on adventures at the latter place with Sue , the schoolmaster was settling down in the new school-house at Shaston . 
All the furniture being fixed , the books shelved , and the nails driven , he had begun to sit in his parlour during the dark winter nights and re-attempt some of his old studies -- one branch of which had included Roman-Britannic antiquities -- an unremunerative labour for a national school-master but a subject , that , after his abandonment of the university scheme , had interested him as being a comparatively unworked mine ; practicable to those who , like himself , had lived in lonely spots where these remains were abundant , and were seen to compel inferences in startling contrast to accepted views on the civilization of that time . 
A resumption of this investigation was the outward and apparent hobby of Phillotson at present -- his ostensible reason for going alone into fields where causeways , dykes , and tumuli abounded , or shutting himself up in his house with a few urns , tiles , and mosaics he had collected , instead of calling round upon his new neighbours , who for their part had showed themselves willing enough to be friendly with him . 
But it was not the real , or the whole , reason , after all . 
Thus on a particular evening in the month , when it had grown quite late -- to near midnight , indeed -- and the light of his lamp , shining from his window at a salient angle of the hill-top town over infinite miles of valley westward , announced as by words a place and person given over to study , he was not exactly studying . 
The interior of the room -- the books , the furniture , the schoolmaster 's loose coat , his attitude at the table , even the flickering of the fire , bespoke the same dignified tale of undistracted research -- more than creditable to a man who had had no advantages beyond those of his own making . 
And yet the tale , true enough till latterly , was not true now . 
What he was regarding was not history . 
They were historic notes , written in a bold womanly hand at his dictation some months before , and it was the clerical rendering of word after word that absorbed him . 
He presently took from a drawer a carefully tied bundle of letters , few , very few , as correspondence counts nowadays . 
Each was in its envelope just as it had arrived , and the handwriting was of the same womanly character as the historic notes . 
He unfolded them one by one and read them musingly . 
At first sight there seemed in these small documents to be absolutely nothing to muse over . 
They were straightforward , frank letters , signed `` Sue B -- '' ; just such ones as would be written during short absences , with no other thought than their speedy destruction , and chiefly concerning books in reading and other experiences of a training school , forgotten doubtless by the writer with the passing of the day of their inditing . 
In one of them -- quite a recent note -- the young woman said that she had received his considerate letter , and that it was honourable and generous of him to say he would not come to see her oftener than she desired -LRB- the school being such an awkward place for callers , and because of her strong wish that her engagement to him should not be known , which it would infallibly be if he visited her often -RRB- . 
Over these phrases the school-master pored . 
What precise shade of satisfaction was to be gathered from a woman 's gratitude that the man who loved her had not been often to see her ? 
The problem occupied him , distracted him . 
He opened another drawer , and found therein an envelope , from which he drew a photograph of Sue as a child , long before he had known her , standing under trellis-work with a little basket in her hand . 
There was another of her as a young woman , her dark eyes and hair making a very distinct and attractive picture of her , which just disclosed , too , the thoughtfulness that lay behind her lighter moods . 
It was a duplicate of the one she had given Jude , and would have given to any man . 
Phillotson brought it half-way to his lips , but withdrew it in doubt at her perplexing phrases : ultimately kissing the dead pasteboard with all the passionateness , and more than all the devotion , of a young man of eighteen . 
The schoolmaster 's was an unhealthy-looking , old-fashioned face , rendered more old-fashioned by his style of shaving . 
A certain gentlemanliness had been imparted to it by nature , suggesting an inherent wish to do rightly by all . 
His speech was a little slow , but his tones were sincere enough to make his hesitation no defect . 
His greying hair was curly , and radiated from a point in the middle of his crown . 
There were four lines across his forehead , and he only wore spectacles when reading at night . 
It was almost certainly a renunciation forced upon him by his academic purpose , rather than a distaste for women , which had hitherto kept him from closing with one of the sex in matrimony . 
Such silent proceedings as those of this evening were repeated many and oft times when he was not under the eye of the boys , whose quick and penetrating regard would frequently become almost intolerable to the self-conscious master in his present anxious care for Sue , making him , in the grey hours of morning , dread to meet anew the gimlet glances , lest they should read what the dream within him was . 
He had honourably acquiesced in Sue 's announced wish that he was not often to visit her at the training school ; but at length , his patience being sorely tried , he set out one Saturday afternoon to pay her an unexpected call . 
There the news of her departure -- expulsion as it might almost have been considered -- was flashed upon him without warning or mitigation as he stood at the door expecting in a few minutes to behold her face ; and when he turned away he could hardly see the road before him . 
Sue had , in fact , never written a line to her suitor on the subject , although it was fourteen days old . 
A short reflection told him that this proved nothing , a natural delicacy being as ample a reason for silence as any degree of blameworthiness . 
They had informed him at the school where she was living , and having no immediate anxiety about her comfort , his thoughts took the direction of a burning indignation against the training school committee . 
In his bewilderment Phillotson entered the adjacent cathedral , just now in a direly dismantled state by reason of the repairs . 
He sat down on a block of freestone , regardless of the dusty imprint it made on his breeches ; and his listless eyes following the movements of the workmen he presently became aware that the reputed culprit , Sue 's lover Jude , was one amongst them . 
Jude had never spoken to his former hero since the meeting by the model of Jerusalem . 
Having inadvertently witnessed Phillotson 's tentative courtship of Sue in the lane there had grown up in the younger man 's mind a curious dislike to think of the elder , to meet him , to communicate in any way with him ; and since Phillotson 's success in obtaining at least her promise had become known to Jude , he had frankly recognized that he did not wish to see or hear of his senior any more , learn anything of his pursuits , or even imagine again what excellencies might appertain to his character . 
On this very day of the schoolmaster 's visit Jude was expecting Sue , as she had promised ; and when therefore he saw the schoolmaster in the nave of the building , saw , moreover , that he was coming to speak to him , he felt no little embarrassment ; which Phillotson 's own embarrassment prevented his observing . 
Jude joined him , and they both withdrew from the other workmen to the spot where Phillotson had been sitting . 
Jude offered him a piece of sackcloth for a cushion , and told him it was dangerous to sit on the bare block . 
`` Yes ; yes , '' said Phillotson abstractedly , as he reseated himself , his eyes resting on the ground as if he were trying to remember where he was . 
`` I wo n't keep you long . 
It was merely that I have heard that you have seen my little friend Sue recently . 
It occurred to me to speak to you on that account . 
I merely want to ask -- about her . '' 
`` I think I know what ! '' 
Jude hurriedly said . 
`` About her escaping from the training school , and her coming to me ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well '' -- Jude for a moment felt an unprincipled and fiendish wish to annihilate his rival at all cost . 
By the exercise of that treachery which love for the same woman renders possible to men the most honourable in every other relation of life , he could send off Phillotson in agony and defeat by saying that the scandal was true , and that Sue had irretrievably committed herself with him . 
But his action did not respond for a moment to his animal instinct ; and what he said was , `` I am glad of your kindness in coming to talk plainly to me about it . 
You know what they say ? 
-- that I ought to marry her . '' 
`` What ! '' 
`` And I wish with all my soul I could ! '' 
Phillotson trembled , and his naturally pale face acquired a corpselike sharpness in its lines . 
`` I had no idea that it was of this nature ! 
God forbid ! '' 
`` No , no ! '' 
said Jude aghast . 
`` I thought you understood ? 
I mean that were I in a position to marry her , or someone , and settle down , instead of living in lodgings here and there , I should be glad ! '' 
What he had really meant was simply that he loved her . 
`` But -- since this painful matter has been opened up -- what really happened ? '' 
asked Phillotson , with the firmness of a man who felt that a sharp smart now was better than a long agony of suspense hereafter . 
`` Cases arise , and this is one , when even ungenerous questions must be put to make false assumptions impossible , and to kill scandal . '' 
Jude explained readily ; giving the whole series of adventures , including the night at the shepherd 's , her wet arrival at his lodging , her indisposition from her immersion , their vigil of discussion , and his seeing her off next morning . 
`` Well now , '' said Phillotson at the conclusion , `` I take it as your final word , and I know I can believe you , that the suspicion which led to her rustication is an absolutely baseless one ? '' 
`` It is , '' said Jude solemnly . 
`` Absolutely . 
So help me God ! '' 
The schoolmaster rose . 
Each of the twain felt that the interview could not comfortably merge in a friendly discussion of their recent experiences , after the manner of friends ; and when Jude had taken him round , and shown him some features of the renovation which the old cathedral was undergoing , Phillotson bade the young man good-day and went away . 
This visit took place about eleven o'clock in the morning ; but no Sue appeared . 
When Jude went to his dinner at one he saw his beloved ahead of him in the street leading up from the North Gate , walking as if no way looking for him . 
Speedily overtaking her he remarked that he had asked her to come to him at the cathedral , and she had promised . 
`` I have been to get my things from the college , '' she said -- an observation which he was expected to take as an answer , though it was not one . 
Finding her to be in this evasive mood he felt inclined to give her the information so long withheld . 
`` You have not seen Mr. Phillotson to-day ? '' 
he ventured to inquire . 
`` I have not . 
But I am not going to be cross-examined about him ; and if you ask anything more I wo n't answer ! '' 
`` It is very odd that -- '' He stopped , regarding her . 
`` What ? '' 
`` That you are often not so nice in your real presence as you are in your letters ! '' 
`` Does it really seem so to you ? '' 
said she , smiling with quick curiosity . 
`` Well , that 's strange ; but I feel just the same about you , Jude . 
When you are gone away I seem such a coldhearted -- '' As she knew his sentiment towards her Jude saw that they were getting upon dangerous ground . 
It was now , he thought , that he must speak as an honest man . 
But he did not speak , and she continued : `` It was that which made me write and say -- I did n't mind your loving me -- if you wanted to , much ! '' 
The exultation he might have felt at what that implied , or seemed to imply , was nullified by his intention , and he rested rigid till he began : `` I have never told you -- '' `` Yes you have , '' murmured she . 
`` I mean , I have never told you my history -- all of it . '' 
`` But I guess it . 
I know nearly . '' 
Jude looked up . 
Could she possibly know of that morning performance of his with Arabella ; which in a few months had ceased to be a marriage more completely than by death ? 
He saw that she did not . 
`` I ca n't quite tell you here in the street , '' he went on with a gloomy tongue . 
`` And you had better not come to my lodgings . 
Let us go in here . '' 
The building by which they stood was the market-house ; it was the only place available ; and they entered , the market being over , and the stalls and areas empty . 
He would have preferred a more congenial spot , but , as usually happens , in place of a romantic field or solemn aisle for his tale , it was told while they walked up and down over a floor littered with rotten cabbage-leaves , and amid all the usual squalors of decayed vegetable matter and unsaleable refuse . 
He began and finished his brief narrative , which merely led up to the information that he had married a wife some years earlier , and that his wife was living still . 
Almost before her countenance had time to change she hurried out the words , `` Why did n't you tell me before ! '' 
`` I could n't . 
It seemed so cruel to tell it . '' 
`` To yourself , Jude . 
So it was better to be cruel to me ! '' 
`` No , dear darling ! '' 
cried Jude passionately . 
He tried to take her hand , but she withdrew it . 
Their old relations of confidence seemed suddenly to have ended , and the antagonisms of sex to sex were left without any counter-poising predilections . 
She was his comrade , friend , unconscious sweetheart no longer ; and her eyes regarded him in estranged silence . 
`` I was ashamed of the episode in my life which brought about the marriage , '' he continued . 
`` I ca n't explain it precisely now . 
I could have done it if you had taken it differently ! '' 
`` But how can I ? '' 
she burst out . 
`` Here I have been saying , or writing , that -- that you might love me , or something of the sort ! 
-- just out of charity -- and all the time -- oh , it is perfectly damnable how things are ! '' 
she said , stamping her foot in a nervous quiver . 
`` You take me wrong , Sue ! 
I never thought you cared for me at all , till quite lately ; so I felt it did not matter ! 
Do you care for me , Sue ? 
