You 've over-stuck un ! 
And I telling you all the time -- '' `` Do be quiet , Arabella , and have a little pity on the creature ! '' 
`` Hold up the pail to catch the blood , and do n't talk ! '' 
However unworkmanlike the deed , it had been mercifully done . 
The blood flowed out in a torrent instead of in the trickling stream she had desired . 
The dying animal 's cry assumed its third and final tone , the shriek of agony ; his glazing eyes riveting themselves on Arabella with the eloquently keen reproach of a creature recognizing at last the treachery of those who had seemed his only friends . 
`` Make un stop that ! '' 
said Arabella . 
`` Such a noise will bring somebody or other up here , and I do n't want people to know we are doing it ourselves . '' 
Picking up the knife from the ground whereon Jude had flung it , she slipped it into the gash , and slit the windpipe . 
The pig was instantly silent , his dying breath coming through the hole . 
`` That 's better , '' she said . 
`` It is a hateful business ! '' 
said he . 
`` Pigs must be killed . '' 
The animal heaved in a final convulsion , and , despite the rope , kicked out with all his last strength . 
A tablespoonful of black clot came forth , the trickling of red blood having ceased for some seconds . 
`` That 's it ; now he 'll go , '' said she . 
`` Artful creatures -- they always keep back a drop like that as long as they can ! '' 
The last plunge had come so unexpectedly as to make Jude stagger , and in recovering himself he kicked over the vessel in which the blood had been caught . 
`` There ! '' 
she cried , thoroughly in a passion . 
`` Now I ca n't make any blackpot . 
There 's a waste , all through you ! '' 
Jude put the pail upright , but only about a third of the whole steaming liquid was left in it , the main part being splashed over the snow , and forming a dismal , sordid , ugly spectacle -- to those who saw it as other than an ordinary obtaining of meat . 
The lips and nostrils of the animal turned livid , then white , and the muscles of his limbs relaxed . 
`` Thank God ! '' 
Jude said . 
`` He 's dead . '' 
`` What 's God got to do with such a messy job as a pig-killing , I should like to know ! '' 
she said scornfully . 
`` Poor folks must live . '' 
`` I know , I know , '' said he . 
`` I do n't scold you . '' 
Suddenly they became aware of a voice at hand . 
`` Well done , young married volk ! 
I could n't have carried it out much better myself , cuss me if I could ! '' 
The voice , which was husky , came from the garden-gate , and looking up from the scene of slaughter they saw the burly form of Mr. Challow leaning over the gate , critically surveying their performance . '' 
'T is well for ` ee to stand there and glane ! '' 
said Arabella . 
`` Owing to your being late the meat is blooded and half spoiled ! 
` Two n't fetch so much by a shilling a score ! '' 
Challow expressed his contrition . 
`` You should have waited a bit '' he said , shaking his head , `` and not have done this -- in the delicate state , too , that you be in at present , ma'am . 
'T is risking yourself too much . '' 
`` You need n't be concerned about that , '' said Arabella , laughing . 
Jude too laughed , but there was a strong flavour of bitterness in his amusement . 
Challow made up for his neglect of the killing by zeal in the scalding and scraping . 
Jude felt dissatisfied with himself as a man at what he had done , though aware of his lack of common sense , and that the deed would have amounted to the same thing if carried out by deputy . 
The white snow , stained with the blood of his fellow-mortal , wore an illogical look to him as a lover of justice , not to say a Christian ; but he could not see how the matter was to be mended . 
No doubt he was , as his wife had called him , a tender-hearted fool . 
He did not like the road to Alfredston now . 
It stared him cynically in the face . 
The wayside objects reminded him so much of his courtship of his wife that , to keep them out of his eyes , he read whenever he could as he walked to and from his work . 
Yet he sometimes felt that by caring for books he was not escaping common-place nor gaining rare ideas , every working-man being of that taste now . 
When passing near the spot by the stream on which he had first made her acquaintance he one day heard voices just as he had done at that earlier time . 
One of the girls who had been Arabella 's companions was talking to a friend in a shed , himself being the subject of discourse , possibly because they had seen him in the distance . 
They were quite unaware that the shed-walls were so thin that he could hear their words as he passed . 
`` Howsomever , 't was I put her up to it ! 
` Nothing venture nothing have , ' I said . 
If I had n't she 'd no more have been his mis ` ess than I. '' '' 'T is my belief she knew there was nothing the matter when she told him she was ... '' What had Arabella been put up to by this woman , so that he should make her his `` mis ` ess , '' otherwise wife ? 
The suggestion was horridly unpleasant , and it rankled in his mind so much that instead of entering his own cottage when he reached it he flung his basket inside the garden-gate and passed on , determined to go and see his old aunt and get some supper there . 
This made his arrival home rather late . 
Arabella however , was busy melting down lard from fat of the deceased pig , for she had been out on a jaunt all day , and so delayed her work . 
Dreading lest what he had heard should lead him to say something regrettable to her he spoke little . 
But Arabella was very talkative , and said among other things that she wanted some money . 
Seeing the book sticking out of his pocket she added that he ought to earn more . 
`` An apprentice 's wages are not meant to be enough to keep a wife on , as a rule , my dear . '' 
`` Then you should n't have had one . '' 
`` Come , Arabella ! 
That 's too bad , when you know how it came about . '' 
`` I 'll declare afore Heaven that I thought what I told you was true . 
Doctor Vilbert thought so . 
It was a good job for you that it was n't so ! '' 
`` I do n't mean that , '' he said hastily . 
`` I mean before that time . 
I know it was not your fault ; but those women friends of yours gave you bad advice . 
If they had n't , or you had n't taken it , we should at this moment have been free from a bond which , not to mince matters , galls both of us devilishly . 
It may be very sad , but it is true . '' 
`` Who 's been telling you about my friends ? 
What advice ? 
I insist upon you telling me . '' 
`` Pooh -- I 'd rather not . '' 
`` But you shall -- you ought to . 
It is mean of ` ee not to ! '' 
`` Very well . '' 
And he hinted gently what had been revealed to him . 
`` But I do n't wish to dwell upon it . 
Let us say no more about it . '' 
Her defensive manner collapsed . 
`` That was nothing , '' she said , laughing coldly . 
`` Every woman has a right to do such as that . 
The risk is hers . '' 
`` I quite deny it , Bella . 
She might if no lifelong penalty attached to it for the man , or , in his default , for herself ; if the weakness of the moment could end with the moment , or even with the year . 
But when effects stretch so far she should not go and do that which entraps a man if he is honest , or herself if he is otherwise . '' 
`` What ought I to have done ? '' 
`` Given me time ... Why do you fuss yourself about melting down that pig 's fat to-night ? 
Please put it away ! '' 
`` Then I must do it to-morrow morning . 
It wo n't keep . '' 
`` Very well -- do . '' 
Next morning , which was Sunday , she resumed operations about ten o'clock ; and the renewed work recalled the conversation which had accompanied it the night before , and put her back into the same intractable temper . 
`` That 's the story about me in Marygreen , is it -- that I entrapped ` ee ? 
Much of a catch you were , Lord send ! '' 
As she warmed she saw some of Jude 's dear ancient classics on a table where they ought not to have been laid . 
`` I wo n't have them books here in the way ! '' 
she cried petulantly ; and seizing them one by one she began throwing them upon the floor . 
`` Leave my books alone ! '' 
he said . 
`` You might have thrown them aside if you had liked , but as to soiling them like that , it is disgusting ! '' 
In the operation of making lard Arabella 's hands had become smeared with the hot grease , and her fingers consequently left very perceptible imprints on the book-covers . 
She continued deliberately to toss the books severally upon the floor , till Jude , incensed beyond bearing , caught her by the arms to make her leave off . 
Somehow , in going so , he loosened the fastening of her hair , and it rolled about her ears . 
`` Let me go ! '' 
she said . 
`` Promise to leave the books alone . '' 
She hesitated . 
`` Let me go ! '' 
she repeated . 
`` Promise ! '' 
After a pause : `` I do . '' 
Jude relinquished his hold , and she crossed the room to the door , out of which she went with a set face , and into the highway . 
Here she began to saunter up and down , perversely pulling her hair into a worse disorder than he had caused , and unfastening several buttons of her gown . 
It was a fine Sunday morning , dry , clear and frosty , and the bells of Alfredston Church could be heard on the breeze from the north . 
People were going along the road , dressed in their holiday clothes ; they were mainly lovers -- such pairs as Jude and Arabella had been when they sported along the same track some months earlier . 
These pedestrians turned to stare at the extraordinary spectacle she now presented , bonnetless , her dishevelled hair blowing in the wind , her bodice apart , her sleeves rolled above her elbows for her work , and her hands reeking with melted fat . 
One of the passers said in mock terror : `` Good Lord deliver us ! '' 
`` See how he 's served me ! '' 
she cried . 
`` Making me work Sunday mornings when I ought to be going to my church , and tearing my hair off my head , and my gown off my back ! '' 
Jude was exasperated , and went out to drag her in by main force . 
Then he suddenly lost his heat . 
Illuminated with the sense that all was over between them , and that it mattered not what she did , or he , her husband stood still , regarding her . 
Their lives were ruined , he thought ; ruined by the fundamental error of their matrimonial union : that of having based a permanent contract on a temporary feeling which had no necessary connection with affinities that alone render a lifelong comradeship tolerable . 
`` Going to ill-use me on principle , as your father ill-used your mother , and your father 's sister ill-used her husband ? '' 
she asked . 
`` All you be a queer lot as husbands and wives ! '' 
Jude fixed an arrested , surprised look on her . 
But she said no more , and continued her saunter till she was tired . 
He left the spot , and , after wandering vaguely a little while , walked in the direction of Marygreen . 
Here he called upon his great-aunt , whose infirmities daily increased . 
`` Aunt -- did my father ill-use my mother , and my aunt her husband ? '' 
said Jude abruptly , sitting down by the fire . 
She raised her ancient eyes under the rim of the by-gone bonnet that she always wore . 
`` Who 's been telling you that ? '' 
she said . 
`` I have heard it spoken of , and want to know all . '' 
`` You med so well , I s ` pose ; though your wife -- I reckon 't was she -- must have been a fool to open up that ! 
There is n't much to know after all . 
Your father and mother could n't get on together , and they parted . 
It was coming home from Alfredston market , when you were a baby -- on the hill by the Brown House barn -- that they had their last difference , and took leave of one another for the last time . 
Your mother soon afterwards died -- she drowned herself , in short , and your father went away with you to South Wessex , and never came here any more . '' 
Jude recalled his father 's silence about North Wessex and Jude 's mother , never speaking of either till his dying day . 
`` It was the same with your father 's sister . 
Her husband offended her , and she so disliked living with him afterwards that she went away to London with her little maid . 
The Fawleys were not made for wedlock : it never seemed to sit well upon us . 
There 's sommat in our blood that wo n't take kindly to the notion of being bound to do what we do readily enough if not bound . 
That 's why you ought to have hearkened to me , and not ha ' married . '' 
`` Where did Father and Mother part -- by the Brown House , did you say ? '' 
`` A little further on -- where the road to Fenworth branches off , and the handpost stands . 
A gibbet once stood there not onconnected with our history . 
But let that be . '' 
In the dusk of that evening Jude walked away from his old aunt 's as if to go home . 
But as soon as he reached the open down he struck out upon it till he came to a large round pond . 
The frost continued , though it was not particularly sharp , and the larger stars overhead came out slow and flickering . 
Jude put one foot on the edge of the ice , and then the other : it cracked under his weight ; but this did not deter him . 
He ploughed his way inward to the centre , the ice making sharp noises as he went . 
When just about the middle he looked around him and gave a jump . 
The cracking repeated itself ; but he did not go down . 
He jumped again , but the cracking had ceased . 
Jude went back to the edge , and stepped upon the ground . 
It was curious , he thought . 
What was he reserved for ? 
He supposed he was not a sufficiently dignified person for suicide . 
Peaceful death abhorred him as a subject , and would not take him . 
What could he do of a lower kind than self-extermination ; what was there less noble , more in keeping with his present degraded position ? 
He could get drunk . 
Of course that was it ; he had forgotten . 
Drinking was the regular , stereotyped resource of the despairing worthless . 
He began to see now why some men boozed at inns . 
He struck down the hill northwards and came to an obscure public-house . 
On entering and sitting down the sight of the picture of Samson and Delilah on the wall caused him to recognize the place as that he had visited with Arabella on that first Sunday evening of their courtship . 
He called for liquor and drank briskly for an hour or more . 
Staggering homeward late that night , with all his sense of depression gone , and his head fairly clear still , he began to laugh boisterously , and to wonder how Arabella would receive him in his new aspect . 
The house was in darkness when he entered , and in his stumbling state it was some time before he could get a light . 
Then he found that , though the marks of pig-dressing , of fats and scallops , were visible , the materials themselves had been taken away . 
A line written by his wife on the inside of an old envelope was pinned to the cotton blower of the fireplace : '' Have gone to my friends . 
Shall not return . '' 
All the next day he remained at home , and sent off the carcase of the pig to Alfredston . 
He then cleaned up the premises , locked the door , put the key in a place she would know if she came back , and returned to his masonry at Alfredston . 
At night when he again plodded home he found she had not visited the house . 
The next day went in the same way , and the next . 
Then there came a letter from her . 
That she had gone tired of him she frankly admitted . 
He was such a slow old coach , and she did not care for the sort of life he led . 
There was no prospect of his ever bettering himself or her . 
She further went on to say that her parents had , as he knew , for some time considered the question of emigrating to Australia , the pig-jobbing business being a poor one nowadays . 
They had at last decided to go , and she proposed to go with them , if he had no objection . 
A woman of her sort would have more chance over there than in this stupid country . 
Jude replied that he had not the least objection to her going . 
He thought it a wise course , since she wished to go , and one that might be to the advantage of both . 
He enclosed in the packet containing the letter the money that had been realized by the sale of the pig , with all he had besides , which was not much . 
From that day he heard no more of her except indirectly , though her father and his household did not immediately leave , but waited till his goods and other effects had been sold off . 
When Jude learnt that there was to be an auction at the house of the Donns he packed his own household goods into a waggon , and sent them to her at the aforesaid homestead , that she might sell them with the rest , or as many of them as she should choose . 
He then went into lodgings at Alfredston , and saw in a shopwindow the little handbill announcing the sale of his father-in-law 's furniture . 
He noted its date , which came and passed without Jude 's going near the place , or perceiving that the traffic out of Alfredston by the southern road was materially increased by the auction . 
A few days later he entered a dingy broker 's shop in the main street of the town , and amid a heterogeneous collection of saucepans , a clothes-horse , rolling-pin , brass candlestick , swing looking-glass , and other things at the back of the shop , evidently just brought in from a sale , he perceived a framed photograph , which turned out to be his own portrait . 
It was one which he had had specially taken and framed by a local man in bird 's - eye maple , as a present for Arabella , and had duly given her on their wedding-day . 
On the back was still to be read , '' Jude to Arabella , '' with the date . 
She must have thrown it in with the rest of her property at the auction . 
`` Oh , '' said the broker , seeing him look at this and the other articles in the heap , and not perceiving that the portrait was of himself , `` It is a small lot of stuff that was knocked down to me at a cottage sale out on the road to Marygreen . 
The frame is a very useful one , if you take out the likeness . 
You shall have it for a shilling . '' 
The utter death of every tender sentiment in his wife , as brought home to him by this mute and undesigned evidence of her sale of his portrait and gift , was the conclusive little stroke required to demolish all sentiment in him . 
He paid the shilling , took the photograph away with him , and burnt it , frame and all , when he reached his lodging . 
Two or three days later he heard that Arabella and her parents had departed . 
He had sent a message offering to see her for a formal leave-taking , but she had said that it would be better otherwise , since she was bent on going , which perhaps was true . 
On the evening following their emigration , when his day 's work was done , he came out of doors after supper , and strolled in the starlight along the too familiar road towards the upland whereon had been experienced the chief emotions of his life . 
It seemed to be his own again . 
He could not realize himself . 
On the old track he seemed to be a boy still , hardly a day older than when he had stood dreaming at the top of that hill , inwardly fired for the first time with ardours for Christminster and scholarship . 
`` Yet I am a man , '' he said . 
`` I have a wife . 
More , I have arrived at the still riper stage of having disagreed with her , disliked her , had a scuffle with her , and parted from her . '' 
He remembered then that he was standing not far from the spot at which the parting between his father and his mother was said to have occurred . 
A little further on was the summit whence Christminster , or what he had taken for that city , had seemed to be visible . 
A milestone , now as always , stood at the roadside hard by . 
Jude drew near it , and felt rather than read the mileage to the city . 
He remembered that once on his way home he had proudly cut with his keen new chisel an inscription on the back of that milestone , embodying his aspirations . 
It had been done in the first week of his apprenticeship , before he had been diverted from his purposes by an unsuitable woman . 
He wondered if the inscription were legible still , and going to the back of the milestone brushed away the nettles . 
By the light of a match he could still discern what he had cut so enthusiastically so long ago : THITHER J. F. -LSB- with a pointing finger -RSB- The sight of it , unimpaired , within its screen of grass and nettles , lit in his soul a spark of the old fire . 
Surely his plan should be to move onward through good and ill -- to avoid morbid sorrow even though he did see uglinesses in the world ? 
Bene agere et loetari -- to do good cheerfully -- which he had heard to be the philosophy of one Spinoza , might be his own even now . 
He might battle with his evil star , and follow out his original intention . 
By moving to a spot a little way off he uncovered the horizon in a north-easterly direction . 
There actually rose the faint halo , a small dim nebulousness , hardly recognizable save by the eye of faith . 
It was enough for him . 
He would go to Christminster as soon as the term of his apprenticeship expired . 
He returned to his lodgings in a better mood , and said his prayers . 
`` Save his own soul he hath no star . '' 
-- SWINBURNE . 
`` Notitiam primosque gradus vicinia fecit ; Tempore crevit amor . '' 
-- OVID . 
The next noteworthy move in Jude 's life was that in which he appeared gliding steadily onward through a dusky landscape of some three years ' later leafage than had graced his courtship of Arabella , and the disruption of his coarse conjugal life with her . 
He was walking towards Christminster City , at a point a mile or two to the south-west of it . 
He had at last found himself clear of Marygreen and Alfredston : he was out of his apprenticeship , and with his tools at his back seemed to be in the way of making a new start -- the start to which , barring the interruption involved in his intimacy and married experience with Arabella , he had been looking forward for about ten years . 
Jude would now have been described as a young man with a forcible , meditative , and earnest rather than handsome cast of countenance . 
He was of dark complexion , with dark harmonizing eyes , and he wore a closely trimmed black beard of more advanced growth than is usual at his age ; this , with his great mass of black curly hair , was some trouble to him in combing and washing out the stone-dust that settled on it in the pursuit of his trade . 
His capabilities in the latter , having been acquired in the country , were of an all-round sort , including monumental stone-cutting , gothic free-stone work for the restoration of churches , and carving of a general kind . 
In London he would probably have become specialized and have made himself a `` moulding mason , '' a `` foliage sculptor '' -- perhaps a `` statuary . '' 
He had that afternoon driven in a cart from Alfredston to the village nearest the city in this direction , and was now walking the remaining four miles rather from choice than from necessity , having always fancied himself arriving thus . 
The ultimate impulse to come had had a curious origin -- one more nearly related to the emotional side of him than to the intellectual , as is often the case with young men . 
One day while in lodgings at Alfredston he had gone to Marygreen to see his old aunt , and had observed between the brass candlesticks on her mantlepiece the photograph of a pretty girlish face , in a broad hat with radiating folds under the brim like the rays of a halo . 
He had asked who she was . 
His grand-aunt had gruffly replied that she was his cousin Sue Bridehead , of the inimical branch of the family ; and on further questioning the old woman had replied that the girl lived in Christminster , though she did not know where , or what she was doing . 
His aunt would not give him the photograph . 
But it haunted him ; and ultimately formed a quickening ingredient in his latent intent of following his friend the school master thither . 
He now paused at the top of a crooked and gentle declivity , and obtained his first near view of the city . 
Grey-stoned and dun-roofed , it stood within hail of the Wessex border , and almost with the tip of one small toe within it , at the northernmost point of the crinkled line along which the leisurely Thames strokes the fields of that ancient kingdom . 
The buildings now lay quiet in the sunset , a vane here and there on their many spires and domes giving sparkle to a picture of sober secondary and tertiary hues . 
Reaching the bottom he moved along the level way between pollard willows growing indistinct in the twilight , and soon confronted the outmost lamps of the town -- some of those lamps which had sent into the sky the gleam and glory that caught his strained gaze in his days of dreaming , so many years ago . 
They winked their yellow eyes at him dubiously , and as if , though they had been awaiting him all these years in disappointment at his tarrying , they did not much want him now . 
He was a species of Dick Whittington whose spirit was touched to finer issues than a mere material gain . 
He went along the outlying streets with the cautious tread of an explorer . 
He saw nothing of the real city in the suburbs on this side . 
His first want being a lodging he scrutinized carefully such localities as seemed to offer on inexpensive terms the modest type of accommodation he demanded ; and after inquiry took a room in a suburb nicknamed `` Beersheba , '' though he did not know this at the time . 
Here he installed himself , and having had some tea sallied forth . 
It was a windy , whispering , moonless night . 
To guide himself he opened under a lamp a map he had brought . 
The breeze ruffled and fluttered it , but he could see enough to decide on the direction he should take to reach the heart of the place . 
After many turnings he came up to the first ancient mediæval pile that he had encountered . 
It was a college , as he could see by the gateway . 
He entered it , walked round , and penetrated to dark corners which no lamplight reached . 
Close to this college was another ; and a little further on another ; and then he began to be encircled as it were with the breath and sentiment of the venerable city . 
When he passed objects out of harmony with its general expression he allowed his eyes to slip over them as if he did not see them . 
A bell began clanging , and he listened till a hundred-and-one strokes had sounded . 
He must have made a mistake , he thought : it was meant for a hundred . 
When the gates were shut , and he could no longer get into the quadrangles , he rambled under the walls and doorways , feeling with his fingers the contours of their mouldings and carving . 
The minutes passed , fewer and fewer people were visible , and still he serpentined among the shadows , for had he not imagined these scenes through ten bygone years , and what mattered a night 's rest for once ? 
High against the black sky the flash of a lamp would show crocketed pinnacles and indented battlements . 
Down obscure alleys , apparently never trodden now by the foot of man , and whose very existence seemed to be forgotten , there would jut into the path porticoes , oriels , doorways of enriched and florid middle-age design , their extinct air being accentuated by the rottenness of the stones . 
It seemed impossible that modern thought could house itself in such decrepit and superseded chambers . 
Knowing not a human being here , Jude began to be impressed with the isolation of his own personality , as with a self-spectre , the sensation being that of one who walked but could not make himself seen or heard . 
He drew his breath pensively , and , seeming thus almost his own ghost , gave his thoughts to the other ghostly presences with which the nooks were haunted . 
During the interval of preparation for this venture , since his wife and furniture 's uncompromising disappearance into space , he had read and learnt almost all that could be read and learnt by one in his position , of the worthies who had spent their youth within these reverend walls , and whose souls had haunted them in their maturer age . 
Some of them , by the accidents of his reading , loomed out in his fancy disproportionately large by comparison with the rest . 
The brushings of the wind against the angles , buttresses , and door-jambs were as the passing of these only other inhabitants , the tappings of each ivy leaf on its neighbour were as the mutterings of their mournful souls , the shadows as their thin shapes in nervous movement , making him comrades in his solitude . 
In the gloom it was as if he ran against them without feeling their bodily frames . 
The streets were now deserted , but on account of these things he could not go in . 
There were poets abroad , of early date and of late , from the friend and eulogist of Shakespeare down to him who has recently passed into silence , and that musical one of the tribe who is still among us . 
Speculative philosophers drew along , not always with wrinkled foreheads and hoary hair as in framed portraits , but pink-faced , slim , and active as in youth ; modern divines sheeted in their surplices , among whom the most real to Jude Fawley were the founders of the religious school called Tractarian ; the well-known three , the enthusiast , the poet , and the formularist , the echoes of whose teachings had influenced him even in his obscure home . 
A start of aversion appeared in his fancy to move them at sight of those other sons of the place , the form in the full-bottomed wig , statesman , rake , reasoner , and sceptic ; the smoothly shaven historian so ironically civil to Christianity ; with others of the same incredulous temper , who knew each quad as well as the faithful , and took equal freedom in haunting its cloisters . 
He regarded the statesmen in their various types , men of firmer movement and less dreamy air ; the scholar , the speaker , the plodder ; the man whose mind grew with his growth in years , and the man whose mind contracted with the same . 
The scientists and philologists followed on in his mind-sight in an odd impossible combination , men of meditative faces , strained foreheads , and weak-eyed as bats with constant research ; then official characters -- such men as governor-generals and lord-lieutenants , in whom he took little interest ; chief-justices and lord chancellors , silent thin-lipped figures of whom he knew barely the names . 
A keener regard attached to the prelates , by reason of his own former hopes . 
Of them he had an ample band -- some men of heart , others rather men of head ; he who apologized for the Church in Latin ; the saintly author of the Evening Hymn ; and near them the great itinerant preacher , hymn-writer , and zealot , shadowed like Jude by his matrimonial difficulties . 
Jude found himself speaking out loud , holding conversations with them as it were , like an actor in a melodrama who apostrophizes the audience on the other side of the footlights ; till he suddenly ceased with a start at his absurdity . 
Perhaps those incoherent words of the wanderer were heard within the walls by some student or thinker over his lamp ; and he may have raised his head , and wondered what voice it was , and what it betokened . 
Jude now perceived that , so far as solid flesh went , he had the whole aged city to himself with the exception of a belated townsman here and there , and that he seemed to be catching a cold . 
A voice reached him out of the shade ; a real and local voice : `` You 've been a-settin ' a long time on that plinth-stone , young man . 
What med you be up to ? '' 
It came from a policeman who had been observing Jude without the latter observing him . 
Jude went home and to bed , after reading up a little about these men and their several messages to the world from a book or two that he had brought with him concerning the sons of the university . 
As he drew towards sleep various memorable words of theirs that he had just been conning seemed spoken by them in muttering utterances ; some audible , some unintelligible to him . 
One of the spectres -LRB- who afterwards mourned Christminster as `` the home of lost causes , '' though Jude did not remember this -RRB- was now apostrophizing her thus : `` Beautiful city ! 
so venerable , so lovely , so unravaged by the fierce intellectual life of our century , so serene ! 
... Her ineffable charm keeps ever calling us to the true goal of all of us , to the ideal , to perfection . '' 
Another voice was that of the Corn Law convert , whose phantom he had just seen in the quadrangle with a great bell . 
Jude thought his soul might have been shaping the historic words of his master-speech : `` Sir , I may be wrong , but my impression is that my duty towards a country threatened with famine requires that that which has been the ordinary remedy under all similar circumstances should be resorted to now , namely , that there should be free access to the food of man from whatever quarter it may come ... Deprive me of office to-morrow , you can never deprive me of the consciousness that I have exercised the powers committed to me from no corrupt or interested motives , from no desire to gratify ambition , for no personal gain . '' 
Then the sly author of the immortal Chapter on Christianity : `` How shall we excuse the supine inattention of the Pagan and philosophic world , to those evidences -LSB- miracles -RSB- which were presented by Omnipotence ? 
... The sages of Greece and Rome turned aside from the awful spectacle , and appeared unconscious of any alterations in the moral or physical government of the world . '' 
Then the shade of the poet , the last of the optimists : How the world is made for each of us ! 
* * * * * And each of the Many helps to recruit The life of the race by a general plan . 
Then one of the three enthusiasts he had seen just now , the author of the Apologia : `` My argument was ... that absolute certitude as to the truths of natural theology was the result of an assemblage of concurring and converging probabilities ... that probabilities which did not reach to logical certainty might create a mental certitude . '' 
The second of them , no polemic , murmured quieter things : Why should we faint , and fear to live alone , Since all alone , so Heaven has will 'd , we die ? 
He likewise heard some phrases spoken by the phantom with the short face , the genial Spectator : `` When I look upon the tombs of the great , every motion of envy dies in me ; when I read the epitaphs of the beautiful , every inordinate desire goes out ; when I meet with the grief of parents upon a tombstone , my heart melts with compassion ; when I see the tombs of the parents themselves , I consider the vanity of grieving for those whom we must quickly follow . '' 
And lastly a gentle-voiced prelate spoke , during whose meek , familiar rhyme , endeared to him from earliest childhood , Jude fell asleep : Teach me to live , that I may dread The grave as little as my bed . 
Teach me to die ... He did not wake till morning . 
The ghostly past seemed to have gone , and everything spoke of to-day . 
He started up in bed , thinking he had overslept himself and then said : `` By Jove -- I had quite forgotten my sweet-faced cousin , and that she 's here all the time ! 
... and my old schoolmaster , too . '' 
His words about his schoolmaster had , perhaps , less zest in them than his words concerning his cousin . 
Necessary meditations on the actual , including the mean bread-and-cheese question , dissipated the phantasmal for a while , and compelled Jude to smother high thinkings under immediate needs . 
He had to get up , and seek for work , manual work ; the only kind deemed by many of its professors to be work at all . 
Passing out into the streets on this errand he found that the colleges had treacherously changed their sympathetic countenances : some were pompous ; some had put on the look of family vaults above ground ; something barbaric loomed in the masonries of all . 
The spirits of the great men had disappeared . 
The numberless architectural pages around him he read , naturally , less as an artist-critic of their forms than as an artizan and comrade of the dead handicraftsmen whose muscles had actually executed those forms . 
He examined the mouldings , stroked them as one who knew their beginning , said they were difficult or easy in the working , had taken little or much time , were trying to the arm , or convenient to the tool . 
What at night had been perfect and ideal was by day the more or less defective real . 
Cruelties , insults , had , he perceived , been inflicted on the aged erections . 
The condition of several moved him as he would have been moved by maimed sentient beings . 
They were wounded , broken , sloughing off their outer shape in the deadly struggle against years , weather , and man . 
The rottenness of these historical documents reminded him that he was not , after all , hastening on to begin the morning practically as he had intended . 
He had come to work , and to live by work , and the morning had nearly gone . 
It was , in one sense , encouraging to think that in a place of crumbling stones there must be plenty for one of his trade to do in the business of renovation . 
He asked his way to the workyard of the stone-mason whose name had been given him at Alfredston ; and soon heard the familiar sound of the rubbers and chisels . 
The yard was a little centre of regeneration . 
Here , with keen edges and smooth curves , were forms in the exact likeness of those he had seen abraded and time-eaten on the walls . 
These were the ideas in modern prose which the lichened colleges presented in old poetry . 
Even some of those antiques might have been called prose when they were new . 
They had done nothing but wait , and had become poetical . 
How easy to the smallest building ; how impossible to most men . 
He asked for the foreman , and looked round among the new traceries , mullions , transoms , shafts , pinnacles , and battlements standing on the bankers half worked , or waiting to be removed . 
They were marked by precision , mathematical straightness , smoothness , exactitude : there in the old walls were the broken lines of the original idea ; jagged curves , disdain of precision , irregularity , disarray . 
For a moment there fell on Jude a true illumination ; that here in the stone yard was a centre of effort as worthy as that dignified by the name of scholarly study within the noblest of the colleges . 
But he lost it under stress of his old idea . 
He would accept any employment which might be offered him on the strength of his late employer 's recommendation ; but he would accept it as a provisional thing only . 
This was his form of the modern vice of unrest . 
Moreover he perceived that at best only copying , patching and imitating went on here ; which he fancied to be owing to some temporary and local cause . 
He did not at that time see that mediævalism was as dead as a fern-leaf in a lump of coal ; that other developments were shaping in the world around him , in which Gothic architecture and its associations had no place . 
The deadly animosity of contemporary logic and vision towards so much of what he held in reverence was not yet revealed to him . 
Having failed to obtain work here as yet he went away , and thought again of his cousin , whose presence somewhere at hand he seemed to feel in wavelets of interest , if not of emotion . 
How he wished he had that pretty portrait of her ! 
At last he wrote to his aunt to send it . 
She did so , with a request , however , that he was not to bring disturbance into the family by going to see the girl or her relations . 
Jude , a ridiculously affectionate fellow , promised nothing , put the photograph on the mantel-piece , kissed it -- he did not know why -- and felt more at home . 
She seemed to look down and preside over his tea . 
It was cheering -- the one thing uniting him to the emotions of the living city . 
There remained the schoolmaster -- probably now a reverend parson . 
But he could not possibly hunt up such a respectable man just yet ; so raw and unpolished was his condition , so precarious were his fortunes . 
Thus he still remained in loneliness . 
Although people moved round him he virtually saw none . 
Not as yet having mingled with the active life of the place it was largely non-existent to him . 
But the saints and prophets in the window-tracery , the paintings in the galleries , the statues , the busts , the gargoyles , the corbel-heads -- these seemed to breathe his atmosphere . 
Like all newcomers to a spot on which the past is deeply graven he heard that past announcing itself with an emphasis altogether unsuspected by , and even incredible to , the habitual residents . 
For many days he haunted the cloisters and quadrangles of the colleges at odd minutes in passing them , surprised by impish echoes of his own footsteps , smart as the blows of a mallet . 
The Christminster `` sentiment , '' as it had been called , ate further and further into him ; till he probably knew more about those buildings materially , artistically , and historically , than any one of their inmates . 
It was not till now , when he found himself actually on the spot of his enthusiasm , that Jude perceived how far away from the object of that enthusiasm he really was . 
Only a wall divided him from those happy young contemporaries of his with whom he shared a common mental life ; men who had nothing to do from morning till night but to read , mark , learn , and inwardly digest . 
Only a wall -- but what a wall ! 
Every day , every hour , as he went in search of labour , he saw them going and coming also , rubbed shoulders with them , heard their voices , marked their movements . 
The conversation of some of the more thoughtful among them seemed oftentimes , owing to his long and persistent preparation for this place , to be peculiarly akin to his own thoughts . 
Yet he was as far from them as if he had been at the antipodes . 
Of course he was . 
He was a young workman in a white blouse , and with stone-dust in the creases of his clothes ; and in passing him they did not even see him , or hear him , rather saw through him as through a pane of glass at their familiars beyond . 
Whatever they were to him , he to them was not on the spot at all ; and yet he had fancied he would be close to their lives by coming there . 
But the future lay ahead after all ; and if he could only be so fortunate as to get into good employment he would put up with the inevitable . 
So he thanked God for his health and strength , and took courage . 
For the present he was outside the gates of everything , colleges included : perhaps some day he would be inside . 
Those palaces of light and leading ; he might some day look down on the world through their panes . 
At length he did receive a message from the stone-mason 's yard -- that a job was waiting for him . 
It was his first encouragement , and he closed with the offer promptly . 
He was young and strong , or he never could have executed with such zest the undertakings to which he now applied himself , since they involved reading most of the night after working all the day . 
First he bought a shaded lamp for four and six-pence , and obtained a good light . 
Then he got pens , paper , and such other necessary books as he had been unable to obtain elsewhere . 
Then , to the consternation of his landlady , he shifted all the furniture of his room -- a single one for living and sleeping -- rigged up a curtain on a rope across the middle , to make a double chamber out of one , hung up a thick blind that nobody should know how he was curtailing the hours of sleep , laid out his books , and sat down . 
Having been deeply encumbered by marrying , getting a cottage , and buying the furniture which had disappeared in the wake of his wife , he had never been able to save any money since the time of those disastrous ventures , and till his wages began to come in he was obliged to live in the narrowest way . 
After buying a book or two he could not even afford himself a fire ; and when the nights reeked with the raw and cold air from the Meadows he sat over his lamp in a great-coat , hat , and woollen gloves . 
From his window he could perceive the spire of the cathedral , and the ogee dome under which resounded the great bell of the city . 
The tall tower , tall belfry windows , and tall pinnacles of the college by the bridge he could also get a glimpse of by going to the staircase . 
These objects he used as stimulants when his faith in the future was dim . 
Like enthusiasts in general he made no inquiries into details of procedure . 
Picking up general notions from casual acquaintance , he never dwelt upon them . 
For the present , he said to himself , the one thing necessary was to get ready by accumulating money and knowledge , and await whatever chances were afforded to such an one of becoming a son of the University . 
`` For wisdom is a defence , and money is a defence ; but the excellency of knowledge is , that wisdom giveth life to them that have it . '' 
His desire absorbed him , and left no part of him to weigh its practicability . 
At this time he received a nervously anxious letter from his poor old aunt , on the subject which had previously distressed her -- a fear that Jude would not be strong-minded enough to keep away from his cousin Sue Bridehead and her relations . 
Sue 's father , his aunt believed , had gone back to London , but the girl remained at Christminster . 
