And Tantripp will be a sufficient companion , just to take care of me . 
I could not bear to have Celia : she would be miserable . '' 
It was time to dress . 
There was to be a dinner-party that day , the last of the parties which were held at the Grange as proper preliminaries to the wedding , and Dorothea was glad of a reason for moving away at once on the sound of the bell , as if she needed more than her usual amount of preparation . 
She was ashamed of being irritated from some cause she could not define even to herself ; for though she had no intention to be untruthful , her reply had not touched the real hurt within her . 
Mr. Casaubon 's words had been quite reasonable , yet they had brought a vague instantaneous sense of aloofness on his part . 
`` Surely I am in a strangely selfish weak state of mind , '' she said to herself . 
`` How can I have a husband who is so much above me without knowing that he needs me less than I need him ? '' 
Having convinced herself that Mr. Casaubon was altogether right , she recovered her equanimity , and was an agreeable image of serene dignity when she came into the drawing-room in her silver-gray dress -- the simple lines of her dark-brown hair parted over her brow and coiled massively behind , in keeping with the entire absence from her manner and expression of all search after mere effect . 
Sometimes when Dorothea was in company , there seemed to be as complete an air of repose about her as if she had been a picture of Santa Barbara looking out from her tower into the clear air ; but these intervals of quietude made the energy of her speech and emotion the more remarked when some outward appeal had touched her . 
She was naturally the subject of many observations this evening , for the dinner-party was large and rather more miscellaneous as to the male portion than any which had been held at the Grange since Mr. Brooke 's nieces had resided with him , so that the talking was done in duos and trios more or less inharmonious . 
There was the newly elected mayor of Middlemarch , who happened to be a manufacturer ; the philanthropic banker his brother-in-law , who predominated so much in the town that some called him a Methodist , others a hypocrite , according to the resources of their vocabulary ; and there were various professional men . 
In fact , Mrs. Cadwallader said that Brooke was beginning to treat the Middlemarchers , and that she preferred the farmers at the tithe-dinner , who drank her health unpretentiously , and were not ashamed of their grandfathers ' furniture . 
For in that part of the country , before reform had done its notable part in developing the political consciousness , there was a clearer distinction of ranks and a dimmer distinction of parties ; so that Mr. Brooke 's miscellaneous invitations seemed to belong to that general laxity which came from his inordinate travel and habit of taking too much in the form of ideas . 
Already , as Miss Brooke passed out of the dining-room , opportunity was found for some interjectional `` asides . '' 
`` A fine woman , Miss Brooke ! 
an uncommonly fine woman , by God ! '' 
said Mr. Standish , the old lawyer , who had been so long concerned with the landed gentry that he had become landed himself , and used that oath in a deep-mouthed manner as a sort of armorial bearings , stamping the speech of a man who held a good position . 
Mr. Bulstrode , the banker , seemed to be addressed , but that gentleman disliked coarseness and profanity , and merely bowed . 
The remark was taken up by Mr. Chichely , a middle-aged bachelor and coursing celebrity , who had a complexion something like an Easter egg , a few hairs carefully arranged , and a carriage implying the consciousness of a distinguished appearance . 
`` Yes , but not my style of woman : I like a woman who lays herself out a little more to please us . 
There should be a little filigree about a woman -- something of the coquette . 
A man likes a sort of challenge . 
The more of a dead set she makes at you the better . '' 
`` There 's some truth in that , '' said Mr. Standish , disposed to be genial . 
`` And , by God , it 's usually the way with them . 
I suppose it answers some wise ends : Providence made them so , eh , Bulstrode ? '' 
`` I should be disposed to refer coquetry to another source , '' said Mr. Bulstrode . 
`` I should rather refer it to the devil . '' 
`` Ay , to be sure , there should be a little devil in a woman , '' said Mr. Chichely , whose study of the fair sex seemed to have been detrimental to his theology . 
`` And I like them blond , with a certain gait , and a swan neck . 
Between ourselves , the mayor 's daughter is more to my taste than Miss Brooke or Miss Celia either . 
If I were a marrying man I should choose Miss Vincy before either of them . '' 
`` Well , make up , make up , '' said Mr. Standish , jocosely ; `` you see the middle-aged fellows early the day . '' 
Mr. Chichely shook his head with much meaning : he was not going to incur the certainty of being accepted by the woman he would choose . 
The Miss Vincy who had the honor of being Mr. Chichely 's ideal was of course not present ; for Mr. Brooke , always objecting to go too far , would not have chosen that his nieces should meet the daughter of a Middlemarch manufacturer , unless it were on a public occasion . 
The feminine part of the company included none whom Lady Chettam or Mrs. Cadwallader could object to ; for Mrs. Renfrew , the colonel 's widow , was not only unexceptionable in point of breeding , but also interesting on the ground of her complaint , which puzzled the doctors , and seemed clearly a case wherein the fulness of professional knowledge might need the supplement of quackery . 
Lady Chettam , who attributed her own remarkable health to home-made bitters united with constant medical attendance , entered with much exercise of the imagination into Mrs. Renfrew 's account of symptoms , and into the amazing futility in her case of all strengthening medicines . 
`` Where can all the strength of those medicines go , my dear ? '' 
said the mild but stately dowager , turning to Mrs. Cadwallader reflectively , when Mrs. Renfrew 's attention was called away . 
`` It strengthens the disease , '' said the Rector 's wife , much too well-born not to be an amateur in medicine . 
`` Everything depends on the constitution : some people make fat , some blood , and some bile -- that 's my view of the matter ; and whatever they take is a sort of grist to the mill . '' 
`` Then she ought to take medicines that would reduce -- reduce the disease , you know , if you are right , my dear . 
And I think what you say is reasonable . '' 
`` Certainly it is reasonable . 
You have two sorts of potatoes , fed on the same soil . 
One of them grows more and more watery -- '' `` Ah ! 
like this poor Mrs. Renfrew -- that is what I think . 
Dropsy ! 
There is no swelling yet -- it is inward . 
I should say she ought to take drying medicines , should n't you ? 
-- or a dry hot-air bath . 
Many things might be tried , of a drying nature . '' 
`` Let her try a certain person 's pamphlets , '' said Mrs. Cadwallader in an undertone , seeing the gentlemen enter . 
`` He does not want drying . '' 
`` Who , my dear ? '' 
said Lady Chettam , a charming woman , not so quick as to nullify the pleasure of explanation . 
`` The bridegroom -- Casaubon . 
He has certainly been drying up faster since the engagement : the flame of passion , I suppose . '' 
`` I should think he is far from having a good constitution , '' said Lady Chettam , with a still deeper undertone . 
`` And then his studies -- so very dry , as you say . '' 
`` Really , by the side of Sir James , he looks like a death 's head skinned over for the occasion . 
Mark my words : in a year from this time that girl will hate him . 
She looks up to him as an oracle now , and by-and-by she will be at the other extreme . 
All flightiness ! '' 
`` How very shocking ! 
I fear she is headstrong . 
But tell me -- you know all about him -- is there anything very bad ? 
What is the truth ? '' 
`` The truth ? 
he is as bad as the wrong physic -- nasty to take , and sure to disagree . '' 
`` There could not be anything worse than that , '' said Lady Chettam , with so vivid a conception of the physic that she seemed to have learned something exact about Mr. Casaubon 's disadvantages . 
`` However , James will hear nothing against Miss Brooke . 
He says she is the mirror of women still . '' 
`` That is a generous make-believe of his . 
Depend upon it , he likes little Celia better , and she appreciates him . 
I hope you like my little Celia ? '' 
`` Certainly ; she is fonder of geraniums , and seems more docile , though not so fine a figure . 
But we were talking of physic . 
Tell me about this new young surgeon , Mr. Lydgate . 
I am told he is wonderfully clever : he certainly looks it -- a fine brow indeed . '' 
`` He is a gentleman . 
I heard him talking to Humphrey . 
He talks well . '' 
`` Yes . 
Mr. Brooke says he is one of the Lydgates of Northumberland , really well connected . 
One does not expect it in a practitioner of that kind . 
For my own part , I like a medical man more on a footing with the servants ; they are often all the cleverer . 
I assure you I found poor Hicks 's judgment unfailing ; I never knew him wrong . 
He was coarse and butcher-like , but he knew my constitution . 
It was a loss to me his going off so suddenly . 
Dear me , what a very animated conversation Miss Brooke seems to be having with this Mr. Lydgate ! '' 
`` She is talking cottages and hospitals with him , '' said Mrs. Cadwallader , whose ears and power of interpretation were quick . 
`` I believe he is a sort of philanthropist , so Brooke is sure to take him up . '' 
`` James , '' said Lady Chettam when her son came near , `` bring Mr. Lydgate and introduce him to me . 
I want to test him . '' 
The affable dowager declared herself delighted with this opportunity of making Mr. Lydgate 's acquaintance , having heard of his success in treating fever on a new plan . 
Mr. Lydgate had the medical accomplishment of looking perfectly grave whatever nonsense was talked to him , and his dark steady eyes gave him impressiveness as a listener . 
He was as little as possible like the lamented Hicks , especially in a certain careless refinement about his toilet and utterance . 
Yet Lady Chettam gathered much confidence in him . 
He confirmed her view of her own constitution as being peculiar , by admitting that all constitutions might be called peculiar , and he did not deny that hers might be more peculiar than others . 
He did not approve of a too lowering system , including reckless cupping , nor , on the other hand , of incessant port wine and bark . 
He said `` I think so '' with an air of so much deference accompanying the insight of agreement , that she formed the most cordial opinion of his talents . 
`` I am quite pleased with your protege , '' she said to Mr. Brooke before going away . 
`` My protege ? 
-- dear me ! 
-- who is that ? '' 
said Mr. Brooke . 
`` This young Lydgate , the new doctor . 
He seems to me to understand his profession admirably . '' 
`` Oh , Lydgate ! 
he is not my protege , you know ; only I knew an uncle of his who sent me a letter about him . 
However , I think he is likely to be first-rate -- has studied in Paris , knew Broussais ; has ideas , you know -- wants to raise the profession . '' 
`` Lydgate has lots of ideas , quite new , about ventilation and diet , that sort of thing , '' resumed Mr. Brooke , after he had handed out Lady Chettam , and had returned to be civil to a group of Middlemarchers . 
`` Hang it , do you think that is quite sound ? 
-- upsetting The old treatment , which has made Englishmen what they are ? '' 
said Mr. Standish . 
`` Medical knowledge is at a low ebb among us , '' said Mr. Bulstrode , who spoke in a subdued tone , and had rather a sickly air . 
`` I , for my part , hail the advent of Mr. Lydgate . 
I hope to find good reason for confiding the new hospital to his management . '' 
`` That is all very fine , '' replied Mr. Standish , who was not fond of Mr. Bulstrode ; `` if you like him to try experiments on your hospital patients , and kill a few people for charity I have no objection . 
But I am not going to hand money out of my purse to have experiments tried on me . 
I like treatment that has been tested a little . '' 
`` Well , you know , Standish , every dose you take is an experiment-an experiment , you know , '' said Mr. Brooke , nodding towards the lawyer . 
`` Oh , if you talk in that sense ! '' 
said Mr. Standish , with as much disgust at such non-legal quibbling as a man can well betray towards a valuable client . 
`` I should be glad of any treatment that would cure me without reducing me to a skeleton , like poor Grainger , '' said Mr. Vincy , the mayor , a florid man , who would have served for a study of flesh in striking contrast with the Franciscan tints of Mr. Bulstrode . 
`` It 's an uncommonly dangerous thing to be left without any padding against the shafts of disease , as somebody said , -- and I think it a very good expression myself . '' 
Mr. Lydgate , of course , was out of hearing . 
He had quitted the party early , and would have thought it altogether tedious but for the novelty of certain introductions , especially the introduction to Miss Brooke , whose youthful bloom , with her approaching marriage to that faded scholar , and her interest in matters socially useful , gave her the piquancy of an unusual combination . 
`` She is a good creature -- that fine girl -- but a little too earnest , '' he thought . 
`` It is troublesome to talk to such women . 
They are always wanting reasons , yet they are too ignorant to understand the merits of any question , and usually fall back on their moral sense to settle things after their own taste . '' 
Evidently Miss Brooke was not Mr. Lydgate 's style of woman any more than Mr. Chichely 's . 
Considered , indeed , in relation to the latter , whose mind was matured , she was altogether a mistake , and calculated to shock his trust in final causes , including the adaptation of fine young women to purplefaced bachelors . 
But Lydgate was less ripe , and might possibly have experience before him which would modify his opinion as to the most excellent things in woman . 
Miss Brooke , however , was not again seen by either of these gentlemen under her maiden name . 
Not long after that dinner-party she had become Mrs. Casaubon , and was on her way to Rome . 
`` But deeds and language such as men do use , And persons such as comedy would choose , When she would show an image of the times , And sport with human follies , not with crimes . '' 
-- BEN JONSON . 
Lydgate , in fact , was already conscious of being fascinated by a woman strikingly different from Miss Brooke : he did not in the least suppose that he had lost his balance and fallen in love , but he had said of that particular woman , `` She is grace itself ; she is perfectly lovely and accomplished . 
That is what a woman ought to be : she ought to produce the effect of exquisite music . '' 
Plain women he regarded as he did the other severe facts of life , to be faced with philosophy and investigated by science . 
But Rosamond Vincy seemed to have the true melodic charm ; and when a man has seen the woman whom he would have chosen if he had intended to marry speedily , his remaining a bachelor will usually depend on her resolution rather than on his . 
Lydgate believed that he should not marry for several years : not marry until he had trodden out a good clear path for himself away from the broad road which was quite ready made . 
He had seen Miss Vincy above his horizon almost as long as it had taken Mr. Casaubon to become engaged and married : but this learned gentleman was possessed of a fortune ; he had assembled his voluminous notes , and had made that sort of reputation which precedes performance , -- often the larger part of a man 's fame . 
He took a wife , as we have seen , to adorn the remaining quadrant of his course , and be a little moon that would cause hardly a calculable perturbation . 
But Lydgate was young , poor , ambitious . 
He had his half-century before him instead of behind him , and he had come to Middlemarch bent on doing many things that were not directly fitted to make his fortune or even secure him a good income . 
To a man under such circumstances , taking a wife is something more than a question of adornment , however highly he may rate this ; and Lydgate was disposed to give it the first place among wifely functions . 
To his taste , guided by a single conversation , here was the point on which Miss Brooke would be found wanting , notwithstanding her undeniable beauty . 
She did not look at things from the proper feminine angle . 
The society of such women was about as relaxing as going from your work to teach the second form , instead of reclining in a paradise with sweet laughs for bird-notes , and blue eyes for a heaven . 
Certainly nothing at present could seem much less important to Lydgate than the turn of Miss Brooke 's mind , or to Miss Brooke than the qualities of the woman who had attracted this young surgeon . 
But any one watching keenly the stealthy convergence of human lots , sees a slow preparation of effects from one life on another , which tells like a calculated irony on the indifference or the frozen stare with which we look at our unintroduced neighbor . 
Destiny stands by sarcastic with our dramatis personae folded in her hand . 
Old provincial society had its share of this subtle movement : had not only its striking downfalls , its brilliant young professional dandies who ended by living up an entry with a drab and six children for their establishment , but also those less marked vicissitudes which are constantly shifting the boundaries of social intercourse , and begetting new consciousness of interdependence . 
Some slipped a little downward , some got higher footing : people denied aspirates , gained wealth , and fastidious gentlemen stood for boroughs ; some were caught in political currents , some in ecclesiastical , and perhaps found themselves surprisingly grouped in consequence ; while a few personages or families that stood with rocky firmness amid all this fluctuation , were slowly presenting new aspects in spite of solidity , and altering with the double change of self and beholder . 
Municipal town and rural parish gradually made fresh threads of connection -- gradually , as the old stocking gave way to the savings-bank , and the worship of the solar guinea became extinct ; while squires and baronets , and even lords who had once lived blamelessly afar from the civic mind , gathered the faultiness of closer acquaintanceship . 
Settlers , too , came from distant counties , some with an alarming novelty of skill , others with an offensive advantage in cunning . 
In fact , much the same sort of movement and mixture went on in old England as we find in older Herodotus , who also , in telling what had been , thought it well to take a woman 's lot for his starting-point ; though Io , as a maiden apparently beguiled by attractive merchandise , was the reverse of Miss Brooke , and in this respect perhaps bore more resemblance to Rosamond Vincy , who had excellent taste in costume , with that nymph-like figure and pure blindness which give the largest range to choice in the flow and color of drapery . 
But these things made only part of her charm . 
She was admitted to be the flower of Mrs. Lemon 's school , the chief school in the county , where the teaching included all that was demanded in the accomplished female -- even to extras , such as the getting in and out of a carriage . 
Mrs. Lemon herself had always held up Miss Vincy as an example : no pupil , she said , exceeded that young lady for mental acquisition and propriety of speech , while her musical execution was quite exceptional . 
We can not help the way in which people speak of us , and probably if Mrs. Lemon had undertaken to describe Juliet or Imogen , these heroines would not have seemed poetical . 
The first vision of Rosamond would have been enough with most judges to dispel any prejudice excited by Mrs. Lemon 's praise . 
Lydgate could not be long in Middlemarch without having that agreeable vision , or even without making the acquaintance of the Vincy family ; for though Mr. Peacock , whose practice he had paid something to enter on , had not been their doctor -LRB- Mrs. Vincy not liking the lowering system adopted by him -RRB- , he had many patients among their connections and acquaintances . 
For who of any consequence in Middlemarch was not connected or at least acquainted with the Vincys ? 
They were old manufacturers , and had kept a good house for three generations , in which there had naturally been much intermarrying with neighbors more or less decidedly genteel . 
Mr. Vincy 's sister had made a wealthy match in accepting Mr. Bulstrode , who , however , as a man not born in the town , and altogether of dimly known origin , was considered to have done well in uniting himself with a real Middlemarch family ; on the other hand , Mr. Vincy had descended a little , having taken an innkeeper 's daughter . 
But on this side too there was a cheering sense of money ; for Mrs. Vincy 's sister had been second wife to rich old Mr. Featherstone , and had died childless years ago , so that her nephews and nieces might be supposed to touch the affections of the widower . 
And it happened that Mr. Bulstrode and Mr. Featherstone , two of Peacock 's most important patients , had , from different causes , given an especially good reception to his successor , who had raised some partisanship as well as discussion . 
Mr. Wrench , medical attendant to the Vincy family , very early had grounds for thinking lightly of Lydgate 's professional discretion , and there was no report about him which was not retailed at the Vincys ' , where visitors were frequent . 
Mr. Vincy was more inclined to general good-fellowship than to taking sides , but there was no need for him to be hasty in making any new man acquaintance . 
Rosamond silently wished that her father would invite Mr. Lydgate . 
She was tired of the faces and figures she had always been used to -- the various irregular profiles and gaits and turns of phrase distinguishing those Middlemarch young men whom she had known as boys . 
She had been at school with girls of higher position , whose brothers , she felt sure , it would have been possible for her to be more interested in , than in these inevitable Middlemarch companions . 
But she would not have chosen to mention her wish to her father ; and he , for his part , was in no hurry on the subject . 
An alderman about to be mayor must by-and-by enlarge his dinner-parties , but at present there were plenty of guests at his well-spread table . 
That table often remained covered with the relics of the family breakfast long after Mr. Vincy had gone with his second son to the warehouse , and when Miss Morgan was already far on in morning lessons with the younger girls in the schoolroom . 
It awaited the family laggard , who found any sort of inconvenience -LRB- to others -RRB- less disagreeable than getting up when he was called . 
This was the case one morning of the October in which we have lately seen Mr. Casaubon visiting the Grange ; and though the room was a little overheated with the fire , which had sent the spaniel panting to a remote corner , Rosamond , for some reason , continued to sit at her embroidery longer than usual , now and then giving herself a little shake , and laying her work on her knee to contemplate it with an air of hesitating weariness . 
Her mamma , who had returned from an excursion to the kitchen , sat on the other side of the small work-table with an air of more entire placidity , until , the clock again giving notice that it was going to strike , she looked up from the lace-mending which was occupying her plump fingers and rang the bell . 
`` Knock at Mr. Fred 's door again , Pritchard , and tell him it has struck half-past ten . '' 
This was said without any change in the radiant good-humor of Mrs. Vincy 's face , in which forty-five years had delved neither angles nor parallels ; and pushing back her pink capstrings , she let her work rest on her lap , while she looked admiringly at her daughter . 
`` Mamma , '' said Rosamond , `` when Fred comes down I wish you would not let him have red herrings . 
I can not bear the smell of them all over the house at this hour of the morning . '' 
`` Oh , my dear , you are so hard on your brothers ! 
It is the only fault I have to find with you . 
You are the sweetest temper in the world , but you are so tetchy with your brothers . '' 
`` Not tetchy , mamma : you never hear me speak in an unladylike way . '' 
`` Well , but you want to deny them things . '' 
`` Brothers are so unpleasant . '' 
`` Oh , my dear , you must allow for young men . 
Be thankful if they have good hearts . 
A woman must learn to put up with little things . 
You will be married some day . '' 
`` Not to any one who is like Fred . '' 
`` Do n't decry your own brother , my dear . 
Few young men have less against them , although he could n't take his degree -- I 'm sure I ca n't understand why , for he seems to me most clever . 
And you know yourself he was thought equal to the best society at college . 
So particular as you are , my dear , I wonder you are not glad to have such a gentlemanly young man for a brother . 
You are always finding fault with Bob because he is not Fred . '' 
`` Oh no , mamma , only because he is Bob . '' 
`` Well , my dear , you will not find any Middlemarch young man who has not something against him . '' 
`` But '' -- here Rosamond 's face broke into a smile which suddenly revealed two dimples . 
She herself thought unfavorably of these dimples and smiled little in general society . 
`` But I shall not marry any Middlemarch young man . '' 
`` So it seems , my love , for you have as good as refused the pick of them ; and if there 's better to be had , I 'm sure there 's no girl better deserves it . '' 
`` Excuse me , mamma -- I wish you would not say , ` the pick of them . ' '' 
`` Why , what else are they ? '' 
`` I mean , mamma , it is rather a vulgar expression . '' 
`` Very likely , my dear ; I never was a good speaker . 
What should I say ? '' 
`` The best of them . '' 
`` Why , that seems just as plain and common . 
If I had had time to think , I should have said , ` the most superior young men . ' 
But with your education you must know . '' 
`` What must Rosy know , mother ? '' 
said Mr. Fred , who had slid in unobserved through the half-open door while the ladies were bending over their work , and now going up to the fire stood with his back towards it , warming the soles of his slippers . 
`` Whether it 's right to say ` superior young men , ' '' said Mrs. Vincy , ringing the bell . 
`` Oh , there are so many superior teas and sugars now . 
Superior is getting to be shopkeepers ' slang . '' 
`` Are you beginning to dislike slang , then ? '' 
said Rosamond , with mild gravity . 
`` Only the wrong sort . 
All choice of words is slang . 
It marks a class . '' 
`` There is correct English : that is not slang . '' 
`` I beg your pardon : correct English is the slang of prigs who write history and essays . 
And the strongest slang of all is the slang of poets . '' 
`` You will say anything , Fred , to gain your point . '' 
`` Well , tell me whether it is slang or poetry to call an ox a leg-plaiter . '' 
`` Of course you can call it poetry if you like . '' 
`` Aha , Miss Rosy , you do n't know Homer from slang . 
I shall invent a new game ; I shall write bits of slang and poetry on slips , and give them to you to separate . '' 
`` Dear me , how amusing it is to hear young people talk ! '' 
said Mrs. Vincy , with cheerful admiration . 
`` Have you got nothing else for my breakfast , Pritchard ? '' 
said Fred , to the servant who brought in coffee and buttered toast ; while he walked round the table surveying the ham , potted beef , and other cold remnants , with an air of silent rejection , and polite forbearance from signs of disgust . 
`` Should you like eggs , sir ? '' 
`` Eggs , no ! 
Bring me a grilled bone . '' 
`` Really , Fred , '' said Rosamond , when the servant had left the room , `` if you must have hot things for breakfast , I wish you would come down earlier . 
You can get up at six o'clock to go out hunting ; I can not understand why you find it so difficult to get up on other mornings . '' 
`` That is your want of understanding , Rosy . 
I can get up to go hunting because I like it . '' 
`` What would you think of me if I came down two hours after every one else and ordered grilled bone ? '' 
`` I should think you were an uncommonly fast young lady , '' said Fred , eating his toast with the utmost composure . 
`` I can not see why brothers are to make themselves disagreeable , any more than sisters . '' 
`` I do n't make myself disagreeable ; it is you who find me so . 
Disagreeable is a word that describes your feelings and not my actions . '' 
`` I think it describes the smell of grilled bone . '' 
`` Not at all . 
It describes a sensation in your little nose associated with certain finicking notions which are the classics of Mrs. Lemon 's school . 
Look at my mother ; you do n't see her objecting to everything except what she does herself . 
She is my notion of a pleasant woman . '' 
`` Bless you both , my dears , and do n't quarrel , '' said Mrs. Vincy , with motherly cordiality . 
`` Come , Fred , tell us all about the new doctor . 
How is your uncle pleased with him ? '' 
`` Pretty well , I think . 
He asks Lydgate all sorts of questions and then screws up his face while he hears the answers , as if they were pinching his toes . 
That 's his way . 
Ah , here comes my grilled bone . '' 
`` But how came you to stay out so late , my dear ? 
You only said you were going to your uncle 's . '' 
`` Oh , I dined at Plymdale 's . 
We had whist . 
Lydgate was there too . '' 
`` And what do you think of him ? 
He is very gentlemanly , I suppose . 
They say he is of excellent family -- his relations quite county people . '' 
`` Yes , '' said Fred . 
`` There was a Lydgate at John 's who spent no end of money . 
I find this man is a second cousin of his . 
But rich men may have very poor devils for second cousins . '' 
`` It always makes a difference , though , to be of good family , '' said Rosamond , with a tone of decision which showed that she had thought on this subject . 
Rosamond felt that she might have been happier if she had not been the daughter of a Middlemarch manufacturer . 
She disliked anything which reminded her that her mother 's father had been an innkeeper . 
Certainly any one remembering the fact might think that Mrs. Vincy had the air of a very handsome good-humored landlady , accustomed to the most capricious orders of gentlemen . 
`` I thought it was odd his name was Tertius , '' said the bright-faced matron , `` but of course it 's a name in the family . 
But now , tell us exactly what sort of man he is . '' 
`` Oh , tallish , dark , clever -- talks well -- rather a prig , I think . '' 
`` I never can make out what you mean by a prig , '' said Rosamond . 
`` A fellow who wants to show that he has opinions . '' 
`` Why , my dear , doctors must have opinions , '' said Mrs. Vincy . 
`` What are they there for else ? '' 
`` Yes , mother , the opinions they are paid for . 
But a prig is a fellow who is always making you a present of his opinions . '' 
`` I suppose Mary Garth admires Mr. Lydgate , '' said Rosamond , not without a touch of innuendo . 
`` Really , I ca n't say . '' 
said Fred , rather glumly , as he left the table , and taking up a novel which he had brought down with him , threw himself into an arm-chair . 
`` If you are jealous of her , go oftener to Stone Court yourself and eclipse her . '' 
`` I wish you would not be so vulgar , Fred . 
If you have finished , pray ring the bell . '' 
`` It is true , though -- what your brother says , Rosamond , '' Mrs. Vincy began , when the servant had cleared the table . 
`` It is a thousand pities you have n't patience to go and see your uncle more , so proud of you as he is , and wanted you to live with him . 
There 's no knowing what he might have done for you as well as for Fred . 
God knows , I 'm fond of having you at home with me , but I can part with my children for their good . 
And now it stands to reason that your uncle Featherstone will do something for Mary Garth . '' 
`` Mary Garth can bear being at Stone Court , because she likes that better than being a governess , '' said Rosamond , folding up her work . 
`` I would rather not have anything left to me if I must earn it by enduring much of my uncle 's cough and his ugly relations . '' 
`` He ca n't be long for this world , my dear ; I would n't hasten his end , but what with asthma and that inward complaint , let us hope there is something better for him in another . 
And I have no ill-will toward 's Mary Garth , but there 's justice to be thought of . 
And Mr. Featherstone 's first wife brought him no money , as my sister did . 
Her nieces and nephews ca n't have so much claim as my sister 's . 
And I must say I think Mary Garth a dreadful plain girl -- more fit for a governess . '' 
`` Every one would not agree with you there , mother , '' said Fred , who seemed to be able to read and listen too . 
`` Well , my dear , '' said Mrs. Vincy , wheeling skilfully , `` if she had some fortune left her , -- a man marries his wife 's relations , and the Garths are so poor , and live in such a small way . 
But I shall leave you to your studies , my dear ; for I must go and do some shopping . '' 
`` Fred 's studies are not very deep , '' said Rosamond , rising with her mamma , `` he is only reading a novel . '' 
`` Well , well , by-and-by he 'll go to his Latin and things , '' said Mrs. Vincy , soothingly , stroking her son 's head . 
`` There 's a fire in the smoking-room on purpose . 
It 's your father 's wish , you know -- Fred , my dear -- and I always tell him you will be good , and go to college again to take your degree . '' 
Fred drew his mother 's hand down to his lips , but said nothing . 
`` I suppose you are not going out riding to-day ? '' 
said Rosamond , lingering a little after her mamma was gone . 
`` No ; why ? '' 
`` Papa says I may have the chestnut to ride now . '' 
`` You can go with me to-morrow , if you like . 
Only I am going to Stone Court , remember . '' 
`` I want to ride so much , it is indifferent to me where we go . '' 
Rosamond really wished to go to Stone Court , of all other places . 
`` Oh , I say , Rosy , '' said Fred , as she was passing out of the room , `` if you are going to the piano , let me come and play some airs with you . '' 
`` Pray do not ask me this morning . '' 
`` Why not this morning ? '' 
`` Really , Fred , I wish you would leave off playing the flute . 
A man looks very silly playing the flute . 
And you play so out of tune . '' 
`` When next any one makes love to you , Miss Rosamond , I will tell him how obliging you are . '' 
`` Why should you expect me to oblige you by hearing you play the flute , any more than I should expect you to oblige me by not playing it ? '' 
`` And why should you expect me to take you out riding ? '' 
This question led to an adjustment , for Rosamond had set her mind on that particular ride . 
So Fred was gratified with nearly an hour 's practice of `` Ar hyd y nos , '' `` Ye banks and braes , '' and other favorite airs from his `` Instructor on the Flute ; '' a wheezy performance , into which he threw much ambition and an irrepressible hopefulness . 
`` He had more tow on his distaffe Than Gerveis knew . '' 
-- CHAUCER . 
The ride to Stone Court , which Fred and Rosamond took the next morning , lay through a pretty bit of midland landscape , almost all meadows and pastures , with hedgerows still allowed to grow in bushy beauty and to spread out coral fruit for the birds . 
Little details gave each field a particular physiognomy , dear to the eyes that have looked on them from childhood : the pool in the corner where the grasses were dank and trees leaned whisperingly ; the great oak shadowing a bare place in mid-pasture ; the high bank where the ash-trees grew ; the sudden slope of the old marl-pit making a red background for the burdock ; the huddled roofs and ricks of the homestead without a traceable way of approach ; the gray gate and fences against the depths of the bordering wood ; and the stray hovel , its old , old thatch full of mossy hills and valleys with wondrous modulations of light and shadow such as we travel far to see in later life , and see larger , but not more beautiful . 
These are the things that make the gamut of joy in landscape to midland-bred souls -- the things they toddled among , or perhaps learned by heart standing between their father 's knees while he drove leisurely . 
But the road , even the byroad , was excellent ; for Lowick , as we have seen , was not a parish of muddy lanes and poor tenants ; and it was into Lowick parish that Fred and Rosamond entered after a couple of miles ' riding . 
Another mile would bring them to Stone Court , and at the end of the first half , the house was already visible , looking as if it had been arrested in its growth toward a stone mansion by an unexpected budding of farm-buildings on its left flank , which had hindered it from becoming anything more than the substantial dwelling of a gentleman farmer . 
It was not the less agreeable an object in the distance for the cluster of pinnacled corn-ricks which balanced the fine row of walnuts on the right . 
Presently it was possible to discern something that might be a gig on the circular drive before the front door . 
`` Dear me , '' said Rosamond , `` I hope none of my uncle 's horrible relations are there . '' 
`` They are , though . 
That is Mrs. Waule 's gig -- the last yellow gig left , I should think . 
When I see Mrs. Waule in it , I understand how yellow can have been worn for mourning . 
That gig seems to me more funereal than a hearse . 
But then Mrs. Waule always has black crape on . 
How does she manage it , Rosy ? 
Her friends ca n't always be dying . '' 
`` I do n't know at all . 
And she is not in the least evangelical , '' said Rosamond , reflectively , as if that religious point of view would have fully accounted for perpetual crape . 
`` And , not poor , '' she added , after a moment 's pause . 
`` No , by George ! 
They are as rich as Jews , those Waules and Featherstones ; I mean , for people like them , who do n't want to spend anything . 
And yet they hang about my uncle like vultures , and are afraid of a farthing going away from their side of the family . 
But I believe he hates them all . '' 
The Mrs. Waule who was so far from being admirable in the eyes of these distant connections , had happened to say this very morning -LRB- not at all with a defiant air , but in a low , muffled , neutral tone , as of a voice heard through cotton wool -RRB- that she did not wish `` to enjoy their good opinion . '' 
She was seated , as she observed , on her own brother 's hearth , and had been Jane Featherstone five-and-twenty years before she had been Jane Waule , which entitled her to speak when her own brother 's name had been made free with by those who had no right to it . 
`` What are you driving at there ? '' 
said Mr. Featherstone , holding his stick between his knees and settling his wig , while he gave her a momentary sharp glance , which seemed to react on him like a draught of cold air and set him coughing . 
Mrs. Waule had to defer her answer till he was quiet again , till Mary Garth had supplied him with fresh syrup , and he had begun to rub the gold knob of his stick , looking bitterly at the fire . 
It was a bright fire , but it made no difference to the chill-looking purplish tint of Mrs. Waule 's face , which was as neutral as her voice ; having mere chinks for eyes , and lips that hardly moved in speaking . 
`` The doctors ca n't master that cough , brother . 
It 's just like what I have ; for I 'm your own sister , constitution and everything . 
But , as I was saying , it 's a pity Mrs. Vincy 's family ca n't be better conducted . '' 
`` Tchah ! 
you said nothing o ' the sort . 
You said somebody had made free with my name . '' 
`` And no more than can be proved , if what everybody says is true . 
My brother Solomon tells me it 's the talk up and down in Middlemarch how unsteady young Vincy is , and has been forever gambling at billiards since home he came . '' 
`` Nonsense ! 
What 's a game at billiards ? 
It 's a good gentlemanly game ; and young Vincy is not a clodhopper . 
If your son John took to billiards , now , he 'd make a fool of himself . '' 
`` Your nephew John never took to billiards or any other game , brother , and is far from losing hundreds of pounds , which , if what everybody says is true , must be found somewhere else than out of Mr. Vincy the father 's pocket . 
For they say he 's been losing money for years , though nobody would think so , to see him go coursing and keeping open house as they do . 
And I 've heard say Mr. Bulstrode condemns Mrs. Vincy beyond anything for her flightiness , and spoiling her children so . '' 
`` What 's Bulstrode to me ? 
I do n't bank with him . '' 
`` Well , Mrs. Bulstrode is Mr. Vincy 's own sister , and they do say that Mr. Vincy mostly trades on the Bank money ; and you may see yourself , brother , when a woman past forty has pink strings always flying , and that light way of laughing at everything , it 's very unbecoming . 
But indulging your children is one thing , and finding money to pay their debts is another . 
And it 's openly said that young Vincy has raised money on his expectations . 
I do n't say what expectations . 
Miss Garth hears me , and is welcome to tell again . 
I know young people hang together . '' 
`` No , thank you , Mrs. Waule , '' said Mary Garth . 
`` I dislike hearing scandal too much to wish to repeat it . '' 
Mr. Featherstone rubbed the knob of his stick and made a brief convulsive show of laughter , which had much the same genuineness as an old whist-player 's chuckle over a bad hand . 
Still looking at the fire , he said -- `` And who pretends to say Fred Vincy has n't got expectations ? 
Such a fine , spirited fellow is like enough to have 'em . '' 
There was a slight pause before Mrs. Waule replied , and when she did so , her voice seemed to be slightly moistened with tears , though her face was still dry . 
`` Whether or no , brother , it is naturally painful to me and my brother Solomon to hear your name made free with , and your complaint being such as may carry you off sudden , and people who are no more Featherstones than the Merry-Andrew at the fair , openly reckoning on your property coming to them . 
And me your own sister , and Solomon your own brother ! 
And if that 's to be it , what has it pleased the Almighty to make families for ? '' 
Here Mrs. Waule 's tears fell , but with moderation . 
`` Come , out with it , Jane ! '' 
said Mr. Featherstone , looking at her . 
`` You mean to say , Fred Vincy has been getting somebody to advance him money on what he says he knows about my will , eh ? '' 
