It was an extraordinary improvisation . 
He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him , and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and to lend colour to his imagination . 
He was brilliant , fantastic , irresponsible . 
He charmed his listeners out of themselves , and they followed his pipe , laughing . 
Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him , but sat like one under a spell , smiles chasing each other over his lips and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes . 
At last , liveried in the costume of the age , reality entered the room in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was waiting . 
She wrung her hands in mock despair . 
`` How annoying ! '' 
she cried . 
`` I must go . 
I have to call for my husband at the club , to take him to some absurd meeting at Willis 's Rooms , where he is going to be in the chair . 
If I am late he is sure to be furious , and I could n't have a scene in this bonnet . 
It is far too fragile . 
A harsh word would ruin it . 
No , I must go , dear Agatha . 
Good-bye , Lord Henry , you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing . 
I am sure I do n't know what to say about your views . 
You must come and dine with us some night . 
Tuesday ? 
Are you disengaged Tuesday ? '' 
`` For you I would throw over anybody , Duchess , '' said Lord Henry with a bow . 
`` Ah ! 
that is very nice , and very wrong of you , '' she cried ; `` so mind you come '' ; and she swept out of the room , followed by Lady Agatha and the other ladies . 
When Lord Henry had sat down again , Mr. Erskine moved round , and taking a chair close to him , placed his hand upon his arm . 
`` You talk books away , '' he said ; `` why do n't you write one ? '' 
`` I am too fond of reading books to care to write them , Mr. Erskine . 
I should like to write a novel certainly , a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal . 
But there is no literary public in England for anything except newspapers , primers , and encyclopaedias . 
Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literature . '' 
`` I fear you are right , '' answered Mr. Erskine . 
`` I myself used to have literary ambitions , but I gave them up long ago . 
And now , my dear young friend , if you will allow me to call you so , may I ask if you really meant all that you said to us at lunch ? '' 
`` I quite forget what I said , '' smiled Lord Henry . 
`` Was it all very bad ? '' 
`` Very bad indeed . 
In fact I consider you extremely dangerous , and if anything happens to our good duchess , we shall all look on you as being primarily responsible . 
But I should like to talk to you about life . 
The generation into which I was born was tedious . 
Some day , when you are tired of London , come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess . '' 
`` I shall be charmed . 
A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege . 
It has a perfect host , and a perfect library . '' 
`` You will complete it , '' answered the old gentleman with a courteous bow . 
`` And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt . 
I am due at the Athenaeum . 
It is the hour when we sleep there . '' 
`` All of you , Mr. Erskine ? '' 
`` Forty of us , in forty arm-chairs . 
We are practising for an English Academy of Letters . '' 
Lord Henry laughed and rose . 
`` I am going to the park , '' he cried . 
As he was passing out of the door , Dorian Gray touched him on the arm . 
`` Let me come with you , '' he murmured . 
`` But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him , '' answered Lord Henry . 
`` I would sooner come with you ; yes , I feel I must come with you . 
Do let me . 
And you will promise to talk to me all the time ? 
No one talks so wonderfully as you do . '' 
`` Ah ! 
I have talked quite enough for to-day , '' said Lord Henry , smiling . 
`` All I want now is to look at life . 
You may come and look at it with me , if you care to . '' 
One afternoon , a month later , Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious arm-chair , in the little library of Lord Henry 's house in Mayfair . 
It was , in its way , a very charming room , with its high panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak , its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling of raised plasterwork , and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk , long-fringed Persian rugs . 
On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette by Clodion , and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles , bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies that Queen had selected for her device . 
Some large blue china jars and parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf , and through the small leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer day in London . 
Lord Henry had not yet come in . 
He was always late on principle , his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time . 
So the lad was looking rather sulky , as with listless fingers he turned over the pages of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had found in one of the book-cases . 
The formal monotonous ticking of the Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him . 
Once or twice he thought of going away . 
At last he heard a step outside , and the door opened . 
`` How late you are , Harry ! '' 
he murmured . 
`` I am afraid it is not Harry , Mr. Gray , '' answered a shrill voice . 
He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet . 
`` I beg your pardon . 
I thought -- '' `` You thought it was my husband . 
It is only his wife . 
You must let me introduce myself . 
I know you quite well by your photographs . 
I think my husband has got seventeen of them . '' 
`` Not seventeen , Lady Henry ? '' 
`` Well , eighteen , then . 
And I saw you with him the other night at the opera . '' 
She laughed nervously as she spoke , and watched him with her vague forget-me-not eyes . 
She was a curious woman , whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest . 
She was usually in love with somebody , and , as her passion was never returned , she had kept all her illusions . 
She tried to look picturesque , but only succeeded in being untidy . 
Her name was Victoria , and she had a perfect mania for going to church . 
`` That was at Lohengrin , Lady Henry , I think ? '' 
`` Yes ; it was at dear Lohengrin . 
I like Wagner 's music better than anybody 's . 
It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other people hearing what one says . 
That is a great advantage , do n't you think so , Mr. Gray ? '' 
The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips , and her fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife . 
Dorian smiled and shook his head : `` I am afraid I do n't think so , Lady Henry . 
I never talk during music -- at least , during good music . 
If one hears bad music , it is one 's duty to drown it in conversation . '' 
`` Ah ! 
that is one of Harry 's views , is n't it , Mr. Gray ? 
I always hear Harry 's views from his friends . 
It is the only way I get to know of them . 
But you must not think I do n't like good music . 
I adore it , but I am afraid of it . 
It makes me too romantic . 
I have simply worshipped pianists -- two at a time , sometimes , Harry tells me . 
I do n't know what it is about them . 
Perhaps it is that they are foreigners . 
They all are , ai n't they ? 
Even those that are born in England become foreigners after a time , do n't they ? 
It is so clever of them , and such a compliment to art . 
Makes it quite cosmopolitan , does n't it ? 
You have never been to any of my parties , have you , Mr. Gray ? 
You must come . 
I ca n't afford orchids , but I spare no expense in foreigners . 
They make one 's rooms look so picturesque . 
But here is Harry ! 
Harry , I came in to look for you , to ask you something -- I forget what it was -- and I found Mr. Gray here . 
We have had such a pleasant chat about music . 
We have quite the same ideas . 
No ; I think our ideas are quite different . 
But he has been most pleasant . 
I am so glad I 've seen him . '' 
`` I am charmed , my love , quite charmed , '' said Lord Henry , elevating his dark , crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused smile . 
`` So sorry I am late , Dorian . 
I went to look after a piece of old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it . 
Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing . '' 
`` I am afraid I must be going , '' exclaimed Lady Henry , breaking an awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh . 
`` I have promised to drive with the duchess . 
Good-bye , Mr. Gray . 
Good-bye , Harry . 
You are dining out , I suppose ? 
So am I. Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury 's . '' 
`` I dare say , my dear , '' said Lord Henry , shutting the door behind her as , looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the rain , she flitted out of the room , leaving a faint odour of frangipanni . 
Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the sofa . 
`` Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair , Dorian , '' he said after a few puffs . 
`` Why , Harry ? '' 
`` Because they are so sentimental . '' 
`` But I like sentimental people . '' 
`` Never marry at all , Dorian . 
Men marry because they are tired ; women , because they are curious : both are disappointed . '' 
`` I do n't think I am likely to marry , Harry . 
I am too much in love . 
That is one of your aphorisms . 
I am putting it into practice , as I do everything that you say . '' 
`` Who are you in love with ? '' 
asked Lord Henry after a pause . 
`` With an actress , '' said Dorian Gray , blushing . 
Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders . 
`` That is a rather commonplace debut . '' 
`` You would not say so if you saw her , Harry . '' 
`` Who is she ? '' 
`` Her name is Sibyl Vane . '' 
`` Never heard of her . '' 
`` No one has . 
People will some day , however . 
She is a genius . '' 
`` My dear boy , no woman is a genius . 
Women are a decorative sex . 
They never have anything to say , but they say it charmingly . 
Women represent the triumph of matter over mind , just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals . '' 
`` Harry , how can you ? '' 
`` My dear Dorian , it is quite true . 
I am analysing women at present , so I ought to know . 
The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was . 
I find that , ultimately , there are only two kinds of women , the plain and the coloured . 
The plain women are very useful . 
If you want to gain a reputation for respectability , you have merely to take them down to supper . 
The other women are very charming . 
They commit one mistake , however . 
They paint in order to try and look young . 
Our grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly . 
Rouge and esprit used to go together . 
That is all over now . 
As long as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter , she is perfectly satisfied . 
As for conversation , there are only five women in London worth talking to , and two of these ca n't be admitted into decent society . 
However , tell me about your genius . 
How long have you known her ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
Harry , your views terrify me . '' 
`` Never mind that . 
How long have you known her ? '' 
`` About three weeks . '' 
`` And where did you come across her ? '' 
`` I will tell you , Harry , but you must n't be unsympathetic about it . 
After all , it never would have happened if I had not met you . 
You filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life . 
For days after I met you , something seemed to throb in my veins . 
As I lounged in the park , or strolled down Piccadilly , I used to look at every one who passed me and wonder , with a mad curiosity , what sort of lives they led . 
Some of them fascinated me . 
Others filled me with terror . 
There was an exquisite poison in the air . 
I had a passion for sensations ... . 
Well , one evening about seven o'clock , I determined to go out in search of some adventure . 
I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours , with its myriads of people , its sordid sinners , and its splendid sins , as you once phrased it , must have something in store for me . 
I fancied a thousand things . 
The mere danger gave me a sense of delight . 
I remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined together , about the search for beauty being the real secret of life . 
I do n't know what I expected , but I went out and wandered eastward , soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black grassless squares . 
About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little theatre , with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills . 
A hideous Jew , in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life , was standing at the entrance , smoking a vile cigar . 
He had greasy ringlets , and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt . 
` Have a box , my Lord ? ' 
he said , when he saw me , and he took off his hat with an air of gorgeous servility . 
There was something about him , Harry , that amused me . 
He was such a monster . 
You will laugh at me , I know , but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box . 
To the present day I ca n't make out why I did so ; and yet if I had n't -- my dear Harry , if I had n't -- I should have missed the greatest romance of my life . 
I see you are laughing . 
It is horrid of you ! '' 
`` I am not laughing , Dorian ; at least I am not laughing at you . 
But you should not say the greatest romance of your life . 
You should say the first romance of your life . 
You will always be loved , and you will always be in love with love . 
A grande passion is the privilege of people who have nothing to do . 
That is the one use of the idle classes of a country . 
Do n't be afraid . 
There are exquisite things in store for you . 
This is merely the beginning . '' 
`` Do you think my nature so shallow ? '' 
cried Dorian Gray angrily . 
`` No ; I think your nature so deep . '' 
`` How do you mean ? '' 
`` My dear boy , the people who love only once in their lives are really the shallow people . 
What they call their loyalty , and their fidelity , I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination . 
Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life of the intellect -- simply a confession of failure . 
Faithfulness ! 
I must analyse it some day . 
The passion for property is in it . 
There are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that others might pick them up . 
But I do n't want to interrupt you . 
Go on with your story . '' 
`` Well , I found myself seated in a horrid little private box , with a vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face . 
I looked out from behind the curtain and surveyed the house . 
It was a tawdry affair , all Cupids and cornucopias , like a third-rate wedding-cake . 
The gallery and pit were fairly full , but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty , and there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the dress-circle . 
Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer , and there was a terrible consumption of nuts going on . '' 
`` It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama . '' 
`` Just like , I should fancy , and very depressing . 
I began to wonder what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill . 
What do you think the play was , Harry ? '' 
`` I should think ` The Idiot Boy ' , or ` Dumb but Innocent ' . 
Our fathers used to like that sort of piece , I believe . 
The longer I live , Dorian , the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is not good enough for us . 
In art , as in politics , les grandperes ont toujours tort . '' 
`` This play was good enough for us , Harry . 
It was Romeo and Juliet . 
I must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare done in such a wretched hole of a place . 
Still , I felt interested , in a sort of way . 
At any rate , I determined to wait for the first act . 
There was a dreadful orchestra , presided over by a young Hebrew who sat at a cracked piano , that nearly drove me away , but at last the drop-scene was drawn up and the play began . 
Romeo was a stout elderly gentleman , with corked eyebrows , a husky tragedy voice , and a figure like a beer-barrel . 
Mercutio was almost as bad . 
He was played by the low-comedian , who had introduced gags of his own and was on most friendly terms with the pit . 
They were both as grotesque as the scenery , and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth . 
But Juliet ! 
Harry , imagine a girl , hardly seventeen years of age , with a little , flowerlike face , a small Greek head with plaited coils of dark-brown hair , eyes that were violet wells of passion , lips that were like the petals of a rose . 
She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen in my life . 
You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved , but that beauty , mere beauty , could fill your eyes with tears . 
I tell you , Harry , I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came across me . 
And her voice -- I never heard such a voice . 
It was very low at first , with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one 's ear . 
Then it became a little louder , and sounded like a flute or a distant hautboy . 
In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing . 
There were moments , later on , when it had the wild passion of violins . 
You know how a voice can stir one . 
Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane are two things that I shall never forget . 
When I close my eyes , I hear them , and each of them says something different . 
I do n't know which to follow . 
Why should I not love her ? 
Harry , I do love her . 
She is everything to me in life . 
Night after night I go to see her play . 
One evening she is Rosalind , and the next evening she is Imogen . 
I have seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb , sucking the poison from her lover 's lips . 
I have watched her wandering through the forest of Arden , disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap . 
She has been mad , and has come into the presence of a guilty king , and given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of . 
She has been innocent , and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike throat . 
I have seen her in every age and in every costume . 
Ordinary women never appeal to one 's imagination . 
They are limited to their century . 
No glamour ever transfigures them . 
One knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets . 
One can always find them . 
There is no mystery in any of them . 
They ride in the park in the morning and chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon . 
They have their stereotyped smile and their fashionable manner . 
They are quite obvious . 
But an actress ! 
How different an actress is ! 
Harry ! 
why did n't you tell me that the only thing worth loving is an actress ? '' 
`` Because I have loved so many of them , Dorian . '' 
`` Oh , yes , horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces . '' 
`` Do n't run down dyed hair and painted faces . 
There is an extraordinary charm in them , sometimes , '' said Lord Henry . 
`` I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane . '' 
`` You could not have helped telling me , Dorian . 
All through your life you will tell me everything you do . '' 
`` Yes , Harry , I believe that is true . 
I can not help telling you things . 
You have a curious influence over me . 
If I ever did a crime , I would come and confess it to you . 
You would understand me . '' 
`` People like you -- the wilful sunbeams of life -- do n't commit crimes , Dorian . 
But I am much obliged for the compliment , all the same . 
And now tell me -- reach me the matches , like a good boy -- thanks -- what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane ? '' 
Dorian Gray leaped to his feet , with flushed cheeks and burning eyes . 
`` Harry ! 
Sibyl Vane is sacred ! '' 
`` It is only the sacred things that are worth touching , Dorian , '' said Lord Henry , with a strange touch of pathos in his voice . 
`` But why should you be annoyed ? 
I suppose she will belong to you some day . 
When one is in love , one always begins by deceiving one 's self , and one always ends by deceiving others . 
That is what the world calls a romance . 
You know her , at any rate , I suppose ? '' 
`` Of course I know her . 
On the first night I was at the theatre , the horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her . 
I was furious with him , and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona . 
I think , from his blank look of amazement , that he was under the impression that I had taken too much champagne , or something . '' 
`` I am not surprised . '' 
`` Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers . 
I told him I never even read them . 
He seemed terribly disappointed at that , and confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy against him , and that they were every one of them to be bought . '' 
`` I should not wonder if he was quite right there . 
But , on the other hand , judging from their appearance , most of them can not be at all expensive . '' 
`` Well , he seemed to think they were beyond his means , '' laughed Dorian . 
`` By this time , however , the lights were being put out in the theatre , and I had to go . 
He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly recommended . 
I declined . 
The next night , of course , I arrived at the place again . 
When he saw me , he made me a low bow and assured me that I was a munificent patron of art . 
He was a most offensive brute , though he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare . 
He told me once , with an air of pride , that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to ` The Bard , ' as he insisted on calling him . 
He seemed to think it a distinction . '' 
`` It was a distinction , my dear Dorian -- a great distinction . 
Most people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose of life . 
To have ruined one 's self over poetry is an honour . 
But when did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane ? '' 
`` The third night . 
She had been playing Rosalind . 
I could not help going round . 
I had thrown her some flowers , and she had looked at me -- at least I fancied that she had . 
The old Jew was persistent . 
He seemed determined to take me behind , so I consented . 
It was curious my not wanting to know her , was n't it ? '' 
`` No ; I do n't think so . '' 
`` My dear Harry , why ? '' 
`` I will tell you some other time . 
Now I want to know about the girl . '' 
`` Sibyl ? 
Oh , she was so shy and so gentle . 
There is something of a child about her . 
Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told her what I thought of her performance , and she seemed quite unconscious of her power . 
I think we were both rather nervous . 
The old Jew stood grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom , making elaborate speeches about us both , while we stood looking at each other like children . 
He would insist on calling me ` My Lord , ' so I had to assure Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind . 
She said quite simply to me , ` You look more like a prince . 
I must call you Prince Charming . ' '' 
`` Upon my word , Dorian , Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments . '' 
`` You do n't understand her , Harry . 
She regarded me merely as a person in a play . 
She knows nothing of life . 
She lives with her mother , a faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta dressing-wrapper on the first night , and looks as if she had seen better days . '' 
`` I know that look . 
It depresses me , '' murmured Lord Henry , examining his rings . 
`` The Jew wanted to tell me her history , but I said it did not interest me . '' 
`` You were quite right . 
There is always something infinitely mean about other people 's tragedies . '' 
`` Sibyl is the only thing I care about . 
What is it to me where she came from ? 
From her little head to her little feet , she is absolutely and entirely divine . 
Every night of my life I go to see her act , and every night she is more marvellous . '' 
`` That is the reason , I suppose , that you never dine with me now . 
I thought you must have some curious romance on hand . 
You have ; but it is not quite what I expected . '' 
`` My dear Harry , we either lunch or sup together every day , and I have been to the opera with you several times , '' said Dorian , opening his blue eyes in wonder . 
`` You always come dreadfully late . '' 
`` Well , I ca n't help going to see Sibyl play , '' he cried , `` even if it is only for a single act . 
I get hungry for her presence ; and when I think of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body , I am filled with awe . '' 
`` You can dine with me to-night , Dorian , ca n't you ? '' 
He shook his head . 
`` To-night she is Imogen , '' he answered , `` and to-morrow night she will be Juliet . '' 
`` When is she Sibyl Vane ? '' 
`` Never . '' 
`` I congratulate you . '' 
`` How horrid you are ! 
She is all the great heroines of the world in one . 
She is more than an individual . 
You laugh , but I tell you she has genius . 
I love her , and I must make her love me . 
You , who know all the secrets of life , tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me ! 
I want to make Romeo jealous . 
I want the dead lovers of the world to hear our laughter and grow sad . 
I want a breath of our passion to stir their dust into consciousness , to wake their ashes into pain . 
My God , Harry , how I worship her ! '' 
He was walking up and down the room as he spoke . 
Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks . 
He was terribly excited . 
