One gloomy afternoon , Mr. Jordan chanced to give our hero a certain message to take to another house , and , as he rose , Fink looked up from his desk , and said to Jordan , `` Just send him at the same time to the gunsmith -- the good-for-nothing fellow can send my gun by him . '' 
Our hero crimsoned . 
`` Do not give me that commission , '' said he to Jordan ; `` I shall not execute it . '' 
`` Really ! '' 
asked Fink , in amazement ; `` and why not , my fine fellow ? '' 
`` I am not your servant , '' replied Anton , bitterly . 
`` Had you requested me to do this for you , I might have complied ; but I will take no orders from you . '' 
`` Dolt ! '' 
muttered Fink , and went on writing . 
The whole office had heard him , and every eye turned to Anton , whose eyes flashed as he exclaimed , `` You have insulted me -- I will not bear an insult from any one -- you must explain yourself . '' 
`` I am not fond of giving any one a thrashing , '' said Fink , negligently . 
`` Enough ! '' 
cried Anton , turning deadly pale ; `` you shall hear farther ; '' and off he rushed to deliver Jordan 's message . 
A cold rain was falling , but Anton was not aware of it : he felt nothing but an agonizing sense of insult and wrong . 
As he reached the establishment he sought , he saw his principal 's carriage at the door , and as he came out again he met Sabine just about to enter it . 
He could not avoid handing her in ; and , struck with his appearance , she asked him what was the matter . 
`` A trifle , '' was the reply . 
Insignificant as the incident was , it changed Anton 's mood . 
Her courteous greeting and kindly inquiry raised his spirits . 
He felt that he was no longer a helpless child ; and , raising his hand to heaven , his resolve was taken . 
On his return to the office , he quietly went on with his work , heedless of the inquiring glances around him ; and , when the office was closed , he hurried to Jordan 's room , where Pix and Specht were already met . 
They all treated him with a commiseration not quite free from contempt ; but he , having inquired from Jordan , in their presence , whether Fink had any right to give him such an order , and whether in his -LRB- Jordan 's -RRB- opinion he had done wrong in resenting it , and having been satisfactorily answered on both heads , requested a few moments ' private conversation , and then proceeded to declare that he should demand a public apology from Fink . 
`` Which he will never consent to , '' said Jordan , with a shake of the head . 
`` In that case I challenge him , either with sword or pistols . '' 
Now , if Jordan had seen a dusky vapor rise from his ink-bottle , and take the form of a hideous genie , after the manner of fairy tales , and this genie had announced his intention of strangling him on the spot , he could not have been more amazed . 
`` The devil is in you , Wohlfart , '' said he at last ; `` you want to fight a duel with Herr von Fink , a dead shot , while you are only an apprentice , and not half a year in the business : impossible . '' 
`` I should now be a student if I had not been brought up to be a merchant . 
Curses on business , if it so degrades me that I can not even ask satisfaction for insult . 
I shall go to Mr. Schröter at once , and give in my resignation . '' 
Jordan 's surprise increased . 
Here was the good-natured apprentice transformed before his eyes . 
At length it was agreed that he should take the message ; but Fink was not found at home . 
`` Very possibly he has forgotten all about it , and is amusing himself at some club or other , '' was Jordan 's commentary on the fact . 
`` In that case , '' said Anton , `` I shall at once write to him , and have the letter laid on his table . '' 
Meanwhile great conferences were held in Jordan 's room ; for , although Pix and Specht had promised secrecy , they indulged in such dark and mysterious hints that the truth was soon known . 
Baumann stole up to Anton to implore him not to peril two human lives for the sake of a rough word ; and , when he was gone , Anton found a New Testament on his table , open at the words , `` Bless them that curse you . '' 
Although not exactly in the mood to enter into their spirit , he took up the sacred book , and , having read the passages his good mother so often repeated to him , he prepared for bed in a softened frame of mind . 
Meanwhile , a rumor of some impending catastrophe pervaded the whole house . 
Sabine was in her treasure-chamber . 
Along its walls stood great oaken presses , richly carved ; in the middle , a table with twisted legs , and a few old-fashioned chairs around . 
On the shelves of the presses appeared piles of linen , and rows of glass , china , and plate , collected by the taste of more than three generations . 
The air was fragrant with old lavender and recent eau de Cologne . 
Here Sabine reigned supreme . 
She herself took out and replaced whatever was wanted , and was not fond of admitting any other person . 
She was now standing at the table , which was covered with newly-washed linen , and , as she looked over the arabesques of the exquisitely fine table-napkins , a cloud passed over her brow . 
Two , three , four holes ! 
She rang for the servant . 
`` It is intolerable , Franz , '' said she ; `` there are three spoiled now in No. 24 ; one of the gentlemen runs his fork through the napkins . 
There is surely no need for that here . '' 
`` That there is not , '' was the indignant reply ; `` the plate is under my own care . '' 
`` Which of the gentlemen is so reckless ? '' 
asked Sabine , severely . 
`` It is Herr von Fink , '' was the reply ; `` he has a habit of constantly running his fork through the napkins . 
It goes to my heart , Miss Sabine ; but what can I do ? '' 
Sabine hung her head . 
`` I knew that it was he , '' she sighed ; `` but we can not go on thus . 
I will give you a set for Herr von Fink 's use , and we must sacrifice it . '' 
She went to the cupboard , and began to look for one , but the choice was difficult ; the beautiful table-linen was dear to her heart . 
At length , with a lingering look at the pattern , she sorrowfully laid a set on the servant 's arm . 
Franz still lingered . 
`` He has burned a curtain in his bed-room , '' said he ; `` the pair is spoiled . '' 
`` And they were quite new ! '' 
sighed Sabine again . 
`` Take them away to-morrow . 
What more , Franz ? 
What else has happened ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
ma'am , '' replied the servant , mysteriously , `` Herr von Fink has insulted Herr Wohlfart , who is quite raging , and Herr Specht says there is to be a duel . '' 
`` A duel ! '' 
cried Sabine ; `` you must have misunderstood Herr Specht . '' 
`` No , indeed , ma'am , it 's all too true . 
Something dreadful will happen . 
Herr Wohlfart brushed past me angrily , and did not touch his tea . '' 
`` Has my brother returned ? '' 
`` He does not come back till late to-day ; he is on committee . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Sabine ; `` say nothing about it , Franz , to any one . '' 
And Sabine sat down again at the table , but the damask was forgotten . 
`` So that was what made poor Wohlfart look so sad ! 
This wild youth -- he came to us like a whirlwind , and the blossoms all fall in his path . 
His whole life is confusion and excitement , and he carries away with him all who approach within his reach . 
Even me -- even me ! 
Do what I will , I too feel his spell -- so beautiful , so brilliant , so strange . 
He is always grieving me , and yet all day long I am thinking and caring about him . 
Oh , my mother ! 
it was in this room that I sat at your feet for the last time when , with your hand on my head , you prayed that Heaven might shield me from every sorrow . 
Beloved mother , shield thy daughter against her own beating heart . 
Strengthen me against him , his ensnaring levity , his daring mockery . '' 
Long did Sabine sit thus , communing with her guardian spirits . 
Then wiping her eyes , she resolutely returned to count and arrange the table-linen . 
Anton had got into bed , and was just going to put out his candle , when a loud knock was heard at the door , and the man he least expected stood before him -- Herr von Fink himself , with his riding-whip , and his usual careless manner . 
`` Ah ! 
in bed already ! '' 
said he , sitting astride on a chair close by . 
`` I am sorry to disturb you . 
You have written me a very spirited letter , and Jordan has told me the rest , so I am come to answer you in person . '' 
Anton was silent , and looked darkly at him . 
`` You are all good and very sensitive people , '' continued Fink , whipping his boots ; `` I am sorry that you took my words so to heart , but I am glad you have so much spirit . '' 
`` Before I listen further , '' said Anton , angrily , `` I must know whether it is your intention to make an apology to me before the other gentlemen . 
Perhaps a more experienced man would not consider this sufficient , but it would satisfy me . '' 
`` There you are right , '' nodded Fink ; `` you may be quite satisfied . '' 
`` Will you make this apology to-morrow morning ? '' 
inquired Anton . 
`` Why should I not ? 
I do n't want to fight with you , and I will declare before the assembled firm that you are a hopeful young man , and that I was wrong to insult one younger and -- forgive me the expression -- much greener than myself . '' 
Our hero listened with mingled feelings , and then declared that he was not satisfied with this explanation . 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked Fink . 
`` Your manner at this moment is unpleasant to me ; you show me less respect than is conventional . 
I know that I am young , have seen little of the world , and that in many points you are my superior ; but , for these very reasons , it would better become you to behave differently . '' 
Fink stretched out his hand good-humoredly , and said in reply , `` Do not be angry with me , and give me your hand . '' 
`` I can not do so yet , '' cried Anton , with emotion ; `` you must first assure me that you do not treat the matter thus because you consider me too young or too insignificant , or because you are noble and I am not . '' 
`` Hark ye , Master Wohlfart , '' said Fink , `` you are running me desperately hard . 
However , we 'll settle these points too . 
As for my German nobility '' -- he snapped his fingers -- `` I would not give that for it ; and as for your youth and position , all I can say is , that , after what I have seen this evening , the next time we quarrel I will fight you with any murderous weapon that you may prefer . '' 
And again he held out his hand , and said , `` Now , then , take it ; we have settled every thing . '' 
Anton laid his hand in his , and Fink , having heartily shaken it , wished him good-night . 
The following morning , the clerks being all assembled earlier than usual , Fink made his appearance last , and said , in a loud voice , `` My lords and gentlemen of the export and home-trade , I yesterday behaved to Mr. Wohlfart in a manner that I now sincerely regret . 
I have already apologized to him , and I repeat that apology in your presence ; and beg to say that our friend Wohlfart has behaved admirably throughout , and that I rejoice to have him for a colleague . '' 
At this the clerks smiled , Anton shook hands with Fink , Jordan with both of them , and the affair was settled . 
But it had its results . 
It raised Anton 's position in the opinion of his brother officials , and entirely changed his relation to Fink , who , a few days after , as they were running up stairs , stopped and invited him into his own apartment , that they might smoke a friendly cigar . 
It was the first time that Anton had crossed the threshold of the volunteer , and he stood amazed at the aspect of his room . 
Handsome furniture all in confusion , a carpet soft as moss , on whose gorgeous flowers cigar-ashes were recklessly strewed . 
On one side a great press full of guns , rifles , and other weapons , with a foreign saddle and heavy silver spurs hanging across it ; on the other , a large book-case , handsomely carved , and full of well-bound books , and above , the outspread wings of some mighty bird . 
`` What a number of books you have ! '' 
cried Anton , in delight . 
`` Memorials of a world in which I no longer live . '' 
`` And those wings -- are they a part of those memorials ? '' 
`` Yes , they are the wings of a condor . 
I am proud of them , as you see , '' answered Fink , offering Anton a packet of cigars , and propelling a great arm-chair toward him with his foot . 
`` And now let us have a chat . 
Are you knowing in horses ? '' 
`` No , '' said Anton . 
`` Are you a sportsman ? '' 
`` Not that either . '' 
`` Are you musical ? '' 
`` Very slightly so , '' said Anton . 
`` Why , what specialities have you , then , in Heaven 's name ? '' 
`` Few in your sense of the word , '' answered Anton , indignantly . 
`` I can love those who please me , and can , I believe , be a true friend ; I can also resent insolence . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Fink , `` I am quite aware of that . 
I know there is plenty of spirit in you . 
Now let me hear what fate has hurled you into this dreary tread-mill , where all must at last go dusty and resigned , like Liebold , or , at best , punctual and precise , like Jordan . '' 
`` It was a kind fate , after all , '' replied Anton , and began to tell the story of his life . 
Fink kept nodding approvingly , and then said , `` After all , the greatest difference between us is that you remember your mother , and I do not mine . 
I have known people who found less love in their home than you have done . '' 
`` You have seen so much of the world , '' pleaded Anton ; `` pray let me hear how you chanced to come here . '' 
`` Very simply , '' began Fink ; `` I have an uncle at New York , one of the aristocrats of the Exchange . 
When I was fourteen , he wrote to my father to send me over , as he meant to make me his heir . 
My father was a thorough merchant . 
I was packed up and sent across . 
In New York I soon became an accomplished scapegrace , was up to every species of folly , and kept race-horses at an age when German boys eat bread and butter , and play with tops in the streets . 
I had my favorite danseuses and cantatrices , and so bullied my servants , both white and black , that my uncle had enough to do to bribe them into taking it quietly . 
My friends had torn me from my home without consulting my feelings , and I did not care a straw for theirs . 
In short , I was the most renowned of the young scamps who pique themselves upon their devilry on the other side the water . 
It was on one of my birth-days that , returning home from a certain petit souper , the thought suddenly struck me that this career must come to an end , or it would end me . 
So I went to the harbor instead of to my uncle 's house , and having , on my way , bought a coarse sailor 's dress and put it on , I hired myself to an English captain . 
We sailed round Cape Horn , and when we reached Valparaiso I thanked the Englishman for my passage , treated the crew , and jumped on shore with twenty doubloons in my pocket , to make my fortune by the strength of my arm . 
I soon fell in with an intelligent man , who took me to his hacienda , where I won my laurels as herdsman . 
I was about half a year with him , and liked the life . 
I was treated as a useful guest , and much admired as sportsman and horseman . 
What did I need further ? 
We were just going to have a great buffalo hunt , when suddenly two soldiers made their appearance on the scene , and trotted me off with them to the town , where I was made over to the American consul ; and as my uncle had moved heaven and earth to track me , and as I found , from a long letter he had written , that my father was really unhappy , I resolved to return to Europe by the next ship . 
I at once told my father that I did not mean to be a merchant , but an agriculturist . 
At this the firm of Fink and Becker went distracted ; but I stood to my point . 
At last we came to a compromise . 
I went for two years to a business-house in North Germany ; then I came here to learn office-work , through which discipline they hope to tame me . 
So here I am now in a cloister . 
But it 's all in vain . 
I humor my father by sitting here , but I shall only stay long enough to convince him that I am right , and then I shall take to agriculture . '' 
`` Will you buy land in this country ? '' 
inquired Anton . 
`` Not I , '' returned Fink ; `` I prefer riding half the day without coming to the end of my property . '' 
`` Then you mean to return to America ? '' 
`` There or elsewhere . 
I am not particular as to hemisphere . 
Meanwhile , I live like a monk , as you see , '' said Fink , laughing , as he mixed for himself a fiery potion , and pushed the bottle to Anton . 
`` Brew for yourself , my lad , '' said he ; `` and let us chat away merrily , as becomes good fellows and reconciled foes . '' 
From that evening forth Fink treated our hero with a friendship that he showed to none of the other clerks . 
He often took him into his room , and even went up the long staircase to his . 
Anton soon discovered that his new friend was a well-known character in the town -- a perfect despot among the fashionables , and the leader of all riding and hunting parties given . 
Accordingly , he was much in society , and often did not come home till morning . 
Anton could not help admiring the strength and energy of this man , who could take his place at the desk after only two or three hours ' sleep without showing a trace of fatigue . 
Fink also departed from the rigid regularity of the house by sometimes appearing after office-hours had begun , or leaving before they ended . 
Of this , however , Mr. Schröter took no notice . 
Thus the winter passed away , and signs of spring penetrated even here . 
The visitors no longer brought in snow-flakes , but left brown footmarks . 
The brokers began to speak of the yellow blossoms of the olive , and at length Mr. Braun came in with a rose in his button-hole . 
A year was gone since Anton crossed the little lake with the fleet of swans behind him . 
The whole year through he had thought of that one day . 
Veitel Itzig still occupied the same sleeping-quarters as on the evening of his arrival . 
If , according to the assertions of the police , every man must have some home or other -- and , according to popular opinion , our home be where our bed stands -- Veitel was remarkably little at his home . 
Whenever he could slip away from Ehrenthal 's , he would wander about the streets , and watch for such youths as were likely to buy from or sell to him . 
He had always a few dollars to rattle in his pocket . 
He never addressed the rawest of schoolboys but as a grown-up man ; he was a proficient in the art of bowing , could brighten up old brass and silver as good as new , was always ready to buy old black coats , and possessed the skill of giving them a degree of gloss which insured their selling again . 
With every bargain that he made for Ehrenthal he combined one for himself , and soon won a reputation that excited the envy of gray-bearded fripperers . 
He did not confine his activity to any one department either , but became a horse-dealer 's agent , the employé of secret money-lenders -- nay , a money-lender himself . 
Then he had the faculty of never getting tired , was all day on his feet , would run any length for a few pence , and never resented a harsh word . 
He allowed himself no other recreation than that of counting over his different transactions and their probable results . 
He lived upon next to nothing ; a slice or two of bread abducted from Ehrenthal 's kitchen would serve for his supper . 
Only once during the first year of his town life did he allow himself a glass of thin small beer , and that after a very profitable bargain . 
He was always remarkably neat in his attire , considering it essential that a man of business should bear the aspect of a gentleman . 
In short , at the end of twelve months his six ducats had increased thirty fold . 
He soon became indispensable in Mr. Ehrenthal 's household . 
Nothing escaped him . 
He never forgot a face , and was as familiar with the daily state of the funds as any broker on ` Change . 
He still occupied the post of errand-boy , blacked Bernhard 's boots , and dined in the kitchen ; but it was plain that a stool in the office , which Ehrenthal kept for form 's sake , would ultimately be his . 
This was the goal of his ambition -- the paradise of his hopes . 
He soon saw that he only wanted three things to attain to it -- a more grammatical knowledge of German , finer caligraphy , and an initiation into the mysteries of book-keeping , of which he as yet knew nothing . 
Meanwhile , he had become a distinguished man in his caravanserai , one whom even Löbel Pinkus himself treated with respect . 
Veitel owed this to his own sharp-wittedness . 
Ever since his first arrival , the hollow sound of the wooden partition had a good deal excited him , and he had often vainly sought to explore the mystery . 
At last , one Saturday evening , he pretended to be ill , and remained at home , when his host and the rest of the household had gone to the synagogue . 
Having had the good fortune to widen a chink in the partition , he beheld what delighted him in the extreme . 
A large dirty room , quite full of chests , coffers , and a chaos of desirable articles -- old clothes , beds , piles of linen , stuffs , hangings , hardware-goods , etc. . 
Aladdin at his first entrance into the magician 's cave was hardly so enraptured as Itzig by his discovery , which he carefully kept to himself . 
Sometimes at night he heard a stir in the mysterious room ; nay , once whispers reached him , some of them in the deep voice of Pinkus himself . 
One evening , too , coming home late , he saw boxes and bundles in a little carriage before the next house , all modestly covered up with white linen ; and that very night two silent guests disappeared , and came back no more ; from all of which Veitel concluded that his host was a commission agent , who had his reasons for carrying on business by night rather than by day . 
It was as clear as possible . 
These goods were taken eastward , smuggled over the border , and spread all over Russia . 
Veitel used his discovery judiciously , only giving such hints of it to Pinkus as to insure his most respectful behavior . 
On one eventful day Veitel returned in thoughtful mood to his lodgings , and sat in the public room . 
He was pondering how best to get hold of some scribe who would initiate him into the mysteries of grammar and book-keeping for the smallest possible fee ; nay , perhaps for a certain old black coat , which , owing to the peculiarity of its cut , he had never yet been able to dispose of . 
Happening to look up in the midst of his reflections , his eye fell on a stranger who held a pen in his hand , and conversed with a tradesman . 
It was plain that this man was no Jew . 
He was little and fat . 
He had a red turned-up nose , bushy gray hair , and he wore an old pair of spectacles , which had great difficulty in keeping on the nose aforesaid . 
Veitel remarked that he had on an unusually bad coat , and took snuff . 
It was plain that this man was a writer of some kind ; so , as soon as he had seen him hand over a paper to the tradesman , and receive a small piece of money , Veitel approached , and began : `` I wished , sir , to ask you if you happened to know any one who could give lessons in writing and book-keeping to a man of my acquaintance ? '' 
`` And this man of your acquaintance is yourself ? '' 
said the little man . 
`` Why should I make a secret of it ? '' 
said Veitel . 
`` Yes , it is I ; but I am only a beginner , and able to give but little . '' 
`` He who gives little receives little , my dear fellow , '' said the elderly scribe , taking a pinch of snuff . 
`` What is your name , and with whom are you placed ? '' 
`` My name is Veitel Itzig , and I am in Hirsch Ehrenthal 's office . '' 
The stranger grew attentive . 
`` Ehrenthal , '' he said , `` is a rich man , and a wise . 
I have had dealings with him in my time ; he has a very fair knowledge of law . 
What fee are you willing to pay , provided a master could be found ? '' 
`` I do not know what should be given , '' said Veitel . 
`` Then I will tell you , '' said he of the spectacles . 
`` I might or might not give you instructions myself ; but first I must know more about you . 
If I were to do so , in consideration of your being but poor , and a beginner , as you say , and also of having myself a little spare time on hand , I should only ask fifty dollars . '' 
`` Fifty dollars ! '' 
cried Veitel , in horror , sinking down on a stool , and repeating mechanically , `` fifty dollars ! '' 
`` If you think that too much , '' said he of the spectacles , sharply , `` know that I am not going to deal with a greenhorn ; secondly , that I never gave my assistance for so little before ; and , thirdly , that I should never think of teasing myself with you if I had not a fancy to spend a few weeks here . '' 
`` Fifty dollars ! '' 
cried Itzig ; `` why , I had thought it would not cost more than three or four , and a waistcoat and a pair of boots , and '' -- for Veitel saw that a storm was coming , and that the hat on the table was much dilapidated -- `` a hat almost as good as new . '' 
`` Go , you fool ! '' 
said the old man , `` and look out for a parish schoolmaster . '' 
`` Then , '' said Itzig , `` you are not a writing-master ? '' 
`` No , you great donkey , '' muttered the stranger ; then , in a soliloquy , `` Who could have supposed that Ehrenthal would keep such a booby as this ? 
He takes me for a writing-master ! '' 
`` Who are you , then ? '' 
`` One with whom you have nothing to do , '' was the curt reply , and the little man rose and betook himself to the loft , while Veitel went off to ask Pinkus , as unconcernedly as he could , the name and calling of the new guest . 
`` Do n't you know him ? '' 
said Pinkus , with an ironical smile ; `` take care you do n't know him to your cost . 
Ask him his name ; he knows it better than I do . '' 
`` If you will put no confidence in me , I will in you , '' said Veitel , and told him the whole conversation . 
`` So he would have given you instruction ? '' 
said Pinkus , shaking his head in amazement ; `` fifty dollars is a large sum ; but many a man would give a hundred times as much to know what he does . 
Not that I care what you learn , or from whom . '' 
Veitel went to his lair in greater perplexity than ever . 
Soon came Pinkus with a slight supper for the stranger , to whom he manifested a remarkable degree of sociability . 
He now called him out on the balcony , and after a short talk in the dark , of which Veitel guessed himself the subject , re-entered the room , saying , `` This gentleman wishes to spend a few weeks here in private ; therefore , even if questioned , you will not mention it . '' 
`` I do n't even know who the gentleman is , '' said Veitel ; `` how could I tell any one that he is living here ? '' 
`` You may trust this young man , '' observed Pinkus to the stranger , and then wished the two good-night . 
The man in spectacles sat down to his supper , every now and then casting such a glance at Veitel as an old raven might do at an unfledged chicken , who had innocently ventured within his reach . 
Meanwhile , the thought darted across Itzig 's mind that this mysterious person might be one of the chosen few -- a possessor of the infallible receipt by which a poor man could become rich . 
Veitel knew now that there was no magic in this , that the receipt consisted in being more cunning than the rest of the world , and that this cunning was not without its serious consequences to its possessor ; nay , it seemed to him as though to acquire it were to make a compact with Satan himself . 
His hand trembled , his pale face glowed , but his desire for more certain knowledge on the subject prevailed ; and he told the stranger that , having heard that there was an art of always buying and selling to the best advantage , and so of making a fortune , he wished to ask whether it was that art that he -LRB- the stranger -RRB- could impart if he chose . 
The old man pushed his plate away , and looked at him with amazement . 
`` Either , '' said he , `` you are a great dolt , or the best actor I have ever seen . '' 
`` No ; I am only a dolt , but I wish to become clever , '' was the reply . 
`` A singular fellow , '' said the other , adjusting his spectacles so as to see him better . 
After a long examination , he went on : `` What you , my lad , call an art , is only a knowledge of law , and the wisdom to turn it to one 's own profit . 
He who is up to this can not fail to be a great man , for he will never be hanged . '' 
At which he laughed in a way that made a painful impression even upon Itzig . 
`` This art , '' he went on , `` is not easily acquired , my boy . 
It takes much practice , a good head , prompt decision , and , above all , what the knowing call ` character . ' '' 
At which he laughed again . 
Veitel felt that a crisis in his life had come . 
He fumbled for his worn-out pocket-book , and held it for a moment in his trembling hand . 
During that moment , all manner of conflicting thoughts flashed like lightning through his mind . 
He thought of his worthy mother 's tearful farewell , and how she had said , `` Veitel , this is a wicked world ; gain thy bread honestly . '' 
He saw his old father on his death-bed , with his white head drooping over his emaciated frame . 
He thought , too , of his fifty dollars gathered together so laboriously -- of the insults he had had to bear for their sake -- the threatened blows . 
At that thought he threw his pocket-book on the table , and cried , `` Here is the money ! '' 
but he knew , at the same time , that he was committing sin , and an invisible weight settled on his heart . 
A few hours later , the lamp had burned low , but still Veitel sat with mouth open , eyes fixed , and face flushed , listening to the old man , who was speaking about what most people would vote a tiresome subject -- promissory notes . 
Later still , the light was gone out ; and the stranger , having emptied his bottle of brandy , was asleep on his straw bed , but still Veitel sat and wrote in fancy on the dark walls fraudulent bonds and receipts , while the sweat ran down from his brow ; then he opened the balcony door , and , leaning on the railing , saw the water rush by like a mighty stream of ink . 
Again he traced bonds on the shadows of the opposite walls , and wrote receipts on the surface of the stream . 
The shadows fled , the water ran away ; but his soul had contracted , in that dark night , a debt to be one day required with compound interest . 
From that night Veitel hurried home every evening , and the lessons went on regularly . 
We may here briefly relate what he gradually discovered as to the history of his teacher . 
Herr Hippus had seen better days . 
He had once been a leading attorney , and had then taken to the Bar , where he soon gained a high reputation for his skill in making a doubtful cause appear a good one . 
At first he had no intention of gaining a fortune by confounding right and wrong . 
On the contrary , he had a painful sense of insecurity when retained for a client whose cause seemed to him unjust . 
He differed but little , indeed , from the best of his colleagues ; perhaps he had somewhat fewer scruples ; and , certainly , he was too fond of good red wine . 
He had a caustic wit , made an admirable boon companion , and , having a subtle intellect , was fond of paradoxes and skillful hair-splitting . 
Thanks to the red wine , he fell into the habit of spending much , and so into the necessity of making much also . 
Vanity and the love of excitement led him to devote the whole energy of his brilliant intellect to winning bad cases , and thus that frequent curse of barristers overtook him ; all who had bad cases applied to him . 
For a long time this annoyed him ; but gradually , very gradually , he became demoralized by the constant contact with falsehood and wrong . 
His wants went on increasing , temptations multiplied , and conscience weakened . 
But , though long hollow within , he continued outwardly prosperous , and many prophesied that he , with his immense practice , would die one of the richest men in the city , when , cunning lawyer as he was , he had the misfortune to provoke inquiry by appearing in a desperate case . 
The result was , that he was at once disgraced , and vanished like a falling star from the circle of his professional brethren . 
He soon lost the last remains of respectability . 
In reality , he had amassed very little , and his love of drink went on increasing . 
He sunk to a mere frequenter of brandy-shops , a promoter of unfair litigation , and an adviser of rogues and swindlers . 
Owing to some of these practices it was that he now found it convenient , under the pretense of a long journey , to become for a time invisible . 
Pinkus was an old ally , and hence the opportunity for Veitel 's lessons . 
These lessons soon became an absolute necessity to the old man 's heart -- ay , to his heart ; for , bad as he was , its warmth was not yet utterly extinguished . 
It grew a melancholy pleasure to him to open out his mental resources to the youth , whose attention flattered him , and gradually he began to attach himself to him . 
He would put by a portion of his supper , and even of his brandy for him , and enjoy seeing him consume it . 
Once , when Veitel had caught a feverish cold , and lay shivering under his thin coverlet , the old man spread his own blankets over him , and felt a glow of pleasure on seeing his grateful smile . 
Veitel repaid these sparks of friendly feeling with a degree of reverence , greater than ever pupil felt before . 
He did many small kindnesses on his side , and made Hippus the confidant of all his own transactions . 
It is true that this intimacy had its thorns . 
The old man could not refrain from practicing his sharp wit on Itzig , who called him , too , by many an irreverent name when he had stupefied himself with brandy ; but , on the whole , they got on capitally , and were essential to each other . 
During the months that the old man spent in this retreat , Veitel learned much besides the special science already alluded to ; he improved in speaking and writing German , and gained a great amount of general information . 
This change did not escape Mr. Ehrenthal , who mentioned it in his family circle much as a farmer would the promising points of a young bullock ; and , at the end of the quarter , announced of his own accord to Veitel that the shoe-blacking and kitchen dinner were to cease , and that he was prepared to give him a place in his office , and a small salary besides . 
Veitel received the long-desired intelligence with great self-command , and returned his humble thanks , adding , `` I have still one very , very great favor to ask . 
May I have the honor of dining once a week at Mr. Ehrenthal 's table , that I may see how people conduct themselves in good society ? 
If you will do me this kindness , you may deduct it from my salary . '' 
Ehrenthal shook his head , and said that he must refer the question to his wife ; the result of which consultation was , that on the following Sabbath Veitel was invited to eat a roast goose with the family . 
One warm summer evening , office hours being over , Fink said to Anton , `` Will you accompany me to-day ? 
I am going to try a boat that I have just had built . '' 
Anton was ready at once ; so they jumped into a carriage , and drove to the river . 
Fink pointed out a round boat that floated on the water like a pumpkin , and said , in a melancholy tone , `` There it is -- a perfect horror , I declare ! 
I cut out the model for the builder myself too ; I gave him all manner of directions , and this is the sea-gull 's egg he has produced . '' 
`` It is very small , '' replied Anton , with an uncomfortable foreboding . 
`` I 'll tell you what it is , '' cried Fink to the builder , who now came forward , respectfully touching his hat , `` our deaths will be at your door , for we shall inevitably be drowned in that thing , and it will be owing to your want of sense . '' 
`` Sir , '' replied the man , `` I have made it exactly according to your directions . '' 
`` You have , have you ? '' 
continued Fink . 
`` Well , then , as a punishment , you shall go with us ; you must see that it is but fair that we should be drowned together . '' 
`` No , sir , that I will not do , with so much wind as this , '' returned the man , decidedly . 
`` Then stay ashore and make sawdust pap for your children . 
Give me the mast and sails . '' 
He fitted in the little mast , hoisted and examined the sails , then took them down again , and laid them at the bottom of the boat , threw in a few iron bars as ballast , told Anton where to sit , and , seizing the two oars , struck out from shore . 
The pumpkin danced gayly on the water , to the great delight of the builder and his friends , who stood watching it . 
`` I wanted to show these lazy fellows that it is possible to row a boat like this against the stream , '' said Fink , replacing the mast , setting the sail , and giving the proper directions to his pupil . 
The wind came in puffs , sometimes filling the little sail , and bending the boat to the water 's edge , sometimes lulling altogether . 
`` It is a wretched affair , '' cried Fink , impatiently ; `` we are merely drifting now , and we shall capsize next . '' 
`` If that 's the case , '' said Anton , with feigned cheerfulness , `` I propose that we turn back . '' 
`` It does n't matter , '' replied Fink , coolly ; `` one way or other , we 'll get to land . 
You can swim ? '' 
`` Like lead . 
If we do capsize I shall sink at once , and you will have some trouble to get me up again . '' 
`` If we find ourselves in the water , mind you do not catch hold of me , which would be the surest way of drowning both . 
Wait quietly till I draw you out ; and , by the way , you may as well be pulling off your coat and boots ; one is more comfortable in the water en négligé . '' 
Anton did so at once . 
`` That 's right , '' said Fink . 
`` To say the truth , this is wretched sport . 
No waves , no wind , and now no water . 
Here we are , aground again ! 
Push off , will you ? 
Hey , shipmate ! 
what would you say if this dirty shore were suddenly to sink , and we found ourselves out on a respectable sea -- water as far as the horizon , waves as high as that tree yonder , and a good hearty wind , that blew your ears off , and flattened your nose on your face ? '' 
`` I ca n't say that I should like it at all , '' replied Anton , nervously . 
`` And yet , '' said Fink , `` there are few plights so bad but they might be still worse . 
Just think ; in that case it would be some comfort to have even these good-for-nothing planks between us and the water ; but what if we ourselves lay on the stream -- no boat , no shore -- mountain waves all round ? '' 
`` I at least should be lost ! '' 
cried Anton , with genuine horror . 
`` I have a friend , a good friend , to whom I trust implicitly in any crisis , to whom this once happened . 
He sauntered down to the shore on a glorious evening , had a fancy to bathe , stripped , plunged , and struck out gayly . 
The waves lifted him up and drew him down ; the water was warm , the sunset dyed the sea with ten thousand exquisite hues , and the golden sky glowed above him . 
The man shouted with ecstasy . '' 
`` You were that man ? '' 
inquired Anton . 
`` True . 
I went on swimming for about an hour , when the dull look of the sky reminded me that it was time to return ; so I made for land ; and what think you , Master Wohlfart , that I saw ? '' 
`` A ship ? '' 
said Anton ; `` a fish ? '' 
`` No . 
I saw nothing -- the land had vanished . 
I looked on all sides -- I rose as high as I could out of the water -- there was nothing to be seen but sea and sky . 
The current that set out from the land had treacherously carried me out . 
I was in mid ocean , somewhere between England and America , that I knew ; but this geographical fact was by no means soothing to one in my circumstances . 
The sky grew dark , the hollows filled with black uncanny shadows , the waves got higher , and a cold wind blew round my head ; nothing was to be seen but the dusky red of the sky and the rolling waters . '' 
`` Horrible ! '' 
cried Anton . 
`` It was a moment when no priest in the world could have prevented a poor human being from wishing himself a pike , or some such creature . 
I knew by the sky where the land lay . 
Now came the question , which was stronger -- the current or my arm ? 
I began a deadly struggle with the treacherous ocean deities . 
I should not have done much by such swimming as they teach in schools . 
I rolled like a porpoise , and struck out desperately for about two hours ; then the labor got hard indeed . 
It was the fiercest battle I ever fought . 
The sky grew dark , the emerald waves pitchy black , only they were crested with foam that blew in my face . 
At times a single star peeped from the clouds -- that was my only comfort . 
So I swam on and on , and still there was no land to be seen . 
I was tired out , and the hideous darkness sometimes made me think of giving up the struggle . 
The clouds gathered darker , the stars disappeared ; I began to doubt whether I was taking the right direction , and I was making very little way . 
I knew the game was nearly up -- my chest heaved -- countless sparks rose before my eyes . 
Just then , my boy , when I had glided half unconsciously down the slope of a wave , I felt something under my feet that was no longer water . '' 
`` It was land ! '' 
