Then every thing conspired to make it peculiarly difficult to each to play his part . 
Schmeie Tinkeles , the unfortunate little Jew who spoke such execrable German , and whom Fink always found especial pleasure in badgering and beating down , made his appearance in the office , and , as usual , a laughable scene ensued . 
All the clerks watched Fink , and chimed in with him , but Anton had to behave as though Tinkeles were a hundred miles away . 
Then Mr. Schröter gave him a commission , which obliged him to ask Fink a question , and he had to cough hard to get out the words at all . 
He received a very short answer , which increased his anger . 
Finally , when the dinner hour struck , Fink , who used regularly to wait till Anton came for him , walked off with Jordan , who wondered what could keep Wohlfart , to which Fink could only reply that he neither knew nor cared . 
During the afternoon Anton could not avoid a few furtive glances at the haughty face opposite him . 
He thought how dreadful it would be to become estranged from one he so dearly loved ; but his resolve was firm as ever . 
And so it happened that Fink , chancing to look up , met his friend 's eyes mournfully fixed upon his face , and this touched him more than the anger of the previous night . 
He saw that Anton 's mind was made up , and the side of the scale in which sat the fair Rosalie kicked the beam . 
After all , if Anton did , in his virtuous simplicity , tell her mother , the adventure was spoiled , and , still worse , their friendship forever at an end . 
These reflections furrowed his fine brow . 
A little before seven o'clock a shadow fell on Anton 's paper , and , looking up , he saw Fink silently holding out a small note to him , directed to Rosalie . 
He sprang up at once . 
`` I have written to tell her , '' said Fink , with icy coldness , `` that your friendship left me no other choice than that of compromising her or giving her up , and that , therefore , I chose the latter . 
Here is the letter ; I have no objection to your reading it ; it is her dismissal . '' 
Anton took the letter out of the culprit 's hand , sealed it in all haste with a little office seal , and gave it to one of the porters to post at once . 
And so this danger was averted , but from that day there was an estrangement between the friends . 
Fink grumbled , and Anton could not forget what he called treachery to Bernhard ; and so it was , that for some weeks they no longer spent their evenings together . 
The firm of T. O. Schröter had one day in the year invariably dedicated to enjoyment . 
It was the anniversary of their principal 's first entrance into partnership with his father . 
Upon this festive occasion there was a dinner given to the whole counting-house assembled , after which they all drove to a neighboring village , where the merchant had a country house , and whither a number of public gardens and summer concerts always attracted the inhabitants of the town . 
There they drank coffee , enjoyed nature , and returned home before dark . 
This year was the five-and-twentieth of these jubilees . 
Early in the morning came deputations of servants and porters to congratulate , and all the clerks appeared at the early dinner in full state ; M. Liebold in a new coat , which , for many years past , he had been in the habit of first wearing upon this auspicious day . 
After dinner , the carriages drove up and took them to the great `` Restauration '' of the village . 
There they got out , the gentlemen all surrounding their young lady , and loud music sounding a welcome as they entered the beechen avenues of the garden , which was bright to-day with gay toilettes from the town . 
Sabine floated on with a perfect nebula of gentlemen around her . 
Possibly this court would have given more pleasure to most other women , but , at all events , the effect was very striking . 
The gentle Liebold 's face wore a continual smile of delight , which he was obliged to suppress , as well as he could , from the fear of being supposed to laugh at the passers-by : Sabine 's shawl hung on his arm . 
Specht had , by a bold coup de main , possessed himself of her parasol , and walked on , hoping that some falling blossom , some passing butterfly , might afford him a pretext for beginning a conversation with her . 
But this was no easy matter , for Fink was on the other side . 
He was in one of his most malevolent moods , and Sabine could not help laughing against her will at his unmerciful comments upon many of the company . 
And so they walked on among the tripping , rustling crowd of pleasure-seekers . 
There was a constant bowing , smiling , and greeting ; the merchant had each moment to take off his hat , and , whenever he did so , the fourteen clerks took off theirs too , and created quite a draught ; and very imposing it was . 
After having swum thus with the stream for some time , Sabine expressed a wish to rest . 
Instantly benches were set , the table got ready , and an ubiquitous waiter brought a giant coffee-pot and the number of cups required . 
Sabine 's office was no sinecure . 
She chose Anton for her adjutant , and it was a pretty sight to see how kindly she gave each one his cup , how watchful she was lest the sugar-bowl and the cream-jug should be interrupted in their rounds , and at the same time how she contrived to bow to her passing acquaintance , and to carry on a conversation with any friends of her brother 's who came up to her . 
She was very lovely thus . 
Anton and Fink both felt how well her serene activity became her ; and Fink said , `` If this be for you a day of recreation , I do not envy your other days . 
No princess has such a reception -- so many to bow , smile , and speak to as you ; but you get on capitally , and have no doubt studied it . 
Now comes the mayor himself to pay his compliments . 
I am really sorry for you ; you have to lend me your ear ; Liebold 's cup is in your hand , and your eyes must be reverentially fixed upon the great civic official . 
I am curious to know whether you understand my words . '' 
`` Take your spoon out of your cup , and I will fill it immediately , '' said Sabine , laughing , as she rose to greet her old acquaintance . 
Meanwhile , Anton amused himself by listening to the remarks made on his party by the passers-by . 
`` That is Herr von Fink , '' whispered a young lady to her companion . 
`` A pretty face ; a capital figure , '' drawled a lieutenant . 
`` What is one among so many ? '' 
muttered another idler . 
`` Hush ! 
those are the Schröters , '' said a clerk to his brother . 
Then two tall handsome forms came slowly by -- Dame Ehrenthal and Rosalie . 
Rosalie passed next to the table : a deep flush suffused her face . 
She threw a troubled glance at Fink , who , in spite of the lively conversation he was carrying on with Sabine , had eyes for every thing that was going on . 
Anton rose to bow ; and the imperturbable Fink coolly took off his hat , and looked at the two ladies with as much unconcern as though he had never admired the bracelets on Rosalie 's white arm . 
Anton 's bow , Rosalie 's striking beauty , and , perhaps , some peculiarity in their dress , had attracted Sabine 's attention . 
Ehrenthal 's daughter did not heed the bow , but fixed her dark eyes on Sabine , whom she took for her fortunate rival , with such a flashing glance of anger and hatred that Sabine shrank as though to avoid the spring of a beast of prey . 
Fink 's lip curled , and he slightly shrugged his shoulders . 
When the ladies had passed by , Sabine asked who they were . 
`` Some acquaintances of Anton 's , '' said he , satirically . 
Anton named them as the mother and sister of the young student of whom he had lately told her . 
Sabine was silent , and leaned back on the bench ; her gay spirits were over . 
The conversation flagged ; and when her brother returned from a visit to the next table , she rose and invited the party to come and see her garden . 
Again the nebula followed her , but Fink was no longer at her side . 
That burning glance had withered the green tendrils that had been drawing them together . 
Sabine turned to Anton , and tried to be cheerful , but he saw the effort it cost her . 
This large garden , with its hot-houses and conservatories , was one of Sabine 's favorite resorts , both in summer and winter . 
While the merchant carried off Fink to look at a plot of neighboring ground which he thought of buying , the clerks besieged Sabine with questions as to the names and peculiarities of the different plants . 
She showed them a great palm-tree that her brother had given her , tropical ferns , gorgeous cactuses , and told them that she often drank coffee under these large leaves on sunny winter days . 
Just then the gardener came up to her with crumbs of bread and bird-seed on a plate . 
`` Even when I have not so large a party with me as to-day , I am not quite alone , '' said she . 
`` Pray let us see your birds , '' cried Anton . 
`` You must go out of sight , then , and keep quite still . 
The little creatures know me , but so many gentlemen would terrify them . '' 
Sabine then went out a few steps , scattered the crumbs on the gravel , and clapped her hands . 
A loud chirping instantly succeeded , and numbers of birds shot down , hopping boldly about , and picking up the crumbs close to her feet . 
They were not a very distinguished company -- finches , linnets , and a whole nation of sparrows . 
Sabine gently stepped back to the door , and said , `` Can you see any difference among these sparrows ? 
They have , I assure you , individualities of dress and character . 
Several of them are personal acquaintances of mine . '' 
She pointed to a large sparrow with a black head and a bright brown back . 
`` Do you see that stout gentleman ? '' 
`` He is the largest of them all , '' said Anton , with delight . 
`` He is my oldest acquaintance , and it is my dinners that have made him so fat . 
He moves about among the others like a rich banker . 
Only hear him ! 
His very chirp has in it something aristocratic and supercilious . 
He looks upon this crumb-scattering as a duty society owes him , and determines generously to leave for the others all he can not eat up himself . 
But I think I see a tuft on his little breast . '' 
`` A loose feather ? '' 
whispered Specht . 
`` Yes , '' continued Sabine ; `` I much fear his wife has pulled it out ; for , important as he seems , he is under petticoat government . 
That gray little lady yonder , the lightest of them all , is his wife . 
Now look , they are going to quarrel . '' 
And a great contest began for an especially large crumb , in which all the birds manifested a strong dislike to the banker , and the wife came off victorious . 
`` And now , do look ! '' 
cried Sabine , joyfully ; `` here comes my little one -- my pet ; '' and down plumped a young sparrow , with helpless outspread wings , and fluttered up to the maternal bird , who hacked the large crumb into little bits , and put them into its wide-opened beak , while the father hopped up and down , at a little distance , looking with a certain misgiving at his energetic better half . 
`` What a pretty sight ! '' 
cried Anton . 
`` Is it not ? '' 
said Sabine . 
`` Even these little creatures have characters and a family life . '' 
But the scene was suddenly changed ; a quick step came round the hot-house ; the birds flew away , and the mother called piteously to her child to follow . 
But the little thing , heavy and stupefied with all it had eaten , could not so quickly lift its weak wings . 
A cut from Fink 's riding-whip caught him , and sent its little body dead among the flowers . 
An angry exclamation arose , and all faces looked darkly on the murderer . 
As for Sabine , she went to the bed , picked up the bird , kissed its little head , and said , in a broken voice , `` It is dead . '' 
Then she put it down on the bench near the door , and covered it with her handkerchief . 
An awkward silence ensued . 
At length Jordan said reproachfully , `` You have killed Miss Sabine 's favorite bird . '' 
`` I am sorry for it , '' replied Fink , drawing a chair to the table . 
Then turning to Sabine , `` I did not know that you extended your sympathy to this class of rogues . 
I really believed that I deserved the thanks of the house for disposing of the young thief . '' 
`` The poor little fellow ! '' 
said Sabine , mournfully ; `` his mother is calling for him ; do you hear her ? '' 
`` She will get over it , '' rejoined Fink ; `` I consider it overdone to expend more feeling upon a sparrow than his own relatives do . 
But I know you like to consider all around you in a tender and pathetic light . '' 
`` If you have not this peculiarity yourself , why ridicule it in others ? '' 
asked Sabine , with a quivering lip . 
`` Why , '' cried Fink , `` because this eternal feeling , which here I meet with every where , expended on what does not deserve it , makes people at length weak and trivial . 
He who is always getting up emotions about trifles will have none to give when a strong attachment demands them . '' 
`` And he who ever looks on all around him with cold unconcern , will not he too be wanting in emotion when a strong attachment becomes a duty ? '' 
returned Sabine , with a mournful glance . 
`` It would be impolite to contradict you , '' said Fink , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` At all events , it is better that a man should be too hard than too effeminate . '' 
`` But just look at the people of this country , '' said he , after another uncomfortable pause . 
`` One loves the copper kettle in which his mother has boiled sausages ; another loves his broken pipe , his faded coat , and with these a thousand obsolete customs . 
Just look at the German emigrants ! 
What a heap of rubbish they take away with them -- old birdcages , worm-eaten furniture , and every kind of lumber ! 
I once knew a fellow who took a journey of eight days merely to eat sauer-kraut . 
And when once a poor devil has squatted in an unhealthy district , and lived there a few years , he has spun such a web of sentimentalism about it that you can not stir him , even though he , his wife and children , should die there of fever . 
Commend me to what you call the insensibility of the Yankee . 
He works like two Germans , but he is not in love with his cottage or his gear . 
What he has is worth its equivalent in dollars , and no more . 
` How low ! 
how material ! ' 
you will say . 
Now , I like this . 
It has created a free and powerful state . 
If America had been peopled by Germans , they would be still drinking chicory instead of coffee , at whatever rate of duty the paternal governments of Europe liked to impose . '' 
`` And you would require a woman to be thus minded ? '' 
asked Sabine . 
`` In the main , yes , '' rejoined Fink . 
`` Not a German housewife , wrapped up in her table-linen . 
The larger her stock , the happier she . 
I believe that they silently rate each other as we do men on ` Change -- worth five hundred , worth eight hundred napkins . 
The American makes as good a wife as the German , but she would laugh at such notions . 
She has what she wants for present use , and buys more when the old set is worn out . 
Why should she fix her heart on what is so easily replaced ? '' 
`` Oh , how dreary you make life ! '' 
rejoined Sabine . 
`` Our possessions lose thus their dearest value . 
If you kill the imagination which lends its varied hues to lifeless things , what remains ? 
Nothing but an egotism to which every thing is sacrificed ! 
He who can thus coldly think may do great deeds perhaps , but his life will never be beautiful nor happy , nor a blessing to others ; '' and unconsciously she folded her hands and looked sadly at Fink , whose face wore a hard and disdainful expression . 
The silence was broken by Anton 's cheerfully observing , `` At all events , Fink 's own practice is a striking refutation of his theory . '' 
`` How so , sir ? '' 
asked Fink , looking round . 
`` I shall soon prove my case ; but first a few words in our own praise . 
We who are sitting and standing around are working members of a business that does not belong to us , and each of us looks upon his occupation from the German point of view which Fink has been denouncing . 
None of us reasons , ` The firm pays me so many dollars , consequently the firm is worth so many dollars to me . ' 
No ; when the house prospers we are all pleased and proud ; if it loses , we regret it perhaps more than the principal does . 
When Liebold enters his figures in the great book , and admires their fair caligraphical procession , he silently smiles with delight . 
Look at him ; he is doing so now . '' 
Liebold , much embarrassed , pulled up his shirt collar . 
`` Then there is our friend Baumann , who secretly longs for another calling . 
A short time ago he brought me a report of the horrors of heathenism on the African coast , and said , ' I must go , Wohlfart ; the time is come . ' 
` Who will attend to the calculations ? ' 
asked I ; ` and what will become of the department which you and Balbus keep so entirely in your own hands ? ' 
` Ay , indeed , ' cried Baumann , ' I had not thought of that ; I must put it off a little longer . ' '' 
The whole party looked smilingly at Baumann , who said , as if to himself , `` It was not right of me . '' 
`` As for the tyrant Pix , I will only say that there are many hours in which he is not quite clear as to whether the concern is his or Mr. Schröter 's . '' 
All laughed . 
Mr. Pix thrust his hand into his breast , like Napoleon . 
`` You are an unfair advocate , '' said Fink ; `` you enlist private feelings . '' 
`` You did the same , '' replied Anton . 
`` And now I will soon dispose of you . 
About half a year ago , this Yankee went to our principal and said , ' I wish no longer to be a volunteer , but a regular member of your house . ' 
Why was this ? 
Of course , only for the sake of a certain number of dollars . '' 
Again all smiled and looked kindly at Fink , for it was well known that he had said on that occasion , `` I wish for a regular share of employment , I wish for the responsibility attached to it , and I thoroughly like my work . '' 
`` And then , '' continued Anton , triumphantly , `` he shares all the weak sentimentalities he so condemns . 
He loves his horse , as you all know , not as the sum of five hundred dollars represented by so many hundred weight of flesh , and covered by a glossy skin -- he loves it as a friend . '' 
`` Because he amuses me , '' said Fink . 
`` Of course , '' said Anton ; `` and thus table-linen amuses our housewives , so that is even . 
And then his pair of condor wings , his pistols , riding-whips , red drinking-glasses , are all trifles that he values , just as a German emigrant does his birdcages ; and , in short , he is , in point of fact , nothing more than a poor-spirited German , like the rest of us . '' 
Sabine shook her head , but she looked more kindly at the American , and his face too had changed . 
He looked straight before him , and there was a something playing over his haughty features that , in any one else , would have been called emotion . 
`` Well , '' said he , at length , `` both the lady and I were perhaps too positive . '' 
Then pointing to the dead sparrow , `` Before this serious fact I lay down my arms , and confess that I wish the little gentleman were still alive , and likely to reach a good old age among the cherries and other delicacies of the firm . 
And so , '' turning to Sabine , `` you will not be angry with me any more , will you ? '' 
Sabine smiled , and cordially answered `` No . '' 
`` As for you , Anton , give me your hand . 
You have made a brilliant defense , and gained me a verdict of ` Not guilty ' from a German jury . 
Take your pen and scratch out a few weeks from our calendar ; you understand ? '' 
Anton pressed his hand , and threw his arm around his shoulder . 
Once more the party was in a thoroughly genial mood . 
Mr. Schröter joined them , cigars were lit , and all tried to be as pleasant as possible . 
Mr. Liebold rose to ask permission from the principal and his sister -- that is , if it would not be considered an interruption -- to sing a few concerted pieces with some of his colleagues . 
As he had for several years regularly made the same proposition in the same words , all were prepared for it , and Sabine good-naturedly cried , `` Of course , Mr. Liebold ; half the pleasure would be gone if we had not our quartette . '' 
Accordingly , the four singers began . 
Mr. Specht was the first tenor , Liebold the second , Birnbaum and Balbus took the base . 
These formed the musical section of the counting-house , and their voices went really very well together , with the exception of Specht 's being rather too loud , and Liebold 's rather too low ; but their audience was well-disposed , the evening exquisite , and all listened with pleasure . 
`` It 's an absurd thing , '' began Fink , when the applause was over , `` that a certain sequence of tones should touch the heart , and call forth tears from men in whom all other gentle emotions are dead and gone . 
Every nation has its own simple airs , and fellow-countrymen recognize each other by the impression these make . 
When those emigrants of whom we spoke just now have lost all love for their fatherland -- nay , have forgotten their mother tongue , their home melodies still survive , and many a foolish fellow , who piques himself on being a naturalized Yankee , suddenly feels himself German at heart on chancing to hear a couple of bars familiar to him in youth . '' 
`` You are right , '' said the merchant . 
`` He who leaves his home is seldom aware of all that he relinquishes , and only finds it out when home recollections become the charm of his later years . 
Such recollections often form a sanctuary , mocked and dishonored indeed , but always revisited in his best hours . '' 
`` I confess , with a certain degree of shame , '' said Fink , `` that I am little conscious of this charm . 
The fact is , I do not exactly know where my home is . 
Looking back , I find that I have lived most of my years in Germany , but foreign countries have left a livelier impression on my mind . 
Destiny has always torn me away before I could take deep root any where . 
And now , at times , I find myself a stranger here . 
For example , the dialects of the provinces are unintelligible to me . 
I get more presents than I deserve on Christmas-day , but am not touched by the magic of the Christmas-tree ; and few of the popular melodies you are all so proud of , haunt my ear . 
And , besides these smaller matters , there are other things in which I feel deficient , '' continued he , more earnestly ; `` I know that at times I make too heavy demands upon the indulgence of my friends . 
I shall have to thank your house , '' said he , in conclusion , turning to the merchant , `` if I ever acquire a knowledge of the best side of the German character . '' 
Fink spoke with a degree of feeling he rarely showed . 
Sabine was happy ; the sparrow was forgotten ; and she cried , with irrepressible emotion , `` That was nobly said , Herr von Fink . '' 
The servants then announced that supper was ready . 
The merchant took his place in the middle , and Sabine smiled brightly when Fink sat down , at her side . 
`` I must have you opposite me , Liebold , '' cried the principal ; `` I must see your honest face before me to-day . 
We have now been connected for five-and-twenty years . 
Mr. Liebold joined us a few weeks after my father took me into partnership , '' said he , by way of explanation to the younger clerks ; `` and while I am indebted to you all , I am most indebted to him . '' 
He held up his glass : `` I drink your good health , my old friend ; and so long as our desks stand side by side , separated only by a thin partition , so long shall there exist between us , as heretofore , a full and firm confidence , without many spoken words . '' 
Liebold had stood at the beginning of this speech , and he remained standing . 
He wished to propose a health , it was evident , for he looked at the principal , held up his glass , and his lips moved . 
At last he sat down again , speechless . 
Straightway , to the amazement of all , Fink rose , and said , with deep earnestness , `` Join me in drinking to the prosperity of a German house where work is a pleasure , and honor has its home . 
Hurrah for our counting-house and our principal ! '' 
Thundering hurrahs followed , in which Sabine could not help joining . 
The rest of the evening was unbroken hilarity , and it was long past ten when they reached the town . 
As they went up stairs , Fink said to Anton , `` To-day , my boy , you are not to pass me by . 
I have found it a great bore to be so long without you ; '' and the reconciled friends sat together far into the night . 
Sabine went to her own room , where her maid gave her a note in an unknown handwriting . 
The smell of musk and the delicate characters showed that it came from a lady . 
`` Who brought it ? '' 
inquired she . 
`` A stranger , '' replied the maid ; `` he said that there was no answer , and would not give his name . '' 
Sabine read , `` Do not triumph too soon , fair lady . 
You have by your coquetry allured a gentleman who is accustomed to mislead , to forget , and shamefully to use those who trust him . 
A short time ago he said to another all he now says to you . 
He will but betray and forsake you also . '' 
The note was not signed : it came from Rosalie . 
Sabine knew well who had written it . 
She held it to the taper , and then flinging it on the hearth , silently watched spark by spark die out . 
Long did she stand there , her head against the mantel-piece , her eyes fixed upon the little heap of ashes . 
Tearless , voiceless , she held her hand pressed firmly on her heart . 
Veitel Itzig was in the highest excitement . 
After many consultations with his adviser Hippus , many nightly calculations as to the state of his purse , he had ventured upon a bold stroke of business , and had succeeded in it . 
He had wormed himself into a not very creditable secret , and had sold it for eight thousand dollars . 
The happy day had at length arrived when he was to carry home this large capital . 
After his long endeavor to appear calm , while his heart was beating with anxious suspense like a smith 's hammer , he was now happy as a child ; he jumped round the room , laughed with pleasure , and asked Hippus what sort of wine he would like to drink to-day . 
`` Wine alone will not do , '' replied Hippus , ominously . 
`` However , it is long since I have tasted any Hungarian . 
Get a bottle of old Upper Hungarian ; or , stay , it is dark enough , I will go for it myself . '' 
`` How much does it cost ? '' 
`` Two dollars . '' 
`` That is a good deal , but 't is all one ; here they are ; '' and he threw them on the table . 
`` All right , '' said Hippus , snatching at them . 
`` But this alone will not do , I must have my percentage . 
However , as we are old acquaintances , I will be satisfied with only five per cent . 
of what you have made to-day . '' 
Veitel stood petrified . 
`` Not a word against it , '' continued Hippus , with a wicked glance at him over his spectacles ; `` we know each other . 
I was the means of your getting the money , and I alone . 
You make use of me , and you see that I can make use of you . 
Give me four hundred of your eight thousand at once . '' 
Veitel tried to speak . 
`` Not a word , '' repeated Hippus , rapping the table with the dollars in his hand ; `` give me the money . '' 
Veitel looked at him , felt in the pocket of his coat , and laid down two notes . 
`` Now two more , '' said Hippus , in the same tone . 
Veitel added another . 
`` And now for the last , my son , '' nodded he , encouragingly . 
Veitel delayed a moment and looked hard at the old man 's face , on which a malevolent pleasure was visible . 
There was no comfort there , however ; so he laid down the fourth note , saying , in a stifled voice , `` I have been mistaken in you , Hippus ; '' and , turning away , he wiped his eyes . 
`` Do not take it to heart , you booby , '' said his instructor ; `` if I die before you , you shall be my heir . 
And now I am off to taste the wine , and I will make a point of drinking your health , you sensitive Itzig ; '' and , so saying , he crept out of the door . 
Veitel once more wiped away a bitter tear that rolled down his cheeks . 
His pleasure in his winnings was gone . 
It was a complex sort of feeling , this grief of his . 
True , he mourned the lost notes , but he had lost something more . 
The only man in the world for whom he felt any degree of attachment had behaved unkindly and selfishly toward him . 
It was all over henceforth between him and Hippus . 
He could not , indeed , do without him , but he hated him from this hour . 
The old man had made him more solitary and unscrupulous than before . 
Such is the curse of bad men ; they are rendered wretched not only by their crimes , but even their best feelings turn to gall . 
However , this melancholy mood did not long continue . 
He took out his remaining treasure , counted it over , felt cheered thereby , and turned his thoughts to the future . 
His social position had been changed at a stroke . 
As the possessor of eight thousand dollars -- alas ! 
there were but seven thousand six hundred -- he was a small Croesus among men of his class : many carried on transactions involving hundreds of thousands without as much capital as he had ; in short , the world was his oyster , and he had but to bethink himself with what lever he should open it -- how invest his capital -- how double it -- how increase it tenfold . 
There were many ways before him : he might continue to lend money on high interest , he might speculate , or carry on some regular business ; but each of these involved his beloved capital in some degree of risk ; he might win , indeed , but then he might lose all , and the very thought so terrified him that he relinquished one scheme after another . 
There was , indeed , one way in which a keen-witted man might possibly make much without great danger of loss . 
Veitel had been accustomed , as a dealer in old clothes , to visit the different seats of landed proprietors ; at the wool market he was in the habit of offering his services to gentlemen with mustaches and orders of merit ; in his master 's office he was constantly occupied with the means and affairs of the nobility . 
How intimately he knew old Ehrenthal 's secret desire to become the possessor of a certain estate ! 
And how came it that in the midst of his annoyance with Hippus , the thought of his schoolfellow Anton suddenly flashed across him , and of the day when he had walked with him last ? 
That very morning he had walked about the baron 's estate , and lounged by the cow-house , counting the double row of horns within , till the dairy-maid ordered him away . 
Now the thought passed like lightning through his brain that he might as well become the owner of that estate as Ehrenthal , and drive with a pair of horses into the town . 
From that moment he had a fixed plan , and began to carry it out . 
And he speculated cunningly too . 
He determined to acquire a claim upon the baron 's property by a mortgage ; thus he would safely invest his capital , and work on quietly till the day came when he could get hold of the property itself . 
At all events , if he did not succeed in that , his money would be safe . 
Meanwhile , he would become an agent and commissioner , buy and sell , and do many clever things besides . 
Also , he must remain Ehrenthal 's factotum as long as it suited him . 
Rosalie was handsome and rich , for Bernhard would not live to inherit his father 's wealth . 
Perhaps he might desire to become Ehrenthal 's son-in-law , perhaps not ; at all events , there was no hurry about that . 
There was one other whom he must get on a secure footing -- the little black man now drinking that expensive wine down stairs . 
Henceforth he would pay him for whatever he did for him , but he would not confide in him . 
These were the resolves of Veitel Itzig ; and , having concocted his plans , he locked his door , threw himself down exhausted on his hard bed , the imaginary possessor of Baron Rothsattel 's fair property . 
That evening the baroness and her daughter sat together in the conservatory , and both were silent ; the baroness intently watching a bright moth , which was bent upon flying into the lamp , and came knocking its thick little body over and over against the glass which saved its life . 
Lenore bent over her book , but often cast an inquiring glance at her mother 's thoughtful face . 
There came a quick step along the gravel , and the old bailiff , cap in hand , asked for the master . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
said Lenore ; `` has any thing happened ? '' 
`` It 's all over with the old black horse , '' said the bailiff , in great concern ; `` he has been biting and kicking like mad , and now he is gasping his last . '' 
Lenore sprang up with an exclamation for which her mother chid her . 
`` I will come and see to him myself , '' said she , and hurried off with the old man . 
The sick horse lay on his straw , with the sweat running down , and his sides heaving violently . 
The stable-boys stood around , looking at him phlegmatically . 
When Lenore entered , the horse turned his head toward her as if asking help . 
`` He knows me yet , '' cried she . 
Then turning to the head groom , `` Ride off instantly for a veterinary surgeon . '' 
The man did not like the thought of a long ride at night , and replied , `` The doctor is never at home , and the horse will be dead before he can come . '' 
`` Go at once ! '' 
commanded Lenore , pointing to the door . 
`` What is the matter with the groom ? '' 
asked Lenore , as they left the stable . 
`` He is grown good for nothing , and ought to be sent off , as I have often told my master ; but the lout is as obedient to him as possible -- he knows the length of his foot -- while to every one else he is cross-grained , and gives me daily trouble . '' 
`` I will speak to my father , '' replied Lenore , with a slight frown . 
The old servant continued : `` Ah ! 
dear young lady , if you would but look after things a little , it would be a good thing for the property . 
I am not satisfied with the dairy either : the new housekeeper does not know how to manage the maids ; she is too smart by half -- ribbons before and behind . 
Things used to go on better ; the baron used to come and look at the butter-casks , now he is busy with other things ; and when the master grows careless , servants soon snap their fingers at the bailiff . 
You can be sharp enough with people ; it 's a thousand pities you are not a gentleman . '' 
`` You are right ; it is a thousand pities , '' said Lenore , approvingly ; `` but there 's no help for it . 
However , I will see to the butter from this very day . 
How is corn now ? 
You have been buying some lately ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said the old man , dejectedly , `` my master would have it so . 
I do n't know what 's come to him : he sold the whole granary full to that Ehrenthal in winter . '' 
Lenore listened sympathizingly , with her hands behind her . 
`` Do not fret about it , my old friend , '' said she ; `` whenever papa is not at home , I will go about the fields with you , and you shall smoke your pipe all the same . 
How do you like the new one I brought you ? '' 
`` It has a beautiful color already , '' said the bailiff , chuckling , and drawing it out of his pocket . 
`` But to return to the black horse ; the baron will be very angry when he hears of it , and we could not help it either . '' 
`` Well , then , '' said Lenore , `` if it could not be helped , it must be endured . 
Good-night . 
Go back now to the horse . '' 
`` I will , dear young lady ; and good-night to you too , '' said the bailiff . 
The baroness had remained in the conservatory , thinking of her husband , who formerly would have been by her side on an evening like this . 
Yes , there was a change in him : kind and affectionate toward her as ever , he was often absent and preoccupied , and more easily irritated by trifles ; his cheerfulness was of a more boisterous character , and his love for men 's society increasing ; and she mournfully asked herself whether it were the fading of her youth that accounted for this . 
`` Is not my father yet returned ? '' 
asked Lenore , as she entered . 
`` No , my child , he has much to do in town ; perhaps he will not be back till to-morrow morning . '' 
`` I do not like papa being so much away , '' said Lenore ; `` it is long since he has read aloud to us in the evening , as he used to do . '' 
`` He means you to be my reader , '' said her mother , with a smile ; `` so take your book , and sit down quietly by me , you impetuous child . '' 
Lenore pouted , and instead of taking up the book , threw her arms round her mother , and said , `` Darling , you too are sad and anxious about my father . 
Things are no longer as they used to be . 
I am no child now ; tell me what he is doing . '' 
`` Nonsense , '' calmly replied the baroness . 
`` I am keeping nothing back from you . 
If there really be any reason for your father 's frequent absence , it is our duty to wait till he chooses to communicate it ; and this is not difficult to those who love and trust him as we do . '' 
`` And yet your eyes are tearful , and you do seek to hide your anxiety from me . 
If you will not , I will ask my father myself . '' 
`` No , you shall not , '' said the baroness , in a tone of decision . 
`` My father ! '' 
cried Lenore ; `` I hear his step . '' 
The stately form came rapidly toward them . 
`` Good-evening , my home treasures ! '' 
he called out . 
Then clasping wife and daughter at once in his arms , he looked so cheerfully at them that the baroness forgot her anxiety and Lenore her question . 
The baron sat down between them , and asked whether they saw any thing unusual about him . 
`` You are cheerful , '' said his wife , fondly , `` as you always are . '' 
`` You have been paying visits , '' said Lenore ; `` I know that by your white cravat . '' 
`` Right , '' replied the baron ; `` but there 's something more : the king has been graciously pleased to give me the Order my father and grandfather have both worn , and I am much pleased that the cross should thus become , as it were , hereditary in our family . 
And with the Order came a most gracious letter from the prince . '' 
`` How charming ! '' 
cried his wife , throwing her arms around him ; `` I have longed for this star for some years past . 
We will put on the decoration ; '' and , having done so , she loyally kissed , first her husband , and then the cross . 
`` We know indeed , '' said the baron , `` how such things are rated in our days , and yet I confess that the rank implied by such a decoration is intensely precious to me . 
Our family is one of the oldest in the kingdom , and there has never been a mésalliance among us . 
However , at the present time , money is beginning to replace our former privileges , and even we nobles must take thought for it if we wish to preserve our families in the same position as ourselves . 
I must provide for you , Lenore , and your brother . '' 
`` As for me , '' said Lenore , crossing her arms , `` I can do nothing for the honor of the family . 
If I marry , which I have , however , no inclination to do , I must take some other name ; and little will my old ancestors , in armor yonder in the hall , care whom I choose for master . 
I can not remain a Rothsattel . '' 
The father drew her toward him laughingly . 
`` If I could only find out how my child has got these heretical notions ! '' 
said he . 
`` She has always had them , '' said her mother . 
`` They will pass , '' answered the baron , kissing his daughter 's brow . 
`` And now read the prince 's letter , while I go and look after the black horse . '' 
`` I will go with you , '' said Lenore . 
The order , a memorial of the chivalrous past , was a source of still more satisfaction to the baron than he cared to avow . 
The congratulations of his numerous acquaintance pleased him , and he felt it a prop to his self-respect , which it often needed . 
A week later , Ehrenthal came on his way to the neighboring village to offer his congratulations too , and just as he was making his final bow he said , `` You had once a notion , baron , of setting up a beet-root-sugar factory . 
