`` I thank you for this bliss ! '' 
said Anton , leading her back to her place . 
As he moved to and fro in the crowd like a rudderless ship amid the waves , Fink took him in tow , and said , `` I say , you hypocrite , you have either drunk sweet wine , or you are a quiet sort of Don Juan . 
How long have you known the Rothsattel ? 
You have never spoken of her to me . 
She has a lovely figure and a classical face . 
Has she any sense ? '' 
At that moment how unspeakably Anton despised his friend ! 
Such an expression as that could only proceed from the most degraded of human beings . 
`` Sense ! '' 
exclaimed he , casting on Fink a look of deadly enmity ; `` he who doubts it must be utterly devoid of sense himself . '' 
`` Well , well ! '' 
exclaimed Fink , in amazement ; `` I am not in that melancholy plight , for I think the girl , or rather the young lady , uncommonly lovely ; and , had I not some small engagements elsewhere , I might feel constrained to choose her for the mistress of my affections . 
As it is , I can only admire her afar off . '' 
`` You are right , '' said Anton , squeezing his arm . 
`` Really , '' returned Fink , in his usual careless tone , `` you begin well , it must be allowed ; go on , my son , and prosper . '' 
And Anton did go on , and did his Mentor honor . 
He was indeed intoxicated , but not with wine . 
The music , the excitement of the dance , the gay scene around , inspired him ; he felt self-confident , nay , daring ; and , one or two trifling solecisms excepted , behaved as if he had been surrounded by waxlights and obsequious domestics all the days of his life . 
He was a good deal remarked -- made , indeed , quite a sensation ; while dark hints of a mystery attached to him spread from corner to corner of the spacious rooms . 
At length came the cotillon . 
Anton sought out Lenore , who exclaimed , `` I knew that you would dance it with me ! '' 
This was to both the happiest part of the whole happy evening . 
As to all that followed , it was a mere indistinct vision . 
Anton was dimly conscious of walking about with Fink , of talking and laughing with him and others , of bowing before the lady of the house , and murmuring his thanks ; of having his paletot reached him by a servant , and of putting something into his hand ; but all this was shadowy and unreal . 
He only saw one thing clearly : a white cloak , with a silk hood and a tassel -- oh , that tassel ! 
Once more the large eyes shone full upon him , and he heard the whispered words , `` Good-night ! '' 
Then came an uninteresting dream of going up stairs with Fink , and but half hearing his jesting comments ; of entering a small room , lighting a lamp , and wondering whether it was really here he lived ; of slowly undressing , and at length falling asleep . 
Since the important evening above described , the dancing-lessons had gone on regularly , and Anton , having got over the purgatory of the first introduction , began to feel perfectly at home . 
Indeed , he became a useful member of the association , and was a pattern of assiduity and punctuality , and a striking contrast to Fink , who horrified the dancing-master by declaring that the galop step was fitted for every and all dances alike , and by waltzing in the most eccentric orbits conceivable . 
The fact was , Anton was so happy that his transfigured aspect struck both the young and the old ladies , confirming the former in their conviction that he was good and true-hearted , and the latter in theirs , that he was a prince in disguise . 
He himself best knew the secret of his bliss . 
Every thought of his loyal heart revolved around its absolute mistress . 
All dances or conversations with others he looked upon as more flourishes surrounding her name ; neither was he without his reward . 
She soon treated him like an old friend ; and , whenever she entered the room , it was not till she had discovered his brown curls among the circle that she felt at home in the brilliant assembly . 
It is , however , a melancholy fact , that destiny never long permits a child of earth to feel his whole nature and circumstances strung up to their utmost sweetness and power . 
It invariably contrives to let down some string while winding up another . 
Hence arises a discord , such as Anton was now called upon to experience . 
It was plain that the gentlemen of the counting-house looked with critical eye upon the change in his way of life . 
There existed every possible diversity among them , it is true ; but all were unanimous in pronouncing that , since he had attended these dancing-lessons , our hero had greatly changed for the worse . 
They declared that his increased silence was pride , his frequent absences in an evening tokens of unbecoming levity ; and he who had once been a universal favorite was now in danger of being universally condemned . 
He himself considered the colder bearing of his colleagues very unkind ; and so it came to pass that , for several weeks , he lived almost exclusively with Fink , and that the two formed , as it were , an aristocratic section in opposition to the rest . 
Anton was more depressed by this state of things than he chose to confess : he felt it every where -- at his desk , in his room , nay , even at dinner . 
If Jordan wanted a commission executed , it was no longer to him , but to Baumann , that he turned ; when Purzel , the cashier , came into the office , he no longer accepted Anton 's seat ; and though Specht addressed him oftener than ever , it was no comfort to have questions like these whispered in his ear , `` Is it true that Baron von Berg has dapple-gray horses ? '' 
or , `` Must you wear patent leather boots , or shoes , at Frau von Baldereck 's ? '' 
But Pix , his former patron , was the severest of all . 
Excessive toleration had never been one of this gentleman 's weaknesses , and he now , for no very definite reasons , looked upon Anton as a traitor to himself and the firm . 
He was in the habit of keeping his birth-day in a most festal manner , surrounded by all his friends , and , knowing this , Anton had purposely refused an invitation of Herr von Zernitz ; yet , when the day came , Fink and he were not included among the birth-day guests . 
Anton felt this deeply ; and , to make matters worse , Specht confidentially told him that Pix had declared that a young gentleman who associated with lieutenants , and frequented Feroni 's , was no companion for a plain man of business . 
As he sat alone and heard the merry laughter of his colleagues , he fell into a melancholy mood , which none of his ball-room recollections had the power to dispel . 
For , truth to tell , he was not satisfied with himself -- he was changed . 
He was not exactly negligent of business , but it gave him no pleasure -- his work was a task . 
Sometimes , in writing letters , he had forgotten the most important clauses ; nay , once or twice he had made mistakes as to prices , and Jordan had handed him them back to re-write . 
He fancied , too , that the principal had not noticed him for some time past , and that Sabine 's greeting had grown colder . 
Even the good-natured Karl had asked him , ironically he thought , whether he , as well as Fink , had a pass-key . 
It was in this mood that he now sat down to look over his own accounts , which of late he had omitted to keep punctually . 
He was horrified to find that his debts amounted to more than he could pay without mortgaging his little inheritance . 
He felt very unhappy and out of tune ; but fate willed that the discord should increase . 
Two or three evenings later , the merchant , returning early from his club , answered Sabine 's greeting dryly , and paced up and down the room . 
`` What is the matter , Traugott ? '' 
asked she . 
He threw himself into a chair . 
`` Would you like to know how Fink got his protégé introduced into Frau von Baldereck 's circle ? 
You were so ready to admire this proof of his friendship ! 
He has concocted a whole system of lies , and made the inexperienced Wohlfart play the part of a mere adventurer . '' 
And he went on to narrate all that we already know . 
`` But is it certain that Fink has done this ? '' 
`` Not a doubt of it . 
It is exactly like him . 
It is the same reckless , unscrupulous spirit , that neither heeds the life nor the reputation of a friend . '' 
Sabine fell back in her chair , and again her heart swelled with indignation . 
`` Oh , how sad it is ! '' 
cried she ; `` but Wohlfart is innocent , that I am convinced of . 
Such falsehoods are not in his nature . '' 
`` I shall know to-morrow , '' said the merchant ; `` for his own sake , I hope you are right . '' 
The next day the principal summoned Anton to his own apartment , and telling him the rumors that had arisen , asked him what he had done to contradict them . 
Anton replied in much amazement , `` That he knew nothing of such rumors as these ; that sometimes , indeed , he had been joked with as to his means , but that he had always avowed how small they were . '' 
`` Have you spoken decidedly ? '' 
asked the merchant , severely . 
`` I believe that I have , '' was the honest reply . 
`` These idle tales would not signify , '' continued the principal , `` but that they expose you to the charge of having sought , by unworthy means , to gain a position to which you are not entitled , and also that they tend to degrade your parents ' reputation , for it is given out that you are the son of a man of very high rank . '' 
`` Oh my mother ! '' 
cried Anton , wringing his hands , and the tears rolling down his cheeks . 
As soon as he could control his emotion , he said , `` The most painful part of all this is , that you should have supposed me capable of circulating these falsehoods . 
I implore you to believe that I never knew of them till now . '' 
`` I am glad to believe it , '' said the merchant ; `` but you have done much to substantiate them . 
You have appeared in a circle and incurred expenses which were alike unsuited to your position and your fortune . '' 
Anton felt that he would greatly prefer the centre of the earth to its surface . 
At length he cried , `` I know it -- you are right -- nay , I knew it all the time ; and especially since I found that I had run into debt '' -- here the merchant smiled almost imperceptibly -- `` I have felt that I was on the wrong road altogether , though I did not know how to retrace my steps . 
But now I will lose no more time . '' 
`` Was it not Fink who introduced you to that circle ? 
Perhaps , '' said the merchant , `` he may be able to throw some light on the affair . '' 
`` Allow me to call him , '' said Anton , `` and let him be witness as to whether I knew of this . '' 
`` Certainly , if it be any satisfaction to you ; '' and Fink was summoned . 
On entering , he looked with astonishment at Anton 's excited aspect , and cried , without particularly heeding the principal 's presence , `` The devil ! 
you have been weeping ! '' 
`` Over calumnies , '' said the merchant , gravely , `` which affect his own character as a respectable man of business , and the honor of his family . '' 
And he proceeded to state the whole affair . 
`` He is quite innocent , '' said Fink , good-naturedly : `` innocent and harmless as the violet that blows in the shade . 
He knew nothing of this ridiculous affair ; and , if any one be to blame , it is I , and the babbling fools who have spread the story . 
Do n't torment yourself , Anton ; since it annoys you , we will soon set it all to rights . '' 
`` I shall go once more , '' declared Anton , `` to Frau von Baldereck , and tell her that I can no longer attend the dancing-parties . '' 
`` As you like , '' said Fink . 
`` At all events , you have learned to dance , and to hold your hat like a gentleman . '' 
Before dinner , the merchant said to his sister , `` You were right , Wohlfart had nothing to do with it ; it was all Fink 's invention . '' 
`` I knew it , '' cried Sabine , drawing out her needle vehemently . 
Anton worked hard all day , said little , and , when evening came , went up stairs to dress , like a man whose mind is made up . 
If Fink could have seen into his heart , he would have been shocked at the sorrow there . 
It was not alone wounded self-love , mortification , shame , but the anguish of bidding farewell to Lenore . 
As it was , `` I say , '' cried he , `` I have a notion that you take this nonsense a great deal too tragically . 
Are you angry with me ? '' 
holding out his hand . 
`` Neither with you nor with any one else ; but let me for once act for myself . '' 
`` What are you going to do ? '' 
`` Do not ask me . 
I have but one thing to do . '' 
`` So be it , then , '' was the good-humored reply ; `` but do not forget that any thing like a scene would only amuse those people . '' 
`` Trust me , '' said Anton , `` I shall make none . '' 
It happened to be a very gay meeting , and there were more gentlemen present than usual . 
Anton at once went up to Lenore , who came to meet him more lovely than ever , in her first ball-dress , saying , `` How late you are ! 
Come , papa is here , and I want to introduce you to him . 
But what is the matter , you look so grave ? '' 
`` Dear lady , '' returned Anton , `` I do indeed feel sad . 
I can not dance the next dance with you , and am only come to apologize to you , and to the lady of the house , for my abrupt departure . '' 
`` Mr. Wohlfart ! '' 
cried Lenore , clasping her hands . 
`` Your good opinion is more to me than that of all others , '' said he , blushing ; and proceeded rapidly to state the whole story , assuring her that he had known nothing of it . 
`` I believe you , '' said Lenore , cordially ; `` and , indeed , papa said that it was all most probably an idle tale . 
And because of this you will give up our dancing-parties ! '' 
`` I will , '' said Anton ; `` for , if I do not , I run a risk of being considered an intruder or an impostor . '' 
Lenore tossed her little head . 
`` Go , then , sir ! '' 
and she turned away . 
Anton stood like one annihilated . 
Had he been ten years older , he might have interpreted her anger more favorably . 
As it was , a bitter pang thrilled through him . 
But the thought of what was still to be done nerved him to overcome it , and he walked steadily , nay , proudly to where Frau von Baldereck was doing the honors . 
All the most distinguished members of the party were around her . 
The gaunt old countess sat drinking a cup of tea . 
The baroness was there ; and near her a tall , handsome man , whom Anton knew instinctively to be Lenore 's father . 
As he advanced to make his bow to the lady of the house , his glance took in the whole scene at once . 
Years have passed since then ; but still he knows the color of every dress , could count the flowers in the bouquet of the baroness , ay , and remembers the gilt pattern on the countess 's tea-cup . 
Frau von Baldereck received his obeisance with a gracious smile , and was about to say something flattering , when Anton interrupted her , and in a voice that shook a little , perhaps , but was audible throughout the room , began his address , which was soon listened to in profound silence . 
`` Madam , I have this day heard that a rumor has been spread of my possessing lands in America , and exciting an interest in certain high quarters . 
I now declare that this is all false . 
I am the son of a late accountant in Ostrau , and I inherit from my parents hardly any thing beyond an unsullied name . 
You , madam , have been kind enough to invite me , an insignificant stranger , to take part in your réunions this winter . 
After what I have just heard , I dare do so no longer , lest I should thus substantiate the idle reports I have mentioned , and be suspected of imposing upon your hospitality . 
Therefore I have only to thank you sincerely for your past kindness , and to take my leave . '' 
The whole party was struck dumb . 
Anton bowed , and turned to go . 
Just then there flew out from the paralyzed circle a brilliant form , and taking both his hands in hers , Lenore looked at him with tearful eyes , and said , in a broken voice , `` Farewell ! '' 
The door closed , and all was over . 
When life returned in the room he had left , the first words audible were the baroness 's whisper to her daughter , `` Lenore , you have forgotten yourself . '' 
`` Do not blame her , '' said the baron , aloud , with great presence of mind ; `` the daughter only did what the father should have done . 
The young man has behaved admirably , and we can not but esteem him . '' 
A murmur , however , began to arise from different groups . 
`` Quite a dramatic scene , '' said the lady of the house ; `` but who then said -- '' `` Ay , who was it that said , '' interposed Von Tönnchen . 
All eyes turned to Fink . 
`` It was you , Herr von Fink , who -- '' Frau von Baldereck majestically began . 
`` I , my dear lady ! '' 
said Fink , with the composure of a just man unjustly accused . 
`` What have I to do with the report ? 
I have always contradicted it as much as possible . '' 
`` Yes , '' said several voices ; `` but then you used to hint -- '' `` And you certainly did say -- '' interpolated Frau von Baldereck . 
`` What ? '' 
coldly inquired the imperturbable Fink . 
`` That this Mr. Wohlfart was mysteriously connected with the Czar . '' 
`` Impossible ! '' 
cried Fink , earnestly ; `` that is a complete misunderstanding . 
In describing the appearance of the gentleman , then unknown to you , I may possibly have mentioned an accidental likeness , but -- '' `` But the American property , '' chimed in Herr von Tönnchen ; `` why , you yourself made it over to him , and requested us to keep the transaction a profound secret . '' 
`` As you have kept my secret so well , '' replied Fink , `` as to tell it every where , and now in my presence , before all assembled here , you and Zernitz are evidently answerable for the whole foolish rumor . 
And now listen , gentlemen ; my friend Wohlfart having once expressed a playful wish to have land in America , I amused myself by making him a Christmas-box of a certain possession of mine on Long Island , near New York , which possession consists of a few sand-hills and a tumble-down hut , built for wild-duck shooting . 
It was natural that I should ask you not to mention this , and I am very sorry that , from such a trifle , you should have spun a web that excludes a delightful man from our circle . '' 
And then a cold irony spreading over his features , he went on : `` I rejoice to see how strongly you all share my feeling , and despise the low snobbishness of soul which could consider a man more fitted for society because a foreign potentate had evinced an interest in him . 
And , since we have begun this evening 's dance with explanations , let me further explain , that Mr. Anton Wohlfart is the son of a late accountant in Ostrau , and that I shall consider any further allusion to this misunderstanding as an insult to my most intimate friend . 
And now , my dear lady , I am engaged to your daughter for the first quadrille , and can positively wait no longer . '' 
In the course of the evening Lieutenant von Zernitz came up and said , `` Fink , you have made fun of us , and I am sorry to be under the necessity of demanding satisfaction . '' 
`` Be rational , and do nothing of the kind , '' replied Fink . 
`` We have shot together so often , it would be a pity now to take each other for a mark . '' 
Fink being by far the best shot in the room , Herr von Zernitz allowed himself to be convinced . 
Anton had vanished from the fashionable circle like a falling star , and he never reappeared therein . 
True , it did occur to Frau von Baldereck , rather late in the day , that it would be proper occasionally to invite the young man , to prove that he had not been tolerated merely as -- what he was not , and some other families thought the same ; but as these invitations came , as before said , rather late , and as Anton declined them , his fate was that of many a greater man -- society forgot him . 
For a short time the two chief hatchers of the grand report , Messrs. von Tönnchen and von Zernitz , spoke to him when they met him in the street ; for a whole year they bowed , then they too knew him no more . 
The following day Anton told the merchant all that had passed , begged him to forgive his late remissness , and promised greater attention in future . 
`` I have no fault to find , '' replied the merchant , kindly . 
`` And now let me see the amount of your debts , that we may get your affairs in order . '' 
Anton drew a slip of paper from his pocket , the cashier was called , the sum paid , and put down to Anton 's account , and that was settled . 
In the evening Fink said to Anton , `` You went off with flying colors ; the oldest man there declared aloud that you had behaved admirably . '' 
`` Who said that ? '' 
Fink told him it was the Baron Rothsattel , and did not appear to remark his deep blush . 
`` It would have been better , '' continued he , `` if you had not taken such a decided step . 
Why avoid the whole circle , in which there are some who have a strong personal regard for you ? '' 
`` I have done what my own feelings prompted , '' said Anton ; `` perhaps one older and more experienced might have managed better ; but you can not blame me for not taking your advice in this matter . '' 
`` It is singular , '' thought Fink , as he went down stairs , `` what different events teach different men to have and exert wills of their own . 
This boy has become independent in one night , and whatever Fate may now have in store for him , he is sure to acquit himself well . '' 
It spoke highly , both for Anton and his friend , that their intimacy was by no means decreased by the circumstances just related . 
On the contrary , it was deepened . 
Fink behaved with more consideration , and Anton gained more freedom , both of opinion and action . 
The influence of the younger of the friends weaned the elder from many an evil habit . 
Anton being more than ever zealous in his office duties , and more obliging to his colleagues , Fink insensibly accustomed himself to greater application and punctuality . 
There was only one subject that he never touched upon , though he well knew that it was always uppermost in Anton 's mind , and that was the lovely young girl who had shown so much heart and spirit on the occasion of his last dancing-lesson . 
Never had the flowers bloomed so gorgeously , never had the birds sung so gayly , as they did this summer on the baron 's estate . 
The season spent in town had greatly extended the family acquaintance , and the castle was , in consequence , almost always full of guests . 
Dances , rides , acted charades , amusements of every kind , filled up the laughing hours . 
What happy days these were to Lenore ! 
True , she still remained something of an original , and her mother would at times shake her head at some daring freak or over-emphatic speech . 
It came naturally to her to play the gentleman 's part whenever there was a lack of gentlemen . 
She was the leader in every expedition , delighting to carry off all her young female friends to some distant spot whence there was a fine view , to force them into some little village inn , where they had only milk and black bread for supper , and then to carry them all home dead-tired in a wagon , which she herself would drive standing . 
She had a way of treating young men with a sort of motherly kindness , as though they were still little bread-and-butter-eating urchins ; and on the occasion of a certain dramatic representation , she horrified her mother by appearing in a male character , with a riding-whip and a little beard , which she twisted about in the most fascinating way . 
But she looked so wondrously lovely , even thus attired , that her mother could not chide in earnest . 
If , however , there was any one not entirely satisfied with this way of life , it was the baroness . 
A certain preoccupation and restlessness had stolen over her husband -- the cloudless serenity of former years was gone . 
It was but a slight change , visible only to the wife 's eyes ; and even she owned to herself that she was hardly justified in grieving over it . 
Just at this time , too , a great joy awaited her . 
Eugene had passed his examination , and promised them a visit to show them his epaulettes . 
His mother had his room newly fitted up , and his father placed some first-rate guns and a new hunting-dress in it as a present for him . 
On the day of his arrival he rode out to meet him , and it was a pleasant sight to see the two noble-looking men embrace , and then ride home together . 
`` We will surprise the ladies , '' said the baron , and soon the baroness clasped her son in her arms . 
This was the climax of happiness at the castle . 
Both parents ' eyes glistened whenever they rested on their son . 
True , some of his expressions and gestures savored of the riding-school , but the baroness only smiled at them all . 
From time immemorial , indeed , the stable has been for the young cavalier the ante-chamber of the saloon . 
Eugene soon became supreme among the band of young ladies ; he paid visits all around , invited friends in return ; in short , one gayety succeeded another . 
To all this there was only one drawback of which the baron was conscious . 
He could no longer live within his income . 
What had been possible for twenty years now became manifestly an utter impossibility . 
The winter residence in town , the epaulettes of his son , Lenore 's gauzes and laces -- even the additional interest of his promissory notes , all tended to embarrass him . 
The returns from his property were eagerly expected , and already in part forestalled ; nor were they increased . 
Nay , many a projected improvement of former years remained unaccomplished . 
He had once meant to plant a sandy waste at the extremity of his estate , but even that small outlay was inconvenient , and the yellow sand still glistened in the sun . 
Again he was obliged to open the inlaid casket , and take out some of the fair parchments , and again his brow grew clouded and his mind troubled ; but it was no longer the same agony of anxiety as before : he had had a little practice , and looked at things with a calmer eye . 
Something would turn up -- there would be some way or other of becoming freed from these embarrassments ; at most , he need only spend two more winters in town till Lenore 's education should be quite completed , and then he would devote himself energetically to the care of his property . 
Meanwhile , he resolved to talk matters over a little with Ehrenthal , for , on the whole , he was an honorable man , that is , as far as a tradesman could be so ; and , what was more , he knew the baron 's circumstances exactly , and it was easier to discuss them with him than with a stranger . 
As usual , Ehrenthal appeared just when wanted . 
His diamond breast-pin shone as usual , his obsequious compliments were as ludicrous as ever , and his admiration of the property as boundless . 
The baron took him all over the farm , and good-humoredly said , `` You must give me some advice , Ehrenthal . '' 
Only two or three years had passed since a similar walk over this farm , and how the times had changed ! 
Then , Ehrenthal had to insinuate his advice to the proud baron , and now the baron himself asked him for it . 
In the lightest tone that he could assume , he went on to say , `` I have had greater expenses than usual this year . 
Even the promissory notes do not yield enough , and I must therefore think of increasing my income . 
What would you consider the best means of doing this ? '' 
The usurer 's eyes brightened ; but he answered , with all due deference , `` The baron must be a better judge of that than I can be . '' 
`` None of your bargains , however , Ehrenthal . 
I shall not enter into partnership with you again . '' 
Ehrenthal replied , shaking his head , `` There are not , indeed , many such bargains to be made , which I could conscientiously recommend . 
The baron has five-and-forty thousand dollars ' worth of promissory notes . 
Why do you keep them when they pay so small an interest ? 
If you were , instead , to buy a good mortgage at five per cent , you would pay four per cent to the Joint-stock Company , and one per cent . 
would be your own ; in other words , a yearly addition of four hundred and fifty dollars . 
But you might make a better thing of them than that . 
There are many safe mortgages which are offered to sale for ready money , at a great profit to the purchaser . 
You might , perhaps , for forty thousand dollars , or even less , get a mortgage that would bring you in five per cent . 
on forty-five thousand dollars . '' 
`` I have thought of that , '' replied the baron ; `` but the security for such mortgages as these , which come into the hands of you brokers , is exceedingly poor , and I can not rely on it . '' 
Ehrenthal waived off this reproach , and said , in a tone of virtuous indignation against all dealers in insecure mortgages , `` For my own part , I am very shy of mortgages altogether , and such as are in the market are not fit for the baron , of course . 
You must apply to a trustworthy man ; your own lawyer , for instance , may be able to procure you a good mortgage . '' 
`` Then you really know of none ? '' 
said the baron , secretly hoping that he did . 
`` I know of none , '' was the positive reply ; `` but if you wish , I can inquire ; there are always some to be had . 
Your lawyer can tell you what he would consider good security ; only you would have to pay down the sum total in case you procured it from him , whereas , if you could get one from a commercial man , you might make a profit of some thousands . '' 
Now this profit was a most important point to the baron , and his mind was made up to realize it if possible . 
But he only said , `` There is no hurry ; should you hear of any thing desirable , you can let me know . '' 
`` I will do all I can , '' was the cautious reply ; `` but it will be well that the baron should also make inquiries himself , for I am not accustomed to deal in mortgages . '' 
If this assertion were not strictly true , it was , at all events , politic , for the cool indifference of the tradesman increased the baron 's confidence in him tenfold . 
The following day he went to town , and had a consultation with his lawyer , who strongly advised him to give up the idea of making any such profit as he contemplated , because such a mortgage would infallibly prove insecure . 
But this good advice only confirmed the baron in his intention of taking his own way in the matter . 
A few days later , a tall stout man , with a shining red face , called upon the baron -- a Mr. Pinkus , from the capital . 
He had heard , he said , that the baron wished to invest , and he knew of a remarkably safe and desirable mortgage , on a large property in the neighboring province , belonging to the rich Count Zaminsky , who lived abroad . 
This property had every possible advantage , including two thousand acres of magnificent natural wood . 
The mortgage was at present in Count Zaminsky 's own hands . 
It was possible , Pinkus mysteriously hinted , to purchase it for ninety per cent. ; in other words , for thirty-six thousand dollars . 
Certainly , it was a pity that the property lay in another province , where agriculturists had many primitive peculiarities . 
But it was only six miles from the frontier -- the neighboring town was on the high road -- the estate was princely . 
In short , the drawbacks were so small , and the advantages so great , that Pinkus never could have made up his mind to let a stranger purchase it , had he not been such an example of human perfection as the baron . 
The baron received the compliment in a dignified manner , and before his departure Pinkus laid down a heavy roll of parchment , that the question of the security might be carefully investigated . 
Early the next morning the baron took the deeds to his man of business , and himself ascended the dirty staircase that led to the white door of Ehrenthal , who was overjoyed to hear of his visit -- dressed himself with the utmost rapidity , and insisted upon the baron doing him the infinite honor of breakfasting with him . 
The baron was not cruel enough to refuse , and accordingly he was ushered into the state apartment , where the contrast between splendor and shabbiness amused him not a little , as did also that between the gorgeous attire of the beautiful Rosalie , and the sneaking , crouching manner of her father . 
During breakfast the baron asked Ehrenthal whether he happened to know a Mr. Pinkus . 
At this business-like inquiry Rosalie vanished , and her father sat bolt upright . 
`` Yes , I do know him , '' said he ; `` he is in a very small way , but I believe him an upright man . 
He is in a very small way , and all his business is with Poland . '' 
`` Have you mentioned to him my wish to buy a mortgage ? '' 
`` How should I have thought of mentioning it to him ? 
If he has offered you a mortgage , he must have heard of it from another dealer , of whom I did make inquiries . 
But Pinkus is in a small way ; how can he procure a mortgage for you ? '' 
And Ehrenthal indicated by a gesture how small Pinkus was , and by a look upward how immeasurably great his guest . 
The baron then told him all particulars , and asked about the property and circumstances of the count . 
Ehrenthal knew nothing ; but he bethought himself that there was then in town a respectable tradesman from that very district , and promised to have him sent to the baron , who soon after took his leave , Ehrenthal accompanying him down stairs , and saying , `` Be cautious about the mortgage , baron ; it is good money , and there are many bad mortgages . 
To be sure , there are good mortgages too ; and , of course , people will say a good deal to recommend their own . 
As to Löbel Pinkus , he is in but a small way of business ; but , so far as I know , a trustworthy man . 
All you tell me about the mortgage sounds well , I own ; but I humbly entreat you , baron , to be cautious -- very cautious . '' 
The baron , not much enlightened by this worthy address , went to his town house , and impatiently awaited for the arrival of the stranger , who soon came . 
His name was Löwenberg , and his appearance was a sort of medley of that of Ehrenthal and Pinkus , only he was thinner . 
He gave himself out as a wine-merchant , and appeared intimately acquainted with the count and his property . 
He said that the present possessor was young , and lived abroad ; that his father had been rather a bad manager ; but that , though the estate was burdened , it was not in the very least endangered . 
The land was not in high cultivation , therefore was susceptible of improvement , and he hoped the young count was the very man to see to it . 
On the whole , his report was decidedly favorable ; there was no exaggeration about it -- all was sensible and straightforward . 
The baron 's mind was very nearly made up , and he went off straightway to one of his acquaintance , who knew the Zaminsky family . 
He did not hear much from him certainly , but still it was rather favorable than otherwise . 
On the other hand , Ehrenthal called to inform him that the wool of the sheep of that district was seldom fine , and to beg that he would consult his lawyer before he decided . 
Ehrenthal 's little office was on the same floor as the rest of the apartments , and opened out upon the hall . 
It was evening before he returned to it , in a state of great excitement . 
Itzig , who had been sitting before a blank book , wearily waiting for his master , wondered what could be the matter , when Ehrenthal eagerly said to him , `` Itzig , now is the time to show whether you deserve your wages , and the advantage of a Sabbath dinner in good society . '' 
`` What am I to do ? '' 
replied Veitel , rising . 
`` First , you are to tell Löbel Pinkus to come here , and then to get me a bottle of wine and two glasses . 
Next go and bring me word to whom in Rosmin , Councilor Horn , who lives near the market-place , has written to-day , or , if not to-day , to whom he writes to-morrow . 
In finding this out you may spend five dollars , and if you bring me back word this evening you shall have a ducat for yourself . '' 
Veitel felt a glow of delight , but replied calmly , `` I know none of Councilor Horn 's clerks , and must have some time to become acquainted with them . '' 
He ordered the bottle of wine , and ran off into the street like a dog in scent of game . 
Meanwhile Ehrenthal , his hat still on , his hands behind his back , walked up and down , nodding his head , and looking in the twilight like an ugly ghost who once has had his head cut off and can not now keep it steadily on . 
As Veitel went on his way , his mind kept working much as follows : `` What can be in the wind ? 
It must be an important affair , and I am to know nothing about it ! 
I am to send Pinkus . 
Pinkus was with Ehrenthal a few days ago , and the next morning he went to Baron Rothsattel 's place in the country ; so it must have something to do with the baron . 
And now , as to these letters . 
If I could catch the clerk who takes them to the post , and contrive to read the directions , I should save money . 
But how manage this ? 
Well , I must find out some way or other . '' 
And , accordingly , Veitel posted himself at the door , and soon saw a young man rush out with a packet of letters in his hand . 
He followed him , and , turning sharply round a corner , contrived to meet him . 
Touching his hat , `` You are from Councilor Horn 's office ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said the clerk , in a hurry to get on . 
`` I am from the country , and have been waiting for three days for an important letter from the councilor ; perhaps you may have one for me . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said the clerk , looking at him mistrustfully . 
`` Bernhard Madgeburg , of Ostrau , '' said Veitel ; `` but the letter may be addressed to my uncle . '' 
`` There is no letter for you , '' replied the clerk , hurriedly glancing at the directions . 
Do what he would , Veitel 's eyes could not follow this rapid shuffling , so he seized the packet , and while the enraged official , catching hold of him , exclaimed , `` What are you about , man ! 
how dare you ? '' 
he devoured the directions , gave back the letters , and touching his hat , coolly said , `` Nothing for me ; do not lose the post ; I am going to the councilor , '' turned on his heel and made his escape . 
Spite of this bold stroke , he could only remember two or three of the addresses . 
`` Perhaps I have made my money , '' thought he ; `` and if not , there 's no time lost . '' 
So he went back , and , creeping to the office door , stood and listened . 
The worthy Pinkus was speaking , but very low , and Veitel could make little of it . 
At last , however , the voices grew louder . 
`` How can you ask such a large sum ! '' 
cried Ehrenthal , angrily ; `` I have been mistaken in thinking you a trustworthy man . '' 
`` I am trustworthy , '' replied Pinkus ; `` but I must have four hundred dollars , or this affair will fall through . '' 
`` How dare you say it will fall through ? 
What do you know about it ? '' 
`` I know this much , that I can get four hundred dollars from the baron by telling him what I know , '' screamed Pinkus . 
`` You are a rascal ! 
You are a traitor ! 
Do you know who it is that you use thus ? 
I can ruin your credit , and disgrace you in the eyes of all men of business . '' 
`` And I can show the baron what sort of a man you are , '' cried Pinkus , with equal vehemence . 
At this the door opened , and Veitel plunged into the shadow of the staircase . 
`` I will give you till to-morrow to consider , '' were Pinkus 's parting words . 
Veitel coolly stepped into the office , and his patron hardly noticed him . 
He was pacing up and down the little room , like a wild beast in its cage , and exclaiming , `` Just heavens ! 
that this Pinkus should turn out such a traitor ! 
He will blab the whole matter ; he will ruin me ! '' 
`` Why should he ruin you ? '' 
asked Veitel , throwing his hat on the desk . 
`` What are you doing here ? 
What have you overheard ? '' 
`` Every thing , '' was the cool reply . 
`` You have both screamed so as to be heard all over the hall . 
Why do you keep the affair a secret from me ? 
I could have compelled Löbel to give you better terms . '' 
Ehrenthal stared in utter amazement at the audacious youth , and could only bring out , `` What does this mean ? '' 
`` I know Pinkus well , '' continued Veitel , determined henceforth to take a part in the game . 
`` If you give him a hundred dollars , he will readily sell you a good mortgage for the baron . '' 
`` How should you know any thing about the mortgage ? '' 
`` I know enough to help in the matter , '' replied Itzig ; `` and I will help you , if you trust me . '' 
Ehrenthal continued to stare and stare , till at last it dawned upon him that his assistant had more coolness and decision than himself . 
Accordingly , he said , `` You are a good creature , Veitel ; go and bring in Pinkus ; he shall have the hundred dollars . '' 
`` I have seen the directions of the councilor 's letters : there was one to Commissary Walter . '' 
`` I thought so , '' cried Ehrenthal , with delight . 
`` All right , Itzig ; now for Löbel . '' 
`` I have to pay five dollars to the councilor 's clerk , '' continued the youth , `` and I am to have a ducat for myself . '' 
`` All right ! 
you shall have the money ; but first I must see Pinkus . '' 
Veitel hastened to his lodgings , and found Pinkus still much excited , and revolving all Ehrenthal 's injurious speeches . 
In a few decided words , he gave him to understand that he was quietly to accept a hundred dollars , and to help Ehrenthal in this matter , else he , Veitel , would give the police a hint of the mysterious chamber in the next house , and of the smuggling guests ; and further , that henceforth he must have a comfortable room on reasonable terms , and be treated no longer like a poor devil , but an equal . 
The result of which address was , that , after a good deal of useless fuming and fretting , Pinkus accompanied Veitel to Ehrenthal 's house , where both worthies shook hands and came to terms ; soon after which Veitel opened the door for Löwenberg , the wine-merchant , and was politely dismissed . 
This time he did not care to listen , but returned to enjoy his supper in his new apartment . 
Meanwhile Ehrenthal said , over a glass of wine , to Löwenberg , `` I have heard that Councilor Horn has written for information respecting this mortgage to Commissary Walter , in your town . 
Is there any thing to be made of him ? '' 
`` Not by money , '' answered the stranger , thoughtfully , `` but possibly by other means . 
He does not know that I have been authorized by the count 's attorney to sell this mortgage . 
I shall go to him , as if on business of my own , and take some opportunity of praising the property . '' 
`` But if he knows it himself , of what use is that ? '' 
said Ehrenthal , shaking his head . 
`` There will still be some use ; for , after all , those lawyers must trust to us traders for details . 
How can they know , as we do , how wool and grain sell on estates ? 
At all events , we must do what we can . '' 
Ehrenthal sighed , `` You can believe , Löwenberg , that it makes me anxious . '' 
`` Come , come , '' said the other , `` it will be a profitable concern . 
The buyer you have in view pays ninety per cent. , and seventy is sent to the count in Paris ; of the twenty per cent . 
remaining , you pay the count 's attorney five , and me five for my trouble , and you keep ten . 
Four thousand dollars is a pretty profit where no capital has been risked . '' 
`` But it makes me anxious , '' said Ehrenthal . 
`` Believe me , Löwenberg , it excites me so much that I can not sleep at night ; and when my wife asks me , ` Are you asleep , Ehrenthal ? ' 
I have always to say , ' I can not sleep , Sidonie ; I must think of business . ' '' 
An hour later a carriage with four horses rolled away from the door . 
The following morning Commissary Walter received a business call from Löwenberg , and was convinced , by the cool , shrewd manner of the man , that the circumstances of the Count Zaminsky could not be so desperate as was commonly believed . 
Eight days after , the baron received a letter from his legal adviser , containing a copy of one from Commissary Walter . 
