`` Well , so let it be ! '' 
said the king , sighing , as he rose from his arm-chair ; `` I must go forth to the strife , and these old limbs must again submit to the fatigue of war . 
But what matters it ? 
The life of princes is passed in the fulfilment of duties and responsibilities , and rarely is it gladdened with the sunny rays of joy and peace ! 
Let us submit ! 
`` Yes , let us submit ! '' 
repeated the king , thoughtfully , slowly pacing his cabinet back and forth , his hands folded upon his staff behind him , and his favorite dog , Alkmene , sleepily following him . 
It was a melancholy picture to see this bowed-down old man ; his thin , pale face shaded by a worn-out , three-cornered hat , his dirty uniform strewn with snuff ; and his meagre legs encased in high-topped , unpolished boots ; his only companion a greyhound , old and joyless as his master . 
Neither the bust of Voltaire , with its beaming , intelligent face , nor those of his friends , Lord-Marshal Keith and the Marquis d'Argens , could win an affectionate glance from the lonely old king . 
He whom Europe distinguished as the Great Frederick , whom his subjects called their `` father and benefactor , '' whose name was worthy to shine among the brightest stars of heaven , his pale , thin lips just murmured , `` Resignation ! '' 
With downcast eyes he paced his cabinet , murmuring , `` Let us submit ! '' 
He would not look up to those who were gazing down upon him from the walls -- to those who were no more . 
The remembrance of them unnerved him , and filled his heart with grief . 
The experiences of life , and the ingratitude of men , had left many a scar upon this royal heart , but had never hardened it ; it was still overflowing with tender sympathy and cherished memories . 
To Lord-Marshal Keith , Marquis d'Argens , and Voltaire , Frederick owed the happiest years of his life . 
D'Argens , who passionately loved Frederick , had been dead five years ; Lord-Marshal Keith one month ; and Voltaire was dying ! 
This intelligence the king had received that very morning , from his Paris correspondent , Grimm . 
It was this that filled his heart with mourning . 
The face , that smiled so full of intelligence , was perhaps distorted with agony , and those beaming eyes were now closing in death ! 
Voltaire was dying ! 
Frederick 's thoughts were with the dead and dying -- with the past ! 
He recalled , when crown prince at Rheinsberg , how much he had admired , loved , and distinguished Voltaire ; how he rejoiced , and how honored he felt , when , as a young king , Voltaire yielded to his request to live with him at Berlin . 
This intimacy , it is true , did not long continue ; the king was forced to recognize , with bitter regret , that the MAN Voltaire was not worthy the love which he bestowed upon the POET . 
He renounced the MAN , but the poet was still his admiration ; and all the perfidy , slander and malice of Voltaire , had never changed Frederick . 
The remembrance of it had long since faded from his noble heart -- only the memory of the poet , of the author of so many hours of the purest enjoyment , remained . 
Voltaire was dying ! 
This great and powerful spirit , who so long a time , in the natural body , had instructed , inspired , and refreshed mankind , would leave that body to rise -- whither ? 
`` Immortality , what art thou ? '' 
asked the king , aloud , and for the first time raising his eyes with an inquiring glance to the busts of his friends . 
`` I have sought for thee , I have toiled for thee , my whole life long ! 
Neither the researches of the learned , nor the subtleties of philosophy reveal thee to me . 
Is there any other immortality than fame ? 
Any other eternal life than that which the memory of succeeding generations grants to the dead ? '' 
In this tone of thought Frederick recited , audibly , the conclusion of a poem , which he had addressed to D'Alembert : `` I have consecrated my days to philosophy , I admit all the innocent pleasures of life ; And knowing that soon my course will finish , I enjoy the present with fear of the future . 
What is there to fear after death ? 
If the body and the mind suffer the same fate , I shall return and mingle with nature ; If a remnant of my intellectual fire escapes death , I will flee to the arms of my God . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : Posthumous works , vol . 
vii. , p. 88 . -RSB- 
`` And may this soon be granted me ! '' 
continued the king ; `` then I shall be reunited to those loved ones -- gone before . 
I must be content to tarry awhile in this earthly vale of sorrow , and finish the task assigned me by the Great Teacher ; therefore , let us submit . '' 
He sighed ; pacing to and fro , his steps were arrested at a side-table , where lay a long black velvet box ; it contained the flute that his beloved teacher , Quantz , had made for him . 
Frederick had always kept it in his cabinet as a memento of his lost friend ; as this room he had devoted to a temple of Memory -- of the past ! 
`` Another of the joys , another of the stars of my life vanished ! '' 
murmured the king . 
`` My charming concerts are at an end ! 
Quantz , Brenda , and my glorious Graun are no more . 
While they are listening to the heavenly choir , I must be content with the miserable , idle chatter of men ; the thunder of battle deafening my ears , to which that mad , ambitious Emperor of Austria hopes to force me ! '' 
As the king thus soliloquized , he involuntarily drew from the box the beautiful ebony flute , exquisitely ornamented with silver . 
A smile played around his delicate mouth . 
He raised the flute to his lips , and a melancholy strain floated through the stillness -- the king 's requiem to the dead , his farewell to the dying ! 
No sound of the outer world penetrated that lonely room . 
The guard of honor , on duty upon the Sans-Souci terrace , halted suddenly , as the sad music fell upon his ear . 
The fresh spring breeze swept through the trees , and drove the laden-blossomed elder-bushes tapping against the windowpanes , as if to offer a May-greeting to the lonely king . 
The servant in waiting stole on tiptoe to the door of the anteroom , listening breathlessly at the key-hole to the moving melody . 
Even Alkmene suddenly raised her head as if something unusual were taking place , fixed her great eyes upon her master , jumping upon his knee , and resting her fore-paws lovingly upon his breast . 
Frederick neither observed nor felt the movement of his favorite ; his thoughts were absent from the present -- absent from the earth ! 
They were wandering in the unknown future , with the spirits of those he longed to see again in the Elysian fields . 
The wailing music of his flute expressed the lamentation of his soul , and his eyes filled with tears as he raised them to the bust of Voltaire , gazing at it with a look of pain until the melody was finished . 
Then abruptly turning , half unwillingly , half angrily , he returned the flute to the box , and stole away , covering his face with his hands , as if to hide his emotion from himself . 
`` Now we have finished with the dead , and the living claim our thoughts , '' sighed the king . 
`` What an absurd thing is the human heart ! 
It will never grow cold or old ; always pretending to a spark of the fire which that shameful fellow Prometheus stole from the gods . 
What an absurdity ! 
What have I , an old fellow , to do with the fire of Prometheus , when the fire of war will soon rage around me , '' At this instant the door gently opened . 
`` What do you want , Muller ? 
What do you poke your stupid face in here for ? '' 
said the king . 
`` Pardon me , your majesty , '' replied the footman , `` the Baron von Arnim begs for an audience . '' 
`` Bid him enter , '' commanded the king , sinking back in his old , faded velvet arm-chair . 
Resting his chin upon his staff , he signed to the baron , who stood bowing upon the threshold , to approach . 
`` Well , Arnim , what is the matter ? 
What papers have you there ? '' 
`` Sire , '' answered Baron von Arnim , `` the contract of the French actors , which needs renewing , I have to lay before your majesty ; also a paper , received yesterday , from Madame Mara ; still another from the singer Conciliani , and a petition from four persons from the opera . '' 
`` What stupid stuff ! '' 
growled the king , at the same time bestowing a caress upon Alkmene . 
`` Commence with your report . 
Let us hear what those singers are now asking for . '' 
`` The singer Conciliani has addressed a heart-breaking letter to your majesty , and prays for an increase of salary -- that it is impossible for him to live upon three thousand dollars . '' 
`` Ah ! 
that is what is wanted ? '' 
cried the king , furious , and striking his staff upon the floor . 
`` The fellow is mad ; When he can not live upon three thousand , he will not be able to live upon four . 
I want money for cannon . 
I can not spend it for such nonsense . 
I am surprised , Von Arnim that you repeat such stuff to me . '' 
`` Your majesty , it is my duty that I -- '' `` What ! 
Your duty is not to flatter them . 
I pay them to give me pleasure , not presumption . 
Remember , once for all , do not flatter them . 
Conciliani will get no increase of salary . 
If he persists , let him go to the mischief ! 
This is my decision . 
-- Proceed ! 
What is Madame Mara begging for ? '' 
`` Madame Mara constantly refuses to sing the airs which your majesty commanded to be introduced into the opera of ` Coriolanus . ' 
She has taken the liberty to address you in writing ; here is the letter , if your majesty will have the grace to read it . '' 
`` By no means , sir , by no means ! '' 
cried the king ; at the same instant catching the paper with his staff , he slung it like a shot arrow to the farthest corner of the room , to the great amusement of Alkmene , who , with a loud bark , sprang from her master 's knee , and with a bound caught the strange bird , and tore it in pieces . 
`` You are right , my pet , '' said the king , laughing , `` you have written my answer with your nose to this arrogant person . 
Director , say to Madame Mara that I pay her to sing , not to write . 
She must sing both airs , or she may find herself at Spandau for her obstinacy , where her husband is , for the same reason . 
She can reflect , and judge for herself . '' 
The director could scarcely repress a sigh , foreboding the disagreeable scene that he would have to encounter with the proud and passionate singer . 
Timidly Von Arnim alluded to the four persons from the opera . 
`` Who are these demoiselles , and what do they want ? '' 
asked the king . 
`` Sire , '' replied the Baron von Arnim , `` they are the four persons who personate the role of court ladies and maids of honor to the queens and princesses . 
They beg your majesty to secure to them a fixed income . '' 
`` Indeed ! 
Go to my writing-table and bring paper and pencil ; I will dictate a reply to them , '' said the king . 
`` Now write , Von Arnim : ` To the four court ladies and maids of honor of the opera : You are mistaken in addressing yourselves to me ; the affair of your salaries concerns YOUR emperors and kings . 
To them you must address yourselves . 
-- Adieu . ' '' 
Von Arnim could scarcely repress a smile . 
`` Now we come to the last affair -- the salaries and pensions of the French actors , '' said the king ; `` but first tell me the news in Berlin -- what report has trumpeted forth in the last few days . '' 
`` Your majesty , the latest news in Berlin , which rumor brings home to every hearth-side and every heart is , that your majesty has declared war with Austria on account of the Bavarian succession . 
Every one rejoices , sire , that you will humble that proud and supercilious house of Austria , and enter the lists for Germany . '' 
`` Listen ! '' 
answered the king , sternly . 
`` I did not ask you to blow the trumpet of praise , as if your honor , inspector of the theatres , thought yourself upon the stage , and would commence a comedy with the king of lamps . 
So it is known then that my soldiers will enter the great theatre of war , and that we are about to fight real battles . '' 
`` It is known , sire , '' replied Von Arnim , bowing . 
`` Then what I am about to communicate to you will not surprise you . 
The present juncture of affairs leads us to await very grave scenes -- we can well dispense with comedy . 
I withdraw the salaries and pensions of the French actors -- your own is included . 
After you have dismissed the French comedians , you will be entirely at leisure to pursue your love-intrigues . 
-- Farewell ! '' 
`` Your majesty , '' cried the baron , amazed , `` has your highness dismissed me ? '' 
`` Are you deaf , or have you some of the cotton in your ears which I presented to you at your recall from Copenhagen ? '' 
replied the king . 
-LSB- Footnote : Baron von Arnim was ambassador to Copenhagen until 1754 , when he begged for his recall , stating that the damp climate was injurious to his health . 
The king granted his request , and the baron returned to Berlin . 
At the first audience with the king , Frederick handed Baron von Arnim a carefully-packed box , saying , `` I do not wish the government to lose so valuable a servant ; in this box you will find something that will keep you warm . '' 
Arnim could scarcely await his return home , to open the box ; it contained nothing but cotton . 
Some days afterward , however , the king increased Von Arnim 's income a thousand dollars , and sent him ambassador to Dresden . 
Von Arnim was afterward director of the Royal Theatre until dismissed in the above manner . -RSB- 
`` Sire , I have heard all , but I can not believe it . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' interrupted the king , `` To believe is difficult ; you , I presume , never belonged to the pious and believing . 
Your intrigues would not admit of it ; but now you have the leisure to pursue them with a right good-will . 
You have only to discharge , as I have said , the entire French troupe , and the whole thing is done with . 
-- Adieu , Arnim , may you be prospered ! '' 
Baron von Arnim muttered some incomprehensible words , and retreated from the royal presence . 
The door had scarcely closed , when it was again opened without ceremony by a young man , wearing a gold-laced dress . 
`` Your majesty , '' said he , hastily , in an undertone , `` your majesty , she has just gone to the Palace Park , just the same hour she went yesterday . '' 
`` Is she alone ? '' 
asked the king , rising . 
`` No , she is not alone ; at a little distance the nurse follows with the princely infant ! '' 
The king cast an angry glance at the saucy , laughing face of the young man , who at once assumed a devoted , earnest mien . 
`` Has your majesty any further commands ? '' 
asked he , timidly . 
`` I command you to hold your tongue until you are spoken to ! '' 
replied the king , harshly . 
`` You understand spying and hanging about , as you have good ears , a quick eye , and a keen scent . 
I therefore make use of you , because I need a spy ; but , understand that a fellow who allows himself to be used as a spy , is , indeed , a useful subject , but generally a worthless one , and to whom it is becoming to be modest and humble . 
I am now going to Berlin ; you will accompany me . 
Take off your finery , so that every one may not recognize at once the peacock by his feathers . 
Go to the taverns and listen to what they say about the war ; whether the people are much dissatisfied about it . 
Keep your great ears wide open , and bring me this evening all the latest news . 
Go , now , tell my coachman to be ready ; in half an hour I shall set off . '' 
The young man slunk away to the door , but stood without opening it , his head down , and his under-lip hanging out . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked the king , in a milder tone , `` why do you not go , Kretzschmar ? '' 
`` I can not go away if your majesty is angry with me , '' muttered the servant , insolently . 
`` I do not wish to hear or see any thing more for you when your majesty abuses me , and considers me such a mean , base fellow . 
Your majesty first commanded me to listen , and spy , and now that I am obeying , I am despised and scolded for it . 
I will have nothing more to do with it , and I wish your majesty to leave me a simple footman rather than to accord me such a mean position . '' 
`` I did not mean so badly , '' said the king . 
`` I mean well enough for you ; but you must not permit yourself to be arrogant or disrespectful , otherwise you may go to Tophet ! 
You are no common spy , you are listening about a little because you know I am fond of hearing what the people are saying , and what is going on in Berlin and Potsdam . 
But take care that they know nothing about it , otherwise they will be careful , and you will hear nothing . 
Now be off , and in order to see a cheerful face on you , I will make you a present . '' 
The king drew from his vest-pocket a purse , well filled with small coin , and gave it to the young man , who took it , though he still looked angry and insolent . 
`` Do not let your under-lip hang down so , for I may step upon it , '' said the king . 
`` Put the money in your pocket , and hurry off to tell old Pfund to harness quickly , or I shall not arrive in time at the park . '' 
`` There is no danger , your majesty , for the miss seems very fond of the promenade ; she remained two hours in the park yesterday , always walking in the most quiet places , as if she were afraid to meet any one . 
She sat a whole hour on the iron seat by the Carp Pond , and then she went to the Philosopher 's Walk , and skipped about like a young colt . '' 
`` You are a very cunning fellow , and know how to use your eyes well , '' said the king . 
`` Now be off , and order the carriage . '' 
The Palace Park was as quiet and deserted as usual . 
Not a voice , not a sound , disturbed the stillness of those silent walks . 
For this reason , undoubtedly , a young lady had sought it ; at least her whole being expressed satisfaction and delight to wander unobserved through those quiet , shady alleys . 
She was of slight and elegant proportions , simply attired , without pretension , in a dark dress of some thin silk material . 
Her black silk mantle was thrown aside upon the stone seat near her , uncovering thus , in solitude , to the sun and birds , her lovely neck and arms , the beauty of which might rival the statues of the ancients . 
Her face was not of regular beauty , yet it possessed that expression of grace , spirit , and energy , which is oftener a more powerful and more enduring charm than regular beauty . 
Her large , expressive black eyes possessed a wonderful power , and her red , pouting lips wore a sweet smile ; her fine Roman nose lent an air of decision , whilst her high-arched forehead led one to believe that daring , energetic thought lay hidden beneath those clusters of brown curls . 
She was not in the bloom of youth , but at twenty-five she appeared younger than many beauties at eighteen ; and if her form no longer possessed the charm of girlhood , it was attractive from its suppleness and full , beautiful bust . 
`` Louisa , Louisa , where are you ? '' 
cried the young lady , stepping quickly forward toward a side-path , which led from the broad avenue , and at the end of which was a sunny grassplot . 
`` Here I am , miss ; I am coming . '' 
`` Miss , '' murmured the young lady , `` how dreadfully it sounds ! 
The blush of shame rises to my face , for it sounds like bitter mockery and contempt , and brings my whole life before me . 
Yet , I must endure it -- and I scarcely wish it were otherwise . 
Ah , there you are , Louisa , and there is my beautiful boy , '' she cried , with a glad voice , hastening toward the peasant-woman and bending fondly over her child . 
`` How beautiful and how knowing he looks ! 
It seems as if my little Alexander began to recognize me -- he looks so earnest and sensible . '' 
`` He knows you , miss , '' said the nurse , courtesying , `` and he knows , like other children , who loves him . 
Children and dogs know who love them . 
The children cry , and the dogs hide themselves when people are around who dislike them . '' 
`` Nonsense , Louisa ! '' 
laughed the young lady , as she bent to kiss her child -- `` nonsense ! 
did not my little boy cry when his father took him yesterday ? 
And he loves his child most tenderly , as only a father can . '' 
`` Oh , there is another reason for that , '' said the nurse . 
`` He has just passed his first stupid three months , and he begins to hear and see what passes around him , and it was the first man 's face that he had seen . 
But only look , miss , what a beautiful little dog is coming up the path . '' 
It was indeed a lovely greyhound , of the small Italian race , which came bounding joyfully toward them , and as he saw the woman barked loudly . 
`` Be quiet , Alkmene , be quiet ! '' 
cried a loud , commanding voice . 
`` Oh , Heaven ! 
it is the king ! '' 
whispered the young lady , turning pale , and , as if stunned , retreated a few steps . 
`` Yes , it is really the king , '' cried the nurse , `` and he is coming directly from the grass-plot here . '' 
`` Let us go as quickly as possible , Louisa . 
Come , come , '' and she hastily threw her mantle around her , drawing the hood over her curly head . 
She had only proceeded a few steps , when a loud voice bade her to remain -- to stand still . 
She stood as if rooted to the spot , leaning upon her nurse for support ; her knees sank under her , and it seemed as if the whole world turned around with her . 
After the first tumult of anxiety and fear , succeeded an insolent determination , and , forcing herself to calmness , she said : `` It is the turning-point of my life ; the next few minutes will either crush me or assure my future ; let me struggle for the future , then . 
I will face him who approaches me as my judge . '' 
Forcing herself to composure , slowly and with effort she turned toward the king , who , approaching by the side path , had entered the avenue , and now stood before her . 
But as she encountered the fiery glance of the king 's eye , she quailed before it , casting down her own , covered with confusion . 
`` Who are you ? '' 
demanded the king , with stern authority , keeping his eagle eye fixed upon her . 
Silent and immovable she stood ; only the quick , feverish breathing and the heaving bosom told the storm that was raging within . 
`` Who are you ? '' 
repeated the voice , with still more severity -- `` who permit themselves to use my park as a nursery ? 
What child is that ? 
and who are its parents ? 
They should be of high position at court , who would dare to send their child and nurse to the royal park ; and with what joy they must regard the offspring of their conjugal tenderness ! 
Tell me to whom does this child belong ? '' 
Sobbing convulsively , the lady sank , kneeling , with uplifted arms , imploring for mercy . 
`` Sire , annihilate me with your anger , but do not crush me with your scorn ! '' 
`` What language do you permit yourself to hold ? '' 
asked the king . 
`` Sire , it is the language of an unhappy , despairing woman , who knows that she stands before that great monarch whose judgment she fears more than that of her God , who sees into her heart , and reads the tortures and reproaches of her conscience ; who knows what she suffers , and knows , also , that she is free from self-interest , and every base desire . 
I believe that God will forgive what I fear your majesty will not . '' 
`` You speak presumptuously , and remind me of the theatre princesses who represent a grand scene with a pathetic exit . 
Let me inform you , I despise comedians -- only high tragedy pleases me . 
Spare yourself the trouble to act before me , but answer me -- who are you ? 
Whose child is that ? '' 
`` Sire , only God and my king should hear my reply -- I beg the favor to send away the nurse and child . '' 
The king assented , slightly nodding his head , at the same time bidding her not to kneel to him as to an image . 
The lady rose and sought the nurse , who , from fright , had withdrawn into the shrubbery , and stood staring at the king with wide-open eyes . 
`` Go home , Louisa , and put the child to sleep , '' said she , quickly . 
The nurse obeyed promptly , and when alone , the king demanded again , `` Who are you ? 
and to whom does the child belong ? '' 
`` Your majesty , I am the daughter of your chapel musician Enke , and the child is the son of Prince Frederick William of Prussia , '' she replied , in a firm and defiant manner . 
The king 's eyes flashed as he glanced at the bold speaker . 
`` You say so , but who vouches for the truth of it ? 
You permit yourself to use a high name , to give your child an honorable father ! 
What temerity ! 
what presumption ! 
What if I should not believe you , but send you to the house of correction , at Spandau , as a slanderer , as guilty of high-treason , as a sinner and an adulteress ? '' 
`` You could not do it , sire -- you could not , '' cried Wilhelmine Enke , `` for you would also send there the honor and the name of your successor to the throne . '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
cried the king , furiously . 
`` I mean , your majesty , that the prince has holy duties toward me . 
I am the mother of that child ! '' 
`` You acknowledge your shame , and you dare confess it to me , your king , that you are the favorite , the kept mistress of the Prince of Prussia , who has already a wife that has borne him children ? 
You do not even seek to deny it , or to excuse yourself ? '' 
`` I would try to excuse myself , did I not feel that your majesty would not listen to me . '' 
`` What excuse could you offer ? 
-- there is none . '' 
`` Love is my excuse , '' cried Wilhelmine , eagerly . 
`` Oh ! 
my ruler and king , do not shake your noble head so unbelievingly ; do not look at me so contemptuously . 
Oh , Father in heaven , I implore Thee to quicken my mind , that my thoughts may become words , and my lips utter that which is burning in my soul ! 
In all these years of my poor , despised , obscure life , how often have I longed for this hour when I might stand before my king , when I might penitently clasp his knees and implore mercy for myself and my children -- those poor , nameless beings , whose existence is my accusation , and yet who are the pride and joy of my life ! 
Oh , sire , I will not accuse , to excuse myself ; I will not cast the stone at others which they have cast at me . 
But it is scarcely charitable to judge and condemn a young girl fourteen years of age , who did but obey the command of her parents , and followed the man who was the first and only one that ever whispered the word of love in her ear . '' 
`` I have heard that your parents sold their child to shame . 
Is it true ? '' 
cried the king . 
`` Sire , my father was poor ; the scanty income of a chapel musician scarcely sufficed to educate and support four children . 
The prince promised my father to educate me . '' 
`` Bah ! 
The promises of a young man of twenty-five are made without reflection , and rarely ever fulfilled . '' 
`` Sire , to the Prince of Prussia I owe all that I know , and all that I am ; his promise to my dying father was fully redeemed . '' 
`` Indeed , by whom were you taught , and what have you learned ? '' 
`` Your majesty , the prince wished , before all , that I should learn to speak French . 
Madame Girard was my French instructress , and taught me to play the guitar and spinet also . '' 
`` Oh , I presume you have learned to jabber a little French and drum a little music , '' said the king , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` I beg pardon , sire ; I have a tolerable knowledge of history and of geography . 
I am familiar with the ancient and modern poets . 
I have read a good French translation of Homer , Horace , and Virgil , with a master . 
I have studied the history of Brandenburg , of Germany , and of America . 
We have read the immortal works of Voltaire , of Jean Jacques Rousseau , and of Shakespeare , with many of our modern poets . 
My instructor has read all these works aloud to me , and he was much pleased when I repeated parts of what he had read to me some days afterward . '' 
`` You appear to have had a very learned instructor , '' remarked the king , sneeringly . 
`` What is his name ? '' 
`` His name , sire , is Prince Frederick William of Prussia . 
Yes , it is he who has taught me -- he who has made me an intelligent woman . 
However young he was when he undertook the task , he has accomplished it with fidelity , firmness , and patience . 
He loved me , and would make me worthy of him , in heart and mind . 
I shall ever be grateful to him , and only death can extinguish the love and esteem with which he in spires me . '' 
`` Suppose I command you to leave the prince ? 
Suppose I will no longer endure the scandal of this sinful relation ? '' 
`` I shall never willingly separate myself from my dear prince and master -- from the father of my two children . 
Your majesty will be obliged to force me from him , '' answered Wilhelmine , defiantly . 
`` Oh , that will not be necessary , mademoiselle , '' cried the king . 
`` There are ways enough . 
I will make known my wishes to the prince ; I will command him to leave you , and have no further communication with you . '' 
`` Sire , '' she answered , gently , `` I know that the prince is an obedient and respectful subject and servant to his king in all things , but this command he would not obey . '' 
`` He would not dare to brave my commands ! '' 
`` He would not brave them , sire . 
Oh , no ; it would be simply impossible to obey them . '' 
`` What would hinder him ? '' 
`` Love , sire ; the respect which he owes to me as the mother of his two children -- who has consecrated her love , her honor to him , and of whom no one can say that she has injured the fidelity which she has sworn to the prince -- to the man of her first and only love -- even with a word or look . '' 
`` You mean to say , that I can not separate you from the prince but by force ? '' 
`` Yes , your majesty , '' cried she , with conscious power , `` that is exactly what I mean . '' 
`` You will find yourself deceived ; you will be made to realize it , '' said the king , with a menacing tone . 
`` You know nothing of the power that lies in a legitimate marriage , and what rivals legitimate children are , whom one dares acknowledge before God -- before the world . 
Boast not of the love of the prince , but remember that an honorable solitude is the only situation becoming to you . 
Such connections bear their own curse and punishment with them . 
Hasten to avoid them . 
Lastly , I would add , never dare to mingle your impure hands in the affairs of state . 
I have been obliged to give the order to the state councillors in appointments and grants of office , not to regard the protection and recommendation of a certain high personage , as you are the real protectress and bestower of mercy . 
Take care , and never let it happen again . 
You will never venture to play the little Pompadour here , nor anything else but what your dishonor allows you ; otherwise you will have to deal with me ! 
You say that you have read Homer ; then , doubtless , you remember the story of Penelope , who , from conjugal fidelity , spun and wove , undoing at night what she had woven by day . 
It is true , you bear little resemblance to this chaste dame , but you might emulate her in spinning and weaving ; and if you are not in future retiring , I can easily make a modern Penelope of you , and have you instructed in spinning , for which you will have the best of opportunities in the house of correction at Spandau . 
Remember this , and never permit yourself to practise protection . 
I will keep the spinning-wheel and the wool ready for you ; that you may count upon . 
Remember , also , that it is very disagreeable to me that you visit my park , as I like to breathe pure air . 
Direct your promenade elsewhere , and avoid meeting me in future . '' 
`` Your majesty , I -- '' `` Silence ! 
I have heard sufficient . 
You have nothing more to say to me . 
Go , hide your head , that no one may recognize your shame , or the levity of the prince . 
Go -- and , farewell forever ! '' 
He motioned impatiently to her to retire , fastening his eyes with a fiery , penetrating glance upon her pale , agitated face , her bowed , humble attitude , and still continued to regard her as she painfully dragged herself down the walk , as if her limbs were giving way under her . 
Long stood the king gazing after her , resting upon his staff ; and as she disappeared at the end of the walk , he still stood there immovable . 
By degrees his face assumed a milder expression . 
`` He who is free from sin , let him cast the first stone at her , '' said the king , softened , as he slowly turned down the path which would lead to his carriage , waiting outside the park . 
Frederick was lost in thought , and addressed no conversation to the equerry , Von Schwerin , who sat opposite to him . 
But as they drove through the beautiful street Unten den Linden , at Berlin , Frederick glanced at the equerry , and found that he had fallen asleep , wearied with the long silence and the monotony of the drive . 
The king spoke to Alkmene , loud and earnestly , until Herr von Schwerin , awakened and startled , glanced at the king , frightened , and trying to discover whether his fearful crime against etiquette would draw upon him the royal censure . 
Frederick , however , appeared not to notice his fright , and spoke kindly to him : `` Did you not tell me , Schwerin , that Count Schmettau would sell his country residence at Charlottenburg ? '' 
`` At your service , your majesty , he asked me to purchase it , or find him a purchaser . '' 
`` How much is it worth ? '' 
`` Sire , Count Schmettau demands eight thousand dollars for it . 
There is a beautiful park belonging to it , and the house is worthy the name of a castle , so large is it . '' 
`` Why do you not buy it , if the count offered it to you ? '' 
The equerry assumed a sad mien , and answered , sighing : `` Sire , I should be the happiest of men if I could buy that charming residence , and it would be a real blessing to me if I could enjoy in summer at times the fresh air . 
My finances unfortunately , do not allow such expenses , as I am not rich , and have a large family . '' 
`` Then you are right not to spend money unnecessarily , '' said the king , quietly . 
`` You can have as much fresh air at Potsdam as can ever enter your mouth , and it costs neither you nor I any thing . 
Say to Count Schmettau that you have a purchaser for his residence at Charlottenburg . '' 
`` Oh , you are really too kind , '' cried the equerry , in an excitement of joy ; `` I do not know -- '' Here the carriage entered the palace court , and the concluding words were inaudible . 
Herr von Schwerin alighted quickly to assist the king . 
`` Say to Schmettau to present himself to my treasurer and cabinet councillor , Menkon , tomorrow morning at twelve o'clock , at Sans-Souci . '' 
The king nodded kindly to the equerry , and passed into the Swiss saloon , and farther on into the private rooms which he was accustomed to occupy whenever he remained at the capital . 
The Swiss saloon was fast filling , not alone with the generals and staff-officers of the Berlin garrison , but with the officers of the regiments from the provinces , who presented themselves at the palace according to the order of the king . 
The most of them were old and worn out , body and mind . 
They all looked morose and sorrowful . 
The great news of the approaching war with Austria had spread through the military . 
The old laurel-crowned generals of the Seven Years ' War were unwilling to go forth to earn new laurels , for which they had lost all ambition . 
Not one dared betray his secret thoughts to another , or utter a word of disapproval . 
The king 's spies were everywhere , and none could trust himself to converse with his neighbor , as he might prove to be one of them . 
There reigned an anxious , oppressive silence ; the generals and staff-officers exchanged the ordinary greetings . 
All eyes were turned toward the door through which the king would enter , bowed down , like his generals , with the cares of life , and the burden of old age . 
The king slowly entered . 
He was , indeed , an old man , like those he came amongst , and now saluted . 
An expression of imperishable youth lighted up his pale , sunken face , and his eyes flashed with as much daring and fire as thirty-eight years before , when he had assembled his young officers around him in this very hall , to announce to them that he would march against Austria . 
How many wars , how many battles , how many illusions , victories , and defeats had the king experienced in these thirty-eight years ! 
How little the youthful , fiery king of that day resembled the weak old man of to-day ; how little in common the young King Frederick had with `` Alten Fritz . '' 
And now in this feeble body dwelt the same courageous spirit . 
In the course of these years King Frederick II had become Frederick the Great ! 
And great he was to-day , this little old man -- great in his intentions and achievements , never heeding his own debility and need of repose . 
All his thoughts and endeavors concentrated on the welfare of his people and his country -- on the greatness and glory of Germany . 
Those eyes which now glanced over the circle of generals were still flashing as those of the hero-king whose look had disarmed the lurking assassin , and confounded the distinguished savant in the midst of his eloquence , so that he stammered and was silent . 
He was still Frederick the Great , who , leaning upon his staff , was surrounded by his generals , whom he called to fight for their fatherland , for Germany ! 
`` Gentlemen , '' said the king , `` I have called you together to announce to you that we must go forth to new wars , and , God willing , to new victories . 
The Emperor of Austria forces me to it , for , against all laws and customs , and against all rights of kingdoms , he thinks to bring German territory into the possession of the house of Hapsburg . 
Charles Theodore , prince-elector , having no children , has concluded a treaty with the Emperor Joseph , that at his death the electorate of Bavaria will fall to Austria . 
In consequence thereof an Austrian army has marched into Bavaria , and garrisoned the frontier . 
-- The prince-elector , Duke Charles Theodore , was not authorized to proceed thus , for , though he had no children to succeed him , he had a lawful successor in his brother 's son , Duke Charles von Zweibrucken . 
Electoral Saxony and Mecklenburg have well-founded pretensions , even if Zweibrucken were not existing . 
All these princes have addressed themselves to me , and requested me to represent them to the emperor and to the imperial government -- to protect them in their injured rights . 
I have first tried kindness and persuasion to bring back Austria from her desire of aggrandizement , but in Vienna they have repulsed every means of peaceable arbitration . 
I , as one of the rulers of the empire -LRB- and as I have reaffirmed the Westphalian treaty through the Hubertsburger treaty -RRB- , feel bound to preserve the privileges , the rights , the liberty of the German states . 
I have therefore well reflected , and decided to draw the sword -- that what the diplomats have failed to arrange with the pen should be settled with the sword . 
These are my reasons , gentlemen , which make it my duty to assemble an army ; therefore I have called you together . '' 
His fiery eyes flashed around the circle , peeling into the thin , withered faces of his generals , and encountering everywhere a grave , earnest mien . 
The king repressed with an effort a sigh ; then continued , with a mild voice : `` My feeble old age does not allow me to travel as in my fiery youth . 
I shall use a post-carriage , and you , gentlemen , have the liberty to do the same . 
On the day of battle you will find me mounted ; you will follow my example . 
Until then , farewell ! '' 
-LSB- Footnote : The king 's words . 
-- See `` Prussia , Frederick the Great , '' vol . 
iii . -RSB- 
`` Long live the king ! '' 
cried General von Krokow ; and all the generals who formerly joined in this cry of the Prussian warrior , now repeated it in weak , trembling tones . 
Frederick smiled a recognition , bowing on all sides , then turned slowly away , leaning upon his staff . 
When once more alone , the youthful expression faded from his eyes , and the gloomy shadows of old age settled down upon his thoughtful brow . 
`` They have all grown old and morose , '' said he , mildly , `` they will not show any more heroism ; the fire of ambition is quenched in their souls ! 
A warm stove must warm their old limbs . 
Oh ! 
it is a pitiful thing to grow old ; and still they call themselves the images of God ! 
Poor boasters , who , with a breath of the Almighty , are overturned and bent as a blade of grass in the sand ! '' 
