One circumstance , however , was exceedingly irksome to me . 
I perceived that , although the Prince always distinguished me by the most unequivocal tokens of his favour , yet the Princess invariably remained , in her manner towards me , cold , haughty , and reserved . 
Nay , my presence seemed often to disquiet her in an extraordinary degree , and it seemed to cost her a great effort to bestow on me now and then , for form 's sake , a few words of ordinary politeness . 
With the ladies , however , by whom she was surrounded , I had better fortune . 
My appearance seemed to have made on them a favourable impression ; and as I was often with them , I succeeded at last in acquiring the arts of gallantry , that is to say , of accommodating myself to the notions of the ladies , whoever they were , among whom I happened to be thrown , and of talking on subjects , in themselves trifling and contemptible , as if they were of some importance . 
Is not this oftentimes a key to the female heart ? 
It is not difficult to possess one 's self of the ideas that usually prevail there , and if these ideas , commonly not very deep nor sublime , are repeated and embellished by the eloquence of a handsome lover , is not this far better than downright flattery ? 
It sounds , indeed , to female ears , like a hymn of self-adoration . 
The beauty , hearing her own slender ideas thus improved , is as delighted as if she beheld herself -LRB- dressed with elegance and splendour -RRB- in a mirror . 
I was satisfied that my transformation was complete . 
Who could now have recognised in me the monk Medardus ? 
The only dangerous place for me now was the church , where I could scarcely avoid mechanically betraying the force of old habits . 
Among the constant hangers-on of the court , the physician was almost the only one , except myself , who seemed to have any decided character of his own . 
He was , therefore , partial to me , and approved highly the boldness of my expressions , by which I had strangely succeeded in banishing from the Prince 's parties , the pleasures of the pharo-table . 
It thus happened that we were often together , and spoke now of literature and the arts -- now of the goings on of those that were around us . 
For the Princess , the physician had , like myself , a high veneration ; and assured me , that it was only through her influence that the Prince was restrained from many other follies . 
It was this only that could charm away that kind of restless ennui by which he was tormented ; and it seemed often as if she were obliged to treat him as a child , and put into his hands some harmless plaything . 
I did not lose this opportunity of lamenting that I seemed to be out of favour with the Princess , without being able to explain to myself any cause for it . 
The Doctor immediately rose , and , as we happened to be in his room , brought a small miniature picture from his writing-desk , desiring me to examine it with great care . 
I did so -- but how was I confounded when I perceived that the features of the male figure whom it represented were precisely my own ! 
It was only the old fashion of hair-dressing and of garb in the portrait , and the luxuriant whiskers -LRB- Belcampo 's chef-d'oeuvre -RRB- on my part , that presented any difference . 
Without hesitation I imparted my astonishment to the physician . 
`` Well , sir , '' said he , `` it is neither more nor less than this resemblance which now terrifies and disquiets the Princess as often as you come into her presence ; for your appearance never fails to bring to her mind the recollection of a tremendous adventure , which formerly happened at this court , and which I knew not whether I ought to relate . 
`` My precursor in the duties of physician , who has been some years dead , and of whom I was a pupil , entrusted me with the particulars of that event , and at the same time gave me this picture , which represents a former favourite in the Prince 's family , known here by the name of Francesco . 
You perceive , by the way , that the miniature itself is a masterpiece of art . 
`` It is one of the numerous works of that celebrated foreign painter who was then at our court , and became a principal actor in the tragedy to which I have alluded . '' 
On contemplating the picture , my mind was overpowered by confused and stupifying apprehensions , which I vainly endeavoured to arrange into some definite shape . 
This only was certain , that some mystery , in which I was myself involved , would now be cleared up ; and I entreated the physician to wave his scruples , and acquaint me with the adventure to which he had alluded , as it probably might account to me for the extraordinary likeness between my features and those of Francesco . 
`` Truly , '' said the physician , `` I can not wonder at your curiosity being thus awakened ; and though I speak very unwillingly of these circumstances , on which , to this day , there lies a veil of mystery which I have never been able to lift up , yet you shall now hear all that I know of the matter . 
Many years have now passed since that occurrence , and the principal actors have retired altogether from the stage ; yet the mere recollection of them is here so hazardous , that I must beg of you not to repeat to any one what I may now communicate . '' 
Of course I promised secrecy , and the physician went on as follows : -- `` It happened just at the time of our Prince 's marriage , that his brother the Duke of Neuenburg returned from his travels in the society of a man whom he called Francesco , though it was known that he was not an Italian , but by birth a German . 
They brought with him also a painter , said to have acquired , as an artist , the highest celebrity . 
`` The Duke of Neuenburg was one of the handsomest men that have ever lived ; and , on this account alone , would have outshone our sovereign , even if he had not also excelled him both in vivacity and energy of mind . 
`` On the young and newly-married Princess , therefore , who was then very lively , and for whose disposition her consort was not very well suited , the Duke made an extraordinary impression . 
Without the slightest shade of criminal intentions , of any premeditated crime , the parties were gradually and almost unconsciously involved in an attachment , at first more distinguishable to by-standers than to themselves , and from which they would , on timely reflection , have fled with terror . 
`` It was the stranger Francesco alone , who , both in talents and in personal beauty , could be compared to the Duke ; and as the Duke interested our reigning Princess , so Francesco completely acquired the affections of her elder sister , who was then an inmate of our court . 
`` Francesco soon became aware of his good fortune , and did not fail to lay the craftiest plans for profiting by the advantages then put within his power . 
Meanwhile , although our sovereign was perfectly convinced of his wife 's virtue , yet the overstrained attentions of his brother , and the satisfaction with which they were received , gave him considerable vexation , and Francesco alone , who was become a great favourite , was able at certain times to keep him in good humour . 
On this man he wished to confer some distinguished situation ; but the foreigner was contented with the advantages derived from the system of favouritism , and the affection of the Princess 's unmarried sister . 
`` Such was the situation of affairs for some time . 
No particular event occurred to disturb the family ; but it was easy to perceive that some among them were in no enviable state of mind . 
At this very juncture , by the invitation probably of the Duke , there appeared with great splendour at our court a certain Italian Countess , to whom , it was said , that , in the course of his travels , he had at one time been greatly attached , and who had even been spoken of as his betrothed bride . 
`` Be this as it may , she is said to have been wonderfully beautiful , to have concentrated in her person and manners the very belle ideal of grace and elegance . 
Indeed these attributes speak for themselves in her portrait , which you may see in the gallery . 
Her presence at first greatly enlivened the court , where a kind of languor had begun to predominate . 
She outshone every lady , even the Royal Princesses not excepted . 
`` Francesco , however , after the arrival of this Italian beauty , became most unfavourably changed . 
It seemed as if he were preyed upon by some inward grief , which wore away the fresh bloom that had been formerly on his features . 
Moreover , he became peevish , reserved , and melancholy . 
He neglected even the society of his noble mistress , to whom he had before shewn such obsequious attention . 
`` After some time , too , the Duke became morose and meditative , seemingly carried away by some new passion , which he was unable to resist . 
But , above all , it was on Francesco 's mistress , the unmarried Princess , that the strange lady 's arrival had the most painful influence . 
Being naturally inclined to enthusiasm , and to feel in extremes , it seemed to her , that with the loss of Francesco 's love , all the hopes and joys of this life were , for her , withered for ever . 
`` Amid these dark clouds of disappointment and melancholy , by which all were more or less affected , the Duke was the first to recover an outward show of cheerfulness . 
That his attentions formerly to the reigning Princess had been perfectly innocent , there can be no doubt ; but these were now changed for a vehement revival of his old attachment to the Italian Countess , so that he lay once more under the same fetters , which , but a short time before he came hither , he had successfully broken ! 
`` The more that the Duke gave himself to this passion , the more remarkable for gloom and discontent was the behaviour of Francesco , who now scarcely ever made his appearance at court , but wandered about through the country alone , and was often for weeks together absent from the residenz . 
`` On the other hand , the painter , who , as I have mentioned before , had also accompanied the Duke from Italy , and who at first had been so shy and reserved , that he was almost invisible , now made his appearance very frequently in society , and laboured with great success and industry in a large room , which the Italian Countess had fitted up for him in her house , and where he took many portraits of her and of others , with matchless fidelity and strength of expression . 
`` To the reigning Princess , meanwhile , he seemed to cherish a decided aversion . 
He absolutely refused to paint her portrait , while , at the same time , of her unmarried sister he took a most perfect likeness , without her having allowed him a single sitting . 
Many other strange stories are told of this painter 's capricious and unaccountable conduct , which I do not think it necessary to detail . 
Suffice it to say , that though for the most part employed sedulously in his own profession , he seemed to be utterly careless of what others said or thought of his productions . 
One day , however , when the Duke had made some remarks which did not suit with the stranger 's particular humour , an irreconcilable and violent quarrel took place betwixt them ; and the artist only requested , that , before retiring from the court , he might be allowed to bestow some finishing touches on a favourite picture of the Italian lady , which he was then painting for his patron . 
This being agreed to , by two or three masterly strokes of his pencil , he converted in a few seconds the countenance which had been so beautiful , into the most hideous monster of deformity , on which no one could bear to look . 
Then , with the words , ` Now art thou for ever lost , ' he slowly and solemnly left the apartment . 
`` This happened when the Italian Princess was already become the betrothed bride of the Duke , and the marriage was appointed to take place in a few days . 
As to the painter 's strange conduct , less notice was taken of it , as he was , by prevalent report , liable frequently to madness . 
He returned , as it was said , to his own small and confined apartments , where he sat staring at a great piece of stretched canvass , without , as the by-standers believed , making any progress , though he himself said that he was engaged on magnificent works . 
So he completely forgot his attendance at court , and was himself forgotten . 
`` The marriage of the Duke with the Italian lady , was solemnly celebrated in the palace . 
The reigning Princess had , of course , accommodated herself to circumstances , and if she really loved her brother-in-law , had renounced a passion which was without legitimate object , and which never could have been gratified . 
`` Her unmarried sister once more seemed in high spirits , for her lover , Francesco , now re-appeared at court , more blooming and joyous than ever . 
`` The Duke , with his consent , was to inhabit a wing of the palace , which our Sovereign had ordered to be prepared for them . 
The Prince was , indeed , at that time , quite in his element . 
He was never visible , without a crowd of architects , painters , and upholsterers around him , turning over great books , and spreading out on the table plans , sketches , and outlines , which he partly devised himself ; and which , among them all , turned out sufficiently incommodious and absurd . 
`` Neither the Duke nor his bride was allowed to see any of these arrangements , till on the eve of their marriage-day , when they were led by the Prince , in a long solemn procession , into the rooms , which were really decorated with great splendour ; and on the evening of that day , the festivities were concluded by a ball , given in the great banquet salle , which was made to resemble a blooming garden . 
`` The nuptials were regularly solemnized on the following day ; and all was conducted as usual on such occasions ; till about midnight , when , from the Duke 's wing of the house , there was heard a strange disturbance , of which the noise became always louder and louder , till it reached our Sovereign 's ears , who , in great alarm , started from his bed . 
`` Having dressed himself hastily , and attended by his guards , he reached the distant corridor of his brother 's apartments , just as the servants were lifting up the dead body of the Duke , who had been found murdered , and lying at the door of the bridal chamber ! 
`` I make the narrative as short as possible . 
It is easier to conceive than describe the horror of the sovereign , the affliction of his consort , and the whole court . 
`` Of course , the first inquiries of the Prince were , how and by whom the murder had been committed ? 
Watches were placed in all the corridors . 
How , therefore , was it possible , that an assassin could have got admittance , or how could he escape if he had once got in ? 
All the private passages were searched , but in vain ! 
`` The page who usually waited on the Duke , related that he had assisted his master to undress , who was for a long while agitated by fearful and undefinable apprehensions , and had walked up and down , greatly disquieted , in his dressing-room , then , carrying a large wax candle , he had accompanied him to the anti-room of the bridal chamber . 
The Duke had there taken the light out of his hand , and sent him away . 
`` Scarcely was he out of the anti-room , when he heard a hollow stifled cry , the noise of a heavy fall , and the rattling of the overthrown candlestick . 
He then ran directly back , and , by the gleam of a lamp , which still burned , beheld the Duke stretched , dying or dead , before the door of the bridal chamber , and near him he saw lying a small bloody stiletto . 
Thereupon he directly gave the alarm . 
`` On the other hand , the Italian Duchess gave a totally different , and quite inexplicable account . 
She said , that directly after her maids had left her , the Duke had hastily come into her room without a light , and had directly put out the other lights , so that the apartment was left in darkness . 
He had remained with her a good half-hour , and had then risen and departed . 
According to her statement , it must have been only a few minutes after this that the murder was perpetrated . 
`` In short , people wore themselves out with conjectures as to who could have been the murderer , while not a single trace of him was to be obtained . 
But at this juncture , there stepped forward a certain waiting-maid of the Princess 's unmarried sister , who had been accidentally and privately a witness of the scene between the Duke and the painter , when the portrait was destroyed . 
After hearing her opinion and evidence , no one doubted that the painter was the man who had found his way secretly into the palace , and become the murderer . 
`` Orders were of course given to arrest this man ; but ere the waiting-maid 's evidence was given , he had found time to escape , and not the slightest tidings of him were to be found . 
`` After this horrible tragedy , '' continued the physician , `` the court remained sunk in the profoundest melancholy , which was shared by all the inhabitants of the town ; and it was only Francesco , -LRB- whose attachment continued unabated to the unmarried Princess , -RRB- who still seemed cheerful , and , by sympathy , spread a gleam of satisfaction through the otherwise melancholy circles . 
`` I have stated only such facts as I can vouch for on my own knowledge . 
As to the conjectures and rumours that were now abroad , they were , of course , many and various , and , especially , a strange story was told of some individual , who , on the marriage night , had played , in the dark , the part of the bridegroom . 
`` Be that as it may , the Italian Countess afterwards retired to a distant castle belonging to our Prince ; and as to her mode of life there , it was kept entirely secret , all that was made known being that her extreme grief had disgusted her with the world . 
`` Notwithstanding the influence of this horrible misfortune , Francesco 's intercourse with the sister of our reigning Princess became always more and more intimate , and the friendship of this Sovereign towards him more publicly confirmed . 
The mystery , whatever it was , that hung over this man 's birth and fortunes , had now been fully explained to him ; and at last , after many consultations and entreaties , he agreed to a private marriage between Francesco and his sister-in-law . 
The former was to be raised to a high rank in the army , under another government , where our Prince had influence ; and not till that event took place , was his marriage to be made public . 
`` The day of the solemnization arrived . 
The Prince and Princess , with two other confidential witnesses , of whom my predecessor was one , were the only persons present at this occasion . 
One page , who was also in the secret , kept watch at the chapel-door . 
`` The couple were kneeling before the altar . 
The Prince 's confessor , a venerable old man , after an appropriate prayer and lecture , began the ceremony , when , to the astonishment of every one , Francesco grew suddenly pale as marble , staring at some object which as yet none but himself beheld . 
` What would ` st thou have ? ' 
cried he , in a deep hollow voice , and letting go his bride 's hand . 
`` Following the direction of his looks , they now observed , leaning against a pillar of the church , in his Italian dress , with a dark violet-coloured mantle drawn closely round him -- the painter ! 
He continued to fix his dark glaring eyes on Francesco , who seemed transfixed with some inexplicable apprehension . 
`` The Princess nearly fainted , and every one but the priest was too much astonished to speak -- ` Why should the figure of this man affright you ? ' 
said he , to Francesco . 
` It is true that his presence here was unexpected ; but if your own conscience is at rest , wherefore should you tremble before him ? ' 
`` Then Francesco , who had till now kept this kneeling posture at the altar , started up , and , with a small stiletto in his hand , rushed towards the painter . 
But before he reached him , he himself fell , with a frightful cry , to the ground , and in the same moment the painter vanished behind the pillar . 
`` The marriage ceremony , of course , was thought of no more . 
All started up as from a dream , and ran to the help of Francesco , who had fainted , and lay on the ground as if dead . 
To avoid risk of publicity , the two witnesses , with the page 's help , carried him into the Prince 's apartments . 
When he recovered from his faint , he demanded vehemently that he should be conveyed to his own lodgings , and left there alone . 
To the Prince 's questions as to his strange conduct in the church , he would make no answer whatever . 
`` On the following morning , Francesco had fled from the residenz , taking with him all the valuables which the favour of the late Duke , and of our Sovereign , had bestowed upon him . 
The latter used every possible means to unravel these mysteries , and , above all , to explain the ghostly apparition of the painter . 
The chapel had only two entrances , of which one led from the rooms of the palace to the seats near the high altar ; the other , from the great corridor into the aisle of the chapel . 
This last entrance had been watched by the page , in order that no prying observer should gain admittance . 
The other had been carefully closed , so that it remained inexplicable both how the painter appeared in , and vanished from , the chapel . 
`` Another circumstance very remarkable was noticed by the page . 
This person had been the confidential attendant of the late Duke , and he declared himself convinced , that the stiletto which Francesco had continued to grasp convulsively during his faint , was the same which he had seen lying by the body of his master on that fatal evening , and which had soon afterwards been unaccountably lost . 
`` Not long after Francesco 's flight , news came of the Italian Duchess . 
On the very day when the former should have been married , she had been delivered of a son , and soon after her accouchement had died . 
The Prince deplored her untimely fate , though the circumstances of the bridal-night had weighed so heavily on her , that her future life must , of necessity , have been unhappy . 
Nor were there wanting individuals malicious enough to raise against her evil rumours and suspicions . 
Her son never appeared here , but was educated in distant countries , under the Italian title of Count Victorin . 
`` The Princess -- I mean the sister-in-law of our Sovereign -- being reduced to utter despair by these horrid events following like links of a chain so closely on one another , determined on devoting the rest of her life to the cloister . 
She is , as you already know , Abbess of the Cistertian Convent at Kreuzberg . 
`` But , between these adventures which happened in our court , there has lately been traced a wonderful , and almost supernatural coincidence , with others which occurred very lately at the castle of the Baron von F -- , in the Thuringian mountains , and by which his house was thrown precisely into the same state of distraction and misery under which ours had suffered . 
You must know that the Abbess , who had been moved with the distress of a poor woman with a child in her arms , who came to her from a pilgrimage to the Convent of the Lime-Tree '' -- Here the entrance of a visitor put an end to the physician 's narrative ; and hastily taking my leave , I succeeded tolerably well in concealing the tempest of emotions which now raged within me . 
Scarcely a doubt remained on my mind that Francesco had been my father . 
He had murdered the Duke with the identical stiletto with which , in self-defence , I had afterwards killed Hermogen ! 
Here , then , was the origin of that hereditary guilt , of which the darkening clouds hung like a curse upon my existence , and which it should have been my earnest endeavour to expiate , by a life of voluntary suffering , of penance , and exemplary piety . 
Hence , therefore , I resolved instantly to follow the Prior 's injunctions , and betake myself to Italy ; thus breaking out at once from that dangerous circle into which I had been seduced by the malicious powers of darkness . 
On that very evening , however , I had been engaged to a party at court , and went accordingly . 
The assembly was as numerous and varied as that which I have described on a former occasion ; but , through them all , there prevailed one only subject of conversation , viz . 
the extraordinary beauty of a young lady who had arrived only the day preceding at our court , and had been appointed one of the maids of honour to the Princess . 
At last the folding-doors were thrown open , the Princess , as usual , stepped in , but not with her usual attendant . 
The stranger was with her , and in that stranger I recognized at once -- AURELIA !! 
Who is there , over the wide world , who has not , at one period or another , in a more or less degree , felt the mysterious influences of love ? 
-- Whoever thou art , then , courteous reader , who shalt , after the lapse of years , turn over these papers , recall , I beseech you , to recollection that noontide interval of dazzling brightness -- contemplate once more that beautiful image , which came , like an impersonization of the abstract spirit of love , from divine regions , to meet you . 
At that time , it was through her , -- through her alone , that thou seemed ` st assured of thine own existence ! 
Canst thou not yet remember , how the rushing streams , the waving trees , and the balmy winds of evening , spoke to thee , in articulate and intelligible accents , of her , and of the prevailing passion which possessed thy whole heart and soul ? 
-- Canst thou yet behold how the flowers unfolded their bright beaming eyes , bearing to thine from her kisses and salutation ? 
Yet , suppose that she herself had actually come -- that she vowed to be thine , and thine only -- to live for thee alone -- then didst thou fold her in thy embraces , and it seemed as if Heaven opened its eternal realms to receive you -- as if thou could ` st raise thyself with her above all the petty sorrows or enjoyments of this every-day and earthly sphere . 
Yet scarcely hadst thou formed such hopes ere she was lost ! 
The bland illusion was broken . 
No longer could ` st thou hear the music of her celestial voice ; and only the sorrowful complaints of the despairing and forsaken lover sounded amid the desolate loneliness ! 
If then , reader , to me unknown ! 
-- if thou hast ever been persecuted by such a destiny , join , then , and sympathize with the grief of the penitent monk , who , recollecting still the sunny gleams of his youthful attachment , weeps on his hard couch , and whose fearful groans reverberate , in the stillness of night , through the gloomy aisles of the convent ! 
-- But thou , too , in spirit to me related , doubtless wilt concur in my belief , that it is not till after death , that the mysterious gifts and enjoyments of this passion can be obtained and fulfilled ! 
This truth is , indeed , announced to us by many a hollow prophesying voice , which rises on our ears from the immeasurable depths of eternity ; and as in those rites , celebrated by our earliest ancestors , -LRB- the children of nature , -RRB- death appears also to us the high festival of love ! 
I have said before , that my leading object in these pages was rapid , concise narrative , without any attempt at description . 
But of my emotions on meeting Aurelia , that evening , in the palace , no words could , however skilfully laboured , convey any adequate impression . 
I was struck as if with a thundershock . 
My breast heaved -- my heart beat convulsively -- and every pulse and vein throbbed almost audibly . 
`` To her ! 
-- to her ! '' 
-- It seemed as if an over-powering impulse would force me to thrust aside the contemptible mob of insipid worldlings -- of every-day flatterers , scarcely possessed of one rational idea , by whom she was surrounded -- to crush , like webs of gossamer , those despicable barriers , and snatch her to my arms , in all the wild frenzy of undisguised passion ! 
Methought I could have exclaimed aloud -- `` What , unhappy girl , dost thou strive against ? 
With that supernatural power , which has irresistibly and unalterably chained thee to me ? 
-- Am I not thy fate , and art thou not indeed mine for ever ? '' 
Yet notwithstanding these emotions , I contrived , far better than formerly , at the Baron 's castle , to conceal from the bystanders my agitation . 
Besides , the eyes of all were directed to Aurelia ; and thus , in a circle of people , who to my concerns were perfectly indifferent , I contrived to move about , without being particularly remarked or spoken to , which to me would have been intolerable , as I could but see , hear , and think of her alone . 
Let no one insist that a truly beautiful girl appears to most advantage in a homely household dress . 
On the contrary , the beauty of woman , like that of flowers in a parterre , is then most attractive and irresistible when they are arrayed in their fullest pomp and magnificence . 
Say , then , oh lover ! 
to whom I have before addressed myself , when thou for the first time beholdest the empress of thy heart -- who had before worn a simple garb , now attired with splendour and gleaming , the cynosure of a brilliant party -- did not a new and nameless rapture vibrate through every nerve and vein ? 
She would appear to you indeed so strange ! 
but this , joined to the knowledge that she was in reality the same , heightened the charms by which thy soul was wholly subjected . 
What unspeakable pleasure , if thou could ` st , by stealth , seize and press her hand in the crowd , and say to thyself , she , who is here the magnet of all eyes , is mine by indissoluble bonds , and lives for me alone ! 
Thus I beheld Aurelia on that evening dressed with becoming splendour for her first introduction at court . 
Then the spirit of evil once more became powerful within me , and lifted up his internal voice , to which I now bent a willing ear -- `` Seest thou not now , Medardus , '' it began , `` how thou triumph ` st over all the conditional laws and limitations of this life -- how Destiny now submits herself to thy will , and only knots more firmly the threads which thou thyself hadst spun ? '' 
There were many other women at court who might well have passed for beautiful , but before the dazzling charms of Aurelia , they faded away into utter insignificance . 
A kind of inspiration now seemed to take possession of the most insipid and common-place characters . 
Even the old courtiers gave up their usual strain of unmeaning talk , and visibly exerted themselves , in order to appear to the best advantage in the eyes of the beautiful stranger . 
Aurelia received all this homage with looks fixed on the ground , and with deep blushes ; but now , when the Prince assembled the elder courtiers about himself , and many a handsome youth timidly and respectfully drew near her , she began , by degrees , to lose her embarrassment , and to seem more cheerful . 
There was , in particular , a certain Major of the garde d'honneur , who succeeded in attracting a good deal of her attention , so that she at last appeared occupied with him in lively discourse . 
I knew this Major to be a decided favourite of the female sex ; with a fine ear , he could catch even the very tone , sentiment , and voice of the person whom he addressed , so that the deceived listener seemed to hear a miraculous anticipation of her own thoughts -- a chord struck in perfect unison . 
I now stood not far from Aurelia , who appeared to take no notice of me . 
Many times I was on the point of going up to her , but , as if bound by iron fetters , I could not move from the spot on which I stood . 
The bitterness of envy and jealousy possessed my heart . 
At last , as I steadfastly gazed on Aurelia and her fortunate companion , methought that the Major 's features were changed into those of Victorin ! 
As if actuated by some demon , I wholly lost all self-possession . 
In a convulsed tone of bitter scorn and mockery , I laughed aloud -- `` Ha , ha , ha ! 
-- Thou revenant ! 
-- Thou cursed libertine ! '' 
cried I , `` has thy bed then , in the devil 's abyss , been so downy , that , in frenzied passion , thou darest aspire to the chosen paramour of the Monk ? '' 
I know not if I actually uttered these words , but I heard myself laugh , and started up as from a dream , when the old Court-Marshal , taking my arm , gently inquired , `` What makes you so merry , Mr Leonard ? '' 
An ice-cold shuddering passed over my whole frame . 
Were not these the identical words of the pious brother Cyrillus , when , at the time of my investiture , he remarked my sinful laughter ? 
-- Scarcely was I able to utter some incoherent nonsense in reply -- I felt conscious that Aurelia was no longer near to me , but did not venture to look up to see what had become of her . 
Instinctively , I resolved to make my escape , and ran with my utmost speed through the illuminated apartments . 
Doubtless , my appearance was in the utmost degree disordered , for I remarked how every one cleared the way for me as if seized with horror and affright . 
At length , I arrived at the outer-door , and leapt headlong rather than ran down the broad marble staircase . 
Henceforward I completely avoided the court ; for to see Aurelia again , without betraying the mystery which it was my interest to conceal , seemed to me impossible . 
Abandoned to my own reveries , I ran through the fields and woods , thinking of her , and beholding her alone . 
My conviction always became more certain that some mysterious destiny bound up her fate indissolubly with mine , and that my pursuit of her , which had many times appeared to me as an unpardonable crime , was but the fulfilment of an eternal and unalterable decree . 
Thus encouraging myself , I laughed at the danger which now threatened me , if Aurelia should recognize in me the murderer of Hermogen ! 
Besides , this appeared to me very improbable ; and , meanwhile , the attentions of those fluttering youths who laboured to win for themselves the good graces of her who was altogether and exclusively mine , filled me with the utmost scorn and contempt for their endeavours . 
`` What , '' said I , `` are to me these Counts , Freyherrs , Chamberlains , and military officers , in their motley coats bedaubed with lace , and hung with orders ? 
What are they more than gaudy impertinent insects , which , if they became troublesome , I could with one blow crush to annihilation ? '' 
Reflecting on the chapel adventure of the Cistertian Convent , it seemed to me as if , robed in my capuchin tunic , I could step in among them with Aurelia , habited like a bride , in my arms , and that this proud and haughty Princess should be forced even to sanction the marriage , and prepare the bridal festival for that conquering and triumphant monk , whom she now so much despised . 
Labouring with such thoughts , I frequently pronounced aloud , and unconsciously , the name of Aurelia ; and , as before in the Capuchin Convent , laughed and howled like a madman ! 
But , ere long , this tempest was laid , and I began quietly to take counsel with myself in what manner I was now to act . 
Thus I was one morning gliding through the park , considering whether it would be prudent for me to attend another evening party at court , which had been announced to me , when some one touched me on the shoulder . 
It was the physician . 
To my great surprise , after the usual salutations , he looked steadfastly in my face , took hold of my arm , and requested that I would allow him to feel my pulse . 
`` What 's the meaning of all this ? '' 
cried I , with some impatience . 
-- `` Nay , '' said he , `` there is a sort of madness going about here , that seizes all at once upon honest Christian people , and makes them utter tremendous noises , though some will have it that the said noises are nothing more than very immoderate laughter . 
At the same time , this may be all a misconception ; this devil of madness may be only a slight fever , with heat in the blood ; therefore I beg of you , sir , allow me to feel your pulse . '' 
`` I assure you , sir , '' said I , `` that I am well , and by no means understand the drift of this discourse . '' 
The physician , however , had kept hold of my arm , and now taking out his watch , counted my pulse with great precision . 
His conduct , indeed , puzzled me completely , and I entreated of him to explain himself . 
`` Do you not know , then , Mr Leonard , '' replied he , `` that your behaviour has lately brought the whole court into the utmost confusion and consternation ? 
Since that time , the lady of the upper Chamberlain has been almost perpetually in hysterics ; and the President of the Consistorial Court has been obliged to put off hearing the weightiest causes , because it was your pleasure to tramp with all your might upon his gouty toes ; so that , now confined to his arm-chair , he sits at home roaring and cursing most notably . 
This happened when you were running out of the hall , after you had laughed in such a demoniacal tone without any perceptible reason , that all were seized with the utmost horror . '' 
At that moment I thought of the Court-Marshal , and said that I indeed recollected having laughed in that sudden manner , but that my conduct surely could not have been attended by such consequences , as the Marshal had only asked me , with great coolness , `` Why I was so merry ? '' 
`` Nay , nay , '' answered the physician , `` that will not prove much -- The Marshal is such a homo impavidus , that the very devil himself could scarcely put him out of his way -- He retained his ordinary placidity of manner , but the Consistorial President , on the other hand , was exceedingly disturbed in mind as well as in body , and maintained seriously , that none but the devil could have laughed in such a style . 
-- But what is worst of all , our beautiful Aurelia was seized with such excessive terror , that all the efforts of the family to quiet her were in vain , -- and she was soon obliged to retire , to the utter despair of the company . 
At the moment too , when you , Mr Leonard , so charmingly laughed , the Baroness Aurelia is said to have shrieked out the name , `` Hermogen ! '' 
Now what may be the meaning of all this ? 
-- You are generally a pleasant , lively , and prudent man , Mr Leonard , and I can not regret having confided to you the story of Francesco , which , if all suggestions be true , must be to you particularly intelligible and instructive ! '' 
During this discourse , the physician had continued to hold my arm , and to gaze steadfastly in my face . 
Tired of this restraint , I disengaged myself with some roughness -- and answered -- `` I really know not how to interpret all this discourse of yours , sir ; but I must confess , that when I saw the beautiful Aurelia surrounded by that tribe of conceited young gentry , a very bitter remembrance from my early life was called up in my mind ; and that , seized with a kind of angry scorn at the behaviour of such empty-brained coxcombs , I forgot in whose presence I was , and laughed aloud in a manner that would only have been warrantable when I was alone . 
I am truly sorry that I have unintentionally brought about so much mischief ; but I have done penance on that score , having for some time denied myself the pleasure of being at court . 
I hope that the Prince 's family and the Baroness Aurelia will excuse me . '' 
`` Alas ! 
dear Mr Leonard , '' said the Doctor , `` one is indeed subject to strange attacks and varieties of mind , which we might yet easily resist , if we were but pure in heart , and quiet in conscience . '' 
`` Who is there , '' said I vehemently , `` on this earthly sphere , that may boast of being so ? '' 
-- The physician suddenly changed his looks and tone . 
Mildly and seriously he said -- `` Mr Leonard , you appear to me to be really and truly sick : your looks are pale and disordered -- your eyes are sunk , and gleam with a strange kind of fire -- your pulse , too , is feverish , and your voice sounds strangely . 
-- Shall I prescribe something for you ? '' 
`` Poison ! '' 
answered I , in a kind of hollow whisper . 
-- `` Ho , ho , '' said the physician , `` does it stand thus with you ? 
-- Nay , nay , instead of poison , rather the tranquillizing and sedative remedy of pleasant society , and moderate dissipation . 
It may , however , be , that '' -- -LRB- hesitating -RRB- -- `` It is wonderful indeed , but -- '' `` I must beg of you , sir , '' said I , now quite angry , `` not to torment me in that manner by your broken hints , but at once to speak out . '' 
`` Hold ! '' 
answered the Doctor . 
`` Not so fast , Mr Leonard -- yonder comes the Princess -- there are in this world the strangest delusions , and for my part , I feel almost a conviction that people have here built up an hypothesis which a few minutes ' explanation will dissolve into nothing . 
Yonder , as I said , comes the Princess with Aurelia . 
-- Do you make use of this accidental rencontre . 
Offer your own excuses for your behaviour . 
Properly , indeed , your only crime is , that you have laughed -- in an extraordinary tone it is true , and rather inopportunely . 
But who can help it , if people with weak nerves have on that occasion chosen to be so absurdly terrified ? 
-- Adieu ! '' 
The physician started away with that vivacity which to him was peculiar . 
-- The Princess and Aurelia were coming down the walk to meet me . 
I trembled ; but with my whole strength laboured to regain composure , for after the mysterious discourse of the physician , I felt that it was my duty on the instant to defend my character . 
Resolutely , therefore , I went forward to meet them ; but no sooner had Aurelia fixed her eyes upon me than she became deadly pale , and to my utter astonishment , with a suppressed scream , she fell down in a fainting fit , to the ground . 
I wished to assist her , but with looks of aversion and horror , the Princess then motioned me away , at the same time calling loudly for help ! 
As if hunted by a thousand devils and furies , I ran away homewards through the park -- I shut myself up in my lodgings , and gnashing my teeth with rage and despair , threw myself on the bed . 
Evening came , and then the dark hours of night , and I still lay there obstinately cherishing my grief . 
At last I heard the outer gate of the house open , and many voices murmuring and whispering confusedly together . 
Then there was a noise of heavy steps tottering and clattering up the staircase , -- and with three hollow knocks on my door , I was commanded to rise and open it in the name of the magistracy . 
Without clearly comprehending the danger that awaited me , I yet felt an instinctive conviction that I was now for ever lost . 
To save myself instantly by flight -- This was my only thought , and I flew to the window , tearing open the lattice . 
This , however , availed me nothing , -- for before the house door , I saw a troop of armed men , one of whom directly observed me , and at the same moment , the door of my apartment was burst in -- several men immediately stood around me , whom I recognized for officers of police , and who shewed me an order of the Justiciary Court for my immediate imprisonment . 
Any attempt at resistance would now have been in vain . 
They led me down stairs , and placed me in a carriage , which stood there ready to receive me , and which immediately drove off rapidly , through the streets . 
When arrived at the place which seemed that of my destination , after being led through divers passages and corridors ; also up staircases that staircases were none , but seemed -LRB- having no steps -LSB- 1 -RSB- -RRB- to be like the side of a mountain ; I inquired `` Where I was ? '' 
I received for answer , `` In the prison of the upper castle . '' 
In this place , according to information already received on the arrestment of others , I knew that dangerous and treasonable criminals were shut up during the time that their trial was going on , or was in preparation . 
-LSB- Footnote 1 : This is exemplified in the -LRB- old -RRB- royal palace at Berlin . -RSB- 
My apartment was comfortless and ghastly enough ; but , in a little time , my bed and some other furniture were brought , and the gaoler asked if I wanted anything more . 
To get rid of him , I answered `` No ; '' and at last was left alone . 
The receding steps through the long-sounding passages , with the opening and shutting of many doors , if I had not known it already , would have sufficiently made me aware that I was in one of the innermost prisons of the fortress . 
It was to myself inconceivable , how , during a pretty long drive , I had remained quite quiet , nay , under a kind of stunning and stupefaction of the senses . 
I beheld all images that passed before me , as if they existed only in the half-effaced colours of a faded picture . 
Now , too , I did not resign myself to sleep , but to a kind of faint or swoon , paralysing the faculty of clear thought , and yet leaving me awake to the most horrible and fantastic apprehensions . 
When I awoke in the bright light of the morning , I , for the first time , gradually took counsel with myself , and fully recollected all that had happened , and whither I had been brought . 
As to the room wherein I lay , its inconvenience made less impression on me than it would have done upon another . 
The vaulted roof , and want of comfort , only reminded me of my cell in the Capuchin Convent ; and the chamber would scarcely have appeared to me a prison , if it had not been that the small and only window was strongly barred with iron , and so high , that I could scarcely reach it with my upstretched hands , far less look out from it on the prospect . 
Only a narrow sunbeam fell through this high loop-hole ; and being anxious to examine the environs of my prison , I drew my bed to the wall under it ; over this placed my table , and was just in the act of mounting up , when my gaoler stepped in and seemed very much surprised at my proceedings . 
He inquired roughly what I was about there ; and on receiving for answer , that I only wished , for diversion , to look out at the window , he did not say a word ; but , in significant silence , made the bed , the table , and chair , be taken away : after which , having set down my breakfast , he again disappeared . 
After about an hour , he came back , accompanied by two other men , and led me through long passages , up stairs and down stairs , till I entered , at last , into an audience-hall of moderate dimensions , where one of the supreme judges awaited me . 
By his side sat a young man as secretary , to whom he afterwards dictated whatever information he got from me , in answer to his questions . 
I had to thank the influence of my former station at Court , and the respect with which I had long been treated by all ranks , for the politeness now shewn to me by this judge . 
However , I was convinced that it could only be suspicions , founded on Aurelia 's extraordinary conduct , which had led to my arrestment . 
The judge 's first demand was , that I should give him a clear and concise account of my former life . 
Instead of answering directly to this , I begged to know whether I had not , in the first place , a right to know the cause of my sudden imprisonment . 
He told me that I should , in due time , have information of the crimes with which I was charged ; but that , meanwhile , it was of the utmost importance that he should learn the exact course of my life up to that day when I first arrived at the residenz ; and he must remind me that , as the court possessed ample means to detect the slightest deviation from truth , I should be watchful for my own sake , to avoid any attempt at deception . 
This admonishment of the judge -LRB- a little spare man , with red hair , staring eyes , and an absurdly croaking voice -RRB- was by no means lost upon me . 
I recollected that I had already ventured to give the name of my birth-place , and some account of my life , to one of the court ladies ; and that the story which I had now to weave , must of necessity be such , as to harmonize with that which I had already promulgated . 
It was also requisite to avoid all marvellous and intricate adventures . 
Moreover , to lay the scene , as much as possible , in a country so distant , that inquiries into the reality of my references would be tedious and difficult . 
At that moment too , there came into my remembrance , a young Pole , with whom I had studied in the college at Königswald . 
I knew the circumstances of his life , and as the safest method now in my power , resolved to appropriate them as my own . 
Thus prepared , I set out as follows : -- `` My arrestment , no doubt , has arisen from the imputation against me of some heavy crime . 
For a considerable period , I have lived here under the eye of the Prince , and all the town 's - people , and during that time , have been guilty of no crime nor misdemeanour ; consequently it must be some stranger lately arrived here who has accused me of a crime formerly committed ; and as my conscience assures me that I am completely free from any such guilt , I can only account for what has occurred , by supposing that an unhappy personal resemblance betwixt myself and some person unknown , has led to the mistake . 
`` However , it seems to me not a little severe , that on account of suppositions merely , -LRB- for here there can exist nothing more , -RRB- I should be thus thrown into prison , and brought like a criminal for examination . 
But why have I not been confronted at once with my rash , and perhaps malicious accuser ? 
I doubt not that individual will be found at last to be some wicked impostor , or , at best , some misguided fool , who -- '' `` Softly -- softly , Mr Leonard , '' croaked the judge . 
`` Correct yourself , otherwise your words may strike against some high personage ; and , besides , I can assure you , that the individual by whom you , Mr Leonard , have been recognized as -- '' -LRB- here he bit himself in the lip -RRB- `` is in truth , neither rash nor foolish , but '' -- -LRB- hesitating -RRB- `` and besides , we have unquestionable intelligence from -- in the Thuringian mountains . '' 
Here he named the residence of the Baron von F. ; and I perceived immediately the dangers which threatened me . 
It was obvious that Aurelia had recognized in me the monk , whom she probably looked upon as the murderer of her brother . 
This monk , however , was Medardus , the preacher of the Capuchin Convent , and as such had been recognized by the Baron 's steward Reinhold . 
The Abbess , however , knew that this Medardus was the son of Francesco , and thus , my resemblance to him , which had so long puzzled the Princess , must now probably have corroborated into certainty the suspicions which the sisters had , no doubt , by letter communicated to each other . 
It was possible even , that intelligence had been received from the Capuchin Convent ; that I had been carefully watched upon my journey ; and that they had unequivocally identified my person with that of Medardus . 
All these possibilities came crowding on my recollection , and forced me to perceive the whole hazard of my situation . 
The judge , while I was occupied in this reverie , still continued to talk on , which was very advantageous , for I had time to repeat to myself the almost unutterable name of the Polish town which I had assigned to the old lady at court as the place of my birth . 
Scarcely , then , had the judge again repeated his gruff demand , that I would concisely inform him as to my past course of life , than I once more began -- `` My proper name is Leonard Krczinski ; and I am the only son of a Polish nobleman , who had sold his property , and lived privately in the town of Kwicziczwo . '' 
-- `` How -- what ? '' 
said the judge , endeavouring in vain to pronounce after me either my name , or that of the town to which I had referred . 
The secretary had no notion how he was to set the words on paper ; I was obliged to write down both names myself , and then went on -- `` You perceive , sir , how difficult it is for a German tongue to imitate these words of my language , which are so overburdened with consonants , and herein consists the reason why I have chosen to lay aside my surname altogether , and bear only my christian name of Leonard . 
`` But this is , indeed , the only mystery or singularity which I have to unfold . 
The rest of my life is the simplest and most ordinary that could be imagined . 
My father , who was himself a man of good education , approved of my decided propensity to literature and the arts , and just before his death , had resolved on sending me to Cracow , to live there under the care of a clergyman related to him , by name Stanislaus Krczinski . 
After that event , being my father 's sole heir , I was left the uncontrolled choice of my own actions . 
I therefore sold the small remnant that was left of a paternal property , called up some debts that were due to my father , and went with the pecuniary proceeds to Cracow , where I studied some years under the guardianship of my relation . 
`` From thence I travelled to Dantzig and Königsberg ; at last I was driven , as if by irresistible impulse , to make a journey towards the south . 
I trusted that the remainder of my small fortune would be sufficient to carry me through , and that I should at last obtain a fixed situation at some university ; but in this town I had probably found my means exhausted , if it had not been that one night 's luck at the Prince 's pharo-table enabled me to live comfortably for some time , after which I intended to prosecute my journey into Italy . 
`` As to anything truly remarkable or worthy of being related -- no such adventure has ever occurred in my life . 
Yet perhaps , -LRB- here I recollected myself , -RRB- I ought not to say this , for I have at least one singular occurrence to record . 
It would have been quite easy for me to prove exactly the truth of all that I have now deposed , had not a very strange chance deprived me of my portefeuille , in which was contained my pass , my journal , and various letters , which would have supplied ample documents for that purpose . '' 
By this conclusion the judge was visibly surprised . 
It was evidently something unexpected ; he fixed his sharp staring eyes upon me , and then , in a tone somewhat ironical , requested me to explain what strange accident had thus unluckily put it out of my power to prove -LRB- as might have been hoped for -RRB- my assertions . 
`` Some months ago , '' said I , `` I was on my way hither by the road leading through the mountains . 
The fine season of the year , and the romantic scenery , made me resolve to perform the journey on foot . 
One day , being much fatigued , I sat in the public room of an inn at a small village . 
I had there got some refreshments , and had drawn out a leaf from my pocket-book , in order to take a drawing of some old houses that had struck my fancy . 
`` At this time there arrived at the inn a horseman , whose extraordinary dress and wild looks excited in me much astonishment . 
He came into the public room obviously striving with much vain effort to look cheerful and unconcerned , took his place opposite to me , and called for drink , casting on me from time to time dark and suspicious glances . 
The man seemed to me to be half mad , or something worse . 
I by no means liked such company , and therefore , merely to avoid him , stepped out into the court . 
Soon afterwards , the stranger also came out , paid the innkeeper , hastily bowed to me , and remounting his horse , rode off at a rapid pace . 
`` Afterwards , as I was in the act of setting out myself , I remembered my portefeuille , which I had left on the table of the public room . 
I went and found it lying where I had left it , and , in my hurry , believed all was right . 
It was not till the following day , that , wishing to refer to my pocket-book , I found the portefeuille was not mine , but had , in all probability , belonged to the stranger , who must have , by mistake , put up mine into his pocket , and left his own in its place . 
`` In the latter there was nothing but letters and cards , which to me were unintelligible , addressed to Count Victorin . 
This portefeuille , with the Count 's papers , will be found still among my effects . 
In mine , which was lost , I had , as before mentioned , my pass , my journal , and , as now occurs to me , even my baptism certificate , the production of which would at once have confirmed whatever regarding myself I have alleged . '' 
The judge here desired that I would give him an accurate description , from head to foot , of the stranger 's personal appearance . 
Accordingly , I patched up a skilful composition from the features and dress of the late Count Victorin , and of myself when on my flight from the Baron 's castle . 
To the judge 's cross-questioning as to all the minutest circumstances of this meeting , to which there almost seemed no end , I continued to answer as quietly and decisively as possible , till at last the fiction that I had thus invented , rounded itself in such manner in my own mind , that I actually believed all that I had asserted , and ran no risk whatever of falling into contradictions . 
Besides , there were other advantages ; my first object indeed had only been to justify my possession of these letters of Count Victorin , which would be found in my portefeuille ; but , by the method that I had chosen to fulfil this purpose , I had luckily raised up an imaginary personage , -LRB- one at least who no longer existed in reality , -RRB- who might hereafter , as need required , play the part either of the fugitive Medardus , or of the Count Victorin . 
Afterwards , it occurred to me also that probably Euphemia 's papers must have been examined ; that among them there were no doubt letters paving the way for Victorin 's plan of appearing as a monk at the castle , and that this would form a fresh nucleus of clouds sufficient to wrap the whole affair in impenetrable mystery . 
Thus my internal fantasy continued to work , during the whole time of my examination ; and there were always new methods suggesting themselves , by which I might avoid the risk of discovery ; so that at last I believed myself secure against the very worst that could happen . 
I now waited in hopes that the judge would have recourse to the criminal accusation which had been entered against me , and concluded that I had said quite enough as to the fortune and adventures of my own past life . 
I was mistaken , however , for he seemed as willing to go on with his tiresome questions as if he had but just begun . 
Among other inquiries , he asked , `` For what reason I had formed the wish of escaping out of prison ? '' 
I assured him that no such thought had ever entered my mind , and that I had only wished to look out through the window . 
The gaoler 's testimony , however , as to the piled-up bed , chair , and table , seemed here much against me . 
At last , after a most tedious interview , the judge finally assured me , that if I attempted any prank of that sort again , I must , of necessity , be bound to the ground with iron chains . 
I was then led back to my prison . 
My bed , as before mentioned , had been removed , and a straw mattress in its stead laid on the ground . 
The table was firmly screwed down , and , in place of the chair , I found a very low wooden bench . 
Many days passed over in dreary captivity , without any farther examination , and without the slightest variety . 
The time of a prisoner is seldom or never a blank ; it is filled up by horrible phantoms and distorted reveries , such as have often been described , though mine probably were of a new character . 
The detail of them , however , is not within the limits of my present undertaking ; I record only simple facts , in the manner of an obtuse old chronicler ; and if there be a colouring of imagination , it is not only unsought , but unwelcome and involuntary . 
During these three days , I did not behold the features of any living being , except the peevish face of an old sub-janitor , who brought my food , and in the evening lighted my lamp . 
Hitherto , I had felt like a warrior , who , in a mood of martial excitement , was determined , at all , risks , to meet danger and fight his way to the last ; but such passion had now time enough to decline entirely away . 
I fell into a dark melancholy trance , during which all things became indifferent . 
Even the cherished vision of Aurelia had faded , or floated in dim colours before me . 
But unless I had been in body as much disordered as in mind , this state of apathy could not , of necessity , continue long . 
In a short time my spirit was again roused , only to feel in all its force the horrid influence of nausea and oppression , which the dense atmosphere of the prison had produced , and against which I vainly endeavoured to contend . 
In the night I could no longer sleep . 
In the strange flickering shadows which the lamp-light threw upon the walls , myriads of distorted visages , one after another , or hundreds at a time , seemed to be grinning out upon me . 
To avoid this annoyance , I extinguished my lamp , and drew the upper mattress over my head -- but in vain ! 
It was now dark , indeed , but the spectres were visible by their own light , like portraits painted on a dark ground , and I heard more frightfully the hollow moans and rattling chains of the prisoners , through the horrid stillness of the night . 
Often did it seem to me as if I heard the dying groans of Hermogen and Euphemia . 
`` Am I then guilty of your destruction ? 
Was it not your own iniquity that brought you under the wrath of my avenging arm ? '' 
One night I had broken out furiously with these words , when , on the silence that for a moment succeeded , there distinctly and unequivocally arose a long deep-drawn sigh or groan , differing from the noises which had disturbed me before . 
The latter might have been imaginary -- this was assuredly real , and the sound was reverberated through the vault . 
Driven to distraction , I howled out -- `` It is thou , Hermogen ! 
-- the hour of thy vengeance is come -- there is for me no hope of rescue ! '' 
* * * * * It might be on the tenth night of my confinement , when , half-fainting with terror , I lay stretched out on the cold floor of my prison . 
I distinctly heard on the ground directly under me a light , but very audible knocking , which was repeated at measured intervals . 
I listened attentively . 
The noise was continued , as if with the determination to attract attention , and occasionally I could distinguish a strange sound of laughter , that also seemed to come out of the earth . 
I started from the floor , and threw myself on the straw couch ; but the beating continued , with the same detestable variety of laughter and groans . 
At last I heard a low , stammering , hoarse voice syllabically pronounce my name -- `` Me-dar-dus ! 
-- Me-dar-dus ! '' 
-- My blood ran ice cold through every vein ; but with a vehement effort I gained courage enough to call out , `` Who 's there ? '' 
-- The laughter now became louder -- the beating and groaning were renewed ; again the stammering demon addressed me -- `` Me-dar-dus ! 
-- Me-dar-dus ! '' 
I rose from bed , and stamped on the floor . 
`` Whoever thou art , '' cried I ; `` man or devil , who art thus adding to the torments of an already miserable captive , step forth visibly before mine eyes , that I may look on thee , or desist from this unmeaning persecution ! '' 
The beating was now right under my feet . 
`` He -- he -- he ! 
-- he -- he -- he ! 
-- Broth-er , -- Broth-er ! 
Open the door ! 
-- I am here -- am here ! 
Let us go hence to the wood -- to the wood ! '' 
Now , methought I recognised the voice as one that I had known before , but it was not then so broken and so stammering . 
Nay , with a chill shivering of horror , I almost began to think there was something in the accents that I now heard , resembling the tones of my own voice , and involuntarily , as if I wished to try whether this were really so , I stammered , in imitation , `` Me-dar-dus ! 
-- Me-dar-dus ! '' 
Hereupon the laughter was renewed , but it now sounded scornful and malicious . 
