-- `` Broth-er , -- Broth-er , '' said the voice , `` do you know me again ? 
-- Open the door -- the -- the door ! 
-- We shall go hence , to the wood -- to the wood ! '' 
`` Poor insane wretch ! '' 
said I ; `` I can not open the door for thee -- I can not enable thee to go forth into the pleasant woods , to hear the fresh rustling of the leaves , or breathe the fragrance of Heaven 's pure atmosphere . 
I am , as thou art , shut up , hopeless and abandoned , within the gloomy walls of a prison . '' 
To this address I was answered only by sobs and moans , as if from the bitterness of despairing grief ; and the knocking became always more faint and indistinct , till at last it ceased altogether ; and from exhaustion , I sunk into troubled slumber . 
At length the morning light had broke in slanting gleams through the window ; the locks and keys rattled , and the gaoler , whom I had not seen for many days , entered my room . 
`` Through the last night , '' said he , `` we have heard all sorts of strange noises in your apartment , and loud speaking . 
What means this ? '' 
`` I am in the habit , '' answered I , `` of talking loudly in my sleep , and even when awake I indulge in soliloquy . 
May not this much of liberty be granted me ? '' 
`` Probably , '' said the gaoler , `` it is known to you , that every endeavour to escape , or to keep up conversation with any of your fellow-prisoners , will be interpreted to your disadvantage ? '' 
I declared that I had never formed any intentions of that kind ; and after a few more surly remarks , he withdrew . 
Some hours after this , I was again summoned , as before , to the hall of judgment . 
It was not , however , the judge by whom I had before been examined , but a very different personage , who now sat on the bench . 
He was a man apparently much younger in years , but far surpassing his predecessor in cleverness and versatility . 
Laying aside all the formality of office , he left his place , came up to me in the friendliest manner , and invited me to take a chair . 
Even at this moment his appearance is vividly present to my recollection . 
In constitution he seemed , for his time of life , to be much broken down ; he was very bald , and wore spectacles . 
But in his whole demeanour there was so much of kindness and good-humour , that , on this account alone , I found it would be difficult for any one , but the most reckless and hardened of criminals , to resist his influence . 
His questions were thrown out lightly , almost in the style of ordinary conversation , but they were well contrived , and so precisely couched , that it was impossible to avoid giving him decisive answers . 
`` In the first place , I must ask you , '' said he , `` whether all that you have before deponed is perfectly consistent with truth ; or , at least , whether many other circumstances may not have occurred to you as requisite to be told , in order to corroborate your former statement ? '' 
`` No , '' said I. `` I have already freely communicated every circumstance which I could mention , or which it can be necessary to mention , as to the tenor of my simple and uniform life . '' 
`` Have you never associated much with clergymen , and with monks ? '' 
`` Yes -- In Cracow , in Dantzig , Königsberg , Frauenberg . 
In the latter place especially , with two lay monks , who officiated there as priest and capellan . '' 
`` You did not state before that you were in Frauenberg ? '' 
`` Because I did not think it worth while to mention a short residence there of about eight days , on my way from Dantzig to Königsberg . '' 
`` So , you are a native of Kwicziczwo ? '' 
This question the judge put in the Polish language , and in the most correct dialect , -LRB- all the while looking quite unconcerned , as if his use of that language had been on the present occasion a matter of course . -RRB- 
For a moment this overthrew all my self-possession . 
I rallied , however ; tried to recollect what little Polish I had learned from my friend Krczinski , and made shift to answer -- `` On a small landed property of my father , near Kwicziczwo . '' 
`` What was the name of this estate ? '' 
`` Krczinzicswo -- the family estate of my relations . '' 
`` For a native Pole , you do not pronounce your own language remarkably well . 
To say the truth , you speak it rather like a German -- How is this ? '' 
`` For many years I have spoken nothing but German . 
Even while in Cracow , I had much intercourse with German students , who wished to learn from me our difficult language . 
Unawares , I may have accustomed myself to their accent , as one finds it very easy , when living in particular districts of the country , to adopt provincialisms . '' 
The judge here looked significantly on me . 
A slight smile passed over his features ; and , turning to the secretary , he dictated to him something in a whisper , of which I could distinctly make out the words `` visibly embarrassed . '' 
Hereupon I wished to say something farther , in excuse for my bad Polish , but the judge gave me no opportunity . 
`` Have you never been in Königswald , where there is a large Capuchin Convent ? '' 
`` Never . '' 
`` The way hither from Königsberg should have led you to that town . '' 
`` I took another road . '' 
`` Have you never been acquainted with a monk from the convent there ? '' 
`` Never . '' 
On receiving this answer , the judge rung the bell , and in a low voice gave an order to the attending officer . 
Soon afterwards , an opposite door opened , and how was my whole frame shaken , and my very heart withered by terror , when I beheld the old Brother Cyrillus ! 
The judge asked , `` Do you know this man ? '' 
`` No . 
I have never seen him before . '' 
It was now the monk 's turn to speak . 
He came nearer ; looked at me stedfastly -- then clasping his hands , while tears involuntarily burst from his eyes -- `` Medardus ! '' 
cried he , `` Brother Medardus ! 
In God 's name , how comes it that I find you thus horribly changed ? 
How came you into this condition of abandoned and obdurate wickedness ? 
Brother Medardus , return into thyself -- Confess -- Repent ! 
-- The patience and long-suffering of God are infinite . '' 
`` Can you then recognize this man , '' said the judge , `` for the Monk Medardus from the Capuchin Convent in Königswald ? '' 
`` As I hope for Heaven 's mercy , '' answered Cyrillus , `` it is impossible for me to think otherwise . 
I believe that this man , although he now appears in a lay dress , is that very Medardus , who lived under my care as a novice at the Capuchin Convent , and whom I attended at the altar on the day of his consecration . 
Yet Medardus had on his neck a scar , in the shape of a cross , on the left side , and if this man -- '' `` You perceive , '' interposed the judge , turning to me , `` that you are looked upon as a runaway monk from the town of Königswald , and you may rightly conjecture that the real monk alluded to has been guilty of serious crimes . 
But this man has a particular mark on his neck , which , according to your own account , you can not have . 
This , therefore , at once gives you the best opportunity to prove your innocence . 
Untie your neckcloth . '' 
`` There is no need of this , '' answered I. `` It is already certain , that an exact personal resemblance exists between myself and the fugitive criminal , who is to me wholly unknown ; for I do bear a slight scar on my throat , such as has been described . '' 
-- `` Remove your neckcloth , '' repeated the judge . 
I did so ; and the scar left by the wound from the Abbess 's diamond cross , which had never been effaced , was immediately perceived . 
Hereupon Cyrillus uttered a loud exclamation . 
-- `` It is -- it is the same impression of the cross , '' he added . 
-- `` Medardus ! 
oh Medardus ! 
hast thou then renounced thy eternal weal ? '' 
-- Weeping and half fainting , he sunk into a chair . 
`` What answers do you now make to the assertion of this venerable man ? '' 
said the judge . 
For a moment I felt as if lifted up and inspired by supernatural strength . 
It seemed as if the devil himself came and whispered to me . 
`` What power have these despicable weaklings over thee , who art yet strong and undaunted in spirit and in frame ? 
Shall not Aurelia yet become thine ? '' 
`` This monk , '' said I , with great vehemence , `` who sits there fainting in his chair , is a fantastic , feeble-minded , drivelling dotard . 
In his absurd visions , he takes me for a runaway capuchin from his own convent , to whom , as it happens , I bear a personal resemblance . '' 
The judge had till now remained perfectly tranquil , without changing his looks , gesture , or tone . 
Now , however , his visage , for the first time , assumed a dark and lowering earnestness of expression . 
He rose , as if the better to observe me , and even the glare of his spectacles was intolerable to my feelings , so that I could not utter a word more of my intended defence . 
For a moment I lost all self-possession . 
Abandoned to rage and despair , I struck my clenched knuckles to my forehead , and , in a tone which must have sounded unearthly , almost shrieked out the name `` Aurelia ! '' 
`` What do you mean by that , sir ? '' 
said the judge , in a voice which , though calm , had yet the effect of thunder , and reverberated through the vaulted roof of the audience-chamber . 
`` A dark and implacable destiny , '' said I , `` dooms me to an ignominious death . 
But I am innocent -- I am wholly innocent of the crimes , whatever they may be , that are charged against me . 
Have compassion , therefore ; and for the present , at least , let me go . 
I feel that madness begins to rage through my brain , and agitate every nerve : therefore , in mercy , let me go ! '' 
The judge , who had resumed his seat , and become perfectly calm , dictated much to the secretary , of which I did not know the import . 
At last he read over to me a record , in which all his questions and my answers , with the evidence of Cyrillus , were faithfully set down . 
This record I was obliged to ratify by my own signature . 
The judge then requested me , in a careless tone , to write for him , on separate slips of paper , something in Polish and in German . 
I did so , without being aware what object he had in view . 
He then immediately gave the German leaf to Cyrillus , with the question , `` Have these characters any resemblance to the hand-writing of your brother , Monk Medardus ? '' 
`` It is precisely his hand even to the most minute peculiarities , '' said Cyrillus ; and turning to me , was about to speak ; but a look of the judge admonished him to silence . 
The latter examined carefully the leaf which I had written in Polish . 
He then rose , quitted the bench , and came down to me . 
`` You are no Pole , '' said he , in a serious and decisive manner . 
`` This writing is altogether incorrect , full of errors , both in grammar and spelling . 
No native Pole would write in that style , even if he were destitute of that education which you have enjoyed . '' 
`` I was born , '' said I , `` in Kwicziczwo , and therefore am most certainly a Pole ; but even were this not really the case , and if circumstances compelled me to conceal my true rank and name , yet it would by no means follow , in consequence of this , that I must turn out to be the Monk Medardus , who , as I understand , came from the Capuchin Convent in Königswald . '' 
`` Alas ! 
Brother , '' interposed Cyrillus , `` did not our excellent Prior send you to Rome , placing the fullest confidence in your fidelity , prudence , and pious conduct ; and is it thus that you requite him ? 
Brother Medardus , for God 's sake , do not any longer , in this blasphemous manner , deny the holy profession to which you belong . '' 
`` I beg of you not to interrupt us , '' said the judge , and , turning again to me , proceeded -- `` It is my duty to observe to you , that the disinterested evidence of this reverend clergyman affords the strongest presumptions , that you are actually that runaway monk , for whom you have been arrested . 
At the same time , I ought not to conceal , that various other persons will be brought forward , who also insist that they have unequivocally recognised you for that individual . 
Among them is one , to whom your escape from the due punishment or coercion of the law would be attended by no little danger , at all events , by no little fear and apprehension . 
Besides , many things have been discovered in your own travelling equipage , which support the allegations against you . 
`` Finally , sir , you may rely , that inquiries will be set on foot as to your pretended family , on which account application is already made to the court at Posen . 
All these things I explain to you the more openly , because it belongs to my office to convince you how little I wish , by artifice , or any undue method , to extort from you the truth , which you wish to conceal , but which , at all events , will soon be brought to light . 
Prepare yourself , therefore , before-hand , as you best can . 
If you are really that criminal named Medardus the Capuchin , you may be assured that justice will soon penetrate through your deepest disguise ; and you will learn , in due time , the precise crimes of which you are accused . 
If , on the other hand , you are Mr Leonard of Kwicziczwo , and only , by some extraordinary lusus naturæ , forced to resemble Medardus , you will be furnished , even by us , with clear and decisive proofs to support this identity . 
`` You appeared at your first trial , in a very disordered state of mind ; therefore I wished that you should be allowed sufficient time for mature reflection . 
After what has taken place to-day , you will again have ample store for meditation . '' 
`` Then , '' said I , `` you look upon all that I have said to-day as utter falsehood ? 
You behold in me only the runaway monk Medardus ? '' 
To this I received merely a slight parting bow , with the words , `` Adieu , Herr von Krczinski ; '' and I was forthwith led back to my prison . 
Every word uttered by this judge had penetrated to my very heart , and I was unable to subdue my vehement agitation . 
All the fictions that I had invented seemed to me utterly absurd and insipid . 
That the chief person who was to appear as my accuser , -LRB- and who was said to entertain such fears of me if left at liberty , -RRB- was Aurelia , I could have no doubt . 
How could I bear this , and how counteract her influence ? 
I considered afterwards what might have been suspicious among my travelling effects , and was much vexed by the recollection , that since my residence at the castle of the Baron von F -- , I had retained in my portefeuille , a hair ring , on which Euphemia 's name was enwoven , and which , perhaps , might be recognized by Aurelia . 
Besides , it had unfortunately occurred , that in the forest I had bound up Victorin 's portmanteau with the knotted cord , which is part of the dress of our order ; and this had still remained in my possession . 
Tormented by these thoughts , I gave myself up for lost ; and unconscious what I did , paced backwards and forwards in despair , through my narrow chamber . 
Then it seemed as if there was a rushing and whispering in mine ears , -- `` Thou fool , '' said a voice , `` why should ` st thou despair ? 
Canst thou not think on Victorin ? '' 
Hereupon , in a loud voice , I called out -- `` Ha ! 
the game is not lost ! 
-- Nay , it may yet be won ! '' 
My heart beat , and my bosom heaved with new impulses . 
I had already thought , that among Euphemia 's papers there must , of necessity , be found something which would point to Victorin 's appearance at the castle as a monk . 
Resting on this assumption , -LRB- or probability , -RRB- I would , at my next examination , amplify on my former deposition as to the meeting with Victorin ; nay , why should I not also have met with the monk Medardus ? 
I could plead knowledge , also , of those adventures at the castle which ended so frightfully , and repeat them as if they came to me by hearsay . 
With such stories I could interweave references to myself , and to my resemblance with both these people . 
In order to attain my object , however , the most trifling circumstances must be maturely weighed . 
I resolved , therefore , that I would commit to writing the romance , by the incidents of which I was to be rescued . 
The gaoler supplied me with the requisite materials , and I laboured with great zeal till late in the night . 
In writing , my imagination was roused , until I almost actually believed whatever I had set down to be the truth ; and I had in the closest manner spun together a web of falsehood , wherewith I expected completely to blind the eyes of the judge . 
The prison-clock had struck twelve , when I again heard softly , and as if from a distance , the knocking which , on the preceding day , so much disturbed me . 
I had resolved that I would pay no attention to this noise ; but it approached nearer , and became louder . 
There were again , at measured intervals , the same divertisements of knocking , laughing , and groaning . 
I struck my hand with great vehemence on the table -- `` Be quiet ! '' 
cried I -- `` Silence below there ! '' 
Thus I thought that I should banish my persecutor , and recover my composure , but in vain ! 
On the contrary , there arose instantly a sound of shrill discordant laughter , and once more the same detestable voice -- '' Brüd-er-lein ! 
-- Brüd-er-lein ! 
-LSB- 2 -RSB- Up to thee ! 
Open the door ! 
Open the door ! '' 
-LSB- Footnote 2 : Little brother . 
One of the German diminutives of familiarity or endearment . -RSB- 
Then right under me commenced a vehement rasping and scratching in the floor , accompanied by continuous groans and cachinnation . 
In vain did I try to write , and persuading myself that these were but illusions of the arch enemy , determined to hold them in contempt . 
The noise always became more intolerable , and was diversified occasionally by ponderous blows , so that I momentarily expected the gaolers to enter in alarm . 
I had risen up , and was walking with the lamp in my hand , when suddenly I felt the floor shake beneath my tread . 
I stepped aside , and then saw , on the spot whereon I had stood , a stone lift itself out of the pavement , and sink again . 
The phenomenon was repeated , but at the second time I seized hold of the stone , and easily removed it from the flooring . 
The aperture beneath was but narrow , and little or no light rose from the gulf . 
Suddenly , however , as I was gazing on it , a naked arm , emaciated , but muscular , with a knife , or dagger , in the hand , was stretched up towards me . 
Struck with the utmost horror , I recoiled from the sight . 
Then the stammering voice spoke from below -- `` Brother -- brother Me-dar-dus is there -- is there ! 
-- Take -- take ! 
-- Break -- break ! 
-- To the wood ! 
-- To the wood ! '' 
Instantly all fear and apprehension were lost . 
I repeated to myself , `` Take -- take ! 
-- Break -- break ! '' 
for I thought only of the assistance thus offered me , and of flight ! 
Accordingly I seized the weapon , which the hand willingly resigned to me , and began zealously to clear away the mortar and rubbish from the opening that had been made . 
The spectral prisoner below laboured also with might and main , till we had dislodged four or five large stones from the vault , and laid them aside . 
I had been occupied in this latter purpose , that is , in placing the large stones in a corner of my room , that they might not interrupt my work ; when , on turning round , I perceived that my horrible assistant had raised his naked body as far as the middle , through the aperture that we had made . 
The full glare of the lamp fell on his pale features , which were no longer obscured as formerly , by long matted locks , or the overgrown grizzly beard , for these had been closely shaven . 
It could no longer be said that I was in vigorous health , while he was emaciated , for in that respect we were now alike . 
He glared on me with the grin , the ghastly laughter , of madness on his visage . 
At the first glance I RECOGNIZED MYSELF , and losing all consciousness and self-possession , fell in a deadly swoon on the pavement . 
From this state of insensibility I was awoke by a violent pain in the arm . 
There was a clear light around me ; the rattling of chains , and knocking of hammers , sounded through the vault . 
The gaoler and his assistants were occupied in loading me with irons . 
Besides handcuffs and ankle-fetters , I was , by means of a chain and an iron hoop , to be fastened to the wall . 
`` Now , '' said the gaoler , in a satisfied tone , when the workmen had finished , `` the gentleman will probably find it advisable to give over troubling us with his attempts to escape for the future ! '' 
`` But what crimes , then , '' said the blacksmith , in an under tone , `` has this obstreperous fellow committed ? '' 
`` How ? '' 
said the gaoler , `` dost thou not know that much , Jonathan ? 
The whole town talks of nothing else . 
He is a cursed Capuchin monk , who has murdered three men . 
All has been fully proved . 
In a few days there is to be a grand gala ; and among other diversions , the scaffold and the wheel will not fail to play their part ! '' 
I heard no more , and my senses were again lost . 
I know not how long I remained in that state , from which I only painfully and with difficulty awoke . 
I was alone , and all was utter darkness ; but , after some interval , faint gleams of daylight broke into the low deep vault , scarcely six feet square , into which I now , with the utmost horror , perceived that I had been removed from my former prison . 
I was tormented with extreme thirst , and grappled at the water-jug which stood near me . 
Cold and moist , it slipped out of my numbed hands before I had gained from it even one imperfect draught , and , with abhorrence , I saw a large overgrown toad crawl out of it as it lay on the floor . 
`` Aurelia ! '' 
I groaned , in that feeling of nameless misery into which I was now sunk -- `` Aurelia ! 
-- and was it for this that I have been guilty of hypocrisy and abominable falsehood in the court of justice -- for this only , that I might protract , by a few hours , a life of torment and misery ? 
What would ` st thou , '' said I to myself , `` delirious wretch , as thou art ? 
Thou strivest after the possession of Aurelia , who could be thine only through an abominable and blasphemous crime ; and however thou might ` st disguise thyself from the world , she would infallibly recognize in thee the accursed murderer of Hermogen , and look on thee with detestation . 
Miserable deluded fool , where are now all thy high-flown projects , thy belief and confidence in thine own supernatural power , by which thou could ` st guide thy destiny even as thou wilt ? 
Thou art wholly unable and powerless to kill the worm of conscience , which gnaws on the heart 's marrow , and thou wilt shamefully perish in hopeless grief , even if the arm of temporal justice should spare thee ! '' 
Thus I complained aloud , but at the moment when I uttered these words , I felt a painful pressure on my breast , which seemed to proceed from some hard substance in my waistcoat pocket . 
I grappled with it accordingly , and drew out , to my surprise , a small stiletto . 
Never had I worn any such implement since I had been in the prison . 
It must , of necessity , be the same which had been held up to me by my mysterious double . 
I recognized the glittering heft . 
It was the identical stiletto with which I had killed Hermogen , and which , for many weeks , I had been without ! 
Hereupon there arose in my mind an entire revolution . 
The inexplicable manner in which this weapon had been returned to me , seemed like a warning from supernatural agents . 
I had it in my power to escape at will from the ignominious death that awaited me . 
I had it in my power to die voluntarily for the sake of Aurelia . 
It seemed again as if there was a rushing and whispering of voices around me ; and among them Aurelia 's accents were clearly audible . 
I beheld her as when formerly she appeared to me in the church of the Capuchin Convent . 
`` I love thee , indeed , Medardus , '' said she ; `` but hitherto thou understandest me not . 
In this world there is for us no hope of enjoyment ; the true festival and solemnization of our love is -- death . '' 
I now firmly resolved that I would demand a new audience -- that I would confess to the judge , without the least reserve , the whole history of my wanderings , after which I would , in obedience to the supposed warning , have recourse to suicide . 
The gaoler now made his appearance , bringing me better food than usual , with the addition of a bottle of wine . 
`` It is by the command of the Prince , '' said he , covering a table which his servant brought in after him . 
He then proceeded to unlock the chain by which I was bound to the wall . 
Remaining firm in my determination , I took but little notice of this , and earnestly requested that he would communicate to the judge my wish for an audience that very afternoon , as I had much to disclose that lay heavy on my conscience . 
He promised to fulfil my commission , and retired . 
Meanwhile , I waited in vain to be summoned to my trial . 
No one appeared until such time as it was quite dark , when the gaoler 's servant entered and lighted my lamp as usual . 
Owing to the fixed resolution which I had adopted , I felt much more tranquil than before ; and , as the night wore on , being greatly exhausted , I fell into a deep sleep . 
My slumber was haunted , however , by a strange and very vivid dream . 
Methought I was led into a high , gloomy , and vaulted hall , wherein I saw , ranged along the walls , on high-backed chairs , a double row of spectral figures , like clergymen , all habited in the black talar , -LSB- 3 -RSB- and before them was a table covered with red cloth . 
At their head sat a judge , and near him was a Dominican friar , in the full habit of his order . 
-LSB- Footnote 3 : Long black robe . -RSB- 
`` Thou art now , '' said the judge , in a deep solemn voice , `` given over to the spiritual court ; forasmuch as thou , obstinate and criminal as thou art , hast attempted to deny thy real name , and the sacred profession to which thou belongest . 
Franciscus , or , according to thy conventual name , Medardus , answer , Dost thou plead guilty , or not guilty , to the crimes of which thou hast been accused ? '' 
Hereupon I wished to confess all that I had done , which , in my own estimation , was sinful or blame-worthy . 
But , to my great horror , that which I uttered was not the thoughts that existed in my mind , and which I intended to deliver . 
On the contrary , instead of a sincere and repentant confession , I lost myself in wandering desultory gibberish , which sounded even in my own ears quite unpardonable . 
Then the Dominican rose up , and , with a frightful menacing look -- `` Away -- to the rack with him , '' cried he , `` the stiff-necked obdurate sinner -- to the rack with him -- he deserves no mercy ! '' 
The strange figures that were ranged along the wall rose up , stretched out their long skeleton arms towards me , and repeated , in a hoarse horrible unison -- `` Ay , ay ! 
-- to the rack with him -- to the rack -- to the rack ! '' 
Instantly I drew out my stiletto and aimed it violently towards my heart , but , involuntarily , it slid upwards to my throat , and striking on that part wherein the diamond necklace of the Abbess had left the sign of the cross , the blade broke in pieces as if it were made of glass , and left me unwounded ! 
Then the executioner seized me , removed me from the audience-hall , and dragged me down into a deep subterranean vault . 
There , however , my persecutions did not cease . 
The man once more demanded of me whether I would not make a true confession ? 
Accordingly , I again made an attempt to do so , but my thoughts and words , as before , were at variance . 
Deeply repentant , torn equally by shame and remorse , I confessed all inwardly and in spirit ; but whatever my lips brought forth audibly , was confused , senseless , unconnected , and foreign from the dictates of my heart . 
Hereafter , upon a sign received from the Dominican , the executioner stripped me naked , and tied my wrists together behind my back . 
How he placed me afterwards , I know not , but I heard the creaking of screws and pulleys , and felt how my stretched joints cracked , and were ready to break asunder . 
In the agony of superhuman torture , I screamed loudly and awoke . 
The pain in my hands and feet continued as if I had been really on the rack , but this proceeded from the heavy chains which I still carried ; yet , besides this , I found a strange pressure on my eye-lids , which , for some time , I was unable to lift up . 
At last , it seemed as if a weight were taken from my forehead , and I was able to raise myself on my couch . 
Here my nightly visions once more stepped forth into reality , and I felt an ice-cold shivering through every vein . 
Motionless like a statue , with his arms folded , the monk -- the Dominican whom I had seen in my dream -- stood there , and glared on me with his hollow black eyes . 
In that look , I at once recognized the expression of the horrible painter , and fell , half fainting , back upon my straw-bed . 
Yet , perhaps , thought I to myself , all this was but a delusion of my senses , which had its origin from a dream . 
I mustered courage , therefore -- but the monk was there ! 
He stood , as the painter had ever done , calm and motionless , with his relentless dark eyes fixed upon me . 
`` Horrible man ! '' 
cried I , `` Avaunt ! 
-- Away ! 
-- But no ! 
Man thou art not . 
Thou art the devil himself , who labours to drag me into everlasting destruction ! 
-- Away ! 
-- I conjure thee , in the name of God , begone ! '' 
`` Poor , short-sighted fool ! '' 
answered the Dominican , `` I am not the fiend who endeavours to bind thee with his iron fetters ; who seeks to turn thy heart from those sacred duties to which thou hast , by Divine Providence , been appointed ! 
-- Medardus , poor insane wanderer ! 
I have indeed appeared frightful to thee , even at those moments when thou should ` st have recognized in me thy best friend -- when thou wert tottering within a hair 's - breadth of being hurled into the eternal gulf of destruction , I have appeared and warned thee ; but my designs have ever been perverted and misunderstood . 
Rise up , and listen to what I would now say ! '' 
The Dominican uttered this in a tone of deep melancholy and complaint . 
His looks , which I had before contemplated with such affright , were become relaxed and mild . 
My heart was roused by new and indescribable emotions . 
This painter , who had haunted me like a demon , now appeared to me almost like a special messenger of Providence , sent to console me in my extreme misery and despair . 
I rose from my bed , and stepped towards him . 
It was no phantom ! 
I touched his garments . 
I kneeled down involuntarily , and he laid his hand on my head as if to bless me . 
Then , in the brightest colouring of imagination , a long train of beautiful and cherished images rose on my mind . 
I was once more within the consecrated woods of the Holy Lime-Tree . 
I stood on the self-same spot of that favourite grove , where the strangely-dressed pilgrim brought to me the miraculous boy . 
From hence I wished to move onwards to the church , which I saw also right before me . 
There only it appeared to me , that I might now , penitent and repentant , receive at last absolution of my heavy crimes . 
But I remained motionless ; my limbs were powerless , and I could scarcely retain the feeling of self-identity . 
-- Then a hollow voice pronounced the words , `` The will suffices for the deed ! '' 
The dream vanished . 
It was the painter who had spoken these words . 
`` Incomprehensible being ! '' 
said I , `` was it then thou , who art here with me as a friend , who appeared leaning on the pillar on that unhappy morning in the Capuchin church at Königswald ? 
At night , in the trading town of Frankenburg ? 
And now -- '' `` Stop there , '' said the painter ; `` it was I indeed who have been at all times near to thee , in order , if possible , to rescue thee from destruction and disgrace ; but thy heart was hardened ; thy senses were perverted . 
The work to which thou wert chosen , must , for thine own weal and salvation , be fulfilled . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
cried I , in a voice of despair , `` why , then , didst thou not withhold mine arm from that accursed deed , when Hermogen -- '' `` That was not allowed me , '' said the painter . 
`` Ask no farther . 
The attempt to resist the eternal decrees of Omnipotence is not only sinful , but hopeless presumption . 
Medardus , thou now drawest near to thy appointed goal -- To-morrow ! '' 
At these words I shuddered ; for I thought that I completely understood the painter . 
I believed that he knew and approved my premeditated suicide . 
He now retreated towards the door of my prison . 
-- `` When , '' said I , with great earnestness , `` when shall I see you again ? '' 
-- `` AT THE GOAL , '' said he , in a deep , solemn tone , that reverberated through the vault . 
-- `` So then -- to-morrow ? '' 
He would not answer . 
The door opened -- turned silently on its hinges -- and the painter had vanished . 
The faint gleams of daylight had long since made their way through the gloom of my wretched prison , when at last the gaoler made his appearance with a train of attendants , who carefully and obsequiously took off the fetters from my wounded arms and ankles . 
They announced also that I should be very soon led up for a final audience in the judgment-hall . 
The summons came accordingly . 
Deeply reserved , and wrapt up in my own thoughts , becoming always more and more accustomed to the idea of immediate death , I stepped into the audience-chamber . 
I had inwardly arranged my confession in such manner , that I had only a short story to tell , which would yet embrace every circumstance that was of importance . 
To my astonishment , the judge , directly on my entrance , left the bench , and came to meet me . 
I must have looked greatly emaciated and disfigured ; for a cheerful smile , that had been at first on his countenance , changed itself obviously into an expression of the most painful sympathy and compassion . 
He shook hands , and made me take possession of a large arm-chair . 
`` Herr von Krczinski , '' said he , in a solemn diplomatic tone , `` I am happy in being able to announce to you some very agreeable intelligence . 
By the Prince 's commands , all proceedings against you are this day brought to an end . 
It appears that people have hitherto confounded you with another person ; and of their mistaken accusations , your exact personal likeness to that individual must bear the blame . 
Your innocence is now established beyond the possibility of doubt . 
Mr Krczinski , you are free ! '' 
A frightful giddiness now attacked me . 
The room , with all its furniture , seemed turning round . 
The figure of the judge was multiplied a thousand fold before mine eyes , and I fell into a swoon . 
When I awoke , the servants were rubbing my temples with eau de cologne ; and I recovered so far , as to hear the judge read over a short Protokoll , stating that he had duly informed me of the process being given up , and of my final release from prison . 
But some indescribable feelings arising from that last interview with the painter , repressed all joy in my bosom . 
It seemed to me as if now , when people believed me innocent , I should voluntarily make a full confession of my crimes , and then plunge the dagger into my heart . 
I wished to speak ; but the judge seemed to expect that I would retire , and I retreated towards the door . 
He came after me a few steps . 
`` I have now , '' said he , in a low voice , `` fulfilled my official duties , and may confess that , from the first time of our meeting , you interested me very much . 
Notwithstanding that appearances -LRB- as you must yourself allow -RRB- were so greatly against you , yet I sincerely wished that you might not turn out to be the horrible monster of wickedness for whom you had been stigmatized . 
I may now repeat to you , in confidence , my conviction , that you are no Pole : you were not born in Kwicziczwo : your name is not Leonard von Krczinski . '' 
With composure and firmness I answered , `` No . '' 
-- `` Nor are you a monk , '' said the judge , casting his eyes on the ground , that he might not seem to play the part of an inquisitor ; but by this question I was irresistibly agitated . 
-- `` Listen , then , '' said I , in a resolute tone , `` and I shall explain all . '' 
-- `` Nay , nay , be silent , '' said the judge . 
`` What I surmised at first is , according to my present belief , wholly confirmed . 
I see that there is here some dark and deep mystery ; and that , by some inexplicable game of chances , your fate is involved with that of certain personages of our court . 
But it is no longer my vocation to make inquiries ; and I should look upon myself as a presumptuous intermeddler , if I wished to extort from you any of the real adventures of your life , of which the tenure has probably been very peculiar . 
`` There is but one suggestion which I can not help offering . 
Would it not be well if you were to tear yourself away from this residenz , where there is so much that is hostile to your mental repose ? 
After what has happened , it is almost impossible that your abode here can be agreeable to you . '' 
When the judge spoke in this manner , my mind again underwent an entire revolution . 
All the dark shadows that had gathered around me were suddenly dissolved . 
The spirit of life once more , with all its enjoyments , vibrated through every nerve . 
-- `` Aurelia ! 
Aurelia ! 
-- Should I leave this place and forsake her for ever ! '' 
The judge looked on me with an expression of the greatest astonishment . 
-- `` God forbid , Mr Leonard , '' said he , `` that a very frightful apprehension , which has now risen up in my mind , should ever be fulfilled . 
But you know best the nature of your own plans . 
I shall say no more . '' 
The hypocritical calmness with which I now answered him , was a proof that my short-lived repentance was over and gone . 
-- `` So then , '' said I , `` you still look upon me as guilty ? '' 
-- `` Permit me , sir , '' said the judge , `` to keep my present fears to myself . 
They are , I must confess , unsubstantiated by proof , and are perhaps the result of imaginary apprehensions . 
It has been in the most conclusive manner proved , that you are not the Monk Medardus ; for that very man is in his own person here among us , and has been recognized by the old Father Cyrillus , though the latter had been deceived at the trial , by the exactitude of your resemblance . 
Nay , this man does not deny that he is the Capuchin Medardus , for whom you were arrested . 
Therefore everything has happened that could have been desired , in order to free you from that first imputation . '' 
At that moment an attendant called the judge away , and thus the dialogue was interrupted at the very time when it began to be disagreeable to me . 
I betook myself forthwith to my old lodgings in the town , where I found my effects placed carefully in the same order in which I had left them . 
My papers had been put up in a sealed envelope . 
Only Victorin 's portefeuille and the Capuchin 's hair-rope were wanting . 
My suppositions as to the importance that would be attached to the latter article were therefore correct . 
But a short time elapsed , when an equerry of the Prince made his appearance , with a card from the Sovereign , and the present of a very elegant box , set with diamonds . 
The card was in his usual familiar style . 
`` There have been very severe measures taken against you , Mr Krczinski , but neither we ourselves , nor our court of justice , can rightly be blamed . 
You are inconceivably like in person to a very wicked and dangerous man . 
All now , however , has been cleared up to your advantage . 
I send you a small token of my good will , and hope that we shall see you soon . '' 
The good will of the Prince and his present were at this moment both indifferent to me . 
My long imprisonment had greatly enfeebled my bodily strength , and the extreme excitement which I had undergone , was followed by lassitude and relaxation . 
Thus I had sunk into a deep and dark melancholy , and looked on it as very fortunate when the physician came to visit me , and prescribed some remedies , which he judged absolutely requisite for the restoration of my health . 
He then , as usual , entered into conversation . 
`` Is it not , '' said he , `` a most extraordinary chance , and concatenation of circumstances , that , at the very moment when every one felt himself convinced that you were that horrible monk , who had caused such misfortunes in the family of the Baron von F -- , this monk should himself actually appear , and rescue you at once from the impending danger ? '' 
`` It would oblige me , '' said I , `` if you would inform me of the minuter circumstances which led to my liberation ; for as yet I have only heard generally that the Capuchin Medardus , for whom I had been taken , had been found here and arrested . '' 
`` Nay , it is to be observed , '' answered the physician , `` that he did not come hither of his own accord , but was brought in , bound with ropes , as a maniac , and delivered over to the police at the very time when you first came to the residenz . 
By the way , it just now occurs to me that , on a former occasion , when I was occupied in relating to you the wonderful events which had happened at our court , I was interrupted , just as I had got to the story of this abominable Medardus , the acknowledged son of Francesco , and his enormous crimes at the castle of the Baron von F -- . 
I shall now take up the thread of my discourse exactly where it was then broken off . 
`` The sister of our reigning Princess , who , as you well know , is Abbess of a Cistertian monastery at Kreuzberg , once received very kindly , and took charge of a poor deserted woman , who , with her infant son , was travelling homeward , towards the south , from a pilgrimage to the Convent of the Holy Lime-Tree . '' 
`` The woman , '' said I , `` was Francesco 's widow , and the boy was Medardus . '' 
`` Quite right , '' answered the physician ; `` but how do you come to know this ? '' 
`` The events of this Medardus 's life , '' said I , `` have indeed become known to me in a manner the strangest and most incredible . 
I am aware of them even up to the period when he fled from the castle of the Baron von F -- ; and of every circumstance that happened there I have received minute information . '' 
`` But how ? '' 
said the physician ; `` and from whom ? '' 
`` In a dream , '' answered I ; `` in a dream I have had the liveliest perception of all his sufferings and adventures . '' 
`` You are in jest , '' said the physician . 
`` By no means , '' replied I. `` It actually seems to me , as if I had in a vision become acquainted with the history of an unhappy man , who , like a mere plaything in the hands of dark powers , -- a weed cast on the waves of a stormy sea , had been hurled hither and thither , and driven onward from crime to crime . 
In the Holzheimer forest , which is not far from hence , on my way hither , the postilion , one stormy night , drove out of the right track , and there , in the forst-haus -- '' `` Ha ! 
now I understand you , '' said the physician , `` there you met with the monk . '' 
`` So it is , '' answered I ; `` but he was mad . '' 
`` He does not seem to be so now , '' observed the physician . 
`` Even at that time , no doubt , he had lucid intervals , and told you his history . '' 
`` Not exactly , '' said I. `` In the night , being unapprized of my arrival at the forst-haus , he came into my room . 
Perhaps it was on account of the extraordinary likeness existing betwixt us , that my appearance frightened him extremely . 
He probably looked upon me as his double , and believed that such an apparition of necessity announced his own death . 
Accordingly , he began to stammer out strange confessions , to which I listened for some time , till at last , being tired by a long journey , I fell asleep ; but the monk , not aware of this , continued to speak on . 
I dreamed , but know not where the reality ended and the dream began . 
