It was not difficult , therefore , in such a place , to find out the best inn , -LRB- where there was but one . -RRB- 
When I pulled up the reins at the door , the landlord , a heavy fat man , with a green glazed night-cap on his head , was so completely confounded by my looks , that he was evidently struck speechless . 
He said nothing , but stared as if half petrified by his own apprehensions , or occasionally twisted his mouth into an ironical grin . 
Without attending to these symptoms , I desired that my horse should be put carefully into the stable , and ordered breakfast for myself . 
I was shewn into the public room , where there were several tables , and while I was engaged over a warm ragout , and a bottle of wine , there were gradually a large company of bauers collecting around me , that looked occasionally as if half afraid , casting significant glances , and whispering with each other . 
The party became always more and more numerous . 
Evidently not being restrained by the laws of good breeding , they at last formed a regular circle , and stared at me in stupid astonishment . 
All the while , I endeavoured to preserve the most perfect composure ; and when I had finished the ragout and bottle of vin ordinaire , I called in a loud tone for the landlord , desiring him to `` saddle my horse , and replace my portmanteau . '' 
He came accordingly , and retired with a significant grin upon his visage . 
Soon afterwards he returned , in company with a tall formal-looking man , who , with a stern official air , and a truly ridiculous gravity , stepped up to me . 
He looked me directly in the face . 
I boldly answered his looks , rose up also , and placed myself right before him . 
This seemed in a considerable degree to disturb his composure , and he looked round rather confusedly on the numerous assemblage . 
`` Well , sir , '' said I , `` what 's the matter ? 
-- You seem to have something particular to say to me , and I shall be obliged by your getting through with it as quickly as possible . '' 
After divers hums and ha 's , he then began to speak , endeavouring to give to every word and tone prodigious importance . 
`` Sir , '' said he , `` you can not go from this place without rendering an account to us , the Judge , circumstantially , who you are , according to all particulars , as to birth , rank , and dignity ; item , whence you came ; item , whither you intend to go , with all particulars ; item , the situation of place , the name of province and town , and whatever is farther requisite to be known and observed . 
And besides all this , you must exhibit to us , the Judge , a pass , written and subscribed , and sealed , according to all particulars , as is legal and customary . '' 
I had indeed never once recollected that it would be necessary for me to assume some name or another ; and still less had I reflected that the peculiarities of my appearance , so unsuitable to my remains of monastic mien and gesture , and even my extraordinary beard and tonsure , would bring me every moment under the embarrassment of questions and misunderstandings . 
The demands of the village Judge , therefore , came upon me so unexpectedly , that I considered for some moments in vain , how I should give him a satisfactory answer . 
I resolved , in the first place , to try what decisive boldness would do , and pronounced in a firm voice , -- `` Who I am , I have reason to conceal ; and therefore you will ask in vain for my pass . 
Besides , I recommend it to you to beware how , with your contemptible circumlocutions , you detain , even for a moment , a person of rank and consequence . '' 
`` Ho , ho ! '' 
cried the village Judge , taking out a great snuff-box , into which , as he helped himself , the hands of no less than five bailiffs behind him were thrust at once , delving out enormous pinches -- `` Ho , ho ! 
not so rough , if you please , most worshipful sir . 
Your excellency must be pleased to submit to the examination of us , the Judge ; for , in a word , there have been some very suspicious figures seen here for some time , wandering among the mountains , that look out and vanish again as if the very devil were among us . 
But we know that these are neither more nor less than cursed vagabonds and thieves , who lie in wait for travellers , committing all sorts of enormities by fire and sword . 
Now , your appearance , sir , with reverence be it spoken , is exactly that of a portrait which has been sent to us by government , of a most notorious robber and bandit , according to all particulars . 
So , without any more circumlocutions , or needless discourse , your pass , or you go directly to the tower . '' 
I saw that nothing was to be gained over the man in this way , and prepared myself therefore for a new attempt . 
`` Mr Judge , '' said I , `` if you would grant me the favour of speaking to you alone , I should easily clear up all your doubts ; and in full reliance on your prudence , would reveal to you the cause of my present strange appearance , which seems to you so formidable . 
There is indeed a mystery -- '' `` Ha ! 
ha ! '' 
replied the Judge , `` mysteries to be revealed ! 
I see already how this business is to conclude . 
Only get away with you there , good people . 
Watch the doors and windows , and see that nobody gets in or out . '' 
Accordingly we were left alone . 
`` Mr Judge , '' said I , `` you behold in me an unhappy fugitive , who has succeeded in escaping from a shameful imprisonment , and from the danger of being immured for ever within the walls of a convent . 
Excuse me for not entering more into particulars of my history , which would only be unravelling a web of the private quarrels and animosities of a revengeful family . 
A love affair with a girl of low rank was the cause of my misfortune . 
During my long confinement my beard had grown , and they had also forced me , as you may perceive , to take the tonsure ; besides all which , I was , of course , obliged to assume the habit of a monk . 
It was for the first time here , in the neighbouring forest , that I ventured to stop and change my dress , as I should otherwise have been overtaken in my flight . 
`` You now perceive whence proceeds that peculiarity in my looks and dress , which appeared so suspicious . 
You may be convinced , also , that I can not shew you any pass ; but of the truth of my assertions I have here certain illustrations , which I hope will be satisfactory . '' 
With these words I drew out my purse , and laid three glittering ducats on the table ; whereupon the assumed gravity of the Judge was involuntarily twisted into smirks and smiles . 
`` Your proofs , sir , '' said he , `` are sufficiently clear and striking ; but do n't take it amiss , your excellency , if I remark , that there is yet wanting a certain equality and consistency , according to all particulars . 
If you wish that I should take the unright for the right , the irregular for the regular , your proofs , at least , must be equally proportioned . '' 
I perfectly understood the rascal , and directly laid another ducat on the table . 
`` Now , '' said the Judge , `` I perceive , indeed , that I had done you injustice by my suspicions . 
Travel on , sir , in God 's name ; but observe -LRB- as you are probably well accustomed -RRB- to avoid , as much as possible , the high roads , till you get rid of your present peculiarity of appearance . '' 
He then opened the door as wide as he could , and called aloud to the people , `` The gentleman here is a man of rank and quality , according to all particulars . 
He has satisfied us the Judge , in a private audience , that he travels incognito , that is to say , unknown ; and that you , good people , have with this nothing to do . 
-- Now , sir , bon voyage ! '' 
Accordingly , my horse was brought from the stable , and as I essayed to mount , the bauers , in respectful silence , took off their caps . 
I wished to get away from them , and to ride as quickly as possible through the gate ; but to my extreme confusion , my horse was restive , and began to snort and rear , while my utter ignorance and want of practice in riding rendered it quite impossible for me to bring him forward . 
Indeed , I soon lost all self-possession ; for he wheeled round in circles , till at last , amid the loud laughter of the peasants , I was thrown off into the arms of the innkeeper and the Judge . 
`` That is a devil of a horse , sir , '' said the Judge , with a suppressed grin . 
`` A devil of a horse , indeed ! '' 
answered I , beating the dust from my clothes , for I had slipped through their arms to the ground . 
They now joined in assisting me once more to mount ; but , for the second time , the horse behaved just as before , snorting and foaming ; in short , would by no means be brought through the gate . 
At last an old man among the crowd cried out , `` See , there ! 
see , there ! 
the old witch Elise is sitting at the gate , and wo n't let the gentleman pass , because he has not given her groschen . '' 
For the first time now I perceived an old beggar sitting , coiled up like a ball , in a corner by the gate , and with the grin of idiotcy on her features . 
`` Will the d -- d witch not get out of the way ? '' 
cried the Judge . 
Hereupon the old woman croaked out , `` The bloody brother -- the bloody brother has given me no groschen ! 
-- Do you not see the dead man there lying before him ? 
-- The murderer can not get over him , for the dead man raises himself up ; but I will crush him down , if the bloody brother will give me a groschen ! '' 
The Judge had taken the horse by the rein , and , not minding the old woman , would have led it through the gate . 
In vain , however , were all his endeavours ; and the witch continued to cry without ceasing , `` Bloody brother , bloody brother -- give me groschen ! '' 
At last I forced my hand into my pocket , and threw her money . 
Shouting and rejoicing , she then started up -- `` See the groschen ! '' 
cried she , `` see the groschen that the murderer has given me -- see the beautiful groschen ! '' 
Meanwhile my horse neighed aloud ; and on the Judge 's letting him go , went curvetting and caprioling through the gate . 
`` Now , sir , '' said he , `` the riding goes on fine and admirably , according to all particulars ! '' 
The bauers , who had followed me through the gate , laughed again out of all measure , when they beheld me dancing up and down to the powerful movements of my too lively horse , and cried aloud , `` See only , see only -- he rides like a Capuchin ! '' 
This whole adventure in the village , especially the disgusting and strange words of the mad-woman , had not a little discomposed me . 
The best rule which I could now adopt , was of course to get rid as soon as possible of every remarkable trait in my outward appearance , and to assume some name or other , under which I might appear unobserved and unsuspected in the world . 
Life now lay before me , as if beneath the dark clouds of impenetrable mystery . 
What was it possible for me to do , but to give myself up to the current of that stream which bore me irresistibly onward ? 
All bonds by which I was formerly connected with certain duties or situations in the world were now broken and dissevered , -- so that I could find no hold or stay by which to pilot my course . 
* * * * * The high road became always more lively and populous . 
I met carriages and horsemen , as well as foot passengers . 
The country was more cultivated , and the hedge-rows were planted with orchard-trees , some of which were yet loaded with the later fruits of autumn . 
In short , everything already announced , from a distance , the existence of the rich and flourishing commercial town to which I was now drawing near . 
In due time it lay visibly before me . 
Without being questioned , nay , without even being rudely stared at , I rode at once into the suburbs . 
A large house , with bright plate-glass windows , over the door of which there was a golden lion , immediately struck my attention . 
Crowds of people were here streaming in and out at the gate -- carriages arrived and departed , while from the rooms on the ground-floor I heard the jovial sounds of laughter and the ringing of glasses . 
Scarcely had I pulled up the reins , being yet undecided , when the hausknecht officiously sprung out , took my horse by the bridle , and on my dismounting , led him , without asking any questions , to the stable . 
The head waiter , smartly dressed , came bustling and rattling , with his bunch of keys at his girdle , and walked before me up stairs . 
When we came into the second story , he looked at me with a flitting glance of inquiry , and then led me up an etage higher , where he shewed me a chamber of moderate dimensions ; then politely asked `` if I had any commands ; '' said that `` dinner would be ready at two o'clock , in the great hall , No. 10 . '' 
etc. etc. . 
`` Bring me a bottle of wine , '' said I . 
These were indeed the first words which the officious assiduity of these people had left me an opportunity to interpose . 
Scarcely had the waiter left me alone , when there was a knocking at the door , and a face looked in , which at once reminded me of the representations that are seen in allegorical pictures , of a comic mask . 
A pointed red nose -- a pair of small glistening eyes -- lips drawn upwards into an exquisite grin -- a long chin -- and , above all this , a high powdered toupée , which , as I afterwards perceived , declined backwards most unexpectedly into a Titus ; -- for his dress , a large ostentatious frill , a fiery-red waistcoat , under which protruded two massy watch-chains -- pantaloons -- a frock-coat , which in some places was too narrow , in others too wide ; of course did not fit anywhere ! 
-- Such was the figure that now stepped into the room , retaining all the way the same angle of obeisance which he had assumed at his first entrance , and talking all the time . 
`` I am the frizeur of this house , '' said he ; `` and beg leave , with the greatest respect , and in the most immeasurable degree , to offer my services ! '' 
There was about this little shrivelled wretch an air and character so irresistibly comical , that I could hardly suppress laughter . 
His visit , however , was now very apropos ; and accordingly I told him that my hair had been both neglected , in the course of a long journey , and spoiled by bad cutting . 
I therefore desired to know , whether he could bring my head into proper order . 
He looked at me accordingly with the significant eyes of an artist and connoisseur , laid his right hand with an elegant and gracioso bend on his breast , and said -- `` Bring into order , forsooth ! 
Oh , heavens ! 
Pietro Belcampo , thou whom malignant enviers and traducers have chosen to call Peter Fairfield , even as that divine military fifer and hornist , Giacomo Punto , was called Jack Stitch , -- thou , like him , art in truth calumniated and misunderstood . 
But , indeed , hast thou not thyself placed thy light under a bushel , instead of letting it shine before the world ? 
And yet , should not even the formation of this hand and fingers , the brightness of genius which beams from these eyes , and colours the nose in passing with a beautiful morning red ; in short , should not thy tout ensemble betray to the first glance of the connoisseur , that there dwells within thee that spirit which strives after the ideal ? 
` Bring into order ! ' 
-- These are indeed cold words , sir ! '' 
I begged the strange little man not to put himself into such a flutter , as I had the fullest reliance on his skill and cleverness . 
`` Cleverness ! '' 
resumed he with great fervour ; `` what is cleverness ? 
Who was clever ? 
He who took the measure at five eye-lengths , and then jumping thirty yards , tumbled into the ditch ? 
He who could throw the grain of linseed at thirty steps distance through the eye of a needle ? 
He who hung five hundred weight on the point of his sword , and then balanced it on his nose for six hours , six minutes , six seconds , and a half ? 
-- Ha ! 
what is cleverness ? 
Be it what it may , it is foreign to Belcampo , whose whole soul is imbued by art , sacred art . '' 
Art , sir , art ! 
My fancy revels in the wonderful formation , the creation of locks -- in that moulding of character , which indeed the breath of a zephyr in wiry curls builds and annihilates . 
There , art -LRB- or science , as it may , for variety 's sake , be called -RRB- conceives , developes , labours , and originates ! 
In this , sir , there is indeed something truly divine ; for art is not properly that of which men , under this name , speak so much , but rather springs out of all to which this name has been given . 
`` You understand me , sir ; for I perceive that you have a meditative head , as I conclude from that lock which hangs over your excellency 's right temple . '' 
I assured him -LRB- however falsely -RRB- that I completely understood him ; and being diverted with the man 's originality of humour , I resolved that , holding his boasted science in due respect , I would by no means interrupt his eloquence , however diffuse . 
`` What then , '' said I , `` do you intend to make of this confused head of mine ? '' 
`` All , everything that you please or wish , '' said the man . 
`` If , however , it may be allowed to Pietro Belcampo to give counsel , then let me first contemplate your excellency 's head , in its proper length , breadth , and circumference -- your whole figure , too , your mien , your gait , your play of gesture ; then I shall be able finally to say whether you belong properly to the antique or romantic , the heroic or pastoral , the grandios or ordinaire , the naive or satyric , the humorous or severe ; then , accordingly , I shall call up the spirits of Caracalla , of Titus , of Charlemagne , of Henri Quatre , of Gustave Adolph , of Virgil , of Tasso , or Boccaccio ! 
`` Inspired by them , the muscles of my fingers will vibrate and quiver , and under the sonorous twittering of the scissars , will proceed the masterpiece of art ! 
I shall be the man , sir , who will perfect your leading characteristic , as it should exhibit itself in real life . 
But now , let me beg of you , sir , to step up and down through the room . 
I shall meanwhile contemplate , remark , and record . 
Let me beg of you , sir ! '' 
I must , of course , accommodate myself to the strange man , therefore did as I was desired , walking up and down the room , endeavouring at the same time to conceal , as much as I could , my inclination to the monastic gait , which , however , it is almost impossible for one by whom it has been thoroughly learned , even after many years , wholly to conquer . 
The little man contemplated me with great attention , then began to trip about the room . 
He sighed and shrugged , even panted and sobbed , then drew out his handkerchief , and wiped the drops from his forehead ; at last he stood still , and I inquired `` if he was yet resolved how he should operate ? '' 
Then , with a deep sigh , he broke out -- `` Alas , sir ! 
what is the meaning of all this ? 
You have not resigned yourself to your natural character . 
There was constraint in every movement -- a conflict of contending principles . 
Yet , a few more steps , sir . '' 
Hereupon I absolutely refused to set myself up for show any longer in that manner , and told him plainly , that if he could not now resolve what to make of my hair , I must refuse altogether to have anything to do with him or his art . 
`` Bury thyself , Pietro ! '' 
cried the little man , with great fervour ; `` go to the grave , for in this world thou art wholly and utterly misunderstood . 
Here is no confidence , no truth any more to be found ! 
`` Yet , sir , you shall be compelled to acknowledge the depth of my perceptions , and do honour to my genius . 
In vain did I labour to amalgamate together all the contradictions and conflicts in your character and gestures . 
In the latter there is something that directly points at monachism . ' 
Ex profundis clamavi ad te , Domine . 
Oremus . 
Et in omnia secula seculorum ! ' '' 
With bitter scorn and mockery the man pronounced these words from the Ritual , in a hoarse croaking voice , imitating , at the same time , to the very life , the postures and gesture of a monk . 
He turned himself as if before the altar , he kneeled , and rose again . 
At last he stopped , drew himself up , and assumed a proud look of defiance , stared widely , and cried , `` MINE is the world ! 
I am more wealthy , more wise , prudent , and intelligent , than all of ye , ye blind moles ! 
Bend , then , and kneel down before me , in humble submission ! 
`` Look you , sir , that which I have mentioned forms the chief attribute and ingredient in your appearance ; and , with your permission , I shall , contemplating your features , your figure , and moods of mind , blend together something of Caracalla , Abelard , and Boccaccio ; and proceeding on the idea thus gained , shall , like an inspired sculptor , begin the glorious creation of antique , ethereal , classic locks and curls ! '' 
Imperfect and ridiculous as the man 's expressions were , yet there was so much home truth in his remarks , that I judged it best to conceal nothing from him ; I therefore confessed that I had indeed been a monk , and had received the tonsure , which , for certain reasons , I now wished as much as possible to keep unobserved . 
With the most absurd writhing , twisting , grimaces , and extravagant discourse , the man at last proceeded with his operations on my hair . 
Now he looked cross and gloomy -- now smiled -- anon stamped and clenched his fist -- then smiled again and stood on tiptoe ; in short , it became impossible for me to refrain from laughing , in which I at last indulged very heartily . 
After about an hour 's work , he had finished , and before he could break afresh into words , which were already on the tip of his tongue , I begged him immediately to go and send up some one who , as a barber , might exhibit the same skill that he had done as a frizeur . 
With a significant grin , he stepped to the door on tiptoe , shut and bolted it , then tripped back into the middle of the room , and began -- `` Oh , golden age ! 
where still the hair of the head and of the beard , in one plenitude of waving locks , poured itself out for the adornment of man and the delightful care of the artist ! 
But those days are for ever gone ! 
Man has insanely cast away his noblest ornament , and a shameful race have set themselves to work , with their horrible instruments , to raze and extirpate the beard even to the skin ! 
O ye despicable band of beard-scrapers ! 
whetting your abominable knives upon black strops stinking with oil , and , in scornful defiance of art , swinging about your tasselled bags , clattering with your pewter basons , splashing about your scalding-hot froth , and asking your unhappy patients whether they will be shaved over the thumb or the spoon ! 
Luckily there are men still -- there is at least one Pietro , who labours against your infamous trade , and who , though lowering himself to your wretched office of rooting out the beard , still endeavours to preserve and cherish that little which is allowed to lift itself from the desolate wrecks of Time ! 
`` What are the numberless varieties of whiskers in their elegant windings and curvatures , now softly bending around the cheek , in the fashion of the delicate oval -- now melancholily sinking straight down into the depth of the neck -- now boldly mounting up even to the corner of the mouth -- anon narrowing modestly into small delicate lines , anon spreading out in full unchastised luxuriance , -- what , I say , are all these but the invention of our science , in which the high striving after the sublime , the beautiful , and the ideal , is unfolded ? 
Ha , then , Pietro , shew what a spirit dwells within thee ! 
Shew what thou art in reality prepared to undertake for the sacred cause of art , while , to the eyes of the ignorant , you appear to be lowering yourself to a mere beard-scraper ! '' 
With these words , the little man had drawn out a complete barber 's apparatus , and begun , with , light and skilful touches , to free me from that remaining incumbrance , which had so much offended the eyes of my old friend the Judge . 
In truth , I came out of his hands completely metamorphosed ; and nothing more was necessary but a proper change of dress , in order to escape all danger of provoking , by my appearance , questions or impertinent curiosity . 
Belcampo , having packed up his implements , stood smiling on me with great satisfaction . 
I then said to him , that I was quite unacquainted with the town ; and that it would be very satisfactory if he could inform me , how to procure immediately a suit of clothes , according to the newest fashion of the time and place . 
To reward his trouble , and encourage him in my service , I slipped a ducat into his hand . 
Hereupon he seemed absolutely inspired -- cast his eyes to the ceiling , and then ogled the ducat in the palm of his hand . 
`` Worthiest of patrons and masters , '' said he , `` in you I have not been deceived . 
A guardian spirit , indeed , guided my hand , and in the proud waving of these curls -- in the eagle flight of these whiskers -- your high sentiments are clearly expressed ! 
`` I have , indeed , a friend , a Damon , an Orestes , who will fulfil upon the rest of the body , that which I have commenced upon the head , with the same depth of reflection , and the same light of genius . 
You perceive , sir , that the individual whom I mean is an artist of costume ; which expression I prefer to the trivial one of tailor . 
`` He , too , willingly luxuriates and loses himself in the ideal ; and thus forming in his own mind shapes , characters , and physiognomies , he has planned a magazine , a depot of the most exquisite dresses . 
You behold there the modern elegant , in all possible shadowings of character , now boldly and energetically out-shining all competitors -- now reserved within himself , and lost to all that is external -- now witty and ironical -- now melancholy and out of humour -- anon bizarre and extravagant , anon plain and citizen-like , according as he wishes to appear , so or so ! 
`` The youth who , for the first time , ventures to order a coat for himself , without the assistance of mamma , or his tutor , -- the man of forty , who must wear powder to conceal grey hairs , -- the old man , still vigorous in his enjoyment of life , -- the profound student , -- the bustling merchant , -- the opulent , retired citizen , -- all these varieties of character rise up before your eyes , as on a theatre , when you enter the shop of my Damon . 
But , in a few moments , the masterpieces of my friend 's art shall be presented in this very room , for your inspection . '' 
Accordingly , he hopped away in great haste , and soon after re-appeared with a tall , stout , genteelly dressed man , who , as well in his whole behaviour as in his exterior , made the most perfect contrast possible , with the little frizeur ; and yet , nevertheless , he introduced him to me as his Damon ! 
Damon sedately measured me with his eyes , and then searched out of a large bale that a boy had carried , several suits of clothes , which exactly corresponded with the wishes that I had expressed . 
Indeed I then , for the first time , acknowledged the fine tact of the costume-artist , as the little man had styled him ; for he had chosen for me precisely that style of dress , in which , without any hints of reference to rank , profession , birth-place , and so forth , one might glide unobserved through the world . 
It is , in truth , no easy matter to dress one 's self in such manner , that all suspicions of a particular character or pursuit may be avoided . 
The costume of a citizen of the world should be regulated by the negative principle , as , in polite behaviour , more depends on judicious unobtrusive leaving out , than on actual performance . 
The little man all the while indulged himself in his own absurd and wandering discourse ; and as he probably did not meet every day with a listener so willing as I had been , he was , no doubt , unusually brilliant . 
Damon , however , a grave , and , as it seemed to me , intelligent man , at last cut him short , without mercy ; and shaking him by the shoulder , `` Fairfield , '' said he , `` you are got again to-day into the old vein -- upon the right ' jawing tack , ' as the Dutch mariners say . 
I would bet any sum , that the gentleman 's ears must have ached already with the nonsense which you are pouring out ! '' 
With an air of the deepest melancholy , Belcampo now hung down his head . 
He then suddenly seized his old weather-beaten hat ; and , running quickly to the door , `` Such , '' cried he , `` is the lamentable fate -- such are the misfortunes of genius ! 
Thus is the character of Belcampo prostituted and defamed , even by his best friends ! '' 
Damon also then took his leave , and , in retiring , said , `` He is a coxcomb quite of his own kind , this Fairfield ! 
Much reading has turned his brain ; otherwise he is a good-natured fellow , and clever in his own business , on which account I can bear him well enough , since , if a man has good success in any one trade , he may be excused a little extravagance on other occasions . '' 
As soon as I was left alone , I began to look in a large mirror , which hung in the room , and to give myself formal lessons in gait and demeanour . 
For this purpose , the discovery made by the frizeur had given me very necessary hints . 
Monks acquire a peculiar awkwardness of walk from their long dresses , which confine the limbs , and from their attempt at the same time to move quickly , which the rules of our order enjoin . 
There is also something farther characteristic in a submissive bending forward of the body , and in the carriage of the arms , which must never hang downwards . 
All this I endeavoured to unlearn as effectually as possible . 
Now , however , I derived most encouragement from the idea , that I was completely transformed in mind , as well as in appearance ; that the thread of my former life was wholly broken , so that I could look on its adventures as on transactions foreign to myself , which I had now done with for ever . 
I had entered on a new state of existence , wherein , if recollections still haunted me , these would every day become fainter and fainter , until at last they wore out , and perished altogether . 
When I looked out from the window , the tumult of people , the uninterrupted noise of business which was kept up upon the streets -- all was new to me , and was exactly calculated to prolong that levity of mind , which the loquacity of the little man , and my being forced to laugh at him , had excited . 
In my new dress I ventured down to the crowded table d'hote , and all apprehension vanished , when I found that no one observed me , nay , that even my nearest neighbour did not give himself the trouble of looking at me when I set myself beside him . 
In the list of strangers , I had entered my name simply as Mr Leonard , and given myself out for a particulier , who travelled for his own pleasure . 
Of such travellers there might be many in the town , and of course I would escape farther questioning . 
After dinner , it afforded me a new and incalculable pleasure to wander through the town , where I found streets much broader and better paved , with far finer houses , than any to which I had yet been accustomed . 
Luckily there were now preparations set on foot for the approaching great yearly fair , which caused an unusual bustle in every quarter ; and I had been told at my hotel that a few days later it would have been impossible for me to obtain lodgings . 
The richness of the booths , which already began to open , exceeded all that my imagination had ever conceived . 
There were the choicest goods from all quarters of the globe ; from France , Italy , England , the East and West Indies ; from Persia , Turkey , Russia , down to the nearer kingdoms of Hungary and Poland ; and I became confirmed in my conviction that here no one would observe my dress or appearance , since there were natives of all countries , in their proper costumes , parading the streets , or arranging their merchandize . 
The air was perfumed by the fragrance of Turkish tobacco , as the natives of Constantinople stalked silently about with their long pipes , in dresses which I had till then only seen in books ; and there were Persians , who , from their splendour of attire , might have passed for sultans , had not their present occupations proved the contrary . 
But as I found my way at last to the streets more particularly allotted to the dealers in all sorts of bijouterie , toys , paintings , engravings , and other works of art , my wonder and delight were increased at every step . 
Amid the infinite variety of objects conducive to luxury and amusement here exhibited , time passed on like a dream . 
I did not fail to indulge myself in the purchase of several articles of ornament and convenience . 
A watch and chain , two seal rings , a large meerschaum pipe , -LRB- which the vender rightly declared to be a chef d'oeuvre , -RRB- a few books and prints , etc. ; all which I ordered to be sent home to my hotel . 
On arriving afterwards at the Great Square , in the centre of the town , I was confounded by finding it already occupied by caravans and temporary theatres , filled with wild beasts , travelling players , puppet-shows , giants , dwarfs , panoramas , jugglers , etc. etc. etc. . 
These sights , however , I did not venture for the present to examine more narrowly , but made my way into the public walks and gardens by which the town is surrounded , and which were now gay with genteel parties , enjoying the afternoon 's promenade , enlivened , moreover , with excellent music from harp-players , singers , organists , etc. , many of whom , especially of the singers , reminded me of the best music that I had heard in early days , in the house of the choir-master at Königswald . 
For a moment , too , I was reminded of his sister , by the countenance , and yet more by the figure , of a girl that passed me , in the midst of a thicket of very dark massive pines , near the Bockenheimer gate ; but the recollection was transient ; for now , though surrounded by gaiety and music , by sparkling groups and beautiful countenances , -LRB- for at Frankenburg , as at Saxe Gotha , almost every female , not in the extreme of old age , is beautiful , -RRB- yet by rapid degrees the cheerfulness which I had felt at the commencement of my walk vanished quite away . 
All at once I felt within me the solution of the riddle , the explanation of the cause why I was thus changed . 
I was alone in the midst of these happy groups . 
The trees , the flowers , -LRB- withered and yellowed already by the blasts of autumn , -RRB- the ruddy gleams of the western sky , and the varieties of the landscape -- these , indeed , were like society -- these I partook in common with the parties around me -- but of all the shapes and forms of men and women , smiling or grave , meditative or gay , that moved about me , I knew not one . 
There was not a single individual in whose breast I could imagine a shadow of apprehension who I really was -- what strange chance had brought me hither , or even the least atom of that overpowering load of mystery by which I was weighed down , and which was wholly locked up within my own bosom . 
All this , however convenient at the present moment , made on me an impression hostile , destructive , and almost insupportable . 
As long as I had the gay booths , the paintings , toys , jewels , sparkling dresses , liqueurs , and confections , tobacco-pipes , books , and engravings around me , -- such things , however contemptible in the eyes of one accustomed to the world , had , from their novelty , power enough to rivet my attention , and alienate it from selfish fears and despondency . 
But now , amid these rural walks , surrounded only by happy groups , of whom each individual enjoyed mutual confidence with his neighbour -- by husbands and wives , lovers and mistresses , parents and children ; amid scenes that reminded me of my early days of innocence , methought I was like a condemned spirit -- like a revenant , doomed involuntarily to wander on the earth , from whence all , and every one to whom he had been attached , had long since died away ! 
If I called to mind how , formerly , every visitant at the Capuchin Convent so kindly and respectfully greeted the pulpit orator , and how the whole neighbourhood , and even strangers from remote countries , thirsted after his conversation , rejoicing even in the opportunity of a few words , then my heart was wrung with the bitterest anguish . 
I strove against this , however , as much as possible . 
`` That pulpit orator , '' said I to myself , `` was the Monk Medardus , he who is now dead , buried , and -LRB- ought to be -RRB- forgotten , in the abysses of the mountains -- in the darkness of the far-distant pine-tree forest . 
With him I have nothing to do , for I am alive and active , nay , life itself has for the first time dawned upon me , and begun to offer its varied and substantial enjoyments . '' 
Thus , when in my involuntary waking dreams I recalled the strange and frightful adventures at the castle , I said to myself , `` These things are indeed known to me , yet it is to some one else that they refer ; over me they can have no influence . '' 
This other was again the Capuchin ; but I was no longer a monk . 
It was only the never-dying thoughts of Aurelia that united still , by indissoluble ties , my former with my present existence ; but when this feeling was truly awoke , like the torment of an incurable malady , it killed and annihilated that spirit of pleasure which had risen up within me . 
I was then suddenly torn out of those brilliant circles of glittering forms and fantastic imagery , by which life had begun to surround me . 
The delusions fled . 
I despised myself for having been pleased for a moment , like a child , with toys and rattles , and once more sunk down , a prey to the darkest and most rayless despondency . 
This evening , on my return from the public walks , I visited , for the first time in my life , a theatre . 
This was to me another new enjoyment ; but before reaching thither , my despondency had gained its full influence . 
The piece performed happened to be a tragedy , and I thought , during the whole performance , only of Aurelia . 
* * * * * During my residence at Frankenburg , I did not omit to visit some of the many houses of public resort , in which people met to breakfast , a la fourchette ; to dine , to sup , and enjoy the pleasures of wine , gaming , and conversation . 
Accordingly , I soon felt a particular preference for a certain hotel in the middle of the town , where , on account of the superior quality of the wines , a numerous society were to be found every night . 
At a table , in a room adjoining to the great salle , I found regularly , at a fixed hour in the evening , the same persons assembled . 
Their conversation was always lively and ingenious . 
Accident at last brought me acquainted with these people , who had thus formed an especial circle for themselves , and who for some time shewed no disposition to bestow on me any share of their attention . 
At first , I used to sit quietly in a corner of the room , and drink my wine alone ; but on one occasion it so happened that I was able to afford them information on a literary topic which they were discussing , and was in consequence invited to a place at their table , which afterwards was the more willingly kept open for me , as my good address and the extent of my reading and acquirements exactly suited their dispositions . 
Thus I obtained , without trouble , some very agreeable acquaintances ; and accustoming myself more and more to the world , I became every day more unconcerned , and was able , in great measure , to rub off the rust of my former habits . 
For several evenings there had been much talk in this society of a certain painter , -LRB- an entire stranger in the town , -RRB- who had lately arrived , and during the fair was to hold an exhibition of his works . 
Every member of the society but myself had seen his pictures , and praised them so highly , that I of course felt anxious for an opportunity of judging for myself , and went accordingly . 
The painter was absent when I entered his exhibition-room , but an old man acted as cicerone , and named the masters of various old pictures which the artist exhibited along with his own . 
Among them were many admirable pieces , most of them originals , of celebrated Italian masters , with which I was highly delighted . 
At last , I came to a series of pictures which the man said were copies from certain large frescoes , designed many years ago . 
What was now my astonishment , when involuntarily the recollections of my youth here began to dawn upon me , every moment acquiring more distinct forms and livelier colours ! 
These were obviously copies from the Convent of the Lime-Tree . 
Above all , I recognized most unequivocally , in a holy family , the features of the old pilgrim who had come to us with the miraculous boy ! 
At this sight , the levity in which I had for some time indulged , once more completely declined ; and , sunk into the deepest melancholy , I stood long gazing at the group . 
But when my sight next fell on a portrait -LRB- large as life , and admirably done -RRB- of my adoptive mother , the Princess , I could not forbear a loud outcry of wonder . 
This portrait exhibited a most accurate resemblance , -LRB- such as Vandyke never failed to give to all his pictures , -RRB- the costume was the same in which she used to walk before the nuns in their procession through the church , and the painter had seized the moment , when , having finished her private devotions , she was leaving her room in full dress , in order to join in that solemnity . 
The perspective behind shewed the interior of the church , crowded with the expectant congregation . 
In the looks of this admirable woman , was fully developed that expression of a mind wholly devoted to Heaven , which was so pre-eminently her own . 
It now seemed to me as if she implored forgiveness for that unhappy sinner , whom his own crimes had torn from her maternal embraces . 
I felt once more all the bitterness of contrast between what I now was , and what I had been ! 
Feelings long lost and estranged gained their full influence over my heart , and I was borne away by an unspeakable longing after the scenes and impressions of my youth . 
Methought I once more heard the south wind sigh through the dark yew-hedges and tall beech-trees of the old manor-house , and traced again the bright wanderings of the Saale , but not , as on the occasion of my last visit there , with coldness and indifference ! 
The delusion for a moment was perfect , only to be followed by the bitterness of reality and remorse . 
Anon , it seemed as if I were again with the good priest of the Cistertian Convent , a cheerful , free-minded , and courageous boy , wandering at will through the wild country , losing himself in rocky recesses of the Thuringian mountains , or shouting and rejoicing because the grand festival of St Bernard was drawing near ! 
That well-known form of her whom I so deeply revered , was again presented , as if living , before me . 
Methought , too , I heard her voice . 
-- `` Medardus , '' said she , `` hast thou been good and pious ? '' 
The well-known tones , deepened by anxiety and love , floated like soft music around me . 
`` Hast thou been good and pious ? '' 
Alas ! 
what must now be my answer ? 
The beautiful picture , traced by the pencil of Innocence and Hope , is clouded and defaced for ever -- the vernal skies are darkened -- the cold tempest winds of grief and remorse desolate the landscape . 
I have heaped up crime on crime . 
On the first breach of my monastic vows followed murder ; and now , is not my daily life of dissipation and deceit , but the certain commencement of crimes yet to come ? 
These thoughts , and many more , that it would require a volume to delineate , rushed at once upon me , so that , completely overpowered , I sunk , half-fainting , into a chair , and burst into tears . 
The old man was terrified . 
`` For God 's sake , sir , '' said he , `` what 's the matter ? 
what has happened to you ? '' 
`` That picture , '' said I , in a hollow suppressed voice , `` resembles with such accuracy a near relation whom I lost by a cruel and untimely death , that it has deeply affected me . '' 
With these words I arose , and assumed as much composure as possible . 
`` Come , sir , '' said this man , `` such recollections are far too painful , and should be avoided . 
There is yet one portrait here , which my master considers his best , and which you have not seen . 
It is painted after the life , and has only just now been finished . 
We have hung a curtain before it , that the sun might not injure the fresh colours . '' 
The old man placed me carefully in the proper light , and then drew up the curtain -- IT WAS AURELIA ! 
At first , a kind of horror seized upon me ; for I knew not if this could be reality , or the mockery of that relentless Fiend , that would lure me on to destruction . 
But , with a violent effort , I summoned up courage ; an entire revolution again took place in my mind ; new hopes and feelings began to break through the gloom and melancholy , which for a space had gathered around me . 
With eager eyes , I devoured the charms of Aurelia , which from the enchanted canvass now gleamed out in full splendour before me . 
Yet , alas ! 
did not these childlike pious looks seem only to complain against the murderer of her brother ? 
The mystery of his guilt , however , which had been deposited in my bosom , gave me confidence ; and even a malicious spirit of scorn and irony rose within me . 
I only regretted now , that in that fatal night of Hermogen 's death , Aurelia had not become mine . 
His appearance had then frustrated my plans ; but with death he had expiated the rashness of his attempts against me . 
-- `` Aurelia , '' said I , `` yet survives ; and this alone is sufficient to encourage my hopes of one day possessing her . 
From the destiny in which she is involved , it is impossible for her to escape ; for am not I myself the living impersonization of the fate to which she is subjected ? '' 
All the sadly-cherished dreams of youth , all feelings of piety which the Abbess 's portrait had inspired , were thus banished ; and , still gazing on Aurelia , I encouraged myself to the commission of deliberate and premeditated crime . 
The old man was astonished at my conduct . 
He drawled out a long string of words , about drawing , tone , colouring , etc. etc. ; but I heard him not . 
The thoughts of Aurelia , the hopes that I might yet fulfil some one of those many plans , which had only been delayed , absorbed me so completely , that I walked away , as in a dream , from the exhibition-room , without once asking for the painter -- thus losing , perhaps , the best opportunity of learning what sort of connection there existed betwixt myself and these pictures , which seemed to comprehend in that magic circle the chief impressions of my whole life . 
Once more , I was now resolved to venture all things for Aurelia . 
Nay , it seemed almost as if the clouds of mystery would soon be broken -- as if , elevated to a station from which I could overlook all the characters and events connected with my life , I could have from them nothing to fear , and therefore nothing to risk . 
I brooded , as formerly , over a thousand plans and resolutions , in order to arrive nearer to my object . 
In the first place , I perceived that I should , no doubt , learn much from the strange painter , and , by conversation with him , develope many trains of evidence , of which the possession was to me most important . 
At last , I had nearly resolved that I would return , in my present state of complete disguise and metamorphosis , to the Baron 's castle . 
Nor , to my excited feelings and disordered imagination , did this appear as an act of extraordinary hazard and daring . 
In the evening , I went , as usual , to the club-room , where I had trouble enough to restrain the vehemence of my emotions , and to prevent the ebullitions of my overheated phantasy from being observed . 
I heard much of the strange painter 's productions , especially of that wonderful power of expression which he had displayed in his portraits , above all in that of Aurelia . 
I had now the means of joining in this approbation , and , with a peculiar splendour , and strength of language , -LRB- heightened , too , by a kind of scorn and irony , for I felt my own superiority in speaking of this picture , -RRB- I described the nameless graces , the angelic charms , which were spread over that saint-like countenance . 
Hereupon , one of the party declared his intention of bringing the painter himself to the club on the following evening , adding , that , though advanced in years , he was still an interesting and agreeable companion , and that he would be detained here for some time longer , having been employed professionally by several rich families in the town . 
* * * * * Agitated by a tempest of conflicting feelings and indefinable apprehensions , I could scarcely summon up resolution for the encounter which I had so much wished , and , on the following night , went at a later hour than usual to the club-room . 
On my entrance , I perceived at once which was the stranger , though his countenance was not turned towards me . 
A conviction of the truth immediately flashed on my mind ; and , when I went round , and took my place opposite to him -- then , oh Heaven ! 
there glared out upon me the never-to-be-forgotten features of that horrible Unknown , the same who , on St Anthony 's day , had leaned against the pillar of the church , and filled me with abhorrence and consternation ! 
Now , too , even as then , he looked at me with the same fixed solemnity of aspect -- the same cold spectral self-possession . 
But the mood of mind which I had so recently been cherishing , the thoughts of Aurelia , and my determination to brave all things for her sake , gave me courage and stability to bear up against his inspection , apparently unmoved . 
I could no longer suppose that I but dreamed . 
The enemy had now visibly started into life ; and I was necessitated to venture the combat . 
I resolved , however , not to begin , but wait for his attack ; and , should he attempt to tear off the mask by which I was now concealed , to beat him back with weapons , on the strength of which I flattered myself that I could rely . 
After a short interval , however , the stranger appeared to take no particular notice of me , but , turning his looks another way , continued the conversation in which he had been engaged at my entrance . 
The party began , at length , to speak of his own works , and bestowed especial praise on the portrait of Aurelia . 
Some one among them maintained , that , although this picture was , even at first sight , evidently a portrait , yet it might serve for an imaginative study , and be taken for the beau -LRB- or belle -RRB- ideal of a female saint . 
As I had , on the preceding evening , been so eloquent in praise of this work , they now asked my opinion , and , almost unconsciously , I said that I coincided with the last speaker , and that I could not imagine to myself the blessed St Rosalia otherwise than as a counterpart of the female here represented . 
The painter seemed scarcely to notice my words , but again broke in -- `` Indeed , that young lady , whom the portrait , whatever may be its merit as a work of art , very faithfully resembles , is a real and immaculate saint -- who , in the spiritual combat , exalts herself even to supernatural excellence . 
I have painted her at the moment when , under the influence of the most overwhelming griefs , she yet placed her hope and trust in religious consolation , -- in the aid of that Divine Providence which unceasingly watches over us . 
`` The expression of this hope , which , in a perfect degree , can dwell only in a mind elevated above all that is terrestrial , I have endeavoured to give to my picture -- I can not flatter myself that I have adequately succeeded , but the principle , ' in magnis voluisse , ' seems to me to have rendered it at least one of the most tolerable of my productions . '' 
The conversation now wandered away to other subjects . 
-- The wine , which to-day , in honour of the stranger-guest , was of a better sort , and drunk more freely than usual , soon did its good office in enlivening the party -- Every one of them at last found something diverting to relate , or some comical song to sing . 
The painter , meanwhile , seemed only to laugh inwardly . 
If any change was produced in his countenance , it was to be observed in his eyes , which were lighted up occasionally with a certain mysterious lustre , -- yet , by means of a few striking and powerful words occasionally thrown in , he was able to play his part , and to keep the whole company in admirable good humour . 
Although , whenever the stranger happened to fix his looks on me , I could not repress a certain feeling of apprehension , yet I gradually overcame that still worse mood of mind into which I had been brought , on my first reconnoissance of his features . 
I even told stories of the absurd Belcampo , who was known less or more to all the party , and , to their great amusement , gave such a lively account of his behaviour on the day of my arrival , -LRB- with imitations of his voice and gesticulations , -RRB- that a good-humoured fat merchant who sat opposite to me , declared , with tears of laughter in his eyes , `` That was the most delightful evening he had ever spent in his life ! '' 
When the merriment that I had raised had begun to decline away , the stranger suddenly inquired -- `` Gentlemen , has any one among you ever seen the Devil ? '' 
This question was received but as the prelude to some new and comical story . 
Of course , every one assured him , in turn , `` that he had never yet had that honour . '' 
`` Well , '' said the stranger , `` it so happened , that I was very lately within a hair-breadth of attaining myself to that honour , and this , namely , at the Castle of the Baron von R -- , among the Thuringian mountains . '' 
I now trembled in every limb ; but the others laughed aloud , crying out , `` Go on -- go on ! '' 
`` Gentlemen , '' said the painter , `` you probably all know that wild district in the Thuringian mountains , through which every one must pass , who travels in that direction northwards . 
But there is especially , on a by-road , one romantic spot , where , if the traveller emerges out of the dark pine-tree forests , and advances to the height of the rocky cliffs , he finds himself suddenly , to his amazement , on the extreme verge of an awful , deep , and , indeed , bottomless abyss . 
This is called the devil 's ground , and the projecting promontory of the rock the devil 's chair . 
`` Of the devil 's chair it is related , that once , when a certain Count Victorin , with his head full of wicked projects , had sat down upon this rock , the devil suddenly appeared beside him ; and because he was himself resolved to carry the Count 's wicked designs into execution , he incontinently hurled Victorin down into the unfathomable gulf . 
`` Thereafter , the devil appeared as a capuchin monk , at the castle of the Baron von R -- ; and when he had taken his pleasure with the Baroness , he first sent her out of the world , -LRB- no one knew how , -RRB- and then , because the Baron 's son , a madman , would by no means allow of this masquerade , but always called out , ` The devil , the devil is among us ! ' 
he strangled him . 
However , by that persevering annonce of the madman , one pious soul at least was saved from the destruction which the devil had intended for them all ; and this was the young Baroness Aurelia , the subject of the picture , which you have this night been commending . 
`` Afterwards , the capuchin , -LRB- or the devil , -RRB- in an inconceivable manner , vanished ; and it is said , that he fled , coward-like , from Victorin , who had risen like a bloody spectre from the grave against him . 
`` Let all this be as it may , I can assure you , in plain truth , that the Baroness died mysteriously -- probably by poison ; and that Hermogen -LRB- the madman -RRB- was assassinated . 
The Baron himself , shortly afterwards , died of grief ; and Aurelia , the pious Saint , whose portrait I painted , at the very time when these horrible events had taken place at the castle , fled as a desolate orphan into a distant Cistertian Convent , of which the Abbess had been in terms of friendship with her father . 
`` You have seen and admired in my gallery the likeness of this admirable and unfortunate young lady . 
But as to other circumstances , this gentleman -LRB- pointing to me -RRB- will be better able to inform you than I am , since , during the whole of the adventures to which I have alluded , he was an inhabitant of the castle ! '' 
All looks , full of astonishment , were now directed towards me . 
Quite unnerved , and lost to all self-possession , I started up -- `` How , sir ! '' 
exclaimed I , in a violent tone -- `` What have I to do with your absurd stories of capuchins , and devils , and assassinations ? 
You mistake me -- you mistake me completely , I assure you ; and I must beg that , for this once , you will leave me completely out of the question . '' 
Considering the tumult of my mind , it was difficult for me to give my words even this much of connection and propriety , or to assume any degree of composure . 
The powerful influence of the painter 's narrative , and my excessive disquietude , were only too visible . 
The cheerful tone which prevailed through the party rapidly declined ; and as the members of the club gradually recollected that I was a complete stranger , and had only by accident obtained my place among them , they began to fix on me mistrustful and suspicious glances . 
Meanwhile , the painter had risen from his chair , and , standing opposite , transfixed me once more with his dead-alive glaring eyes , as formerly in the Capuchin church . 
He did not utter a word ; he stood cold , stiff , and , but for the expression of his eyes , as if lifeless . 
But at those ghostly looks , my hair rose on end ; cold drops gathered on my forehead , and , seized by the most intense horror , I trembled through every fibre . 
`` Avaunt ! 
-- away with thee ! '' 
I exclaimed , out of myself with agitation ; `` for thou thyself art Satan ! 
Thou art the murderer -- yet over me thou hast no power ! '' 
The whole party instantly left their seats . 
-- `` What 's the matter ? 
Who is that ? '' 
was heard from all quarters ; and out of the adjoining salle , the people , terrified by my voice , having left their amusements , came thronging into our room . 
-- `` A drunk man ! 
-- A madman ! 
-- Turn him out ! '' 
cried several voices . 
Meanwhile , the painter stood there steadfast , and immovably staring upon me . 
The power which he thus -LRB- I know not how -RRB- exerted over my very mind and thoughts -- the whole train of consequences which the discovery he was determined to force out would bring upon me -- the wretched thraldom in which I should remain at present , and the destruction which must ensue -- all these ideas conflicted together in my mind . 
But even without their aid , the looks of the spectral painter alone were more than I could endure . 
Methought his detestable features at length enlarged , moved , and were writhen in mockery and scorn . 
At last , driven to the uttermost paroxysm of rage and despair , I drew forth the stiletto with which I had , in self-defence , killed Hermogen , and which I always carried in my breast-pocket . 
With this weapon in my hand , I now fell upon my enemy ; but his quick eye had caught every movement , and one blow of his powerful arm brought me to the ground . 
Methought I heard him laugh aloud , in hideous and scornful triumph , so that his voice resounded through the chamber . 
`` Brother Medardus ! '' 
said he , `` Brother Medardus , play no longer this false game ! 
Go , return to the sanctuary of thy convent , and humble thyself to the dust in shame and repentance ! '' 
I now felt myself seized by the people in the room ; and allowing them to raise me up , pretended at first to be quite exhausted ; then , all at once , rousing my whole strength , I drove and struck like a raging wild beast against my assailants ; and this so unexpectedly , that several of them fell to the ground , and I made myself a passage towards the door ; but had scarcely rushed into the corridor , when a small side door opened , and I felt myself seized on by an invisible arm , by which I was drawn into a dark chamber . 
To this I made no resistance , for the multitude of pursuers were raging behind me . 
Into this dark room I had been drawn just as I turned round a corner of the corridor , and the mob of people , imagining that I had run onwards and escaped down stairs , passed by the door and left me for the moment unmolested . 
My invisible companion listened to their proceedings , and in a few moments led me by the arm down a dark , private staircase , into a back court , and then through the buildings behind into the open street . 
By the light of the lamps I here recognised as my deliverer the absurd Belcampo ! 
`` Your excellency , '' said Belcampo , `` appears to have laboured under a strange fatality with regard to this painter . 
I was drinking my wine in an adjoining room when the uproar began , and resolved , if possible , to rescue you , for I alone am the author of all this disturbance . '' 
`` How can that be ? '' 
said I ; `` what share could you possibly have in the disaster ? '' 
`` Who can resist momentary impulse ? '' 
said the little man , in a tone of great pathos ; `` who can withstand the influences of that unseen , but predominant Spirit , that rules over and inspires all our thoughts and actions ? 
`` When I arranged your excellency 's hair , my mind was , as usual , lighted up by the sublimest ideas . 
I resigned myself up to the unbridled impulse of wild phantasy , and accordingly I not only forgot to bring the lock of anger on the topmost curls into a state of proper softness and roundness , but even left seven-and-twenty hairs of fear and horror upon the forehead . 
`` The twenty-seven hairs that were thus left , raised themselves erect at the stern looks of the painter , -LRB- who is , in truth , neither more nor less than a revenant , -RRB- and inclined themselves longingly towards the lock of anger on the toupée , which , in return , hissing and rustling , became dishevelled . 
All this I could perceive with my own eyes . 
