thought she . 
Her father had surely ere this imparted to the lady the gratifying news of her lover 's recovery ; whilst he , poor man , had not heard one word from her for many days ! 
Has he not been deprived of his senses during nine whole days ; and since their return been left in anxious suspense on her account ? 
These circumstances , therefore , left no doubt upon her mind , of the reason why he cherished the scarf with such tender regard , and convinced her from whose hands it came , at the same time that it satisfied her why he constantly pressed it to his heart and lips . 
Thinking to give him comfort , she determined to relate to him what had passed on that night , when she overheard the conversation between her father and the stranger . 
Whilst Barbelle was occupied at her spinning wheel , Albert remarked that she was not so cheerful as usual , that there was a cast of seriousness on her countenance , which he had never observed before . 
Her mind appeared occupied with a thought that distressed her ; nay , he even perceived a tear in her eye . 
He was so much struck by the change , as to wish to know the cause of it . 
`` What have you at heart , girl ? '' 
he asked , just after her mother had left the room . 
`` What makes you all at once so silent and serious ? 
you even moisten your thread with tears ! '' 
`` And can you be gay , sir ? '' 
asked Barbelle , and looked at him inquisitively in the face . 
`` I think I saw something once fall from your eye also , which moistened that scarf . 
I am sure it was given you by your love ; and I was just thinking how much I grieved that you were not by her side . '' 
Albert was taken by surprise at this remark of his young friend , and blushed deeply , which satisfied her she had made a better guess about the mysteries of the scarf than her mother had . 
`` You are not far wrong , '' he answered , smiling ; `` but I am not uneasy on that account , as I hope to see her again very shortly . '' 
`` Ah ! 
what joy there will be at Lichtenstein when that happy event comes to pass , '' said Barbelle , whose countenance had now resumed its wonted gaiety . 
What could be the meaning of this , thought Albert ? 
could her father have made known to her the secret of his love ? 
`` In Lichtenstein , did you say ? 
what do you know about me and Lichtenstein ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
I rejoice to think of the happiness the noble lady will have when she sees you again . 
I have heard how miserable she was when you were ill . '' 
`` Miserable , did you say ? '' 
cried Albert , springing upon his feet , and approaching her ; `` was she aware of my state ? 
O speak ! 
what do you know of Bertha ? 
Are you acquainted with her ? 
What has your father said of her ? '' 
`` My father has not said a single word to me ; and I should not have known there was such a person as a lady of Lichtenstein , if my aunt was not her nurse . 
But you must not be offended at me , sir , if I listened a little ; look ye , this is the way I know it . '' 
She then related how she became acquainted with the secret ; and that her father was probably gone to Lichtenstein to give the lady comforting intelligence of his recovery . 
Albert was painfully affected at this news . 
He had all along cherished the hope that Bertha would have heard of his misfortune and recovery at the same time , and have been spared much anxiety on his account . 
He well knew how the cruel uncertainty of his being safe from the vigilance of the enemy 's patroles , even had his health been restored , would wear upon her spirits ; perhaps affect her health also . 
Truly his own misfortune appeared nothing , when he compared it to the distress of that dear girl . 
How much had she not gone through in Ulm ! 
how painful the separation from him ! 
and now scarcely had she enjoyed the thought of his having quitted the colours of the League , scarcely had she been able to look forward to a more cheerful futurity , when she was terrified by the news of his being almost mortally wounded . 
And all this she was obliged to suffer in secret , to conceal it from the looks of her father -- without possessing one single soul as a friend , to whose sympathy she could confide the secret of her heart -- and from whom she might seek consolation . 
He now felt more than ever how necessary it became to hasten his departure for Lichtenstein ; and his impatience was inflamed into anger , that the fifer of Hardt , otherwise a cautious and clever man , should just at this moment remain so long absent . 
The maiden guessed his thoughts : `` I plainly see you long to be away -- oh , were but my father here to shew you the way to Lichtenstein ! 
It would be imprudent in you to go alone , for there would be no difficulty in detecting your not being a Würtemberger by your speech . 
Do you know what ? 
I 'll run to meet my father , and hurry him home . '' 
`` You go to meet him ? '' 
said , Albert touched by the proposal of the good-hearted girl ; `` do you know whether he be in the neighbourhood ? 
he may be still some distance from home ; and it will be dark in an hour . '' 
`` And were it so dark , that I should be obliged to grope my way blindfolded to Lichtenstein , I 'll wager you could not go faster to your -- . '' 
Blushing , she cast her eyes down ; for although her good heart induced her to proffer her services as a messenger of love , she felt confused when she touched upon the tender subject , which had been made so clear to her this day , and which confirmed her in her former suspicions . 
`` But if you volunteer to go to Lichtenstein out of regard for me , there is no reason why I should not accompany you , rather than remain behind , to await the arrival of your father . 
I 'll saddle my horse immediately , and ride by your side ; you can shew me the way until I am far enough not to mistake the rest of it . '' 
The girl of Hardt scarcely knew which way to look , when Albert made this proposal ; and playing with the ends of her long plaits of hair , said , almost in a whisper , `` But it will be so soon dark . '' 
`` Well , what does that signify ? 
So much the better , because I shall then be able to arrive in Lichtenstein by cock-crow , '' answered Albert ; `` you yourself proposed finding the way through the darkness . '' 
`` Yes , to be sure , so I could , '' replied Barbelle , without looking up ; `` but you are not strong enough yet to undertake the journey ; and he who has just risen from a sick bed , must not think of travelling six hours in the night . '' 
`` I can not pay any more attention to that , '' said Albert ; `` my wounds are all healed , and I feel as well as ever I was ; so get ready , my good girl , we will start immediately ; I 'll go and saddle my horse . '' 
He took the bridle , which hung on a nail on the wall , and went to the door . 
`` But , sir ! 
hear me , good sir ! '' 
cried the girl , in a beseeching tone , after him : `` pray do not think of going now . 
It would not be proper for me to travel alone with you in the dark . 
The people in Hardt are very censorious , and they would certainly say some ill-natured thing of me if -- ; better stay till to-morrow morning , when I will willingly go as far as Pfullingen with you . '' 
The young man respected her reasons , and replaced in silence the bridle on the nail . 
It would certainly have been much more agreeable to him , if the folks of Hardt had been less inclined to think evil of their neighbours ; but he could not do otherwise than meet the well-meant scruples of Barbelle in their proper light . 
He therefore determined to remain the night waiting the arrival of the fifer of Hardt ; should he not then come , he would mount his horse by daybreak , and set out for Lichtenstein , under the conduct of his young friend . 
The whispering breezes fan the day , And gently blow around ; With fragrance passing sweet they play , And break with dulcet sound . 
Now , my poor heart , be not oppress 'd by fear , Those breezes will a better fortune bear . 
L. UHLAND . 
But the fifer of Hardt did not return home that night ; and as Albert could no longer restrain his desire to prosecute his journey , he saddled his horse at break of day . 
His good hostess , after no small struggle , allowed her daughter to accompany him . 
She was afraid lest such an extraordinary event should furnish conversation , perhaps not to the credit of her child , for many an evening 's gossip in the spinning occupations of her neighbours , and therefore reluctantly gave her consent . 
Upon the consideration , however , of the interest her husband must have taken in the welfare of the young knight , having treated him like a son in concealing him in his house , she thought she could not well refuse him this last piece of service . 
She accordingly permitted her daughter to go as his guide , upon the sole condition , that she was to proceed a quarter of an hour 's distance in advance , and wait for him at a certain milestone . 
Albert was affected in taking leave of the kind-hearted matron , who , out of respect for him , had decked herself out in her best Sunday 's attire . 
He had placed a gold ducat in the carved chest , as a mark of gratitude for the attention he had received from her ; a considerable present in those days , and a large sum out of the travelling purse of Albert von Sturmfeder . 
It would appear that the fifer of Hardt never knew a word about this deposit whether it was , that his wife did not find the piece of gold , or that she did not like to inform him of it , fearing lest he might return the present to the donor , and thereby affront him . 
But so much is certain , that the musician 's wife was shortly after seen in church dressed in a new gown , to the astonishment and envy of all the women of the neighbourhood , and her daughter Barbelle wore a beautiful bodice of the finest cloth , trimmed with gold , which had never been seen before , at the next feast , kept in commemoration of the dedication of the church . 
She was always seen to blush , also , whenever any of her companions felt the texture of the new bodice and congratulated her upon the acquisition of it . 
Such was the effect which a single piece of gold produced in the village of Hardt , in those good old times ! 
Albert found his conductor sitting on the appointed milestone . 
She jumped up as soon as he arrived , and walked with a quick pace beside his horse . 
The girl appeared much more cheerful than the day before . 
The fresh air of an April morning had given her cheeks a high colour , and her eyes sparkled with kindness . 
Her costume was well adapted for a long walk , for her short petticoats did not impede her progress . 
A basket hung on her arm , as if she were going to market . 
But neither vegetables nor fruit were contained in it , which was generally the case on such occasions ; she only carried a large shawl , as a precaution against April showers . 
The young man thought to himself , as his companion walked by his side , what a housekeeper she would make for some country swain , who should be fortunate enough to possess her for a wife ! 
She had inherited much of the vivacity of her father 's character . 
For in the same way that he beguiled the time of his companion on their journey over the Alb , by relating stories and pointing out the principal features of the country , did she draw his attention to the most beautiful points of view of the surrounding vallies and mountains ; or imparted to him , unsolicited , the popular anecdotes of castles , or other striking objects . 
Choosing the most unfrequented paths , she led her guest only through two or three villages , and rested awhile after every two hours ' walk . 
At last , after having made four such stations , a town was seen about a short half-hour 's walk from them ; the road parted at the spot of their last halt , and a foot-path to the left conducted to a village . 
At this point of separation , the girl said : `` That is Pfullingen which you see yonder , from whence any child will show you the road to Lichtenstein . '' 
`` How ! 
are you going to leave me already ? '' 
asked Albert , who was so much charmed with the cheerful conversation of his companion , that the thought of parting from her took him by surprise . 
`` Will you not come at least as far as Pfullingen , where you can rest yourself , and have some refreshment ? 
You do n't intend to return home immediately ? '' 
The girl endeavoured to look merry and unconcerned ; but she could not conceal an expression about her mouth and eye , which betrayed the pain she felt at parting from her guest , whose presence might have been much dearer to her than she was , perhaps , altogether aware of . 
`` I must leave you here , sir , '' she said , `` much as I would willingly go on with you ; but my mother will have it so ; I have a cousin in that village on the hill , where I will remain to-day , and return to Hardt to-morrow . 
And now may God and the Holy Virgin protect you , and all the Saints take you under their care ! 
Remember me to my father , should you meet him ; and , '' she added with a smile , as she quickly dried a tear , `` give my respects to the lady also whom you love . '' 
`` Thanks , many thanks , Barbelle , '' replied Albert , as he took her hand to wish her goodbye ; `` I can never repay your faithful care of me ; but when you get home , look into the carved chest , where you will find something which will , perhaps , provide you with a new bodice or petticoat for Sunday . 
And when you put it on for the first time , and your true love kisses you , then think of Albert von Sturmfeder . '' 
The young man gave his horse the spur , and trotted across the green plain towards the town . 
When he had gone about two hundred paces , he turned around to have one more look at his young guide . 
There she stood on the same spot where he had left her , watching him as he increased his distance from her , with her hands up to her eyes ; but whether to guard them from the rays of the sun , as she followed him with her look , or whether to wipe away the tear which stood on the brink of her eyelid as they parted , Albert could not precisely tell . 
He was soon at the gate of the town , and , feeling tired and thirsty , inquired where the best inn was ? 
He was shown a small gloomy-looking house , having the sign of a Golden Stag , and a spear and shield , over the door . 
A little bare-footed boy led his horse to the stable , whilst he was received at the entrance by a young , good-natured looking woman , who conducted him into the room common to all . 
This was a large dark apartment , around the walls of which were placed heavy oak tables and benches . 
The number of well-polished cans and jugs , placed in regular order upon shelves , proved that the Stag was much frequented . 
As it was , there were already many men seated , drinking wine , although it was only just mid-day . 
They scrutinized the distinguished-looking knight very closely , as he passed their table to the place of honour which was situated at the top of the room , in a kind of bow window of the shape of a lantern , with six glass sides ; but their conversation was in no wise interrupted by the appearance of the stranger , for they went on talking of peace and war , battles and sieges , in the way which independent citizens were wont to do , Anno Domini 1519 . 
The hostess appeared pleased with the bearing of her new guest . 
She peered at him with a smiling look as she passed him , and when she brought him a can of old Heppacher wine , and set a silver tankard before him for his use , her mouth , which was somewhat large , expressed friendly intentions . 
She promised to roast a chicken , and prepare a table for him , if he would wait patiently a little while ; in the mean time , she hoped the wine was to his taste . 
The bow window , in which Albert had taken his seat , was a couple of steps higher than the floor of the room , so that he could easily look down upon and examine the company . 
Though he was not accustomed to pass much time in inns and drinking rooms , he had a peculiar tact in judging of the characters of men , and from the circumstance of his being more a man of observation than of talk , he now had an opportunity of putting this talent into practice . 
The party which was sitting around one of the large oak tables , consisted of ten or twelve men . 
There did not appear to be much difference in point of circumstances among them , at the first glance ; large beards , short hair , round caps , dark jackets , were common to them all ; but , upon a closer inspection , three of them were to be particularised from the rest . 
One , sitting nearest to Albert , was a short , fat , good-humoured looking man ; his hair , which fell over his neck , was longer and more carefully combed than his neighbours ' ; his dark beard appeared also to be the peculiar object of his attention . 
His cloak of fine black cloth , and a felt hat with a pointed crown and broad brim , which hung on a nail behind him , denoted him to be a man of some consequence , perhaps holding the rank of counsellor . 
He appeared also to drink a better sort of wine than the rest , for he sipped it with the air of a connoisseur , and when he made a sign that his jug was empty , by putting on the cover , a fashion peculiar to those days , he did it with a certain grace and in more polished manner than the others . 
He listened to everything that was said with a cunning look , like one who knew more than he would deign to express upon the present occasion . 
He enjoyed also the privilege of patting the waiting maid on the cheek , or stroking her round plump arm , when she replenished his can . 
Another man , who sat at the opposite end of the table , was not less distinguished than his fat neighbour , from the rest of the group ; every thing belonging to him was lengthy and gaunt . 
His face from the forehead to a long pointed chin , measured at least a good span ; his fingers , with which he was beating time to a song he hummed to himself , closely resembled the limbs of the spider tribe ; and as Albert happened to bend himself , he discovered two long lanky legs , belonging to the same personage , stretched under the table . 
There was something about the twist of his nose also that expressed self-sufficiency , evidently a prominent feature of his character , for he invariably contradicted the rest of the party , whenever they spoke . 
His manner altogether was that of one who pretends to unrestrained intimacy with persons of higher rank in life than himself , but who never feels at ease in their society . 
Albert thought it not likely that he belonged to the town of Pfullingen , for he occasionally inquired of the hostess after his horse , and forming his opinion upon the whole bearing of this extraordinary looking person , he supposed him to be a travelling doctor , who in those days rode about the country , dispatching people professionally . 
The third person who attracted Albert 's observation was ill-conditioned , and raggedly clothed ; but there was something quick and cunning in his appearance , that distinguished him from the good-humour and tranquillity of his companions , particularly the fat man . 
He wore a large plaister over one of his eyes , whilst the look of the other was bold and sharp . 
A large walking stick , with an iron spike at the end , lay beside him , and a well-worn leather back to his coat , upon which he probably carried a basket or box , prompted the idea of his being either a messenger , or more likely a travelling pedlar , one who visits fairs and festivals , bringing wonderful news from distant lands , remedies for women against mad animals , and all sorts of coloured ribands and silks for girls . 
These three men led the conversation , which only now and then was interrupted by an expression of astonishment from the rest of the worthy burghers , or by the noise of the covers of their wine cans . 
One subject , among others , appeared the principal point of discussion between them , and drew the attention of Albert . 
They spoke of the undertakings of the League in the low land of Würtemberg . 
The pedlar with the leather back related the storming of Möckmühl by the League , where Götz von Berlichingen had shut himself up with many brave followers , and where that iron-fisted man was made prisoner . 
The counsellor smiled knowingly at this piece of news , and took a long draught of wine ; Raw-bones did not permit the leather back man to finish his story , but beating time with renewed force with his long fingers , said , with sepulchral voice , `` That 's a rank lie , friend ! 
it is impossible , d' ye see ; because Berlichingen understands the art of war , and is a determined man ; I ought to know that ; and besides , he alone , with his iron hand , has in many a battle killed two hundred men as dead as mice ; do you suppose then that such a man would allow himself to be taken ? '' 
`` With your permission , '' interrupted the fat gentleman , `` you are wrong in what you say , because I know that Götz is , in fact , a prisoner , and is now confined in Heilbron . 
He did not surrender himself , however ; neither was his castle of Möckmühl stormed ; but when he was marching out of the gate , the League having promised him and his followers a free retreat , they fell on him , took him prisoner , and killed many of his men . 
That was not fair , and he has been infamously treated . '' 
`` I must beg of you , sir , '' said the thin man , `` not to speak of the League in such terms ; I am acquainted with many of the officers , for example , Herr Truchses von Waldburg is my most intimate friend . '' 
The fat man looked big , and appeared as if he wished to make a reply , but , upon second thoughts , washed the words which were upon the tip of his tongue , down his throat with a draught of wine . 
The other burghers , however , broke out in a murmur of astonishment at the mention of such a high acquaintance , and raised their caps out of respect . 
`` Well , if you are so well acquainted with the movements of the League , as you pretend to be , '' said the pedlar , with something of a haughty mien , `` you will be able to give us the last intelligence respecting the state of Tübingen . '' 
`` It whistles out of its last hole , '' answered the rawbone man ; `` I was there but a short time ago , and saw most formidable preparations for the siege . '' 
`` Eh ! 
-- what ? '' 
whispered the inquisitive burghers among themselves , and drew nearer , expecting to hear some important news . 
The thin man leaned back on his chair , grasped the handle of his sword with his long fingers , stretched out his legs a yard further , and said , with an air of triumph , `` Yes , yes , my friends , it looks very bad there ; the surrounding places in the neighbourhood have suffered ; all the fruit trees have been cut down , the town and castle furiously bombarded , the former having already surrendered . 
Forty knights , indeed , still defend the castle ; but they can not hold out their tottering walls much longer ! '' 
`` What tottering walls do you talk of ? '' 
cried the fat man ; `` whoever has seen the castle of Tübingen , must not talk of tottering walls . 
Are there not two deep ditches on the side towards the mountains , which no ladder of the League can scale , and walls twelve feet thick , with high towers , whence the falconets keep up no insignificant fire , I can tell you ? '' 
`` Battered down , battered down ! '' 
cried the thin man , with such a fearful hollow voice , as made the astonished burghers think they heard the falling of the towers of Tübingen about their ears : `` the new tower , which Ulerich lately built , was battered down by Fronsberg , as if it had never stood there . '' 
`` But everything is not lost with that , '' answered the pedlar ; `` the knights make sallies from the castle , and many a one has found his bed in the Neckar . 
Old Fronsberg had his hat shot from his head , which makes his ears tingle to this day , I 'll be bound . '' 
`` There you are wrong again , '' said the thin man , carelessly ; `` sallies , indeed ! 
the besiegers have light cavalry enough , who fight like devils ; they are Greeks ; but whether they come from the Ganges or Epirus , I know not , and are called Stratiots , commanded by George Samares , who does not allow a dog of them to sally out of their holes . '' 
`` He also has been made to bite the grass , '' replied the pedlar , with a scornful side glance : `` the dogs , as you call them , did make a sally , in spite of the Greeks , and made their leader prisoner , and -- '' `` Samares prisoner ? '' 
cried the rawbone man , startled out of his tranquillity ; `` you are not right again , friend ! '' 
`` No ? '' 
answered the other , quietly ; `` I heard the bells toll , as he was buried in the church of Saint George . '' 
The burghers looked attentively at the thin stranger , to notice the impression this news would make on him . 
His thick eyebrows fell so low that his eyes were scarcely visible ; he twisted his long thin mustachios , and striking the table with his bony hand , said : `` And if they have cut him and his Greeks into a hundred pieces , the besieged ca n't help themselves ! 
the castle must fall ; and when Tübingen is ours , good night to Würtemburg ! 
Ulerich is out of the country , and my noble friends and benefactors will be the masters . '' 
`` How do you know that he will not come back again ? 
and then -- '' said the cautious fat man , and clapped on the cover of his goblet . 
`` What ! 
come back again ? '' 
cried the other : `` the beggar ! 
who says he will come back again ? 
Who dares say it ? '' 
`` What does it signify to us ? '' 
murmured the guests ; `` we are peaceable citizens ; and it is all the same to us who is lord of the land , provided the taxes are lowered . 
In a public house a man has a right to say what he pleases . '' 
The thin man appeared satisfied that none of the company dared return an angry answer . 
He eyed each of them with a searching look , when , assuming a kinder manner , he said , `` It was only to put you in mind , that we do not want the Duke any longer as our master that I speak as I do ; upon my soul , he is rank poison to me ; so I 'll sing you a paternoster , which a friend wrote upon him , and which pleases me much . '' 
The honest burghers , by their looks , did not appear very curious to hear a burlesque song upon their unfortunate Duke . 
The other , however , having cleared his throat with a good draught , began a few words of a burlesque parody on the Lord 's Prayer , in a disagreeable hoarse tone of voice -- a vulgar song , apparently familiar to the ears of his audience -- for no sooner had he commenced , than the good taste of the burghers manifested itself by a whisper of disapprobation ; some shrugging their shoulders , others winking at each other ; symptoms sufficiently evident to the thin man , that the burden of his song was not welcome to their ears . 
He therefore stopt short , looking around for encouragement ; but , finding none , he threw himself back in his chair , with a scowl of contempt on his features . 
`` I know that song well , '' said the pedlar ; `` and shame be to him who would offend the ears of honest men with it . 
With your permission , '' he added , addressing the company , `` I 'll give you one I think more to your taste . '' 
Encouraged by the rest of the burghers , excepting the thin man , who squinted at him with scorn , he began : Mourn , Würtemberg ! 
thy fallen state , Thy drooping pride , thy luckless fate ! 
A Quack , whom even dogs despise , Presumes to make thy fortunes rise . 
Noisy applause and laughter , mingled with the hisses of the thin man , interrupted the singer . 
The burghers reached across the table , shook the pedlar by the hand , praised his song , and begged him to proceed . 
The raw bone man said not a word , but looked furiously at the company . 
He knew not whether to envy the applause which the songster received , or to feel offended at the subject of his song . 
The fat man put on an air of greater wisdom than usual , and joined in approbation with the rest . 
The leather-backed pedlar was going on , encouraged by his audience : Of Nurenberg he , a knife-grinder by trade ; His friend was a weaver , a man of low grade -- when the thin man , upon hearing these words , and not able to contain his indignation , flew into a violent rage , and vociferated : `` May the cuckoo stick in your throat , you ragged dog ! 
I know very well who you mean by the weaver , -- my best friend , Herr von Fugger . 
That such a vagabond as you should calumniate him ! '' 
expressing his anger by a frightful distortion of his countenance . 
But his opponent was in no wise to be daunted , and held his muscular fist before him , saying , `` Vagabond yourself , Mr. Calmus , I know who you are ; and if you do n't keep silence , I 'll twist those pot-ladle arms of yours off your half-starved body . '' 
The crest-fallen guest rose immediately , and pronounced his regret to have fallen into such low company ; he paid for his wine , and walked out of the room with the strut of a man of quality . 
Hope , faith , and confidence are there , For all that I esteem are near ; And yet suspicion finds its way , And makes my hopeless mind its prey . 
SCHILLER . 
When the offensive man left the room , the guests looked at each other with astonishment ; they were in a state of mind similar to that of one who sees a heavy storm arise , and expects it to burst and overwhelm him ; when , behold , it produces little more than a flash in the pan . 
They thanked the man with the leather back for having driven away the odious stranger , and inquired what he knew of him ? 
`` I know him well , '' he answered ; `` he is a worthless , idle fellow , a travelling doctor , who sells pills to cure the plague ; extracts the worm from dogs , and crops their ears ; eases young women of thick necks ; and gives the old ones eyewater , which , instead of healing , makes them blind . 
His proper name is Kahlmaüser , or baldmouse ; pretending to be a learned man , he calls himself doctor Calmus . 
He fastens himself upon the great , and should one of them call him ass , he fawns upon him as his best friend . '' 
`` But he can not be upon good terms with the Duke , '' remarked the cunning-looking man ; `` for he abused him in no measured terms . '' 
`` Yes , he certainly is not happy with him ; and for this reason -- the Duke had a beautiful Danish sporting dog , which had run a thorn deep into its foot . 
It was a great favourite of the Duke , who inquired after an experienced man to cure it ; and it so happened that this Kahlmaüser was on the spot , and tendered his services , with a look full of consequence . 
The wretch was fed every day with the best of food in the castle of Stuttgardt , and the fare was so palatable that he remained more than a quarter of a-year , doctoring the dog 's foot . 
The Duke one day called for both doctor and dog , to know and see what had been done . 
The quack , it appears , talked a great deal of learned stuff , to which the Duke paid no attention ; but , upon examining the wound himself , he found the dog 's foot worse than ever . 
He laid hold of the doctor , tall as he was , led him to the top of the long flight of steps , so contrived that a horse can mount up to the second story , and threw him headlong down . 
He was half dead when he arrived at the bottom , so you may imagine that since that time , Doctor Calmus does not speak well of the Duke . 
He is also said to have been a spy between Hutten and Frau Sabina , and only undertook the care of the dog for the purpose of remaining in the castle to carry on intrigues . '' 
`` Really ! 
was he in correspondence with Hutten ? '' 
said one of the burghers ; `` if we had but known that , he should not have come off so cheaply , the vagabond doctor ; for Hutten 's amorous intrigue is the cause of this unhappy war ; and it appears that this Kahlmaüser assisted him in it ! '' '' 
De mortuis nil nisi bonum , -- we ought to spare the dead , say the Latins , '' replied the fat man ; `` the poor devil has paid his crime dear enough with his life . '' 
`` It served him right , '' cried the other burgher , angrily ; `` had I been in the Duke 's place I would have done the same ; every one must protect his domestic rights . '' 
`` Do not you ride sometimes hunting with the bailiff ? '' 
asked the fat man , with a peculiar crafty smile : `` you surely have the best opportunity to assert your rights ; you possess a sword , and could easily find an oak tree to hang a corpse upon . '' 
A loud laugh from the burghers of Pfullingen apprised the stranger in the balcony , that the jealous upholder of domestic rights was not so well able to administer justice in his own house . 
He coloured up , and murmured some unintelligible words as he put his can to his mouth . 
The pedlar , however , who , as a stranger , thought it not courteous to join in the laugh , took his part : `` Yes , indeed , the Duke was quite in the right , for he had the power of hanging Hutten upon the spot , without giving him a chance of his life in fair honourable fight . 
Is he not president of the Westphalian chair , and of the secret tribunal , which gives him the power of dispatching villanous fellows without further ceremony ? 
Had he not the best proof of his treachery before his eyes ? 
Have you ever heard a pretty little song upon that subject ? 
I 'll sing a couple of verses , if you like : `` In the forest he turn 'd him to Hutten , to know , What ' t was on his hand that glittered so ? '' 
`` Lord Duke , it is this little ring you see , This ring which my sweet love gave to me . '' 
`` Hey , Hans , by my troth thou art nobly drest , A chain of gold , too , lies on thy breast . '' 
`` That , too , my true love gave so free , A pledge that she would remember me . '' 
`` And then it goes on : `` Oh ! 
Hutten , away ! 
nor spare the goad , The Duke 's eye rolls with fury wode ; Away , whilst there is yet time to fly , The scabbard is voided , his sword is on high . '' 
The fat man put on a serious face , and said , `` I would not advise you to go on ; such songs in public houses , in these times , are dangerous ; they can not serve the Duke 's cause at present . 
The confederates being round about us , some one of them might easily overhear it , '' he added , as he cast a scrutinizing glance at Albert , `` and then Pfullingen might have to pay another hundred ducats contribution . '' 
`` God knows , you are in the right , '' said the pedlar ; `` it is no longer the case , as it used to be , when one could freely speak his mind , and sing a song over his glass ; but now a man must always be on the look out , to see that a partizan of the Duke 's does not sit on one side , or a Leaguist on the other ; but , in spite of Bavarian or Swabian , I 'll sing the last verse : `` There stands an oak in Schönbuch wood , It shoots aloft and it spreads abroad ; And centuries hence recorded shall be , That the Duke hang 'd Hutten on that very tree . '' 
When he had finished , the conversation among the burghers sunk into a whisper , which made Albert suspect they were making comments upon him . 
The good-natured hostess also appeared curious to know who she entertained in the balcony . 
When she had spread a clean table-cloth over the round-table , and placed the repast she had prepared before him , she took her seat on the opposite side , and questioned him , but with respect and deference , whence he came , and whither he was going ? 
The young man was not inclined to give her positive information as to the real object of his journey . 
The conversation to which he had listened at the long table , made him cautious in giving an answer to her leading question , for he felt that in times of civil strife , it was not less indiscreet than dangerous to declare , in a place like a public inn , to what party he belonged . 
Albert 's peculiar circumstances at this moment required him to exercise more than ordinary prudence , and he merely said , `` that he came from Franconia , and was going further into the country , in the neighbourhood of Zollern . '' 
With this general answer to the question , he cut short any other upon the same subject . 
But being now in the neighbourhood of Lichtenstein , he thought he might be able to learn something of the family from the loquacious landlady of the Golden Stag . 
Putting a few questions to her respecting the different surrounding castles and their inhabitants , in the hope of gaining his point , she very soon related to him reports which deeply affected his future prospects ; for upon the truth or falsehood of them seemed , to his ardent mind , to depend his future happiness or misery . 
The hostess , fond of a gossip , in less than a quarter of an hour gave him the history of five or six castles about the country , and among them of Lichtenstein . 
The young man drew a deep breath at the sound of that name , and pushed away the plate from before him , to devote his whole attention to what she said : `` Well , the owners of Lichtenstein are not poor ; on the contrary , they possess fields and woods in plenty , and not an acre of land is mortgaged ; rather than do so , the old gentleman would allow his beard to be shaved off , for believe me he prizes it much , and takes a pride in smoothing it down when people speak to him . 
He is a severe stern man , and what he has once determined upon must be done ; as the saying is , should the bow not bend , it must break . 
He is also one of those who have continued faithful to the Duke , for which the League will make him pay dear . '' 
`` How is his -- , I mean -- you said he had a daughter ? '' 
`` No , '' answered the hostess , whilst her cheerful face became clouded of a sudden , `` I certainly said nothing about her , that I am aware of . 
But he has a daughter , the good old man ; and it had been much better for him that he went childless to the grave , rather than depart in sorrow on account of his only child . '' 
Albert could scarcely believe his ears at these words : what reason could the landlady have to throw out this allusion ? 
`` What has happened to the young lady ? '' 
he asked , whilst he in vain sought to appear indifferent : `` you have excited my curiosity ; or is it a secret you dare not divulge ? '' 
The woman of the Golden Stag mysteriously looked around on all sides , to see that no one was listening ; the burghers were quietly taken up with their own conversation , and paid no attention to them , and there was no one else in the room who could overhear them . 
`` You , I perceive , are a stranger , '' she said , after her scrutiny ; `` you are travelling further , and have nothing to do in this neighbourhood , so that I can communicate to you what I would not confide to every one . 
The lady who lives there on the Lichtenstein rock , is a -- , a -- yes ; what the citizens with us would call , a wicked girl , a -- '' `` Landlady ! '' 
cried Albert . 
`` Do n't speak so loud , worthy sir ; the people will notice it . 
Do you suppose I would venture to say what I do not know to be certain truth ? 
Only think , every night as the clock strikes eleven , she lets her lover into the castle . 
Is not that wicked enough for a well-bred young lady ? '' 
`` Mind what you say ! 
Her lover ? '' 
`` Yes , alas ! 
at eleven o'clock in the night , her lover . 
Is it not a shame , a disgrace ! 
He is a tall man , and comes to the gate enveloped in a grey cloak . 
She has so well arranged it , that all the servants are out of the way at that hour except the old porter of the gate , who has assisted her in all her wicked tricks from her childhood . 
When the clock strikes eleven in the village , she always comes herself down into the court , cold as it may be , and brings the keys of the drawbridge , which she beforehand steals from her father 's bed ; the old sinner , the porter , then opens the lock , lets down the bridge , when the man in the grey cloak hastens to the presence of the young lady . '' 
`` And then ? '' 
asked Albert , who scarcely had any more breath in his breast , scarcely any more blood in his cheeks , -- `` and then ? '' 
`` Then she brings food , bread and wine : so much is certain , that the nightly lover must have an uncommon appetite , for many nights running he has demolished half a haunch of roebuck , and drank three or four pints of wine ; what else they do , I know not ; I guess nothing , I say nothing ; but I suppose , '' she added , with an upward look to heaven , `` they do n't pray . '' 
Albert was angry with himself , after a moment 's reflection , for having doubted for an instant the falsehood of this narration , spun from some gossipping head ; or , should there be any truth in it , it was impossible that Bertha could act with dishonour to herself . 
We are told that , though the passion of love in the young men of the good old times was not less ardent than in our days , it bore more the character of idolized respect . 
It was the custom , in those days , for the lady wooed to think herself not only not upon an equality , but far superior to her suitor . 
If we look to the romantic tales and love stories in old chronicles , we shall find many descriptions of enamoured knights allowing themselves to be cut to pieces on the spot , rather than doubt the faith and purity of their mistresses . 
Judging therefore from this fact , it is not surprising that Albert von Sturmfeder could not bring his mind to think ill of Bertha , and however puzzling these nocturnal visits appeared to him , he clearly perceived it had not been proved that her father was ignorant of the transaction , or that the mysterious man was her lover . 
He mentioned these doubts to his hostess . 
`` Really ! 
you suppose that her father is acquainted with it ? '' 
said she ; `` not at all -- I know it for a certainty , because old Rosel , the young lady 's nurse -- '' `` Old Rosel said so ? '' 
cried Albert , involuntarily : the nurse , being the sister of the fifer of Hardt , was well known to him . 
If she had really said so , the case was no longer to be doubted , for he knew that she was a pious woman , and devoted to her charge . 
`` Do you know old Rosel ? '' 
she asked , wondering at the warmth with which her guest inquired after that woman . 
`` I know her ? 
you forget that I come for the first time to-day in your neighbourhood ; it was only the name of Rosel which struck me . '' 
Albert parried this question , being desirous the woman should not suspect he was acquainted with the Knight of Lichtenstein or his family . 
`` Do n't they call her so in your country ? 
Rosel means Rosina with us , and the old nurse in Lichtenstein goes by that name . 
But observe , she is a particular friend of mine , and comes now and then to see me , when I give her a glass of hot sweet wine , which she loves dearly , and out of gratitude tells me all the news . 
What I have told you comes from her mouth . 
Old Lichtenstein knows nothing of the nocturnal visits , because he goes to bed regularly at eight o'clock ; and his daughter sends her nurse every evening at eight o'clock also to her apartment . 
It struck the good Rosel , however , a few nights ago , that there must be some mysterious cause for this conduct . 
She pretended to go to bed , -- and only think what happened ? 
Scarcely was everything quiet in the castle , when the young lady , who otherwise never touches a chip of wood , laid heavy logs on the hearth with her own delicate hands , made a fire , cooked and roasted the best way she could , got wine out of the cellar , and bread out of the cupboard , and spread the table in the dining room . 
She then opened the window and looked out in the cold dark night , when , just as the village clock struck eleven , the drawbridge rattled down on its chains , the nocturnal visitor entered , and went into the dining room with the young lady . 
Rosel has often listened in vain to hear the conversation between them , but the oak doors are very thick , and she peeped also once through the keyhole , but could only perceive the head of the stranger . '' 
`` Well , is he an old man ? 
What does he look like ? '' 
`` Old , indeed ? 
what are you thinking about ? 
She does not look like one who would put up with an old lover . 
Rosel told me he was young and handsome , with a dark beard on his chin and lip , beautiful smooth hair on his head , and looked very kind and gracious . '' 
`` May Satan pluck hair for hair out of his beard ! '' 
muttered Albert , as he passed his hand over his own chin , which was tolerably smooth . 
`` Woman ! 
are you sure you have really heard all this from old Rosel ? 
Have you not added more than she told you ? '' 
`` God forbid that I should calumniate any one ! 
You do n't know me , sir knight ! 
Rosel told me every word of it , and she suspects a great deal more , and whispered in my ear things which it does not become a respectable woman to relate to a young man . 
And only think how very wicked the young lady must be ; she has had also another lover , to whom she is unfaithful . '' 
`` Another ? '' 
asked Albert , to whom the narration appeared to gain more and more the semblance of truth . 
`` Yes , another ; who according to Rosel 's account must be a charming nice young man . 
She was with her young mistress in Tübingen , and there was a Herr von -- von -- , I believe he was called Sturmfittich ; he studied at the University ; they became acquainted with each other there ; and the old nurse declares such a handsome couple was not to be found in all Swabia . 
She was over head and ears in love with him , that 's true ; and was very unhappy when she parted with him in Tübingen ; but now her false heart is unfaithful to the poor youth , and Rosel really weeps when she thinks of him ; he is handsomer , much handsomer , than her present lover . '' 
The hostess , who had quite forgotten her household duties in her zeal to relate the gossip of the neighbourhood , was now called by the fat man in the drinking room : `` Landlady , '' said he , `` how long must I knock here , before I get another can of wine . '' 
`` Coming , coming , sir ! '' 
she answered , and flew to the bar to satisfy the importunate man , and from thence she went to the cellar , and then to the kitchen , and was all of a sudden so full of business , that her guest in the bow had sufficient time to ponder over all he had just heard . 
He sat there , his hand supporting his head , looking with fixed eyes into the bottom of his silver tankard ; he remained in that position from the afternoon till the evening ; night advanced , and still he sat at the round table , dead to all the world about him , giving signs of life only by an occasional deep sigh . 
The landlady did not know what to make of him . 
She had placed herself at least a dozen times near him , had tried to speak with him , but he only looked at her with a staring eye , and answered nothing . 
She at last got very uneasy , for just in the same way had her good husband of blessed memory gazed at her when he died , and left her in possession of the Golden Stag . 
She consulted the fat man , and he with the leather back gave his opinion also . 
The landlady maintained that he must be either over head and ears in love , or that some one must have bewitched him . 
She strengthened her supposition by a terrible history of a young knight , whom she had seen , and whose whole body became quite stiff from sheer love , which caused his death . 
The pedlar was of a different opinion ; he thought that some misfortune must have happened to the stranger , a circumstance which often befals those engaged in war , and that , therefore , he was in deep distress . 
But the fat man , winking , asked , with a countenance full of cunning conjecture , what was the growth and age of the wine the gentleman had been drinking ? 
`` He has had old Heppacher of the year 1480 , '' said the landlady : `` it is the best that the Golden Stag furnishes . '' 
`` There we have it , '' said the wise fat man ; `` I know the Heppacher of the year eighty , and such a young fellow can not stand it ; it has got into his head . 
Let him alone , with his heavy head upon his hand ; I 'll bet that before the clock strikes eight he will have slept his wine out , and be as fresh as a fish in water . '' 
The pedlar shook his head and said nothing ; but the hostess praised the acknowledged sagacity of the fat man , and thought his supposition the most probable . 
It was now nine o'clock ; the daily visitors of the drinking room had all left it , and the landlady was also on the point of retiring to rest , as the stranger awoke out of his reverie . 
He started up , made a few hasty steps about the room , and at last stood before the hostess . 
His look was clouded and disturbed , and the short time which had elapsed between mid-day and the present moment had so far altered the features of his otherwise kind , open countenance , as to impart to them an expression of deep melancholy . 
The kind-hearted woman was grieved at his appearance ; and calling to mind the sagacious supposition which the fat man had pronounced as to the cause of his agitation , she proposed cooking a comfortable supper and preparing a bed for him ; but her kind offices were altogether unavailing , as he appeared bent upon a rougher pastime for the night . 
`` When did you say , '' he inquired with a altering voice , `` when did you say the nocturnal guest went to Lichtenstein ? 
and at what hour did he depart ? '' 
`` He enters at eleven o'clock , dear sir , '' she replied ; `` and at the first cock crow he retires over the drawbridge . '' 
`` Order my horse to be saddled immediately , and let me have a guide to Lichtenstein . '' 
`` At this hour of night ! '' 
cried the landlady , and clasped her hands together in astonishment ; `` you would not start now : you surely can not be in earnest . '' 
`` Yes , good woman , I am in real earnest ; so make haste , for I am in a hurry . '' 
`` You have not been so all day long , '' she replied , `` and you now would rush over head and ears into the dark . 
The fresh air , indeed , may do invalids such as you some good ; but do n't suppose I 'll let your horse out of the stable this night ; you might fall off , or a hundred accidents might happen to you , and then it would be said , ` where was the head of the landlady of the Golden Stag , to let people leave her house in such a state , and at such an hour . ' '' 
The young man did not heed her conversation , having relapsed into the same melancholy mood as before ; but when she finished , and paused to get an answer , he roused up again , and wondered that she had not yet put his orders into execution . 
While she still hesitated to meet his wishes , and saw he was on the point of going himself to look after his steed , she thought that , as her good intentions were unavailable to retain him in her house , it would be more advisable to let him have his own way . 
`` Bring the gentleman 's horse out , '' she called to her servant , `` and let Andres get ready immediately , to accompany him part of the way . 
He is in the right to take some one with him , '' she said to herself , `` who may be of use to him in case of need . 
How much do you owe me , did you say , sir knight ? 
why , you have had a measure of wine , which makes twelve kreuzers ; and the dinner , -- as to that it 's not worth talking about , for you ate so little ; indeed you scarcely looked at my fowl . 
If you give me two more kreuzers for the feed of your horse , you shall receive the thanks of the poor widow of the Golden Stag . '' 
Having paid his reckoning in the small current money of the times , Albert took his leave of his kind landlady , who though her opinion of him was somewhat changed since he first entered her house , proceeding from an air of mystery about his character which she could not account for , still she could not conceal from herself , when he threw himself into the saddle by the light of a torch , that she had seldom seen a handsomer youth . 
She therefore impressed upon the lad who accompanied him to be very careful , and keep an especial look out upon the gentleman , `` who , '' she added , `` did not appear to be quite right in his head . '' 
Having reached the outer gate of Pfullingen , the guide asked his new master where he wished to go ? 
and upon his answer , `` to Lichtenstein , '' took a road to the right , leading to the mountains . 
Albert rode on in profound silence ; he looked not to the right nor to the left , neither at the stars over head nor in the distant horizon ; his eye only sought the ground . 
His mind now was in much the same state as at that moment when a blow from the hand of an enemy laid him senseless on the ground . 
His thoughts stood still , hope no longer animated him , he had ceased to love and to wish . 
But at that time , when he sank , exhausted , on nature 's cool carpet , his last thoughts were cheered with the endearing recollection of his beloved , and his benumbed lips were still able to pronounce once more her idolized name . 
But that light seemed to be extinguished which had hitherto guided his steps . 
It appeared as if he had but a short distance still to go in the dark , in order to seek his peace of mind in a light different to that he had fondly hoped to find on the Lichtenstein rock . 
His right hand went occasionally to his sword , as if to assure himself that at least this companion was faithful to him , for he now trusted to it alone , as the important key by which he might open the door that would lead from darkness to light . 
The travellers had long since reached the wood ; the path became steeper , and the horse with difficulty ascended the hill with his rider , who was , however , unconscious of all surrounding objects . 
The night air blew cool , and played with the flowing locks of the young man , -- he felt not its effects ; the moon rose and lighted up the road , which ascended amidst huge masses of rock and tall oaks , under which he passed , -- he noticed them not ; time flowed on unobserved by him ; hour followed hour in rapid succession , unheeded by his troubled mind . 
It was past midnight when they arrived at the summit of the highest hill , and having reached the skirts of the wood , they beheld the castle of Lichtenstein before them , situated upon an insulated perpendicular rock , rising as if by magic from the depths of darkness , and separated by a broad chasm from the surrounding country . 
Its white walls , its indented rocks , glimmered in the moonlight ; it seemed as if the castle slumbered in the profound tranquillity of solitude , cut off from the rest of the world . 
Albert cast a troubled glance towards it , and sprang from his horse , which he fastened to a tree , and sat down on a stone covered with moss directly opposite the castle . 
The guide stood waiting for further orders , and asked several times in vain , whether his services were required any longer . 
`` How long is it to the first crow of cock ? '' 
inquired Albert at last . 
`` Two hours , sir , '' was the answer of the lad . 
He then gave him a handsome reward for his conduct , and made signs to him to depart . 
The boy hesitated to obey him , as if afraid of leaving the young man in his present state of mind ; but , upon his repeating the sign with impatience , he withdrew with a slow step . 
He looked back once before he regained the wood , and observed his silent master still seated upon the same stone , under an oak , with his hand supporting his head . 
This hollow path must be his way , It doth to Küssnacht lead , So here I will his coming stay , And here I 'll do the deed . 
SCHILLER . 
Much has been said and written in all ages upon the folly of jealousy , but since the days of Uriah the world has nevertheless not grown wiser upon the subject . 
The news which Albert von Sturmfeder had heard from the hostess of the Golden Stag respecting the nocturnal visits of the stranger to the castle of Lichtenstein , had created a feeling in his breast to which it had hitherto been a perfect stranger , and he did not possess sufficient coolness of blood , to exercise his judgment with calmness and moderation , upon a subject of such vital importance to his future prospects . 
Though he was of an age in which an open generous disposition places implicit reliance in the honour of others , yet taken by surprise , as his unsuspicious heart now was , in its dearest affections , the consequences were likely to become fatal to his happiness . 
The anguish attendant upon plighted faith broken , burnt within him ; he could scarcely control the feeling of wounded pride , at being made the dupe of misplaced confidence ; that calm judgment which teaches us to discriminate between right and wrong forsook his mind , and the truth was veiled from his sight in an atmosphere of gloomy foreboding . 
The fiendish associates , contempt , rage , and revenge , which , with many others , compose the steps of the ladder of feeling between love and hatred , now assailed him , and rendered even jealousy a secondary passion in his breast . 
Brooding over these tormenting sensations , he sat upon the moss-covered stone , insensible to the chill of the night air , and his only thought was , to meet the nocturnal visitor , and demand an explanation . 
When the clock struck two in a village beyond the wood , he observed lights moving in the windows of the castle . 
His heart beat in full expectation ; he grasped the hilt of his sword . 
A few moments after the lights were visible behind the trellis of the gate , and dogs began to bark . 
Albert sprang upon his feet , and threw his cloak aside . 
He heard a deep voice very distinctly say , `` Good night . '' 
