`` Maxx , '' said he , `` how have they acted towards the people of the country ? '' 
`` Like robbers , '' he answered : `` they wantonly desolate the vineyards , cut down the fruit trees , and burn them at the guard houses ; Sickingen 's cavalry ride through the corn fields and tread down what they can not consume ; they ill treat the women , and extort money from the men . 
The people every where begin to murmur ; and should the present drought continue , followed by a failing harvest , a time when the poor people will be called upon to pay the heavy expenses of the war which the league 's administration will exact , misery and poverty will then be at its height . '' 
`` Oh , what villains ! '' 
cried the Duke , `` they who boasted , with high sounding words , that they came to free Würtemberg of her tyrant , and to liberate her people from oppression now commit abominations even worse than Turks . 
But I vow that if God will assist me , and his holy saints be merciful to my soul , I will return to the wasted vallies of the Neckar and its vineless banks , with the scythe of vengeance , cut down their ranks like sheaves of corn , and , as a revengeful vine dresser , tread and crush them under foot . 
I will avenge myself of all the calamities they have brought on me and my country , so help me God ! '' 
`` Amen ! '' 
responded the knight of Lichtenstein . 
`` But before you venture to the rescue of your country , you must first withdraw from it , for a season . 
No time is to be lost , if you would escape unmolested . '' 
The Duke considered awhile , and then answered , `` You are right , I will go to Mömpelgard , where I shall be able to make arrangements , and , I trust , collect men sufficient to venture to make a blow . 
Come here , thou faithful dog , thou wilt follow me into the misery of banishment . 
Thou knowest not what it is to break an oath or forfeit thy faith . '' 
`` Here stands another , who also knows nothing of treachery , '' said Schweinsberg , and approached the Duke . 
`` I will accompany you to Mömpelgard , if you do not disdain my services . '' 
The knight of Lichtenstein , animated by the same generous feeling , next said : . 
`` Take me also with you , Duke ! 
my feeble arm indeed is not worth much in the field , but my voice in council may still be heard . '' 
Bertha 's eyes lighted up more brilliantly than ever , as she beheld her lover , whose cheeks glowed with the ardour of youth , and whose looks bespoke the fire of his noble spirit . 
`` My Lord Duke , '' said he , `` I proffered hand and arm in your service , when we met in the cavern , when I knew not who you were , and you did not refuse them . 
I aspire not to have a voice in council -- but as you value a heart which beats faithful to you , an eye that will watch over you when you sleep , or an arm that will stand between you and your enemies , take me with you , and let me follow your fortune . '' 
The noble feelings which had at first attached the young man to the `` man without a name , '' now animated his breast , and the consideration of the Duke 's misfortune , which he bore with such dignified magnanimity , added to the encouraging glance of his beloved , fed the flame of enthusiasm and devotion to the Duke 's cause , and irresistibly threw him at his feet . 
The old knight of Lichtenstein looked at his young guest with the joyous pride of a father ; the Duke beheld him with emotion , and taking his hand , raised him from his knee and kissed his forehead . 
`` Where such hearts beat for us , '' said he , `` we have still fortresses and walls to shelter us , and can not bewail our poverty . 
You possess my love and esteem , Albert von Sturmfeder ; you shall accompany me ; I accept your faithful service with joy . 
Maxx Stumpf von Schweinsberg , I shall require your aid in more important business than to protect my body ; I have a commission for you to execute in Hohentwiel and Switzerland . 
I can not accept your company , good and faithful Lichtenstein . 
I honour you as a father , for your kindness to me has been such . 
You opened your door to me every night . 
I will repay it . 
When I return to my country , with God 's help and will , your voice shall be the first in council . '' 
The Duke 's eye fell upon the fifer of Hardt , who stood aloof in humble retirement . 
`` Come here , thou faithful man ! '' 
he called to him , and gave him his right hand , `` you once were guilty of a great crime , but you have repented of it sincerely , and by faithful service regained my confidence . '' 
`` To attempt another 's life is not so soon expiated , '' said the peasant , with downcast looks : `` I am still in your grace 's debt , but I will requite it when the time comes . '' 
`` Go to your home -- such is my will -- follow your occupations as heretofore . 
Perhaps you may be able to collect some faithful hearts in our cause by the time we return to our country . 
And you , lady ! 
how can I reward your kindnesses ? 
You deprived yourself many a night of rest , to open the door for me and shelter me against treachery ! 
Do not blush so , as if you had some great sin to confess , this being the moment to act . 
Venerable father , '' said he , turning to the knight of Lichtenstein , `` I appear before you as the intercessor of a couple of loving hearts . 
You will not disdain the son-in-law whom I propose to you ? '' 
`` I do not understand you , gracious Lord , '' said the knight , looking with astonishment at his daughter . 
The Duke took Albert 's hand , and led him to the old man . 
`` This young man loves your daughter , and she is not indifferent to him , -- what think you of making them a happy couple ? 
But what means that frown of displeasure ? 
Is he not high born , a gallant antagonist , the strength of whose arm I have already experienced , and now become my support in the hour of need ? '' 
Bertha cast her eyes down , her face was suffused with blushes , she trembled for the reply of her father , who looked sternly at the young man . 
`` Albert , '' said he , `` I have had a high opinion of you since the first moment I saw you ; it had been , perhaps , not so favourable , had I been aware of the object which brought you to my house . '' 
The youth was about to make an answer , but the Duke interrupted him . 
`` You forget that it was I who sent him to you with my seal and letter -- he came not of his own accord . 
But what are you thinking of so long ? 
I will adopt him as my son , and reward him with a property which will make you proud to call him your son-in-law . '' 
`` Do not trouble yourself further upon this point , my Lord Duke , '' said Albert , indignantly , when he noticed the indecision of the knight of Lichtenstein . 
`` It shall never be said of me , that the heir of the Sturmfeders begged for a wife , and obtruded his importunity to gain the consent of a father against his free will . 
My name is too dear to me to resort to such means . '' 
He was about to leave the room in displeasure , but the old knight held him by the hand : `` Hot-headed youth , '' he cried , `` restrain your impetuosity ? 
there , take her , she is yours , but -- you must not think of leading her home , so long as an enemy 's banner floats over the towers of Stuttgardt . 
Be faithful to the Duke , help him to return to his country , and if you continue true to his cause , the day that you enter the gates of the capital , when Würtemberg shall see her ensigns floating again over the pinnacles of her castles , my daughter from that moment shall be yours , and you shall then become my cherished son-in-law . '' 
`` And on that day , '' spoke the Duke , `` the bride will blush more beautifully than ever , when the merry bells peal from the towers , and the marriage procession moves to the church . 
I will then approach the bridegroom , and demand the reward to which I claim a right . 
But now , my good friend , give her the bridal kiss , which is probably not the first , embrace her once more , and then you belong to me , until that happy day when we enter Stuttgardt . 
Let 's drink , my friends , to the health of the happy couple . '' 
A smile mingled with the tears of Bertha , which gleamed in her beautiful eyes . 
She filled the goblet to the brim , and having tasted the wine , a custom in those days done by the cup-bearers at courts , presented it first to the Duke , with a look so full of gratitude and lovely grace , that he thought Albert the happiest man in the world , and that many a one would not have hesitated to risk his life in order to gain a gem of her worth . 
The men took each their goblet , waiting for a toast , which the Duke should give after his fashion . 
But Ulerich von Würtemberg , casting a long farewell look at his country , which he was about to quit , felt a tear start in his eye , which forced him to tear himself away from the painful view . 
`` I now turn my back , '' said he , `` upon objects which are dear to me , but , please God ! 
I 'll see them again in better days . 
Do not bewail my fate , but be of good cheer : as long as the Duke and his trusty friends are united , our good cause is not lost . 
` Here 's to good Würtemberg for ever ! ' '' 
In Swabia did thy princely father reign Beloved , and all did glad allegiance yield ; And of the people , many now remain Who fought beneath thy banners in the field . 
Sure memory can not be in Swabia dead . 
Towards Swabia let us then our footsteps turn , And as we the Black Forest 's mazes tread , Reviving hopes will in our bosoms burn . 
L. UHLAND . 
So hot a summer as that of the year 1519 , had scarcely ever been known in Würtemberg . 
The whole country had submitted to the power of the League , and its inhabitants now hoped their troubles were at an end . 
But the original intentions of its chiefs only began now to be fully developed , and it was evident that the mere reoccupation of Reutlingen was not the sole object for which they had coalesced . 
They were still to be indemnified for their expenses , and to be requited for their services . 
Some were for dividing Würtemberg equally among themselves , others proposed to sell it to Austria , whilst a third party insisted upon keeping it under the administration of Ulerich 's children , subject to their own guardianship . 
They quarrelled about the possession of the country , to which none of them could found the slightest claims . 
Disunion and party spirit spread their baneful effects among them , now that they had satisfied their revenge in driving the legitimate lord from his dominions . 
The expenses of the war were to be met , and there was no one who could or would pay . 
The knights held this a favourable opportunity to declare themselves independent . 
Citizens and peasants were drained of their money by continual forced contributions , their fields were desolated and trodden under foot , and they saw no prospect of recovering their losses . 
Neither would the clergy contribute to the expenses of the war ; so that the result of it was only dispute and violence . 
Many a heart felt how cruelly their legitimate prince had been persecuted , and bitterly repented having driven him into banishment , far from the land of his fathers . 
And when they compared his system of government with that of their present rulers , they found they had not bettered themselves by the change ; on the contrary , they were much worse off than before . 
But they were too much under subjection to venture to publish their grievances . 
The discontent of the people did not escape the government of the League . 
Their ears were not shut to `` much strange and wicked talk , '' as we read in old official documents . 
They tried to gain adherents to their cause by rigorous measures . 
They spread lies concerning the Duke ; one of which was , that he had cut a boy of noble blood in halves , of the name of Wilhelm von Janowitz . 
It made a great noise at the time , but when he was pointed out some time afterwards to a Swiss , as the man of whom the enemies of Ulerich had spread the report , he gave for answer , `` He must indeed have been a good carpenter who put the boy so well together again . '' 
The priests were ordered to announce from the pulpit , that whoever spoke favourably of the Duke was to be put in prison , and those who supported or assisted him were to lose their eyes , and perhaps their heads . 
Ulerich had many faithful friends among the country people , who secretly gave him intelligence how things were going on in Würtemberg . 
He remained in Mömpelgard with the men who had followed him in his misfortune , waiting a favourable moment to return to his country . 
He wrote to many Princes , imploring their assistance , but none would bestir themselves in his behalf . 
He petitioned also the Electors , assembled for the purpose of electing a new Emperor . 
The only aid they rendered him was to oblige the new Emperor to add an additional clause to his contract , favourable to Würtemberg and the Duke , -- but he paid no attention to it . 
Though he felt himself thus deserted by all the world , he did not give way to despondency , but set all his energies at work to recover his lost country by the resources of his own mind . 
Many circumstances appeared to favour his project : the League , having satisfied themselves that no one would dare shelter the exile in the country , disbanded most of their troops , composed chiefly of lansquenet , retaining only weak garrisons in the towns and castles ; and in Stuttgardt itself , the capital , there remained but few infantry under their banners . 
These measures of the League , however , were the cause of creating a formidable enemy to themselves , in a quarter they did not suspect , but which very soon contributed essentially to produce a change in the Duke 's favour . 
This enemy were the common foot soldiers , or the lansquenet . 
This body of men , collected together from all ends and corners of the empire , and composed of all nations , generally offered their services to those who paid them best . 
The cause for which they were to fight was perfectly indifferent to them . 
Being a licentious set , and difficult to be restrained even by severity of discipline , they indemnified themselves by robbery , murder , plunder , and forcibly exacting contributions , if they were not regularly paid . 
George von Fronsberg had been the first to keep them in some measure in subordination , and by the renown of his name , by daily exercise , and unbending severity , succeeded in forming them into something like an army . 
He divided them into regular companies and brigades , appointed special officers to each , and taught them to move and fight in columns and masses . 
These men now shewed that they came from a good school , for when the League disbanded them they did not , as formerly , separate and spread over the country , seeking service individually , but confederating together , formed twelve companies , chose their own commanders from among themselves , and appointed their general in the person of a man who went by the name of Long Peter . 
Being exasperated against the League , and living upon plunder and forced contributions , they became the dread of the whole country . 
Anarchy had spread its baneful spirit throughout Würtemberg to such a degree , that no one was able to resist their depredations . 
The party of the League was enfeebled by continual disunion , and was too much employed with its own affairs to think of freeing the impoverished land of this formidable band . 
The knights , being at variance with each other , remained shut up in their castles , looking on with indifference at the state of affairs . 
The garrisons of the towns were weak , and not able to repel them by force . 
The citizens and peasantry , when they were not hard pressed by these marauders , treated them civilly , being equally averse to the government of the League , whom no one now favoured ; it was even said they were not disinclined to reinstate the Duke , by the assistance of the same arms that had dethroned him . 
On a fine morning of the month of August this body was assembled , and encamped in a meadow of a valley touching the boundary of Baden . 
Tall black firs and pines encompassed the spot on three sides , and formed part of the Black Forest , with the rivulet called the Würm running through it . 
Partly under the shade of the wood , partly stretched out among the bushes of the meadow , the little army was distributed about in different groups , taking their rest . 
At the distance of about two hundred paces were to be seen advanced posts of armed men on the look-out , whose shining lances and lighted matches inspired dread and awe to the by-passer . 
In the middle of the valley , under the shade of a large oak tree , sat five men , round an out-spread cloak , which served them for a table , where they were playing at a game of cards , called to this day lansquenet . 
These men were distinguished from the rest of their companions by a broad red scarf , hanging down over the shoulder and breast ; but their dress had otherwise much the same ragged worn-out appearance with the others . 
Some of them wore helmets , others large felt hats , bound with iron , and all of them leather jerkins , of every possible shade and colour , which long service in rain , dust , and bivouacing had imparted to them . 
Upon a closer inspection , there were two things which particularly distinguished them from the rest of their comrades . 
They had neither gun nor pike , which were the ordinary weapons of the lansquenet , but wore rapiers of uncommon length and breadth . 
They also carried in their hats and helmets , in fashion with the nobility and leaders of armies of those days , cock 's tail feathers of various colours , assuming to themselves the rank of superiority . 
These five men , particularly one who was seated with his back to the tree , appeared much interested in the game which they were playing . 
He wore a hat with a brim of the breadth of a good sized millstone , trimmed with dingy gold lace , and ornamented in front with a gilt portrait of Saint Peter , out of which sprang two enormous red cock 's feathers . 
His language was a compound of French , Italian , and Hungarian , put together in such strange mixture , that he was scarcely intelligible to those to whom he addressed himself . 
No one knew what country gave him birth ; but he commanded a certain respect among his comrades from the fact of his having served in most of the armies of Europe , and been in nearly all the campaigns of his day ; and as he generally prefaced most of his phrases with oaths which he had picked up in the countries he had passed through , and which he pronounced after his own fashion , he thought to render himself thereby of more consequence among those over whom he had assumed the title of general . 
His beard was dressed in the Hungarian fashion , for being twisted up with pitch , it stuck out on both sides from under his nose a whole span 's breadth in the air , much like two iron spikes . '' 
Canto cacramento ! '' 
cried this man , with a threatening bass voice , `` the little knave is mine ; I 'll cut him with the king of spades ! '' 
`` It 's mine , with your permission , '' cried his neighbour , `` and the king into the bargain ; there 's the queen of spades ! '' 
`` Morbleu ! '' 
vociferated the other , in a rage ; `` do you want to take the trick from your commander , Captain Löffler ? 
For shame , for shame ! 
he is a rebel who dares do that . 
May my soul be punished , but you want to take the command away from me . '' 
The general , for such he was , frowned furiously , pushed his hat off his ears , and discovered a large red scar on his forehead , which heightened the savage appearance of his look . 
`` There is no military discipline at play , '' General Peter , `` answered the other . 
You may order us captains to blockade a town , and raise contributions , but at play one man is as good as another . '' 
`` You are mutinous , a rebel against the authorities ! 
Thunder and lightning ! 
were it not against my honour , I would cut you into a hundred pieces ; -- but play on . '' 
`` There 's an ace , '' said one . 
`` Here 's a quart , '' said another . 
`` I cut with the ten , '' exclaimed a third . 
`` And here 's the knave , -- who can take him ? '' 
said the fourth player . 
`` I can , '' cried the large man ; `` there 's the king , -- Morbleu ! 
the trick is mine . '' 
`` Where did you get the king ? '' 
said a little thin man , with a cunning face , small searching eyes , and shrill voice , `` did n't I see it at the bottom of the pack when you dealt . 
He has cheated ! 
Long Peter has cheated , by all the saints ! '' 
`` Muckerle , captain of the eighth company ! 
I advise you to hold your tongue , '' said the general ; '' Bassa manelka ! 
I do n't take a joke , -- the mouse should not play with the lion . '' 
`` And I say it again , -- where did you get the king ? 
I 'll prove you false before the pope and the king of France , thou foul player . '' 
`` Muckerle , '' replied the general , drawing his sword deliberately out of its scabbard , `` pray another Ave Maria and a Gratias , for as soon as the game is over you are a dead man . '' 
The other three men were roused from a state of indifference at these angry words . 
They sided with the little captain , and gave the general to understand clearly that they thought he was capable of the imputed meanness . 
He , however , looked big , and full of importance , and swore he had not cheated . 
`` If the holy Peter , my gracious patron , who I carry on my hat , could speak , he would bear me witness , as true as I am a Christian lansquenet , that I have not played false ! '' 
`` He played fair , '' said a strange voice , which appeared to issue from the tree . 
The men crossed themselves to defend them from an evil spirit , the gallant general even turned pale , and let drop his cards ; when a peasant stept forward from behind the tree , armed with a dagger , and having a guitar slung over his shoulder with a leathern strap . 
He beheld the group with an undaunted eye , and said , `` That gentleman did not cheat ; I saw all the cards that were dealt to him . '' 
`` Ah ! 
you are a fine fellow , '' said the general , much pleased ; `` as I am an honest lansquenet , what you say is all right . '' 
`` But how is this ? '' 
said the little captain , with a sharp look , `` how did this peasant get here without being announced by the piquet ? 
He is a spy , and deserves to be hung . '' 
`` Do n't be astonished , Muckerle , he is no spy ; come and sit down by me , my friend , you are a musician , I see , by your instrument hanging over your shoulder , like a Spaniard going to serenade his love . '' 
`` Yes , sir ! 
I am a poor musician ; your guard allowed me to pass when I came through the wood . 
I saw you playing , and I ventured to look on . '' 
The commanders of this free corps not being accustomed to hear themselves addressed in such polite terms , took a liking to the peasant , and invited him courteously to seat himself among them ; for they had learned in the military service of foreign countries that kings and princes often went about in the guise of minstrels . 
The general filled a cup of wine out of a pewter bottle , offered it to the little captain , and said , with a good-natured smile , `` Muckerle , what I drink shall be my death , if I do n't forget everything that has passed between us ! 
an end to strife and quarrel . 
We wo n't play any more , gentlemen : I love a song and the sound of the guitar -- what say you to some music ? '' 
The men agreed , and threw the cards aside . 
The peasant tuned his instrument , and asked what he should sing . 
`` Give us a song upon card-playing ! '' 
cried one of the party . 
The musician considered awhile , and sung the following upon the game of lansquenet , which they had just been playing . 
`` Cinque , quatre , and ace Bring many a man to disgrace ; Quatre , and cinque , and tré Make many to cry well-a-day ; An ace , a seize , and a deuce Make many an empty house ; A quatre , a trois , and cinque Cause many pure water to drink ; A cinque , a trois , and quatre Make parents ' and children 's eyes water ; From cinque , and quatre , and seize , Miss Catherine and Miss Elize Must long unmarried remain , Unless from your play you refrain . '' 
Long Peter and his associates praised his singing , and reached him the flask with their thanks . 
`` May God bless you ! '' 
said the singer , as he returned the bottle ; `` I wish you luck in your campaign . 
If I do n't mistake , you are the commanders of the League , and are on your march to the enemy . 
May I ask who you are going against ? '' 
The men looked and smiled at each other , but the general answered him : `` you are quite in the wrong . 
We did , indeed , serve the League formerly , but we are now free and our own masters , ready to assist any one who wants us . '' 
`` This will be a good year for the Swiss , for it is said the Duke will return to his country with their assistance , '' said the peasant . 
`` May the Swiss be hunted by wolves , '' said the general , `` for having treated him so ill ! 
The good Duke set all his hopes upon them , and , diavolo maledetto ! 
did they not desert him in Blaubeuren ? '' 
`` Yes , it was too bad , '' said Captain Muckerle ; `` but when one looks at the circumstance in its proper light , it served him half right , because he should have known them better . 
May the devil take them all ! '' 
`` They were the Duke 's last resource , '' replied the musician ; `` but if he had trusted to such men as you , the League would still be at Ulm . '' 
`` You have spoken a true word there , my hearty friend ! '' 
said the captain . 
`` He ought to have preferred the lansquenets before those Swiss dogs . 
And if he trusts to them now , I know what will happen . 
I say it again : he should take lansquenets . 
Is it not so , Magdeburger ? '' 
`` That 's my opinion also , '' said the Magdeburger : `` no other than lansquenets can seat the Duke upon his chair again . 
The Swiss only know how to use their long halberds ; that 's all their art . 
But you ought to see us load our guns , how we lay them in the fork , and fire them with a match . 
No one can come near us in that man -LSB- oe -RSB- uvre . 
The Swiss take half an hour to fire their guns , but we only half of a quarter . '' 
`` With all respect , gentlemen of this noble corps , '' said the peasant , raising his cap respectfully , `` the Duke should certainly have thrown himself upon your bounty . 
But the League rewarded you too well for the poor Duke to be able to crave your assistance . '' 
`` Rewarded , did you say ? '' 
cried the captain of the fifth company , and laughed ; `` yes , those Swabian dogs would have melted gold out of lead if they could ! 
But I say they paid us ill , and if his grace the Duke will take me , my services are at his command . '' 
`` You are right , Staberl , '' said the general , and stroked his beard . '' 
Morbleu ! 
the cat likes to have his back stroked : -- if the Duke pays well , the whole corps will join him . '' 
`` Well , you shall soon see that , '' said the peasant , with a cunning smile ; `` have you had an answer to your message to the Duke ? '' 
The general 's whole countenance became as red as fire at this question . '' 
Mordelement ! 
Who are you , child of man , who knows my secret ? 
Who told you I had sent to the Duke ? '' 
`` Did you , Peter , send to him ? 
What secret have you between each other that we should not know ? 
Tell us immediately , '' said the Magdeburger . 
`` Well , I thought it was my duty to think for you all again , as I always have done , and sent a man to the Duke in our name , and with our compliments , to know if he required our services ? 
Our terms were , half a broad piece a man per month , and for us generals and captains a gold florin , with four measures of old wine . '' 
`` Those are no bad terms : a gold florin a month ! 
none of us will object to them . 
Have you had an answer from the Duke ? '' 
said the Magdeburger . 
`` Not yet , '' said the general . 
`` But , bassa manelka ! 
tell me , how do you come to know my secret , peasant , or I 'll cut off your ear , and pin it to my hat ? 
Tell me immediately , or off it comes . '' 
`` Long Peter , '' cried the little captain Muckerle , `` let him go in peace , for God 's sake ! 
he is a resolute man , and possesses the art of witchcraft . 
I recollect his face as well as if it was but to-day , when we had orders to arrest him in Ulm , and were sent to look for him at the stable of Herrn von Kraft , the clerk of the council , where he resided . 
He was a spy , and was able to make himself smaller and smaller , not bigger than a sparrow , and flew away from us . '' 
`` What ! '' 
cried the gallant general , and edged away from the peasant ; `` is this the man ? 
Why did not the magistrates of Ulm order all the sparrows to be shot , because a Würtemberger spy had turned himself into one ? '' 
`` That 's him , '' whispered Muckerle ; `` that 's the fifer of Hardt ; I knew him as soon as I saw him . '' 
The general and his companions did not recover their astonishment for some time . 
They beheld the man of whom many wonderful stories had been related with mingled curiosity and apprehension . 
Hans was clever enough , however , to understand what they whispered to each other , without the appearance of remarking the state of surprise he had created among them . 
At length , Long Peter , the official organ of the rest , took heart , twisted his whiskers , and , taking off his enormous hat , thus addressed the fifer of Hardt : `` Pardon us , worthy companion , and highly respected fifer of Hardt , that we have treated you with so little ceremony ; but how could we know who it was we had among us ? 
be many times welcome ; I have long wished to see so renowned a man as the fifer of Hardt , who had the power of flying away from Ulm like a sparrow in the middle of the day . '' 
`` Let 's have done with those old stories , '' interrupted the fifer , hastily . 
`` I heard this day from the Duke , who desired me to find you out , to know if you were still inclined to join him upon the terms he has proposed . '' '' 
Canto cacramento ! 
he is a good man ! 
a gold ducat a month and four measures of wine daily ! 
Long may he live ! '' 
cried the general . 
`` When will he come ? '' 
asked captain Löffler . 
`` Where shall we meet him ? '' 
`` This very day , if no ill luck attends him . 
He was to advance upon Heimsheim this morning , where the garrison is weak , and , when he has taken it , he will come on this way . '' 
`` Look ! 
there rides a man in armour , to all appearance a knight ! '' 
The men looked towards the end of the valley , and remarked a helmet and armour shining in the sun , with a horse occasionally visible . 
The fifer of Hardt jumped up and climbed the oak , whence he could overlook the valley with greater ease . 
The horseman was too distant from him to be able to recognise his features , but he thought he knew the scarf which he wore , and that it was the person he had been expecting to appear . 
`` What do you see ? '' 
said the men ; `` is it one riding by chance through the wood , or do you think he comes from the Duke ? '' 
`` That 's him with the white and blue scarf , '' said the fifer ; `` that 's his long hair , and his seat on horseback . 
Oh , precious youth , welcome back to Würtemberg ! 
He observes your advanced post , and rides towards it ; only look how the fellows present their lances and spread out their legs ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , the lansquenet knows the arts of war ; no one dare pass the spot where the commanders are , without knowing his business , '' said the general . 
`` Stop ! 
they are calling to him ; he speaks to them ; they point this way ; he comes ! '' 
cried the fifer , who came down from the tree with a joyful countenance . '' 
Diavolo maledetto ! 
bassam terendete ! 
They wo n't let him ride alone , I hope ? 
Ah ! 
I see one of them has hold of his bridle 1 How ? 
It is really a knight that comes ! 
`` A nobleman as good as any in the empire , '' answered the fifer ; `` the friend and favourite of the Duke . '' 
Upon hearing this they all stood up , for , though they fancied themselves men of importance and rank , they were aware of their being only lansquenets , and bound to pay proper respect to their superiors . 
The general seated himself again , with an air of gravity , at the foot of the oak -- stroked his beard to make it shine -- arranged his hat with the cock 's feathers properly -- supported his hand on his enormous sword -- and in this manner awaited the arrival of the stranger . 
END OF VOL . 
II . 
J. B. Nichols and Son , 25 , Parliament-street . 
THE BANISHED . 
VOL . 
III . 
LONDON : PRINTED BY J. B. NICHOLS AND SON , 25 , PARLIAMENT STREET . 
THE BANISHED : A SWABIAN HISTORICAL TALE . 
EDITED BY JAMES MORIER , ESQ. . 
AUTHOR OF HAJJI BABA , & c . 
IN THREE VOLUMES . 
VOL . 
III . 
LONDON : HENRY COLBURN , PUBLISHER , GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET . 
1839 . 
THE BANISHED . 
* * * * * The Duke at length is coming , The battle field 's not far ; For vanquish 'd is the foeman , And he brings the spoils of war . 
G. SCHWAB . 
A knight in armour , his horse being led between two of the lansquenet from the outpost , now approached the place where Long Peter , their general , and the other men , were assembled . 
Though he had drawn the vizor of his shining helmet over his face , the fifer of Hardt thought he recognised him as the man he expected , by the plates and cuish of steel which encased his muscular limbs , the plumes which waved high in the breeze , and the well known scarf which crossed over his coat of mail . 
And he was not mistaken , for one of the men who led his horse advanced to the General , and acquainted him that the noble `` Knight of Sturmfeder '' wished to speak to the leaders of the lansquenet . 
Long Peter answered in the name of the rest , `` tell him he is welcome , and that Peter Hunzinger the General , Staberl of Vienna , Conrad the Magdeburger , Balthaser Löffler , and the brave Muckerle , all well appointed Captains , are ready to receive and hear him . 
May my soul be punished , but he has a beautiful suit of armour , and an helmet fit for King Francis ; and as to his steed , I have never seen a finer -- Morbleu , how well he stands on his four legs ! '' 
The men kept at a respectful distance from the stranger , who now approached , but shewed no inclination to dismount . 
Raising his vizor , he spoke to one of the men , and discovered his handsome friendly countenance . 
`` Is not that Hans , the musician ? '' 
said he , to the men . 
`` I have a word to say to him first . '' 
The general made a sign to the fifer to approach the young knight , who immediately dismounted from his horse . 
`` Welcome in Würtemberg , noble sir , '' said the man of Hardt , and returned a hearty shake of Albert von Sturmfeder 's hand : `` what news do you bring ? 
The Duke 's cause prospers , if I can judge from the expression of your countenance . '' 
`` Come on one side , '' he replied , in anxious haste . 
`` How fares it in Lichtenstein ? 
Have you a letter or a couple of lines for me ? 
O give it quickly ! '' 
The fifer smiled at the impatience of the lovesick youth ; `` I have neither letter nor line . 
The lady is well , and the old knight also ; that is all I know . '' 
`` How ! '' 
replied the other , `` nothing , not even a message ? 
I am sure she did not let you depart without something for me ! '' 
`` When I took my leave of the lady the day before yesterday , she said , ` Tell him to hasten the entrance into Stuttgardt ; ' and when she spoke , became as red in the face as you are at present . '' 
`` We 'll soon be there , with God 's will ! '' 
he answered . 
`` But how has she passed the long summer ? 
I have only heard from her three times since we parted . 
Were you often in Lichtenstein , Hans ? '' 
`` Dear sir , '' answered the fifer , `` have patience , and I will relate every thing , in length and breadth , on the march : for the present , be satisfied with the assurance , that so soon as the old knight hears you are advancing to Stuttgardt , he will set out from Lichtenstein with your bride , for he does not doubt of your overpowering the garrison . 
Have you succeeded in taking Heimsheim ? '' 
`` We have : I rode through the gates with twelve horsemen , before they were aware of our coming . 
Though the garrison were somewhat stronger than us , they were dispirited and dissatisfied . 
I treated with them in the Duke 's name , and made them believe that he was coming up with a large body of troops , upon which they surrendered : thus far are we in Würtemberg . 
But in what state is the road before us ? '' 
`` Open , into the heart of the country , open . 
I have important news for the Duke from the knight of Lichtenstein , namely , that the men in power are out of the land , do you know -- '' `` Is it the meeting they now hold at Nördlingen you mean ? '' 
interrupted Albert . 
`` Oh ! 
yes , we know it , for it was that news which determined the Duke to commence operations . '' 
`` Well , when the cats are away , the mice will play , '' said the fifer ; `` the garrisons are every where careless . 
None of the League think any more of the Duke , their attention being wholly taken up with the meeting at Nördlingen , where it will be decided , whether Austria , or Bavaria , or Prince Christoph , or the Leaguist towns Augsburg and Aalen , Nürnberg , and Bopfinger , will reign over us . '' 
`` What long faces they will make , '' exclaimed Albert , smiling , `` when they hear that the chair about which they are quarrelling is already possessed : ` The frog jumps into the muddy pool , Tho ' he may set upon a golden stool ! ' 
says the proverb ; they may shoulder their guns and give up governing now . 
And the Würtembergers , what are their feelings towards the Duke at present ? 
Do you believe many will come to his assistance ? '' 
`` He may reckon upon the citizens and peasantry , '' replied the fifer . 
`` How it stands with the knights , I do n't know ; for when I asked the old man of Lichtenstein , he shrugged up his shoulders and muttered a couple of curses : I fear that matter is not so well as it should be . 
But citizens and peasants hold to a man for their Prince . 
Many extraordinary signs have appeared , which encourage the people . 
Lately in the valley of the Rems a stone fell from the sky , on one side of which a stag 's horn and the following words were engraved , ` Here 's to good Würtemberg for ever , ' and on the reverse , in Latin , ` Long live Duke Ulerich . ' '' 
`` Did you say it fell from the sky ? '' 
`` So it was said . 
The peasantry were overjoyed at it , but the officers of the League put the magistrate of the place where it had fallen into prison , and wanted to extort from him the name of the person who had engraved the letters . 
And when it was proclaimed , upon pain of severe punishment , that no one was to speak of the Duke , the men only laughed , and said , ` We dream of him now . ' 
They all wish him back again , and would rather be oppressed by their legitimate Lord than be flayed by strangers . '' 
`` That 's as it should be , '' said Albert . 
`` The Duke and his cavalry may be here in a few hours . 
His intention is , to cut his way straight through the country to Stuttgardt . 
The capital once ours , the rest will soon follow . 
But how is it with these lansquenets -- will they join us ? '' 
`` I had almost forgotten them , '' said Hans , `` we had better go to them ; else they will become impatient if we keep them waiting . 
You must be cautious how you treat them , for they are proud fellows , and have no small idea of their own importance . 
By winning these five to our interests , the whole twelve companies are sure to follow . 
With their General , Long Peter , mind and be very civil and courteous . '' 
`` Which is Long Peter ? '' 
`` The big man , sitting under the oak ; he with the stiff mustachios and hat of distinction on his head . 
He is the commander in chief . '' 
`` I will talk to him , and follow your advice , '' Albert answered , and proceeded towards them . 
The long conversation which they had held had somewhat displeased the men , and little Muckerle in particular eyed the ambassador of the Duke with a penetrating glance . 
But when the young knight appeared among them his noble demeanour disconcerted them , they became shy and embarrassed before him , so much so , that the courteous words which he addressed to them soon had the desired effect of bringing them over to the Duke 's cause . 
They listened to him in respectful silence . 
`` Most experienced general and brave commanders of the assembled lansquenet , '' said Albert , `` the Duke of Würtemberg having approached the boundary of his country , and captured Heimsheim , is determined in the same way to recover his whole dukedom . '' 
`` May my soul be punished , but he is right ! '' 
said Long Peter ; `` I would do the same . '' 
`` He has already experienced the courage and military science of the lansquenet , when they fought on the side of his enemies , and he trusts they will manifest the same bravery in his cause , promising upon his princely word , faithfully to fulfil the engagements he has proposed . '' 
`` A pious man , '' murmured the commanders among themselves , with approving nods ; `` a gold florin a month , and , morbleu ! 
four measures of wine a day for the superior officers . '' 
The general rose from his seat , saluted him by uncovering his bald head , and said , though often interrupted by many coughs of embarrassment , `` We thank you , most noble sir ; we agree -- we 'll join you . 
We 'll give back to the Swabian League what they gave us , that we will -- hard usage . 
The very best and most courageous , as well as the most excellent of men , have they dismissed , as if they did not value our services . 
There stands , for example , Captain Löffler : if there is a braver lansquenet in all Christendom , I 'll allow my skin to be peeled off and walk about in my bones the rest of my life ! 
Look at Staberl of Vienna : the sun and moon have never shone upon his equal ! 
And the Magdeburger there , no Turk ever fought like him ; and as for little Muckerle , though he does not look it , he is the best shot in the world , and can hit the bull 's eye in the target at forty paces . 
I wo n't say anything of myself ; self praise does not sound well . 
But , bassa manelka ! 
I have served in Spain and Holland -- and , canto cacramento -- also in Italy and Germany ! 
Morbleu ! 
Long Peter is known in every army . 
May my soul be punished , when I and the others get behind the Swabian dogs , diavolo maledetto , they 'll take to their hareskin , and be off as fast as their heels can carry them ! '' 
This was the longest speech Long Peter had ever made ; and when many years after he sealed the renown of the German lansquenet with his death before Pavia , his companions , in relating to their young comrades the events of his life , always mentioned this moment as the most glorious of his career . 
He was described as standing before his audience , leaning upon his long sword , his large hat with the red feathers cocked over his ear , the right hand resting upon his side , and his legs spread out , wanting nothing to complete his pretensions to a regular general than a better jerkin and the chain of honour . 
The commanders , after the flattering speech of their general , invited their new guest to pass their army in review . 
The hollow sound of enormous drums soon roused the men from their rest . 
