`` Then , roused to extreme rage , your excellency pulled out a stiletto , on which I distinguished that there were already drops of blood . 
But it was a vain and needless attempt to send to hell him who to hell already belongs . 
For this painter is Ahasuerus , the Wandering Jew , or Bertram de Bornis , or Mephistopheles , or Benvenuto Cellini , or Judas Iscariot ; in short , a wicked revenant , and , in my opinion , to be banished by no other means than by burning-hot curling-irons , which shall twist away into annihilation that idea in which he properly consists ; or , by the dexterous and energetic use of electrical combs , against those thoughts which , in order to his own existence , he must suck up and imbibe . 
`` Your excellency perceives that to me , phantast and artist by profession , such things are , as the French say , veritable pomade , which proverb , borrowed from our science , has more meaning than one would otherwise suppose , as soon as the pomade is known to contain genuine oil of cloves . '' 
This mad and unintelligible gibberish of the little man , who , meanwhile , ran along with me through the streets , had for me , in my present mood of mind , something truly horrible ; and yet , when I looked now and then at his incredible leaps and springs , his grotesque gestures , and comical countenances , I was forced , as if by an involuntary convulsion , to laugh . 
At last we were in my own chamber , in the inn of the suburb , and beyond the town gates . 
Here Belcampo assisted me to pack up my clothes , etc. and in a short time all was ready for my departure . 
Thereafter , I slipped not one only , but several ducats , into his hand , whereupon he jumped up into the air for joy , and cried aloud , `` Hurrah ! 
-- hurrah ! 
-- now I have got gold , indeed -- honourable gold , dyed in heart 's - blood , streaming and beaming with its red effulgence ! 
Excuse me , sir , '' -LRB- for at these words I looked at him with amazement , -RRB- '' 't was but a passing thought , and now 't is gone ! '' 
He then offered his services to give to the `` lock of anger '' the proper degree of roundness , and cut away the `` twenty-seven hairs of horror , '' requesting also that he might be allowed to choose for himself a small `` love-lock , '' to keep as a remembrance . 
This I accordingly granted , and with indescribable gestures and grimaces , he fulfilled his task . 
After this , he seized the stiletto , which , on undressing , I had laid upon the table , and taking the position of a fencer , made with it divers cuts and thrusts into the air . 
`` Ha ! '' 
said he , `` now shall I make an end of your adversary , for he is but an idea , probably he may also be extirpated by a thought . 
Let him die , then , by this thought of mine , which , in order to render more powerful , I accompany with suitable gestures of the body -- Apage , Satanas ! 
-- apage , Ahasuerus ! 
-- Allez vous en ! 
-- Now , that was something like ! 
That was working to some purpose , '' said he , laying down the stiletto , breathing hard , and wiping his brows , like one that has exerted his utmost to get through some great labour . 
Luckily I now got possession of the stiletto , and , wishing to conceal it , groped with it into my sleeve , forgetting that I no longer wore my capuchin robes . 
This gesture the man seemed to remark , and slyly to laugh at . 
Meanwhile the postilion -LRB- for I had ordered horses -RRB- began to blow his bugle before the house . 
Then Belcampo suddenly changed his posture and tone . 
He drew out a small pocket-handkerchief , bent himself several times with deep reverence , at last kneeled before me , and entreated in a lamentable voice -- `` Two masses , reverend father , I beseech you , for my poor grandmother , who died of a surfeit ; four for my father , who died of involuntary fasting ; but for myself , one every week when I am dead . 
Above all , however , and in the first place , an indulgence for my many faults and sins now , while I am yet living ! 
`` Alas ! 
sir , there is an infamous wicked fellow that lurks concealed within me , and says , ` Peter Fairfield , be no longer an ass , and believe that thou existest ; for I am properly thou , and am called Belcampo -- moreover am a genial idea ; and if thou dost not believe this , I will strike thee down to the earth with an acute thought , finely pointed as a hair ! ' 
`` This damnable fellow , sir , commits all sorts of sins and wicked pranks . 
Oftentimes he doubts of the Real Presence -- gets drunk -- falls into quarrels and pommelling matches , and commits gross indelicacies against pure virgin thoughts . 
This Pietro Belcampo , sir , has made me , Peter Fairfield , quite confused and dissipated ; so that I frequently jump about in an absurd and unbecoming manner , and defile the spotless garb of innocence , when , with white silk stockings , and singing dulce jubilo , I splash unawares into the dirt . 
Forgiveness , then , venerable father , for both , for Peter Fairfield and Pietro Belcampo . '' 
He continued prostrate , and pretended to sob violently . 
The folly of the man became tiresome to me . 
`` Be reasonable at least , '' said I to him , `` and give us no more of this . '' 
The head-waiter now came in to take my luggage . 
Belcampo sprung up , and resuming at once his mirthful humour , he assisted , talking , however , all the time , to collect together whatever property of mine was in the room . 
In a few moments I found myself seated in my cabriolet . 
`` That fellow is a most complete puppy , '' said the waiter , in a low voice , and pointing to Belcampo ; `` the less one has to do with him the better . '' 
The door was closed , and the postilion mounted . 
Belcampo waved his hat , and began , `` Even to the last breath of my life -- '' but with a significant look , I laid my finger on my lips , and he was silent . 
Anon the postilion drove off , blowing the Tyroler-lied on his bugle as we clattered along the chaussée , and I was once more , emancipated from all ties , whether hostile or friendly , thrown upon the world . 
* * * * * When the morning began to dawn , the town from which I had fled lay far behind me ; and as I contemplated with some interest the new scenes through which we passed , the form of that frightful man , who pursued and haunted me like a visible impersonization of the guilt and mystery by which my life had been darkened , had again almost vanished away . 
On setting out , I had merely desired to be driven to the first stage on the high road leading southwards ; but at every new station , the questions of the postmaster , '' Whence and whither ? '' 
revived to my mind how completely I was now separated and cut off from every relationship in life ; and like the wandering Ahasuerus , of whom Belcampo had spoken , was utterly given up , a prey to the stormy waves of chance , that bore me like a powerless wreck along . 
But had not my ruling destiny drawn me thus out of my former relationships and dependencies , only that the internal efforts of my spirit might be exerted with greater life and vigour ? 
Something must be accomplished , in order to still those yearnings of the soul , by which I was convinced that a great and important result was before me . 
Restless I travelled on , through a beautiful and flourishing country . 
Nowhere could I find repose , but was driven irresistibly onward , always farther and farther , towards the south . 
I had hitherto , without any consciousness or attention on my own part , scarcely made any important deviation from the route recommended to me by Leonardus ; so that the impulse which he had given to me at first setting out , seemed to work always in a straight-forward direction , and with an influence wholly uninterrupted . 
* * * * * It happened , one very dark night , that I travelled through a dense wood of pine and beech-trees , which was said to extend as far as the next station , on which account the postmaster had advised me to remain with him till the next morning ; but from an impatience , to myself unaccountable , as I was unable to put a name on any goal or object which I wished to reach , I peremptorily refused his proposal . 
Already , at the time of my departure , lightning , which is not usual at that season of the year , gleamed on the distant horizon ; and very soon , clouds , collected by the approaching storm , rolled together , darker and darker , in threatening volumes . 
The postilion observed what sort of weather we should of necessity encounter ; pointed to the clouds , and asked if he might return ? 
To this I gave a peremptory answer in the negative . 
We entered accordingly that long , interminable , and tangled forest which stretches between Holzenheim and Rosenthurm , where the wood alternately consists of tall beech-trees and dense thickets of Norway and Scotch fir . 
Having laid aside his tobacco-pipe , he began here , for his diversion , to play `` Malbrook '' on his bugle ; but anon the thunder began to roll , and even to crack above our heads , with numberless reverberations ; while , far as the eye could reach , there was nothing but the crossing and re-crossing of red lightnings on the horizon . 
Such a tempest I have never witnessed , neither before nor since . 
During a thunderstorm , the air is generally calm , but now there were unaccountable gusts of wind , such as usually occur only in the depth of winter . 
The tall fir-trees , shaken to their very roots , groaned and crashed . 
The rain poured down in torrents . 
Every moment we ran the risk of being killed by the falling of the trees , and the horses constantly reared , and ran back from the flashes of lightning . 
At last , after a long struggle , and many vicissitudes , we were `` beat to a stand still , '' for the carriage -LRB- as a climax -RRB- was overturned , on a piece of rough road , so violently , that one of the hinder wheels broke in pieces . 
Thus we had no alternative , but must remain on the spot , till the storm should abate , and the moon break through the clouds . 
The postilion now remarked , that , on account of the darkness , and the rain driving in his face , he had quite wandered away from the right road , and had fallen into an avenue of the forest . 
There was now no other method , but to follow out this avenue as far as it would go , and thus perhaps to arrive at some woodman 's hut or village . 
Though the darkness continued , yet we contrived to prop up the carriage with a kind of wooden leg , and thus it was dragged gradually onwards . 
We had not gone far , till , marching in the van , I perceived now and then the gleaming of a light , and thought that I could distinguish the baying of dogs . 
I had not deceived myself ; for we had not persevered in our laborious progress above a few minutes longer , before I distinctly heard the dogs ' voices ; and in due time we came to an opening in the wood , where the road became more passable . 
At last we arrived at a large respectable-looking house , though , as far as the dim light enabled us to perceive , old , gloomy , and surrounded by the high walls of a regularly-built square court . 
The postilion , without hesitation , knocked loudly at the outer gate . 
The dogs immediately grew outrageous , and sprang out from their kennels against us . 
In the house , -LRB- or keep , -RRB- however , all remained quiet and dead , till the postilion had recourse to his horn , -LRB- lending me a spare one , that we might play a duet , -RRB- and blew `` Wilhelmus von Nassau '' with such vehemence , that the old vaulted building re-echoed to the notes . 
Then a window in the upper story , from which I had before seen the light , was opened , and a deep , rough voice called out , `` Christian ! 
Christian ! '' 
-- `` Ay , ay , sir , '' cried a voice from below . 
Then we knocked again , and blew our horns . 
`` There is a knocking and blowing of bugles at our gate , '' said the voice from above , `` and the dogs are raging like devils . 
Take the lantern down , with the blunderbuss number three , and see what is the matter . '' 
-- Soon after , we heard Christian 's voice , quieting the dogs , and saw him at last come with the lantern . 
The postilion now found out where we were . 
Instead of going straight forward , he had quitted the road , and driven almost in a retrograde direction , so that we were now at the Prince von Rosenthurm 's forst-haus , distant only about a league to the right of the station which we had quitted . 
As soon as we had explained to Christian the mischance that we had met with , he directly opened both wings of the gate , and let the carriage pass into the court . 
The dogs , who were now pacified , came fawning and snuffling about us ; and the man above , who was still stationed at the window , cried out incessantly , in a voice by no means of good-humour , `` Who 's there ? 
-- who 's there ? 
What for a caravan is that ? '' 
to which neither Christian nor I returned a word in answer . 
At last I stepped into the house , and was walking up stairs , when I met a powerful tall man , with a sun-burnt visage , a large hat , with a plume of green feathers , on his head , -LRB- which was oddly contrasted with the rest of his figure , for he appeared in his shirt and slippers , -RRB- and a drawn stiletto -LRB- or hunting dagger -RRB- in his hand . 
In a rough voice , he called out to me , `` Whence do you come ? 
How dare you disturb people in the dead of night ? 
This is no public-house ; no post station . 
Here no one lives but the Ober-revier-forster , and for want of a better , I am he . 
Christian is an ass , for having opened the gates without my permission . '' 
In a tone of great humility , I now related the story of my mischance , explaining that nothing but necessity had brought me hither . 
Hereupon the man was somewhat conciliated . 
He said , `` Well , no doubt , the storm was very violent ; but your postilion must be a stupid rascal , to drive out of the road , and break your carriage in that manner . 
Such a fellow should have been able to go blindfolded through these woods . 
He should be at home among them , like any one of us . '' 
With these words , he led me up stairs into a large hall , furnished with a long oak table and benches ; the walls adorned with stag 's antlers , hunting weapons , bugle-horns , etc. . 
An enormous stove was at one end , and an open kamin , where there were yet the warm embers of a wood-fire , at the other . 
The Ober-revier-forster now laid aside his hat and dagger , and drawing on his clothes , requested I would not take it ill that he had received me so roughly ; for , in his remote habitation , he must be constantly on his guard . 
All sorts of bad people were in the habit of haunting these woods -- and especially with poachers , he lived almost always in open warfare -- `` However , '' added he , `` the rogues can gain no advantage over me , for , with the help of God , I fulfil my duty to the prince conscientiously and faithfully . 
They have more than once attacked my house by night ; but , in reliance on Providence , and my trusty dogs and fire-arms , I bid them defiance . '' 
Involuntarily , and led away by the force of old habits , I here thrust in some common-place words about the power and efficacy of trust in God . 
-- However , such expressions were not lost on the forester , but seemed to gain for me his confidence and good opinion . 
He became always more cheerful , and notwithstanding my earnest entreaties to the contrary , roused up his wife -- a matron in years , of a quiet , good-humoured demeanour , who , though thus disturbed from her sleep , welcomed , in a very friendly manner , her unexpected guest , and began , by her husband 's orders , to prepare supper . 
As for the postilion , he , by the forester 's decision , was obliged , for a punishment , that night , to drive back -LRB- as he best could -RRB- to the station from which he had come , -- and on the following morning I should be carried on by the forester to the place of my destination . 
I agreed the more readily to this plan , as I found myself now much in want of repose . 
I therefore said to my host that I would gladly stay with him even till the middle of the following day , as , by constant travelling , I had been greatly fatigued , and would be much the better for such refreshment . 
`` If I might advise you , sir , '' said the forester , `` you had better remain here through the whole of to-morrow -- After that , my son , whom I must at any rate send to the residenz , will himself take you forward in my carriage . '' 
I was , of course , well contented with this proposal ; and by way of conversation , while supper was placed on the table , began to praise the solitude and retirement of his house , by which I professed myself to be greatly attracted . 
`` It is remote , sir , no doubt , '' said the forester ; `` at the same time , our life here is the farthest possible from being dull or gloomy , as a townsman would probably conclude it to be . 
-- To such people every situation in the country appears both lonely and stupid ; -- but much depends on the temper and disposition of the party by whom a house like this of ours is inhabited . 
`` If , as in former years in this castle , an old gloomy Baron were the master , -- one who shuts himself up within the four walls of his court , and takes no pleasure in the woods or the chase -- then , indeed , it would be a dull and lonely habitation -- But since this old Baron died , and our gracious Prince has been pleased to fit it up as a forst-haus , it has been kept in constant liveliness and mirth . 
`` Probably you , sir , may be one of those townspeople , who know nothing , unless by report , of our pleasures , and therefore can have no adequate idea , what a joyous pleasant life we hunters lead in the forest -- As to solitude , I know nothing either of its pains or pleasures -- for , along with my huntsmen lads , we live all equally , and make but one family . 
Indeed , however absurd this may seem to you , I reckon my staunch wise dogs also among the number -- And why not ? 
They understand every word that I say to them . 
They obey even my slightest signals , and are attached , and faithful even to death . 
`` Mark there , only , how intelligently my Waldmann looks up , because he knows already that I am speaking about him ! 
`` Now , sir , not only is there every day something to be done with the huntsmen and dogs in the forest -- but every evening before , there is the pleasure of preparation , and a hospitable well-supplied board , -LRB- at which we enjoy ourselves with a zest , that you townsmen never experience ;-RRB- then , with the first dawn of day , I am always out of bed , and make my appearance , blowing all the way a cheering réveille upon my hunting-horn . 
`` At that sound every one directly starts up -- The dogs , too , begin to give tongue , and join in one great concert , of barking and rejoicing , from their delight at the anticipation of the coming sport . 
The huntsmen are quickly dressed -- They throw the game-bags and fire-arms on their shoulders , and assemble directly in this room , where my old woman -LRB- my wife , I mean -RRB- prepares for us a right stout hunter 's breakfast , an enormous schüssel of hot ragout , with a bottle of vin-ordinaire , a reaming flagon of home-brewed ale , with another of Stettiner beer , sent us from the residenz ; then , after a glass of schnaps , we all sally forth in the highest possible spirits , shouting and rejoicing . 
`` Thereafter , we have a long march before us -- -LRB- I speak of our employments at this present season -RRB- -- but at last we arrive at the spot where the game lies in cover -- There every one takes his stand apart from the rest ; the dogs grope about with their noses on the ground , snuffing the scent , and looking back every now and then to give notice to the huntsman , who , in his turn , stands with his gun cocked , motionless and scarcely daring to breathe , as if rooted to the ground . 
But when at last the game starts out of the thicket , when the guns crack , and the dogs rush in after the shot , ah ! 
then , sir , one 's heart beats -- every fibre is trembling with youthful energy ; old as I am , I thus feel transformed into a new man . 
`` Moreover , and above all , there are no two adventures of this kind exactly like each other . 
In every one is something new , and there is always something to talk over that never happened before . 
If it were no more than the variety of game at different seasons of the year , this alone renders the pursuit so delightful , that one never can have enough of it . 
`` But setting aside these diversions , I assure you , sir , that the mere superintendance and care of the woods is an employment which would amply fill up my time from January to December . 
So far am I from feeling lonely , that every tree of the forest is to me like a companion . 
`` Absolutely , it appears to me as if every plant which has grown up under my inspection , and stretches up its glossy waving head into the air , should know me and love me , because I have watched over , and protected it . 
Nay , many times , when I hear the whispering and rushing of the leaves in the wind , it seems as if the trees themselves spoke with an intelligible voice , that this was indeed a true praising of God and his omnipotence ; a prayer , which , in no articulate words , could so well have been expressed . 
`` In short , sir , an honest huntsman and forester , who has the fear of God before him , leads , even in these degenerate times , an admirable and happy life . 
Something is yet left to him of that fine old state of liberty , when the habits of men were according to nature , and they knew nothing of all that conventional artifice , parade , and frippery , wherewith they are now tormented in their walled-up garrisons and cities . 
There , indeed , they become totally estranged from all those delightful influences which God , in the midst of his works in this world , is ready to shower upon them , by which , on the contrary , they ought to be edified and rejoiced , as the free sylvan people were in former ages , who lived in love and friendship with nature , as we read in the old histories . '' 
All this -LRB- though his style was somewhat rambling and methodistic -RRB- the old forester uttered with a gusto and emphasis , by which one could not fail to perceive that he felt whatever he had said deeply in his own heart ; and I truly envied him his station in life , together with his deeply-grounded quiet moods of mind , to which my own bore so little resemblance , or rather presented so painful a contrast . 
* * * * * In another part of the building , which was of considerable extent , the old man shewed me a small and neatly-fitted-up apartment , in which was a bed , and where I found my luggage already deposited . 
There he left me , with the assurance that the early disturbance in the house would not break my sleep , as I was quite separated from the other inhabitants of the castle , and might rest as long as I chose . 
My breakfast would not be carried in until I rung the bell , or came down stairs to order it . 
He added , that I should not see him again till we met at the dinner-table , as he should set out early with his lads to the forest , and would not return before mid-day . 
I gave myself no farther trouble therefore , but being much fatigued , undressed hastily , and threw myself into bed , where I soon fell into a deep sleep . 
After this , however , I was persecuted by a horrible dream . 
In a manner the most extraordinary , it began with the consciousness of slumber . 
I said to myself , `` Now this is fortunate , that I have fallen asleep so readily ; I shall by this means quite recover from my fatigue , and , for fear of awaking , must only take special care to keep my eyes shut . '' 
Notwithstanding this resolution , it seemed to me as if I must , of necessity , open my eyes , and yet continued at the same time to sleep . 
Then the door of my room opened , and a dark form entered , in whom , to my extreme horror and amazement , I recognised myself in the capuchin habit , with the beard and tonsure ! 
The monk came nearer and nearer to the bed , till he stood leaning over me , and grinned scornfully . 
`` Now , then , '' said he , in a hollow sepulchral voice , and yet with a strange cadence of exultation -- `` now , then , thou shalt come along with me ; we shall mount on the altan -LSB- 2 -RSB- on the roof of the house beside the weather-cock , who will sing us a merry bridal-song , because the owl to-night holds his wedding-feast -- there shall we contend together , and whoever beats the other from the roof of the house is king , and may drink blood ! '' 
-LSB- Footnote 2 : Balcony . -RSB- 
I felt now that the figure seized upon me , and tried to lift me up from the bed . 
Then despair gave me courage , and I exclaimed , `` Thou art not Medardus ! 
-- thou art the devil ! '' 
and as if with the claws of a demon , I grappled at the throat and visage of this detestable spectre . 
But when I did so , it seemed as if my fingers forced their way into empty skeleton sockets , or held only dry withered joints , and the spectre laughed aloud in shrilling tones of scorn and mockery . 
At that moment , as if forcibly roused by some one violently wrenching me about , I awoke ! 
The laughter still continued in the room . 
I raised myself up . 
The morning had broken in bright gleams through the window , and I actually beheld at the table , with his back turned towards me , a figure dressed in the capuchin habit ! 
I was petrified with horror . 
The abominable dream had started into real life ! 
The capuchin tossed and tumbled among the things which lay upon the table , till by accident he turned round , and thereupon I recovered all my courage , for his visage , thank Heaven , was not mine ! 
Certain features , indeed , bore the closest resemblance , but I was in health and vigour ; he was , on the contrary , worn and emaciated , disguised too by an overgrown head of hair , and grizzly black beard . 
Moreover , his eyes rolled and glared with the workings of a thoughtless and vacant delirium . 
I resolved not to give any alarm , but remain quietly on the watch for whatever he might do , and not interrupt him unless he attempted something formidably mischievous , for my stiletto lay near me on the bed , and on that account , together with my superior strength , I could soon be completely master of this intruder . 
He appeared to look at , and to play with , the things that lay upon the table , as a child would do with toys ; especially , he seemed delighted with the red portefeuille , which he turned over and over towards the light of the window , at the same time making strange grimaces , and jumping up like a patient in the dance of St Vitus . 
At last , he found the bottle with the rest of the Devil 's Elixir , which he directly opened and smelt at ; then he seemed to tremble convulsively through every limb . 
He uttered a loud and indescribable cry -- `` He , he , he ! 
-- He , he , he ! '' 
which echoed in faltering reverberations through the room , and passages . 
A clear-toned clock in the house just then struck three -LRB- but the hour must have been much later . -RRB- 
Thereupon , to my great annoyance , he lifted up his voice , and howled as if seized by some horrible torment ; then broke out once more into the same shrill laughter that I had heard in my dream . 
He heaved himself about into the wildest attitudes and caprioles , concluding with a long draught from the bottle with the Devil 's Elixir , which -LRB- after having exhausted the last drops -RRB- he then hurled from him against the wall , and ran out at the door . 
I now instantly rose up and looked after him , but he was already out of sight , and I heard him clamping and clattering down a distant staircase ; and , lastly , the violent hollow clank of a door , as he closed it after him . 
I then carefully locked and bolted that of my own room , that I might be secured against any second intrusion , and threw myself once more into bed . 
I had been too much excited to be able for some time to sleep again ; but at last slumber fell heavily upon me , and I did not awake till a late hour , when , refreshed and strengthened , I found the bright warm sun beating into my apartment . 
Having dressed , I found a bell in the corridor , which I rung , to give notice that I was awake . 
The forester , according to what he had said , had gone out early with his huntsmen ; but a very blooming , and indeed beautiful girl , his youngest daughter , appeared , and served me with breakfast , while her elder sister , as she told me , was busied with her mother in household concerns . 
The girl was frank and unembarrassed . 
She described to me , very prettily , how the inhabitants of the forst-haus all lived on the best terms together , and that only now and then , their usual quiet routine was interrupted when the Prince came to hunt in this district , who on such occasions frequently staid through the night with the forester . 
* * * * * Thus a few hours glided away . 
Then it was mid-day , and the mirthful sounds of shouting and bugle-horns announced that the forester was on his return . 
He appeared soon after , attended by his four sons , -LRB- of whom the youngest was about fifteen , -RRB- all blooming , handsome young men , and three servants . 
They were all dressed uniformly , in dark green and gold , with complete accoutrements for the chasse . 
The forester directly inquired how I had rested in the night , and if the early alarm in the court had not awoke me . 
I did not like to relate to him the adventure which had befallen me ; for the living appearance of the horrible monk had joined itself so closely to the phantom of my dream , that I could scarcely distinguish that point at which the vision had passed onwards into reality . 
The long oak table was spread . 
Two large dishes smoked at head and foot ; -- the old man took off his cap in order to say grace . 
Then the door suddenly burst open , and the emaciated , grizzly capuchin , habited precisely as I had seen him in the night , marched in . 
The wildness of insanity had indeed somewhat relaxed upon his visage ; but he still looked gloomy , discontented , and scowled around him . 
`` Welcome , reverend sir , '' cried the forester . 
`` You are come in good time . 
Do you say grace for me , and then take your place with us at the dinner-table . '' 
Hereupon the monk 's eyes kindled with furious rage ; -- he looked wildly on every one ; and , in a frightful tone , cried out , `` May the devil fetch you , with your reverend sirs , and your damned hypocritical graces ! 
Have you enticed me hither , in order that I might be the thirteenth , and that you might allow me to be butchered by the strange murderer ? 
Have you stuck me into this tunic , that no one might recognise the Count , who is thy lord and master ? 
But beware , thou miscreant ! 
-- beware of my just anger ! '' 
With these words , the monk seized a heavy earthen bottle , which stood upon the table , and hurled it at the old man , who , only by his professional quickness of eye , and a very clever turn of his head , escaped the blow , which otherwise must have been his instant destruction . 
At that moment , the three servants started up , seized the madman , and pinioned his arms . 
`` What ! '' 
cried the forester , `` thou cursed , blasphemous wretch , is it thus that , with thy old bedlamite pranks , thou venturest to come into the society of honest Christians ? 
Thou venturest again to aim against my life -- against me , by whom thou wert raised from the condition of the beasts of the field , and from the certainty of everlasting perdition ? 
-- Away -- away with thee to prison ! '' 
The monk now fell upon his knees . 
He prayed -- even wept -- moaned , and howled for mercy . 
But in vain . 
`` Thou must and shalt go to prison , '' said the forester ; `` and never shalt thou dare to come hither again , until such time as I know that thou hast renounced the Satan that thus blinds thee ; and if not , thou shalt die ! '' 
Hereupon the maniac shrieked out in the hopeless agony of grief . 
He was seized , however , and led away by the huntsmen , who , returning soon afterwards , announced to us , that he had become quieter as soon as he was deposited in his dungeon . 
They added , that Christian , who generally watched over him , had said , that the monk , through the whole preceding night , had been restless , and tumbling about through the walks and corridors of the castle ; and that , more especially towards the morning , he had been heard often to exclaim -- `` More wine , and I will give myself up wholly to thee ! 
-- More wine -- more wine ! '' 
Besides , it had seemed to Christian as if the man absolutely rolled about like a drunken person , though it was impossible for him to conceive how he could have got at any kind of intoxicating liquor . 
Now , therefore , I of course did not any longer hesitate to relate my adventures of the night ; nor did I forget the circumstance of his drinking out of my basket-bottle . 
`` Ha , worthy sir , '' said the forester , `` I owe you indeed many apologies . 
You must have been cruelly disturbed . 
But you seem a pious good man , and therefore courageous . 
Another might have absolutely died of terror . '' 
I begged him to tell me , somewhat minutely , what was the real history of his connection with the monk . 
`` At another opportunity , sir , if you please , '' said the forester ; `` it is too long a narrative to begin during dinner ; and indeed it is bad enough that this abominable man has disturbed us in such manner just as we were about to enjoy , gratefully and tranquilly , that which the goodness of God bestows upon us . 
However , let us lose no farther time . '' 
Thereupon he took off his hat , and said the grace , with much emphasis and devotion . 
The conversation became animated and cheerful , as if nothing had happened ; -- the dishes , though served in a rustic style , were plentiful , and admirably cooked ; so that I had never partaken of a more refreshing and agreeable repast . 
There were excellent strong soup , and boiled meat ; afterwards , a course of venison and other game , prepared in different ways , -LRB- of which I preferred the sour braten , -RRB- salmon , etc. . 
In honour of his guest , the old man produced some bottles of noble old wine , which was drunk , according to patriarchal custom , out of a magnificent goblet , and passed round the table . 
While the wine thus went round , the dishes were cleared away . 
The huntsmen then took their bugle-horns from the wall , and , by way of concert , blew a loud , inspiring jager-lied ; -LSB- 3 -RSB- first without accompaniment , but , at the second repetition , they blew more softly , and the girls joined in with very sweet voices . 
Then , at the third and concluding part , the forester 's four sons also joined , and finished the performance with a grand chorus . 
-LSB- Footnote 3 : Hunting-song . -RSB- 
My heart was in a wonderful degree lightened and expanded . 
For a long period , I had not felt myself in so genial a mood of mind as now , among these honest , simple-hearted people . 
There were afterwards many songs , very musically and effectively given , by the girls , assisted by the young men , till at last the forester rose up , and with the toast , `` Long life to all brave men who love the noble art of hunting , '' he emptied his glass . 
We all followed his example ; and thus the agreeable banquet , which , on my account , had been enlivened with wine and with song , was concluded . 
`` Now , sir , '' said the forester , `` I shall sleep for half an hour , or thereabouts ; but after that , we go once more to the wood ; and if you are pleased to accompany us , I shall , on the way , relate to you how the monk came to my house , and all that I know of him . 
We must wait till the twilight , however . 
Then we go to our appointed station , where Franz has informed me , that there are a noble covey of partridges . 
You shall have a gun also , if it is agreeable to you , and try your fortune . '' 
The thing was new to me ; for though I had , as a seminarist , many times practised shooting at a mark , yet I had never tried at living game . 
I therefore accepted the forester 's offer , who appeared quite delighted that I did so ; and even before going to sleep , instructed me in various rules and precautions , by means of which he thought that I would make sure of booty . 
Accordingly , I was in due time accoutred with a huntsman 's bag , and a fowling-piece slung over my shoulder , and , in company with the old man , marched away through the woods , while , in the following manner , he began the story of the monk . 
`` This harvest , it must be now about six months since , my lads first announced that they heard oftentimes a tremendous howling in the forest , which , though the noise could not well be called human , yet my Franz always insisted it must be the voice of a man . 
Francis , indeed , seemed to be particularly aimed at , as the butt or prey of this howling spectre , for , when he went to a good station , the howling always frightened away the game ; and , at last , whenever he wanted to shoot at a deer or hare , he saw a large bristly human monster burst out of the thicket , against whom he did not venture to draw the trigger . 
`` This youth had his head full of all the ghostly hunting legends which his father , an old chasseur , had related to him ; -- and he was inclined to hold that strange intruder for the devil himself , who wanted to destroy his sport , or entice him to destruction . 
`` The other lads , -- even my own sons , to whom also the same devil had appeared , -- at last joined with Francis , and my desire to obtain an explanation of all this mystery , was so much the greater , as I held it for a contrivance of the poachers , to frighten away my people from the proper covers . 
`` Consequently , I gave strict orders that the next time they met with the devil , they should stop and question him ; and if he would not answer , they should , without hesitation , according to the rules of the forest , shoot him dead on the spot . 
`` Francis happened once more to be the first who encountered him . 
-- Recollecting my orders , he commanded him to stand , at the same time presenting his fowling-piece -- Thereupon the spectre rushed away into the thicket ; Francis thought to send a thundering shot after him , but the gun missed fire ; and now looking on this as supernatural , he ran homewards more horrified than ever . 
Of course , he told every adventure of this kind to his companions , who became all convinced that it was the devil who thus , frighted away the game , and frustrated his attempts in shooting -- for it was quite true , that ever since he was persecuted by this demon , he had killed nothing , though , before that time , he had been an excellent and successful marksman . 
`` The rumour of the devil being in our wood spread itself abroad , and in the nearest village the people had got long stories , how Satan had come to Francis , and offered him freikügeln , -LRB- enchanted balls , -RRB- with a deal of other absurd nonsense . 
I resolved , therefore , that I would myself make an end of all this , and watch at the places where he was usually found , for the monster , who had hitherto never once appeared to me . 
`` For a long time , my endeavours were unsuccessful , but at length , when I was at the station where he had first appeared to Francis , there was heard a rustling in the thickets -- softly I raised up my gun , expecting a wild boar , or some other animal , but to my utter astonishment , there started up a horrible human figure , with flaming red eyes , bristly black hair , and his body hung -LRB- I can not say clothed -RRB- with rags . 
-- The spectre glared on me with his fiery eyes -- uttering at the same time the tremendous howlings , which had been before now so faithfully described to me . 
`` In truth , sir , that was a moment which might have inspired terror even into the most courageous heart . 
I must confess I thought it was the devil who thus stood visibly before me , -- and felt a cold sweat involuntarily burst from every pore -- But in a powerful energetic prayer , which I uttered aloud , I completely recovered my courage . 
While I thus prayed , and pronounced audibly the name of Christ , the monster howled more outrageously than ever , and at last broke out into horrible blasphemies and execrations . 
`` Then I cried out -- ` Thou cursed , wicked , lubberly fellow , desist from these blasphemous words , and resign thyself into my power , otherwise I shall instantly shoot thee through the head ! ' 
`` Hereupon , with moans and lamentations , the man instantly fell upon the earth before me , and prayed for compassion . 
My servants came up -- we seized the wretch , and led him home , where I shut him up in the prison of the tower , at the corner of the court , and next morning I intended to give notice of what had happened to the magistrates . 
`` As soon as he came into the tower , he had fallen into a state of almost utter insensibility . 
-- When I went to him next morning , he was sitting on a bed of straw , which we had prepared for him , and wept violently . 
He fell at my feet , and begged that I would take compassion on him . 
-- He told me that he had already lived several weeks in the woods , eating nothing but roots and wild fruit . 
He was a poor Capuchin from a distant convent , and had escaped out of the prison , in which , on account of his madness , he had been shut up . 
`` The man was , to say the truth , in a most miserable condition -- I had compassion upon him , and desired that food and wine should be administered for his restoration , after which he visibly recovered . 
He begged of me in the most earnest and abject manner , that I would bear with him for a few days in the house , and that I would , if possible , get him a new dress of his order . 
He would then alone , and of his own accord , walk back to his convent . 
`` I complied with his wishes , and his madness seemed visibly to leave him . 
The paroxysms were more rare , and far less vehement . 
In the exasperations of his madness he uttered horrible cries , and I observed , that when on this account I spoke to him harshly , and threatened him with death , he fell into a state of almost utter annihilation , threw himself on the earth , chastised himself with a knotted rope , and called on God and the Saints , to free him from the torments and terrors of hell which awaited him . 
`` At such intervals he seemed to look on himself as St Anthony , and at other times , in his violent paroxysms , affirmed that he was an herrgraf , and supreme Prince , adding , that he would have us all put to death as soon as his servants appeared to rescue him . 
`` In his lucid moments , he begged of me for God 's sake not to turn him out of this house , as he felt that his cure depended on his residence with me . 
Only once I had another disagreeable adventure with him , and , as luck would have it , it befell just at the time when the Prince was hunting in our forest , and spent the night in my house . 
`` The monk , after he had beheld the Prince with his brilliant train of attendants , was completely changed . 
He remained gloomy and reserved . 
When we went as usual to prayers , he retired abruptly . 
If he heard even a word uttered in the spirit of devotion , there was a trembling through all his limbs , and at the same time , he looked on my daughter Anne with an aspect so strange and ambiguous , that I resolved to get him directly away from the house , in order to prevent all sorts of misdemeanours , which of necessity would ensue . 
`` In the course of the very night preceding the day on which I had intended to pack him off , I was alarmed about one o'clock by a piercing cry , which vibrated along the corridor . 
I sprung out of bed , got a light , and ran towards the room where my daughters slept . 
The monk had contrived to break from the dungeon in which I always kept him shut up , and giving the reins to his abominable impulses , had betaken himself directly to the door of my daughters ' room , which he had burst in with his foot . 
`` By good luck , the lad Francis had been awoke by extreme thirst , and was going to get water in the court , when he heard the monk 's heavy step in the corridor . 
He ran up to him accordingly , and seized him from behind , just at the moment when he was entering the room ; but the lad was too weak to get the better of the madman . 
They wrestled together , and both fell out of the room again into the corridor , the girls , meanwhile , screaming loudly . 
`` Just at this time I came up . 
The monk had got Francis on the ground , and was grappling him by the throat in such a manner that he would very soon have made an end of his victim . 
Without losing a moment , therefore , I seized the maniac , and tore him away . 
Then suddenly , before I could understand how he could accomplish it , I saw a knife gleaming in his clenched hand , with which he directly struck at me ; but Francis , who had now recovered , seized his arm , and , as I am a strong man , we succeeded in pinning the wretched man to the wall , in such manner , that his breath was almost squeezed out of his body . 
`` The noise had by that time roused all my people from their sleep , and they came running to the spot . 
We bound the monk with ropes , and threw him into the tower ; then I brought a horse-whip , and inflicted on him such a castigation , that he sobbed and moaned most lamentably . '' 
` Thou incorrigible miscreant ! ' 
said I , ` this is all far too little for thy deserts . 
Thou , who wouldst have seduced my daughter , and hast , with thy knife , aimed at the life of thy preserver , were I to do justice , death itself would be too little for thee ! ' 
`` Hereupon he howled aloud with horror ; for the apprehension of death seemed always quite to annihilate him . 
The following morning we found that he could not be removed ; for he lay there as if dead , in the most miserable depression and exhaustion , so that involuntarily I could not help once more taking compassion upon him . 
`` Consequently I made a bed be prepared for him in a better apartment , where my wife nursed him with strong soups , and gave him from our domestic dispensary whatever drugs were requisite . 
Moreover , you must know , sir , that my wife , when alone , has the good Christian habit of singing to herself some pious hymn or favourite anthem , in which she sometimes desires my daughter Anne to join with her . 
This happened to take place several times near the bed of the sick man . 
Then he began to sigh heavily , and to look at my wife and Anne with an aspect of the deepest melancholy , and frequently tears forced their way over his cheeks . 
Sometimes he moved his hand and fingers as if he would cross himself ; but could not succeed in it , his hand fell down powerless ; many times , too , he uttered low and imperfect tones , as if he were about to join in the anthem ; in short , he began perceptibly to recover . 
`` Then , according to monastic habits , he crossed himself very often , and prayed in a low voice . 
At last he began to sing Latin songs , the words of which my wife and daughter , of course , did not understand ; but their music , their admirably deep , solemn cadence , penetrated so deeply into their hearts , that they could not express how much they had been , by the sick man 's conduct , moved and edified . 
`` The monk was now so far recovered , that he rose from bed , and could walk about the house ; but his appearance , and whole manner were completely changed . 
His eyes now looked mild and tranquil , whereas before they had gleamed with a malicious fire . 
According to conventual rules , he now walked about softly , and with clasped hands , in an attitude of constant devotion . 
Every trace of madness had vanished from his aspect and conduct . 
He would take nothing for food , but vegetables , bread , and water . 
It was only of late that I had forced him to sit at my table ; to eat our ordinary provisions , and to allow himself , now and then , a small draught of wine . 
At these times he said grace , and we were delighted with his discourse , which was often unusually eloquent . 
`` Frequently he went alone , walking through the woods , where it chanced that I met him one day , and , without attaching much importance to the question , I asked him whether he now thought of returning to his convent . 
He seemed much affected . 
` My friend , ' said he , ` it is to you that I am indebted , under Heaven , for the rescue of my soul . 
You have saved me from eternal destruction . 
Even now I can not bear to part with you ; let me , therefore , remain here . 
Alas ! 
have compassion on me , whom the devil has thus enticed and misled , and who would have been for ever lost , if the guardian saint , to whom he yet prayed in hours of terror , had not brought him , in his madness , to this forest . '' 
` You found me , ' continued the monk , after a short pause , ` in a condition altogether depraved , and therefore can not have guessed that I was once a promising youth , gifted by nature with many excellent endowments ; whom nothing but an enthusiastic love of solitude , and of deep meditation , led to a convent . 
My brethren there all looked on me with regard and affection , and I lived as happily as any one within the walls of a cloister can possibly do . 
By piety and exemplary conduct I gained a high reputation , and already people beheld in me the future prior . '' 
` It happened , unfortunately for me , that one of the brethren returned home from distant travels , and brought with him to our convent various relics , which he had carefully collected on his journey . 
Among them was an extraordinary sealed-up bottle , which , it was said , St Anthony had one time taken from the devil . 
This relic was , like all the rest , preserved with great reverence , though there appeared to me something in the nature of it wholly opposite to the true spirit of devotion , and indeed ludicrous and absurd . 
However , by commencing in this manner , my attention was gradually directed more and more to the subject , till at last an indescribable longing took possession of me to know what was actually in the bottle . 
I succeeded at last in getting it into my possession , opened it , and found therein a strong drink , which exhaled a very delightful perfume , and tasted very sweetly , and which , therefore , I drank out , even to the last drops . '' 
` In what manner my spirit and disposition were now at once wholly changed , -- how I felt a burning thirst for the pleasures of the world , -- how vice , in seductive form , appeared to me as the very highest object of pursuit in this life , I can only hint at , but can not adequately describe . 
In short , my life became a continued chain of shameful crimes , till at last , notwithstanding my devilish artifice and cunning , I was betrayed to the prior , who , accordingly , sentenced me to perpetual imprisonment in the dungeons of the convent . '' 
` When I had passed several weeks in a damp dark prison , I cursed myself and my existence -- I blasphemed God and the Saints . 
Thereupon the devil came to me in a glowing atmosphere of red flame , and said to me , that if I would turn away my soul wholly and utterly from the service of the Most High , and swear allegiance to him alone , he would set me directly at liberty . 
Howling , I fell upon my knees , and cried out , ` There is no God whom I serve ! 
-- Thou alone art my master ; and from the fervour of thy fire stream forth all the pleasures and enjoyments of this life ! ' '' 
` Scarcely had I uttered these wild words , when there arose a roaring wind like a hurricane , and my prison walls groaned and cracked , as if agitated by an earthquake . 
An indescribable voice , like the piping shrill tone of the wind in autumn , vibrated through the air . 
The iron bars of the window fell down , broken into fragments ; and , hurled out by some invisible power , I found myself standing in the court of the convent . '' 
` At that moment the moon gleamed clear and powerful through the clouds , and in her light shone above me the statue of St Anthony , which was erected at a fountain in the middle of the court . 
An inexpressible horror now seized on me ; my frame shook with the agony of conscious guilt . 
I threw myself prostrate and annihilated before the Saint , renounced the devil , and prayed for mercy . 
But then dark clouds rose up into the sky , and again the hurricane roared around me . 
My senses were lost , and I recovered myself , for the first time , in the forest , where I raged about , delirious with hunger and despair , out of which situation you rescued me . ' 
* * * * * `` Such , '' continued the forester , `` was the Capuchin 's story , and it made upon me an impression so deep , that , even after the lapse of many months , I am able thus to repeat it , word for word . 
Since that time the monk has behaved himself with so much piety and consistency , that we all conceived an affection for him ; and on this account it is to me the more inexplicable how his madness during the last night should have broken out so violently again . '' 
`` Do you not know , then , '' said I , `` from what Capuchin convent the fugitive has come ? '' 
`` He has been silent on that head , '' said the forester ; `` and I am the less inclined to ask him regarding it , because it is probable this may be the same unhappy man , who , not long ago , was a constant subject of discourse at our Prince 's court . 
Yet there was no knowledge of his being in this neighbourhood ; and for the monk 's sake , I by no means wished that my suspicions should be changed into conviction , as I should then have been compelled to announce the truth at the residenz . '' 
`` But I at least may hear your suspicions , '' said I ; `` for , being a stranger , I am not involved in the consequences ; besides , I shall solemnly promise not to repeat what you may communicate . '' 
`` You must know , then , '' said the forester , `` that the sister of our reigning Princess is Abbess of the Cistertian Convent at Kreuzberg . 
The Abbess had taken under her care the son of a poor woman , -LRB- betwixt whose husband and our Prince 's family some mysterious connection subsisted , -RRB- and provided for his support and education . 
By his own desire , he became a Capuchin monk , and acquired , as a pulpit orator , great reputation . 
The Abbess frequently wrote to her sister in praise of her chosen eléve ; but not long ago her style on this subject became completely changed , and she deeply deplored that she had irrecoverably lost him . 
It was rumoured that , on account of the misuse of a certain relic , he had been banished from that convent , of which he had been so long the chief ornament . 
All this I learned from a conversation of the Prince 's physician with another gentleman of the court , at which I happened , not long ago , to be present . 
They mentioned some other very remarkable circumstances , which , however , have escaped me , as I did not hear the whole distinctly , and durst not trouble them with questions . 
I am , therefore , not prepared on all particulars of the story , which in part remains to me inexplicable . 
`` Yet , though the monk , who is now in our house , describes his leaving the monastery in a different manner , this may be the work of his own imagination . 
He may have dreamed all that he tells about his escape ; and , in short , I am persuaded that this monk is no other than Brother Medardus , the Capuchin , whom the Prioress educated , and whom the devil enticed to all sorts of crimes , until Heaven at last punished him with the infliction of utter insanity . '' 
When the forester pronounced the name of Medardus , my whole frame violently shook , nay , the story throughout had even , physically and corporeally , tormented me , so that at every word I felt almost as if daggers were piercing to my heart ; and it was with great difficulty that I prevented my agitation from being observed by my companion . 
I felt convinced that the monk had spoken only the truth , both with regard to the relic and direct agency of the devil ; nay , that it could have been nothing else but a repetition of the same infernal drink that had now renewed in him this horrible delirium . 
But my own situation had again become degraded . 
I found myself more and more confirmed into the mere plaything of that mysterious and malicious destiny , which had so effectually wrapt its indissoluble toils around me , so that , while I madly believed myself free , I was , in truth , only beating about , like a captive bird in a cage , within barriers , from which I could find no outlet . 
The good and pious lessons of my old friend Cyrillus , on which I had bestowed no attention ; the appearance of the young Count and his volatile tutor , all came back on my memory . 
I was now clearly instructed whence had proceeded that sudden alteration which I had experienced both in mind and body . 
I was utterly ashamed of the delusions to which I had been subjected , and of my criminal conduct . 
But , alas ! 
this shame , which was the emotion of a selfish worldling , rather than a penitent , appeared to me at the moment as equivalent to the deep repentance , the self-annihilation which I ought in my inmost heart to have felt and cherished . 
Thus I had sunk into deep reflection , and scarcely listened to the old man , who once more recurred to his hunting stories , describing to me various adventures which he had encountered with poachers , etc. etc. . 
The twilight had now drawn on , and at last we stood opposite to the covert in which it was said that there were black game or partridges . 
The forester placed me in a proper station and attitude , admonished me once more that I was not to speak nor move , but , with the utmost care , to hold my gun on the cock , and ready to fire . 
The huntsmen softly glided away to their several places , and I was left standing alone in the dim light , which always became more obscure . 
Seldom have I known visions more strange than what arose to my bewildered senses at that moment . 
Forms and features , imagery and adventures out of my past life , stept out vividly , like the illusions of a phantasmagorie , amid the gloom of the dark forest , before me . 
Among them were visions even of my earliest years . 
I beheld alternately my mother and the Abbess . 
They looked at me with a severe and reproving aspect . 
Euphemia , too , habited in luxurious splendour , came floating and rustling up , as if to salute me . 
But her visage was deadly pale , and I liked not the gleam of her darkly-glaring eyes . 
I shrunk , therefore , from her proffered embrace , whereupon she lifted up her hands , in a threatening attitude , against me . 
`` They are steeped in blood , '' cried I , `` that drops reeking to the earth . 
They are died in the life-blood from Hermogen 's wounds ! '' 
Instantly , as I uttered aloud these delirious words , there came over my head a great whirring of wings , so that by the noise I was quite stunned and confounded . 
It was a large covey of partridges . 
I directly put my gun to my shoulder , and shot , blindfold and at random , into the air , whereupon two birds fell directly to the ground . 
`` Bravo ! '' 
cried one of the huntsmen , who had been standing at a short distance , while at the same moment , as the stragglers of the covey started up , he fired , and brought down a third partridge . 
Shots afterwards reverberated all round us . 
The air was filled with smoke , and the chasseurs at last assembled , every one bearing his own proper booty . 
The lad to whom I had been stationed nearest , related , not without sly side-looks at me , how , when the partridges rose on the wing , I had cried out aloud , as if in great affright , and then , without once taking aim , had shot blindly into the midst of them , though he was obliged to allow , that I had at the same time killed two birds . 
Nay , he insisted that , in the twilight , it had appeared to him as if I held the gun in a direction totally wrong ; yet the birds were struck , by which result he seemed to have been brought into great perplexity . 
The old forester was mightily diverted , and laughed aloud at the notion that I could be frightened in such manner by a covey of partridges , and that I had then only shot at random among them . 
`` However , '' added he , `` I shall nevertheless trust that you are an honest Christian hunter , and no freischutz -- no devil 's marksman -- who can hit whatever he likes , whether he aims at it or not . '' 
This unpremeditated jest of the old man struck my inmost heart , and even the good luck attending my random shot , at that moment filled me with horror . 
More than ever discontented , and torn by conflicting impulses , I became wholly involved in doubt and mystery , which , by their destructive influence , continued to darken my whole existence . 
* * * * * On our return to the forst-haus , Christian announced that the monk had kept himself quite quiet in his prison , had not spoken a word , and would not accept of any nourishment . 
`` It is impossible now , '' said the forester , `` that he can remain any longer with me ; for who can say that his madness , which is obviously incurable , might not break out again , and , in consequence , some horrible misfortune be brought upon our house ? 
To-morrow , therefore , he must , as early as possible , be sent off with Christian into the town . 
The deposition that I thought it best to draw up , as to my whole adventures with him , has been long since ready , and in town he may be at once taken to the mad-house . '' 
* * * * * This night , when I was again left alone in my chamber , the same frightful visions that had haunted me in the wood , once more regained their full influence . 
More especially Hermogen , like a horrible ghastly spectre , stood , in the dimness of the half-lighted room , before me , and when mustering courage to dare the worst , I tried to look fixedly on the apparition , it was changed into that of the delirious monk . 
Both seemed , according to my confused perceptions , to be melted into one , and thus perhaps impersonized the warning influence of a higher power , which interposed to save me just as I stood upon the very brink of destruction . 
While undressing , I stumbled over the basket-bottle , which still lay upon the floor . 
The monk had drained it even to the last drops ; thus I was protected completely from any temptation to drink more . 
But even the bottle itself , from which there exhaled a strong stupifying odour , I hurled away through the open window , over the wall of the court , in order to annihilate at once every operation of this damnable Elixir . 
By degrees I became more tranquil , and found at last some consolation in the belief , that in point of intellect , I must be greatly elevated over that monk , who , by a scanty draught out of my bottle , had been roused into furious madness . 
I felt also that the present dangers had passed over me , for the forester believed that his maniac monk was the Capuchin Medardus ; and , from all this , I inferred the favourable warning of Providence , whose purpose it was not that I should utterly perish . 
* * * * * Irresistibly I felt myself drawn towards the Prince 's residenz . 
