What would she not have given to bring back even a single day of that time ! 
But it was gone forever . 
Her presentiment at the time had not deceived her -- that that state of freedom and readiness for any enjoyment would not return again . 
Yet it was necessary to live on . 
It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly imagined , but worse , much worse , than anybody else in the world . 
But this was not enough . 
She knew that , and asked herself , `` What next ? '' 
But there was nothing to come . 
There was no joy in life , yet life was passing . 
Natasha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to anyone , but wanted nothing for herself . 
She kept away from everyone in the house and felt at ease only with her brother Petya . 
She liked to be with him better than with the others , and when alone with him she sometimes laughed . 
She hardly ever left the house and of those who came to see them was glad to see only one person , Pierre . 
It would have been impossible to treat her with more delicacy , greater care , and at the same time more seriously than did Count Bezukhov . 
Natasha unconsciously felt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society . 
But she was not even grateful to him for it ; nothing good on Pierre 's part seemed to her to be an effort , it seemed so natural for him to be kind to everyone that there was no merit in his kindness . 
Sometimes Natasha noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence , especially when he wanted to do something to please her , or feared that something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her . 
She noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness , which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her . 
After those involuntary words -- that if he were free he would have asked on his knees for her hand and her love -- uttered at a moment when she was so strongly agitated , Pierre never spoke to Natasha of his feelings ; and it seemed plain to her that those words , which had then so comforted her , were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoken to comfort a crying child . 
It was not because Pierre was a married man , but because Natasha felt very strongly with him that moral barrier the absence of which she had experienced with Kuragin that it never entered her head that the relations between him and herself could lead to love on her part , still less on his , or even to the kind of tender , self-conscious , romantic friendship between a man and a woman of which she had known several instances . 
Before the end of the fast of St. Peter , Agrafena Ivanovna Belova , a country neighbor of the Rostovs , came to Moscow to pay her devotions at the shrines of the Moscow saints . 
She suggested that Natasha should fast and prepare for Holy Communion , and Natasha gladly welcomed the idea . 
Despite the doctor 's orders that she should not go out early in the morning , Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for the sacrament , not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostov family by attending three services in their own house , but as Agrafena Ivanovna did , by going to church every day for a week and not once missing Vespers , Matins , or Mass. . 
The countess was pleased with Natasha 's zeal ; after the poor results of the medical treatment , in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer might help her daughter more than medicines and , though not without fear and concealing it from the doctor , she agreed to Natasha 's wish and entrusted her to Belova . 
Agrafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natasha at three in the morning , but generally found her already awake . 
She was afraid of being late for Matins . 
Hastily washing , and meekly putting on her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla , Natasha , shivering in the fresh air , went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn . 
By Agrafena Ivanovna 's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their own parish , but at a church where , according to the devout Agrafena Ivanovna , the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life . 
There were never many people in the church ; Natasha always stood beside Belova in the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin , let into the screen before the choir on the left side , and a feeling , new to her , of humility before something great and incomprehensible , seized her when at that unusual morning hour , gazing at the dark face of the Virgin illuminated by the candles burning before it and by the morning light falling from the window , she listened to the words of the service which she tried to follow with understanding . 
When she understood them her personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its own . 
When she did not understand , it was sweeter still to think that the wish to understand everything is pride , that it is impossible to understand all , that it is only necessary to believe and to commit oneself to God , whom she felt guiding her soul at those moments . 
She crossed herself , bowed low , and when she did not understand , in horror at her own vileness , simply asked God to forgive her everything , everything , to have mercy upon her . 
The prayers to which she surrendered herself most of all were those of repentance . 
On her way home at an early hour when she met no one but bricklayers going to work or men sweeping the street , and everybody within the houses was still asleep , Natasha experienced a feeling new to her , a sense of the possibility of correcting her faults , the possibility of a new , clean life , and of happiness . 
During the whole week she spent in this way , that feeling grew every day . 
And the happiness of taking communion , or `` communing '' as Agrafena Ivanovna , joyously playing with the word , called it , seemed to Natasha so great that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday . 
But the happy day came , and on that memorable Sunday , when , dressed in white muslin , she returned home after communion , for the first time for many months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the life that lay before her . 
The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously . 
`` She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening , '' said he , evidently sincerely satisfied with his success . 
`` Only , please be particular about it . 
`` Be quite easy , '' he continued playfully , as he adroitly took the gold coin in his palm . 
`` She will soon be singing and frolicking about . 
The last medicine has done her a very great deal of good . 
She has freshened up very much . '' 
The countess , with a cheerful expression on her face , looked down at her nails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room . 
At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the war began to spread in Moscow ; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to the people , and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow . 
And as up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received , exaggerated reports became current about them and about the position of Russia . 
It was said that the Emperor was leaving the army because it was in danger , it was said that Smolensk had surrendered , that Napoleon had an army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia . 
On the eleventh of July , which was Saturday , the manifesto was received but was not yet in print , and Pierre , who was at the Rostovs ' , promised to come to dinner next day , Sunday , and bring a copy of the manifesto and appeal , which he would obtain from Count Rostopchin . 
That Sunday , the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis ' private chapel as usual . 
It was a hot July day . 
Even at ten o'clock , when the Rostovs got out of their carriage at the chapel , the sultry air , the shouts of hawkers , the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd , the dusty leaves of the trees on the boulevard , the sounds of the band and the white trousers of a battalion marching to parade , the rattling of wheels on the cobblestones , and the brilliant , hot sunshine were all full of that summer languor , that content and discontent with the present , which is most strongly felt on a bright , hot day in town . 
All the Moscow notabilities , all the Rostovs ' acquaintances , were at the Razumovskis ' chapel , for , as if expecting something to happen , many wealthy families who usually left town for their country estates had not gone away that summer . 
As Natasha , at her mother 's side , passed through the crowd behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them , she heard a young man speaking about her in too loud a whisper . 
`` That 's Rostova , the one who ... '' `` She 's much thinner , but all the same she 's pretty ! '' 
She heard , or thought she heard , the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski . 
But she was always imagining that . 
It always seemed to her that everyone who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened to her . 
With a sinking heart , wretched as she always was now when she found herself in a crowd , Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace walked -- as women can walk -- with the more repose and stateliness the greater the pain and shame in her soul . 
She knew for certain that she was pretty , but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to . 
On the contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late , and particularly so on this bright , hot summer day in town . 
`` It 's Sunday again -- another week past , '' she thought , recalling that she had been here the Sunday before , `` and always the same life that is no life , and the same surroundings in which it used to be so easy to live . 
I 'm pretty , I 'm young , and I know that now I am good . 
I used to be bad , but now I know I am good , '' she thought , `` but yet my best years are slipping by and are no good to anyone . '' 
She stood by her mother 's side and exchanged nods with acquaintances near her . 
From habit she scrutinized the ladies ' dresses , condemned the bearing of a lady standing close by who was not crossing herself properly but in a cramped manner , and again she thought with vexation that she was herself being judged and was judging others , and suddenly , at the sound of the service , she felt horrified at her own vileness , horrified that the former purity of her soul was again lost to her . 
A comely , fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with that mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the souls of the worshipers . 
The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed , the curtain was slowly drawn , and from behind it a soft mysterious voice pronounced some words . 
Tears , the cause of which she herself did not understand , made Natasha 's breast heave , and a joyous but oppressive feeling agitated her . 
`` Teach me what I should do , how to live my life , how I may grow good forever , forever ! '' 
she pleaded . 
The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and , holding his thumb extended , drew his long hair from under his dalmatic and , making the sign of the cross on his breast , began in a loud and solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer ... `` In peace let us pray unto the Lord . '' 
`` As one community , without distinction of class , without enmity , united by brotherly love -- let us pray ! '' 
thought Natasha . 
`` For the peace that is from above , and for the salvation of our souls . '' 
`` For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us , '' prayed Natasha . 
When they prayed for the warriors , she thought of her brother and Denisov . 
When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea , she remembered Prince Andrew , prayed for him , and asked God to forgive her all the wrongs she had done him . 
When they prayed for those who love us , she prayed for the members of her own family , her father and mother and Sonya , realizing for the first time how wrongly she had acted toward them , and feeling all the strength of her love for them . 
When they prayed for those who hate us , she tried to think of her enemies and people who hated her , in order to pray for them . 
She included among her enemies the creditors and all who had business dealings with her father , and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her she remembered Anatole who had done her so much harm -- and though he did not hate her she gladly prayed for him as for an enemy . 
Only at prayer did she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole , as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe and devotion to God . 
When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod , she bowed very low and made the sign of the cross , saying to herself that even if she did not understand , still she could not doubt , and at any rate loved the governing Synod and prayed for it . 
When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his breast and said , `` Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ the Lord ! '' 
`` Commit ourselves to God , '' Natasha inwardly repeated . 
`` Lord God , I submit myself to Thy will ! '' 
she thought . 
`` I want nothing , wish for nothing ; teach me what to do and how to use my will ! 
Take me , take me ! '' 
prayed Natasha , with impatient emotion in her heart , not crossing herself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting some invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself , from her regrets , desires , remorse , hopes , and sins . 
The countess looked round several times at her daughter 's softened face and shining eyes and prayed God to help her . 
Unexpectedly , in the middle of the service , and not in the usual order Natasha knew so well , the deacon brought out a small stool , the one he knelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday , and placed it before the doors of the sanctuary screen . 
The priest came out with his purple velvet biretta on his head , adjusted his hair , and knelt down with an effort . 
Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in surprise . 
Then came the prayer just received from the Synod -- a prayer for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion . 
`` Lord God of might , God of our salvation ! '' 
began the priest in that voice , clear , not grandiloquent but mild , in which only the Slav clergy read and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart . 
`` Lord God of might , God of our salvation ! 
Look this day in mercy and blessing on Thy humble people , and graciously hear us , spare us , and have mercy upon us ! 
This foe confounding Thy land , desiring to lay waste the whole world , rises against us ; these lawless men are gathered together to overthrow Thy kingdom , to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem , Thy beloved Russia ; to defile Thy temples , to overthrow Thine altars , and to desecrate our holy shrines . 
