And Tikhon , purposely writhing and making faces , pretended to be angry and swore at the French with the funniest curses . 
The only effect of this incident on Tikhon was that after being wounded he seldom brought in prisoners . 
He was the bravest and most useful man in the party . 
No one found more opportunities for attacking , no one captured or killed more Frenchmen , and consequently he was made the buffoon of all the Cossacks and hussars and willingly accepted that role . 
Now he had been sent by Denisov overnight to Shamshevo to capture a `` tongue . '' 
But whether because he had not been content to take only one Frenchman or because he had slept through the night , he had crept by day into some bushes right among the French and , as Denisov had witnessed from above , had been detected by them . 
After talking for some time with the esaul about next day 's attack , which now , seeing how near they were to the French , he seemed to have definitely decided on , Denisov turned his horse and rode back . 
`` Now , my lad , we 'll go and get dwy , '' he said to Petya . 
As they approached the watchhouse Denisov stopped , peering into the forest . 
Among the trees a man with long legs and long , swinging arms , wearing a short jacket , bast shoes , and a Kazan hat , was approaching with long , light steps . 
He had a musketoon over his shoulder and an ax stuck in his girdle . 
When he espied Denisov he hastily threw something into the bushes , removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim , and approached his commander . 
It was Tikhon . 
His wrinkled and pockmarked face and narrow little eyes beamed with self-satisfied merriment . 
He lifted his head high and gazed at Denisov as if repressing a laugh . 
`` Well , where did you disappear to ? '' 
inquired Denisov . 
`` Where did I disappear to ? 
I went to get Frenchmen , '' answered Tikhon boldly and hurriedly , in a husky but melodious bass voice . 
`` Why did you push yourself in there by daylight ? 
You ass ! 
Well , why have n't you taken one ? '' 
`` Oh , I took one all right , '' said Tikhon . 
`` Where is he ? '' 
`` You see , I took him first thing at dawn , '' Tikhon continued , spreading out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes . 
`` I took him into the forest . 
Then I see he 's no good and think I 'll go and fetch a likelier one . '' 
`` You see ? 
... What a wogue -- it 's just as I thought , '' said Denisov to the esaul . 
`` Why did n't you bwing that one ? '' 
`` What was the good of bringing him ? '' 
Tikhon interrupted hastily and angrily -- `` that one would n't have done for you . 
As if I do n't know what sort you want ! '' 
`` What a bwute you are ! 
... Well ? '' 
`` I went for another one , '' Tikhon continued , `` and I crept like this through the wood and lay down . '' 
-LRB- He suddenly lay down on his stomach with a supple movement to show how he had done it . -RRB- 
`` One turned up and I grabbed him , like this . '' 
-LRB- He jumped up quickly and lightly . -RRB- '' 
` Come along to the colonel , ' I said . 
He starts yelling , and suddenly there were four of them . 
They rushed at me with their little swords . 
So I went for them with my ax , this way : ` What are you up to ? ' 
says I. ` Christ be with you ! ' '' 
shouted Tikhon , waving his arms with an angry scowl and throwing out his chest . 
`` Yes , we saw from the hill how you took to your heels through the puddles ! '' 
said the esaul , screwing up his glittering eyes . 
Petya badly wanted to laugh , but noticed that they all refrained from laughing . 
He turned his eyes rapidly from Tikhon 's face to the esaul 's and Denisov 's , unable to make out what it all meant . 
`` Do n't play the fool ! '' 
said Denisov , coughing angrily . 
`` Why did n't you bwing the first one ? '' 
Tikhon scratched his back with one hand and his head with the other , then suddenly his whole face expanded into a beaming , foolish grin , disclosing a gap where he had lost a tooth -LRB- that was why he was called Shcherbaty -- the gap-toothed -RRB- . 
Denisov smiled , and Petya burst into a peal of merry laughter in which Tikhon himself joined . 
`` Oh , but he was a regular good-for-nothing , '' said Tikhon . 
`` The clothes on him -- poor stuff ! 
How could I bring him ? 
And so rude , your honor ! 
Why , he says : ` I 'm a general 's son myself , I wo n't go ! ' 
he says . '' 
`` You are a bwute ! '' 
said Denisov . 
`` I wanted to question ... '' `` But I questioned him , '' said Tikhon . 
`` He said he did n't know much . 
` There are a lot of us , ' he says , ` but all poor stuff -- only soldiers in name , ' he says . 
` Shout loud at them , ' he says , ` and you 'll take them all , ' '' Tikhon concluded , looking cheerfully and resolutely into Denisov 's eyes . 
`` I 'll give you a hundwed sharp lashes -- that 'll teach you to play the fool ! '' 
said Denisov severely . 
`` But why are you angry ? '' 
remonstrated Tikhon , `` just as if I 'd never seen your Frenchmen ! 
Only wait till it gets dark and I 'll fetch you any of them you want -- three if you like . '' 
`` Well , let 's go , '' said Denisov , and rode all the way to the watchhouse in silence and frowning angrily . 
Tikhon followed behind and Petya heard the Cossacks laughing with him and at him , about some pair of boots he had thrown into the bushes . 
When the fit of laughter that had seized him at Tikhon 's words and smile had passed and Petya realized for a moment that this Tikhon had killed a man , he felt uneasy . 
He looked round at the captive drummer boy and felt a pang in his heart . 
But this uneasiness lasted only a moment . 
He felt it necessary to hold his head higher , to brace himself , and to question the esaul with an air of importance about tomorrow 's undertaking , that he might not be unworthy of the company in which he found himself . 
The officer who had been sent to inquire met Denisov on the way with the news that Dolokhov was soon coming and that all was well with him . 
Denisov at once cheered up and , calling Petya to him , said : `` Well , tell me about yourself . '' 
Petya , having left his people after their departure from Moscow , joined his regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a general commanding a large guerrilla detachment . 
From the time he received his commission , and especially since he had joined the active army and taken part in the battle of Vyazma , Petya had been in a constant state of blissful excitement at being grown-up and in a perpetual ecstatic hurry not to miss any chance to do something really heroic . 
He was highly delighted with what he saw and experienced in the army , but at the same time it always seemed to him that the really heroic exploits were being performed just where he did not happen to be . 
And he was always in a hurry to get where he was not . 
When on the twenty-first of October his general expressed a wish to send somebody to Denisov 's detachment , Petya begged so piteously to be sent that the general could not refuse . 
But when dispatching him he recalled Petya 's mad action at the battle of Vyazma , where instead of riding by the road to the place to which he had been sent , he had galloped to the advanced line under the fire of the French and had there twice fired his pistol . 
So now the general explicitly forbade his taking part in any action whatever of Denisov 's . 
That was why Petya had blushed and grown confused when Denisov asked him whether he could stay . 
Before they had ridden to the outskirts of the forest Petya had considered he must carry out his instructions strictly and return at once . 
But when he saw the French and saw Tikhon and learned that there would certainly be an attack that night , he decided , with the rapidity with which young people change their views , that the general , whom he had greatly respected till then , was a rubbishy German , that Denisov was a hero , the esaul a hero , and Tikhon a hero too , and that it would be shameful for him to leave them at a moment of difficulty . 
It was already growing dusk when Denisov , Petya , and the esaul rode up to the watchhouse . 
In the twilight saddled horses could be seen , and Cossacks and hussars who had rigged up rough shelters in the glade and were kindling glowing fires in a hollow of the forest where the French could not see the smoke . 
In the passage of the small watchhouse a Cossack with sleeves rolled up was chopping some mutton . 
In the room three officers of Denisov 's band were converting a door into a tabletop . 
Petya took off his wet clothes , gave them to be dried , and at once began helping the officers to fix up the dinner table . 
In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it . 
On the table were vodka , a flask of rum , white bread , roast mutton , and salt . 
Sitting at table with the officers and tearing the fat savory mutton with his hands , down which the grease trickled , Petya was in an ecstatic childish state of love for all men , and consequently of confidence that others loved him in the same way . 
`` So then what do you think , Vasili Dmitrich ? '' 
said he to Denisov . 
`` It 's all right my staying a day with you ? '' 
