`` What would you have me do ? '' 
he said at last . 
`` You know I did all a father could for their education , and they have both turned out fools . 
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool , but Anatole is an active one . 
That is the only difference between them . '' 
He said this smiling in a way more natural and animated than usual , so that the wrinkles round his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant . 
`` And why are children born to such men as you ? 
If you were not a father there would be nothing I could reproach you with , '' said Anna Pavlovna , looking up pensively . 
`` I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my children are the bane of my life . 
It is the cross I have to bear . 
That is how I explain it to myself . 
It ca n't be helped ! '' 
He said no more , but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a gesture . 
Anna Pavlovna meditated . 
`` Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole ? '' 
she asked . 
`` They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking , and though I do n't feel that weakness in myself as yet , I know a little person who is very unhappy with her father . 
She is a relation of yours , Princess Mary Bolkonskaya . '' 
Prince Vasili did not reply , though , with the quickness of memory and perception befitting a man of the world , he indicated by a movement of the head that he was considering this information . 
`` Do you know , '' he said at last , evidently unable to check the sad current of his thoughts , `` that Anatole is costing me forty thousand rubles a year ? 
And , '' he went on after a pause , `` what will it be in five years , if he goes on like this ? '' 
Presently he added : `` That 's what we fathers have to put up with ... . 
Is this princess of yours rich ? '' 
`` Her father is very rich and stingy . 
He lives in the country . 
He is the well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the late Emperor , and was nicknamed ` the King of Prussia . ' 
He is very clever but eccentric , and a bore . 
The poor girl is very unhappy . 
She has a brother ; I think you know him , he married Lise Meinen lately . 
He is an aide-de-camp of Kutuzov 's and will be here tonight . '' 
`` Listen , dear Annette , '' said the prince , suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna 's hand and for some reason drawing it downwards . 
`` Arrange that affair for me and I shall always be your most devoted slave - slafe with an f , as a village elder of mine writes in his reports . 
She is rich and of good family and that 's all I want . '' 
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him , he raised the maid of honor 's hand to his lips , kissed it , and swung it to and fro as he lay back in his armchair , looking in another direction . 
`` Attendez , '' said Anna Pavlovna , reflecting , `` I 'll speak to Lise , young Bolkonski 's wife , this very evening , and perhaps the thing can be arranged . 
It shall be on your family 's behalf that I 'll start my apprenticeship as old maid . '' 
Anna Pavlovna 's drawing room was gradually filling . 
The highest Petersburg society was assembled there : people differing widely in age and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged . 
Prince Vasili 's daughter , the beautiful Helene , came to take her father to the ambassador 's entertainment ; she wore a ball dress and her badge as maid of honor . 
The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya , known as la femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg , * was also there . 
She had been married during the previous winter , and being pregnant did not go to any large gatherings , but only to small receptions . 
Prince Vasili 's son , Hippolyte , had come with Mortemart , whom he introduced . 
The Abbe Morio and many others had also come . 
* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg . 
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said , `` You have not yet seen my aunt , '' or `` You do not know my aunt ? '' 
and very gravely conducted him or her to a little old lady , wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap , who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive ; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt , Anna Pavlovna mentioned each one 's name and then left them . 
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not one of them knew , not one of them wanted to know , and not one of them cared about ; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful and solemn interest and silent approval . 
The aunt spoke to each of them in the same words , about their health and her own , and the health of Her Majesty , `` who , thank God , was better today . '' 
And each visitor , though politeness prevented his showing impatience , left the old woman with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return to her the whole evening . 
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a gold-embroidered velvet bag . 
Her pretty little upper lip , on which a delicate dark down was just perceptible , was too short for her teeth , but it lifted all the more sweetly , and was especially charming when she occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip . 
As is always the case with a thoroughly attractive woman , her defect -- the shortness of her upper lip and her half-open mouth -- seemed to be her own special and peculiar form of beauty . 
Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty young woman , so soon to become a mother , so full of life and health , and carrying her burden so lightly . 
Old men and dull dispirited young ones who looked at her , after being in her company and talking to her a little while , felt as if they too were becoming , like her , full of life and health . 
All who talked to her , and at each word saw her bright smile and the constant gleam of her white teeth , thought that they were in a specially amiable mood that day . 
The little princess went round the table with quick , short , swaying steps , her workbag on her arm , and gaily spreading out her dress sat down on a sofa near the silver samovar , as if all she was doing was a pleasure to herself and to all around her . 
`` I have brought my work , '' said she in French , displaying her bag and addressing all present . 
`` Mind , Annette , I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me , '' she added , turning to her hostess . 
`` You wrote that it was to be quite a small reception , and just see how badly I am dressed . '' 
And she spread out her arms to show her short-waisted , lace-trimmed , dainty gray dress , girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast . 
`` Soyez tranquille , Lise , you will always be prettier than anyone else , '' replied Anna Pavlovna . 
`` You know , '' said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in French , turning to a general , `` my husband is deserting me ? 
He is going to get himself killed . 
Tell me what this wretched war is for ? '' 
she added , addressing Prince Vasili , and without waiting for an answer she turned to speak to his daughter , the beautiful Helene . 
`` What a delightful woman this little princess is ! '' 
said Prince Vasili to Anna Pavlovna . 
One of the next arrivals was a stout , heavily built young man with close-cropped hair , spectacles , the light-colored breeches fashionable at that time , a very high ruffle , and a brown dress coat . 
This stout young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov , a well-known grandee of Catherine 's time who now lay dying in Moscow . 
The young man had not yet entered either the military or civil service , as he had only just returned from abroad where he had been educated , and this was his first appearance in society . 
Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod she accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room . 
But in spite of this lowest-grade greeting , a look of anxiety and fear , as at the sight of something too large and unsuited to the place , came over her face when she saw Pierre enter . 
Though he was certainly rather bigger than the other men in the room , her anxiety could only have reference to the clever though shy , but observant and natural , expression which distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room . 
`` It is very good of you , Monsieur Pierre , to come and visit a poor invalid , '' said Anna Pavlovna , exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt as she conducted him to her . 
Pierre murmured something unintelligible , and continued to look round as if in search of something . 
On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little princess with a pleased smile , as to an intimate acquaintance . 
Anna Pavlovna 's alarm was justified , for Pierre turned away from the aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty 's health . 
Anna Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words : `` Do you know the Abbe Morio ? 
He is a most interesting man . '' 
`` Yes , I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace , and it is very interesting but hardly feasible . '' 
`` You think so ? '' 
rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and get away to attend to her duties as hostess . 
But Pierre now committed a reverse act of impoliteness . 
First he had left a lady before she had finished speaking to him , and now he continued to speak to another who wished to get away . 
With his head bent , and his big feet spread apart , he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe 's plan chimerical . 
`` We will talk of it later , '' said Anna Pavlovna with a smile . 
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave , she resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch , ready to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag . 
As the foreman of a spinning mill , when he has set the hands to work , goes round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that creaks or makes more noise than it should , and hastens to check the machine or set it in proper motion , so Anna Pavlovna moved about her drawing room , approaching now a silent , now a too-noisy group , and by a word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady , proper , and regular motion . 
But amid these cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident . 
She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there , and again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbe . 
Pierre had been educated abroad , and this reception at Anna Pavlovna 's was the first he had attended in Russia . 
He knew that all the intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and , like a child in a toyshop , did not know which way to look , afraid of missing any clever conversation that was to be heard . 
Seeing the self-confident and refined expression on the faces of those present he was always expecting to hear something very profound . 
At last he came up to Morio . 
Here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunity to express his own views , as young people are fond of doing . 
Anna Pavlovna 's reception was in full swing . 
The spindles hummed steadily and ceaselessly on all sides . 
With the exception of the aunt , beside whom sat only one elderly lady , who with her thin careworn face was rather out of place in this brilliant society , the whole company had settled into three groups . 
One , chiefly masculine , had formed round the abbe . 
Another , of young people , was grouped round the beautiful Princess Helene , Prince Vasili 's daughter , and the little Princess Bolkonskaya , very pretty and rosy , though rather too plump for her age . 
