But when he had been on the Semenovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed to him to bring several batteries of artillery up to those heights to strengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo . 
Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be brought to him of the effect those batteries produced . 
An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns had been concentrated on the Russians , as he had ordered , but that they still held their ground . 
`` Our fire is mowing them down by rows , but still they hold on , '' said the adjutant . 
`` They want more ! 
... '' said Napoleon in a hoarse voice . 
`` Sire ? '' 
asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark . 
`` They want more ! '' 
croaked Napoleon frowning . 
`` Let them have it ! '' 
Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire , and for which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him , was being done . 
And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginary greatness , and again -- as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doing something for itself -- he submissively fulfilled the cruel , sad , gloomy , and inhuman role predestined for him . 
And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happening lay more than on all the others who took part in it . 
Never to the end of his life could he understand goodness , beauty , or truth , or the significance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness and truth , too remote from everything human , for him ever to be able to grasp their meaning . 
He could not disavow his actions , belauded as they were by half the world , and so he had to repudiate truth , goodness , and all humanity . 
Not only on that day , as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men killed and maimed -LRB- by his will as he believed -RRB- , did he reckon as he looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and , deceiving himself , find reason for rejoicing in the calculation that there were five Russians for every Frenchman . 
Not on that day alone did he write in a letter to Paris that `` the battle field was superb , '' because fifty thousand corpses lay there , but even on the island of St. Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his leisure to an account of the great deeds he had done , he wrote : The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times : it was a war of good sense , for real interests , for the tranquillity and security of all ; it was purely pacific and conservative . 
It was a war for a great cause , the end of uncertainties and the beginning of security . 
A new horizon and new labors were opening out , full of well-being and prosperity for all . 
The European system was already founded ; all that remained was to organize it . 
Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere , I too should have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance . 
Those ideas were stolen from me . 
In that reunion of great sovereigns we should have discussed our interests like one family , and have rendered account to the peoples as clerk to master . 
Europe would in this way soon have been , in fact , but one people , and anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the common fatherland . 
I should have demanded the freedom of all navigable rivers for everybody , that the seas should be common to all , and that the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guards for the sovereigns . 
On returning to France , to the bosom of the great , strong , magnificent , peaceful , and glorious fatherland , I should have proclaimed her frontiers immutable ; all future wars purely defensive , all aggrandizement antinational . 
I should have associated my son in the Empire ; my dictatorship would have been finished , and his constitutional reign would have begun . 
Paris would have been the capital of the world , and the French the envy of the nations ! 
My leisure then , and my old age , would have been devoted , in company with the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son , to leisurely visiting , with our own horses and like a true country couple , every corner of the Empire , receiving complaints , redressing wrongs , and scattering public buildings and benefactions on all sides and everywhere . 
Napoleon , predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner of the peoples , assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the peoples ' welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and by the employment of power confer benefactions . 
`` Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula , '' he wrote further of the Russian war , `` half were Austrians , Prussians , Saxons , Poles , Bavarians , Wurttembergers , Mecklenburgers , Spaniards , Italians , and Neapolitans . 
The Imperial army , strictly speaking , was one third composed of Dutch , Belgians , men from the borders of the Rhine , Piedmontese , Swiss , Genevese , Tuscans , Romans , inhabitants of the Thirty-second Military Division , of Bremen , of Hamburg , and so on : it included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French . 
The Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men ; the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the various battles four times more men than the French army ; the burning of Moscow cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and want in the woods ; finally , in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian army also suffered from the severity of the season ; so that by the the time it reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand , and at Kalisch less than eighteen thousand . '' 
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will , and the horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul . 
He boldly took the whole responsibility for what happened , and his darkened mind found justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians . 
Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov family and to the crown serfs -- those fields and meadows where for hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino , Gorki , Shevardino , and Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle . 
At the dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space of some three acres around . 
Crowds of men of various arms , wounded and unwounded , with frightened faces , dragged themselves back to Mozhaysk from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other . 
Other crowds , exhausted and hungry , went forward led by their officers . 
Others held their ground and continued to fire . 
Over the whole field , previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter of bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun , there now spread a mist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell of saltpeter and blood . 
Clouds gathered and drops of rain began to fall on the dead and wounded , on the frightened , exhausted , and hesitating men , as if to say : `` Enough , men ! 
Enough ! 
Cease ... bethink yourselves ! 
What are you doing ? '' 
To the men of both sides alike , worn out by want of food and rest , it began equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue to slaughter one another ; all the faces expressed hesitation , and the question arose in every soul : `` For what , for whom , must I kill and be killed ? 
... You may go and kill whom you please , but I do n't want to do so anymore ! '' 
By evening this thought had ripened in every soul . 
At any moment these men might have been seized with horror at what they were doing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere . 
But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of what they were doing , though they would have been glad to leave off , some incomprehensible , mysterious power continued to control them , and they still brought up the charges , loaded , aimed , and applied the match , though only one artilleryman survived out of every three , and though they stumbled and panted with fatigue , perspiring and stained with blood and powder . 
The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both sides , crushing human bodies , and that terrible work which was not done by the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worlds continued . 
Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would have said that , if only the French made one more slight effort , it would disappear ; and anyone looking at the rear of the French army would have said that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and the French would be destroyed . 
But neither the French nor the Russians made that effort , and the flame of battle burned slowly out . 
The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attacking the French . 
At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the beginning . 
But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the French from their positions , they could not have made this last effort , for all the Russian troops had been broken up , there was no part of the Russian army that had not suffered in the battle , and though still holding their positions they had lost ONE HALF of their army . 
The French , with the memory of all their former victories during fifteen years , with the assurance of Napoleon 's invincibility , with the consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had lost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guards intact , twenty thousand strong , might easily have made that effort . 
The French had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position ought to have made that effort , for as long as the Russians continued to block the road to Moscow as before , the aim of the French had not been attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain . 
But the French did not make that effort . 
Some historians say that Napoleon need only have used his Old Guards , who were intact , and the battle would have been won . 
To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his Guards is like talking of what would happen if autumn became spring . 
It could not be . 
Napoleon did not give his Guards , not because he did not want to , but because it could not be done . 
All the generals , officers , and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done , because the flagging spirit of the troops would not permit it . 
It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling of the mighty arm being stricken powerless , but all the generals and soldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not , after all their experience of previous battles -- when after one tenth of such efforts the enemy had fled -- experienced a similar feeling of terror before an enemy who , after losing HALF his men , stood as threateningly at the end as at the beginning of the battle . 
The moral force of the attacking French army was exhausted . 
Not that sort of victory which is defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks , called standards , and of the ground on which the troops had stood and were standing , but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by the Russians at Borodino . 
The French invaders , like an infuriated animal that has in its onslaught received a mortal wound , felt that they were perishing , but could not stop , any more than the Russian army , weaker by one half , could help swerving . 
By impetus gained , the French army was still able to roll forward to Moscow , but there , without further effort on the part of the Russians , it had to perish , bleeding from the mortal wound it had received at Borodino . 
The direct consequence of the battle of Borodino was Napoleon 's senseless flight from Moscow , his retreat along the old Smolensk road , the destruction of the invading army of five hundred thousand men , and the downfall of Napoleonic France , on which at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger spirit had been laid . 
Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind . 
Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when he examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion ; but at the same time , a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements . 
There is a well known , so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this , that Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following , in spite of the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise . 
By the time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the tortoise , the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead of him : when Achilles has covered that tenth , the tortoise has covered another one hundredth , and so on forever . 
This problem seemed to the ancients insoluble . 
The absurd answer -LRB- that Achilles could never overtake the tortoise -RRB- resulted from this : that motion was arbitrarily divided into discontinuous elements , whereas the motion both of Achilles and of the tortoise was continuous . 
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a solution of the problem , but never reach it . 
Only when we have admitted the conception of the infinitely small , and the resulting geometrical progression with a common ratio of one tenth , and have found the sum of this progression to infinity , do we reach a solution of the problem . 
A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex problems of motion which used to appear insoluble . 
This modern branch of mathematics , unknown to the ancients , when dealing with problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small , and so conforms to the chief condition of motion -LRB- absolute continuity -RRB- and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind can not avoid when it deals with separate elements of motion instead of examining continuous motion . 
In seeking the laws of historical movement just the same thing happens . 
The movement of humanity , arising as it does from innumerable arbitrary human wills , is continuous . 
To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of history . 
But to arrive at these laws , resulting from the sum of all those human wills , man 's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected units . 
The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selected series of continuous events and examine it apart from others , though there is and can be no beginning to any event , for one event always flows uninterruptedly from another . 
The second method is to consider the actions of some one man -- a king or a commander -- as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills ; whereas the sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity of a single historic personage . 
Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually takes smaller and smaller units for examination . 
But however small the units it takes , we feel that to take any unit disconnected from others , or to assume a beginning of any phenomenon , or to say that the will of many men is expressed by the actions of any one historic personage , is in itself false . 
It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions drawn from history . 
It is merely necessary to select some larger or smaller unit as the subject of observation -- as criticism has every right to do , seeing that whatever unit history observes must always be arbitrarily selected . 
Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation -LRB- the differential of history , that is , the individual tendencies of men -RRB- and attaining to the art of integrating them -LRB- that is , finding the sum of these infinitesimals -RRB- can we hope to arrive at the laws of history . 
The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an extraordinary movement of millions of people . 
Men leave their customary pursuits , hasten from one side of Europe to the other , plunder and slaughter one another , triumph and are plunged in despair , and for some years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive movement which first increases and then slackens . 
What was the cause of this movement , by what laws was it governed ? 
asks the mind of man . 
The historians , replying to this question , lay before us the sayings and doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris , calling these sayings and doings `` the Revolution '' ; then they give a detailed biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him ; tell of the influence some of these people had on others , and say : that is why this movement took place and those are its laws . 
But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation , but plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious , because in it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger . 
The sum of human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon , and only the sum of those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them . 
`` But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors ; every time there has been a revolution in any state there have been great men , '' says history . 
