But it remained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed into their different lodgings . 
As soon as the men of the various regiments began to disperse among the wealthy and deserted houses , the army was lost forever and there came into being something nondescript , neither citizens nor soldiers but what are known as marauders . 
When five weeks later these same men left Moscow , they no longer formed an army . 
They were a mob of marauders , each carrying a quantity of articles which seemed to him valuable or useful . 
The aim of each man when he left Moscow was no longer , as it had been , to conquer , but merely to keep what he had acquired . 
Like a monkey which puts its paw into the narrow neck of a jug , and having seized a handful of nuts will not open its fist for fear of losing what it holds , and therefore perishes , the French when they left Moscow had inevitably to perish because they carried their loot with them , yet to abandon what they had stolen was as impossible for them as it is for the monkey to open its paw and let go of its nuts . 
Ten minutes after each regiment had entered a Moscow district , not a soldier or officer was left . 
Men in military uniforms and Hessian boots could be seen through the windows , laughing and walking through the rooms . 
In cellars and storerooms similar men were busy among the provisions , and in the yards unlocking or breaking open coach house and stable doors , lighting fires in kitchens and kneading and baking bread with rolled-up sleeves , and cooking ; or frightening , amusing , or caressing women and children . 
There were many such men both in the shops and houses -- but there was no army . 
Order after order was issued by the French commanders that day forbidding the men to disperse about the town , sternly forbidding any violence to the inhabitants or any looting , and announcing a roll call for that very evening . 
But despite all these measures the men , who had till then constituted an army , flowed all over the wealthy , deserted city with its comforts and plentiful supplies . 
As a hungry herd of cattle keeps well together when crossing a barren field , but gets out of hand and at once disperses uncontrollably as soon as it reaches rich pastures , so did the army disperse all over the wealthy city . 
No residents were left in Moscow , and the soldiers -- like water percolating through sand -- spread irresistibly through the city in all directions from the Kremlin into which they had first marched . 
The cavalry , on entering a merchant 's house that had been abandoned and finding there stabling more than sufficient for their horses , went on , all the same , to the next house which seemed to them better . 
Many of them appropriated several houses , chalked their names on them , and quarreled and even fought with other companies for them . 
Before they had had time to secure quarters the soldiers ran out into the streets to see the city and , hearing that everything had been abandoned , rushed to places where valuables were to be had for the taking . 
The officers followed to check the soldiers and were involuntarily drawn into doing the same . 
In Carriage Row carriages had been left in the shops , and generals flocked there to select caleches and coaches for themselves . 
The few inhabitants who had remained invited commanding officers to their houses , hoping thereby to secure themselves from being plundered . 
There were masses of wealth and there seemed no end to it . 
All around the quarters occupied by the French were other regions still unexplored and unoccupied where , they thought , yet greater riches might be found . 
And Moscow engulfed the army ever deeper and deeper . 
When water is spilled on dry ground both the dry ground and the water disappear and mud results ; and in the same way the entry of the famished army into the rich and deserted city resulted in fires and looting and the destruction of both the army and the wealthy city . 
The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine , * the Russians to the barbarity of the French . 
In reality , however , it was not , and could not be , possible to explain the burning of Moscow by making any individual , or any group of people , responsible for it . 
Moscow was burned because it found itself in a position in which any town built of wood was bound to burn , quite apart from whether it had , or had not , a hundred and thirty inferior fire engines . 
Deserted Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of shavings has to burn on which sparks continually fall for several days . 
A town built of wood , where scarcely a day passes without conflagrations when the house owners are in residence and a police force is present , can not help burning when its inhabitants have left it and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke pipes , make campfires of the Senate chairs in the Senate Square , and cook themselves meals twice a day . 
In peacetime it is only necessary to billet troops in the villages of any district and the number of fires in that district immediately increases . 
How much then must the probability of fire be increased in an abandoned , wooden town where foreign troops are quartered . 
`` Le patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine '' and the barbarity of the French were not to blame in the matter . 
Moscow was set on fire by the soldiers ' pipes , kitchens , and campfires , and by the carelessness of enemy soldiers occupying houses they did not own . 
Even if there was any arson -LRB- which is very doubtful , for no one had any reason to burn the houses -- in any case a troublesome and dangerous thing to do -RRB- , arson can not be regarded as the cause , for the same thing would have happened without any incendiarism . 
* To Rostopchin 's ferocious patriotism . 
However tempting it might be for the French to blame Rostopchin 's ferocity and for Russians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte , or later on to place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people , it is impossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause of the fire , for Moscow had to burn as every village , factory , or house must burn which is left by its owners and in which strangers are allowed to live and cook their porridge . 
Moscow was burned by its inhabitants , it is true , but by those who had abandoned it and not by those who remained in it . 
Moscow when occupied by the enemy did not remain intact like Berlin , Vienna , and other towns , simply because its inhabitants abandoned it and did not welcome the French with bread and salt , nor bring them the keys of the city . 
The absorption of the French by Moscow , radiating starwise as it did , only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by the evening of the second of September . 
After the last two days spent in solitude and unusual circumstances , Pierre was in a state bordering on insanity . 
He was completely obsessed by one persistent thought . 
He did not know how or when this thought had taken such possession of him , but he remembered nothing of the past , understood nothing of the present , and all he saw and heard appeared to him like a dream . 
He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life 's demands that enmeshed him , and which in his present condition he was unable to unravel . 
He had gone to Joseph Alexeevich 's house , on the plea of sorting the deceased 's books and papers , only in search of rest from life 's turmoil , for in his mind the memory of Joseph Alexeevich was connected with a world of eternal , solemn , and calm thoughts , quite contrary to the restless confusion into which he felt himself being drawn . 
He sought a quiet refuge , and in Joseph Alexeevich 's study he really found it . 
When he sat with his elbows on the dusty writing table in the deathlike stillness of the study , calm and significant memories of the last few days rose one after another in his imagination , particularly of the battle of Borodino and of that vague sense of his own insignificance and insincerity compared with the truth , simplicity , and strength of the class of men he mentally classed as they . 
When Gerasim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of taking part in the popular defense of Moscow which he knew was projected . 
And with that object he had asked Gerasim to get him a peasant 's coat and a pistol , confiding to him his intentions of remaining in Joseph Alexeevich 's house and keeping his name secret . 
Then during the first day spent in inaction and solitude -LRB- he tried several times to fix his attention on the Masonic manuscripts , but was unable to do so -RRB- the idea that had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic significance of his name in connection with Bonaparte 's more than once vaguely presented itself . 
But the idea that he , L'russe Besuhof , was destined to set a limit to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies that often passed through his mind and left no trace behind . 
When , having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part among the people in the defense of Moscow , Pierre had met the Rostovs and Natasha had said to him : `` Are you remaining in Moscow ? 
... How splendid ! '' 
the thought flashed into his mind that it really would be a good thing , even if Moscow were taken , for him to remain there and do what he was predestined to do . 
Next day , with the sole idea of not sparing himself and not lagging in any way behind them , Pierre went to the Three Hills gate . 
But when he returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended , he suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a possibility had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable . 
He must remain in Moscow , concealing his name , and must meet Napoleon and kill him , and either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe - which it seemed to him was solely due to Napoleon . 
Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte 's life in 1809 by a German student in Vienna , and knew that the student had been shot . 
And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying out his design excited him still more . 
Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to this purpose . 
The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering in view of the common calamity , the same feeling that had caused him to go to Mozhaysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick of the battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and , in place of the luxury and comfort to which he was accustomed , to sleep on a hard sofa without undressing and eat the same food as Gerasim . 
The other was that vague and quite Russian feeling of contempt for everything conventional , artificial , and human -- for everything the majority of men regard as the greatest good in the world . 
Pierre had first experienced this strange and fascinating feeling at the Sloboda Palace , when he had suddenly felt that wealth , power , and life -- all that men so painstakingly acquire and guard -- if it has any worth has so only by reason the joy with which it can all be renounced . 
It was the feeling that induces a volunteer recruit to spend his last penny on drink , and a drunken man to smash mirrors or glasses for no apparent reason and knowing that it will cost him all the money he possesses : the feeling which causes a man to perform actions which from an ordinary point of view are insane , to test , as it were , his personal power and strength , affirming the existence of a higher , nonhuman criterion of life . 
From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for the first time at the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under its influence , but only now found full satisfaction for it . 
Moreover , at this moment Pierre was supported in his design and prevented from renouncing it by what he had already done in that direction . 
If he were now to leave Moscow like everyone else , his flight from home , the peasant coat , the pistol , and his announcement to the Rostovs that he would remain in Moscow would all become not merely meaningless but contemptible and ridiculous , and to this Pierre was very sensitive . 
Pierre 's physical condition , as is always the case , corresponded to his mental state . 
The unaccustomed coarse food , the vodka he drank during those days , the absence of wine and cigars , his dirty unchanged linen , two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without bedding -- all this kept him in a state of excitement bordering on insanity . 
It was two o'clock in the afternoon . 
The French had already entered Moscow . 
Pierre knew this , but instead of acting he only thought about his undertaking , going over its minutest details in his mind . 
In his fancy he did not clearly picture to himself either the striking of the blow or the death of Napoleon , but with extraordinary vividness and melancholy enjoyment imagined his own destruction and heroic endurance . 
`` Yes , alone , for the sake of all , I must do it or perish ! '' 
he thought . 
`` Yes , I will approach ... and then suddenly ... with pistol or dagger ? 
But that is all the same ! 
` It is not I but the hand of Providence that punishes thee , ' I shall say , '' thought he , imagining what he would say when killing Napoleon . 
`` Well then , take me and execute me ! '' 
he went on , speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression . 
While Pierre , standing in the middle of the room , was talking to himself in this way , the study door opened and on the threshold appeared the figure of Makar Alexeevich , always so timid before but now quite transformed . 
His dressing gown was unfastened , his face red and distorted . 
He was obviously drunk . 
On seeing Pierre he grew confused at first , but noticing embarrassment on Pierre 's face immediately grew bold and , staggering on his thin legs , advanced into the middle of the room . 
`` They 're frightened , '' he said confidentially in a hoarse voice . 
`` I say I wo n't surrender , I say ... Am I not right , sir ? '' 
He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized it with unexpected rapidity and ran out into the corridor . 
Gerasim and the porter , who had followed Makar Alexeevich , stopped him in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him . 
Pierre , coming out into the corridor , looked with pity and repulsion at the half-crazy old man . 
Makar Alexeevich , frowning with exertion , held on to the pistol and screamed hoarsely , evidently with some heroic fancy in his head . 
`` To arms ! 
Board them ! 
No , you sha n't get it , '' he yelled . 
`` That will do , please , that will do . 
Have the goodness -- please , sir , to let go ! 
Please , sir ... '' pleaded Gerasim , trying carefully to steer Makar Alexeevich by the elbows back to the door . 
`` Who are you ? 
Bonaparte ! 
... '' shouted Makar Alexeevich . 
`` That 's not right , sir . 
Come to your room , please , and rest . 
