`` Do you know , I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune homme . '' 
* * `` A little bit in love with the young man . '' 
`` Forfeit , forfeit , forfeit ! '' 
`` But how could one say that in Russian ? '' 
When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin 's broadsheets that had been brought that day . 
The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbidden people to leave Moscow was false ; on the contrary he was glad that ladies and tradesmen 's wives were leaving the city . 
`` There will be less panic and less gossip , '' ran the broadsheet `` but I will stake my life on it that that will not enter Moscow . '' 
These words showed Pierre clearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow . 
The second broadsheet stated that our headquarters were at Vyazma , that Count Wittgenstein had defeated the French , but that as many of the inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed , weapons were ready for them at the arsenal : sabers , pistols , and muskets which could be had at a low price . 
The tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the former Chigirin talks . 
Pierre pondered over these broadsheets . 
Evidently the terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his soul but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near . 
`` Shall I join the army and enter the service , or wait ? '' 
he asked himself for the hundredth time . 
He took a pack of cards that lay on the table and began to lay them out for a game of patience . 
`` If this patience comes out , '' he said to himself after shuffling the cards , holding them in his hand , and lifting his head , `` if it comes out , it means ... what does it mean ? '' 
He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in . 
`` Then it will mean that I must go to the army , '' said Pierre to himself . 
`` Come in , come in ! '' 
he added to the princess . 
Only the eldest princess , the one with the stony face and long waist , was still living in Pierre 's house . 
The two younger ones had both married . 
`` Excuse my coming to you , cousin , '' she said in a reproachful and agitated voice . 
`` You know some decision must be come to . 
What is going to happen ? 
Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting . 
How is it that we are staying on ? '' 
`` On the contrary , things seem satisfactory , ma cousine , '' said Pierre in the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her , always feeling uncomfortable in the role of her benefactor . 
`` Satisfactory , indeed ! 
Very satisfactory ! 
Barbara Ivanovna told me today how our troops are distinguishing themselves . 
It certainly does them credit ! 
And the people too are quite mutinous -- they no longer obey , even my maid has taken to being rude . 
At this rate they will soon begin beating us . 
One ca n't walk in the streets . 
But , above all , the French will be here any day now , so what are we waiting for ? 
I ask just one thing of you , cousin , '' she went on , `` arrange for me to be taken to Petersburg . 
Whatever I may be , I ca n't live under Bonaparte 's rule . '' 
`` Oh , come , ma cousine ! 
Where do you get your information from ? 
On the contrary ... '' `` I wo n't submit to your Napoleon ! 
Others may if they please ... . 
If you do n't want to do this ... '' `` But I will , I 'll give the order at once . '' 
The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry with . 
Muttering to herself , she sat down on a chair . 
`` But you have been misinformed , '' said Pierre . 
`` Everything is quiet in the city and there is not the slightest danger . 
See ! 
I 've just been reading ... '' He showed her the broadsheet . 
`` Count Rostopchin writes that he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter Moscow . '' 
`` Oh , that count of yours ! '' 
said the princess malevolently . 
`` He is a hypocrite , a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot . 
Did n't he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone , ` whoever it might be , should be dragged to the lockup by his hair ' ? 
-LRB- How silly ! -RRB- 
` And honor and glory to whoever captures him , ' he says . 
This is what his cajolery has brought us to ! 
Barbara Ivanovna told me the mob near killed her because she said something in French . '' 
`` Oh , but it 's so ... You take everything so to heart , '' said Pierre , and began laying out his cards for patience . 
Although that patience did come out , Pierre did not join the army , but remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation , irresolution , and alarm , yet at the same time joyfully expecting something terrible . 
Next day toward evening the princess set off , and Pierre 's head steward came to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his regiment could not be found without selling one of the estates . 
In general the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of raising a regiment would ruin him . 
Pierre listened to him , scarcely able to repress a smile . 
`` Well then , sell it , '' said he . 
`` What 's to be done ? 
I ca n't draw back now ! '' 
The worse everything became , especially his own affairs , the better was Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe he expected was approaching . 
Hardly anyone he knew was left in town . 
Julie had gone , and so had Princess Mary . 
Of his intimate friends only the Rostovs remained , but he did not go to see them . 
To distract his thoughts he drove that day to the village of Vorontsovo to see the great balloon Leppich was constructing to destroy the foe , and a trial balloon that was to go up next day . 
The balloon was not yet ready , but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor 's desire . 
The Emperor had written to Count Rostopchin as follows : As soon as Leppich is ready , get together a crew of reliable and intelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov to let him know . 
I have informed him of the matter . 
Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for the first time , that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy 's hands . 
It is essential for him to combine his movements with those of the commander in chief . 
On his way home from Vorontsovo , as he was passing the Bolotnoe Place Pierre , seeing a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place , stopped and got out of his trap . 
A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged . 
The flogging was only just over , and the executioner was releasing from the flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers , in blue stockings and a green jacket , who was moaning piteously . 
Another criminal , thin and pale , stood near . 
Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen . 
With a frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman 's face , Pierre pushed his way in through the crowd . 
`` What is it ? 
Who is it ? 
What is it for ? '' 
he kept asking . 
But the attention of the crowd -- officials , burghers , shopkeepers , peasants , and women in cloaks and in pelisses -- was so eagerly centered on what was passing in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him . 
The stout man rose , frowned , shrugged his shoulders , and evidently trying to appear firm began to pull on his jacket without looking about him , but suddenly his lips trembled and he began to cry , in the way full-blooded grown-up men cry , though angry with himself for doing so . 
In the crowd people began talking loudly , to stifle their feelings of pity as it seemed to Pierre . 
`` He 's cook to some prince . '' 
`` Eh , mounseer , Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman ... sets his teeth on edge ! '' 
said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind Pierre , when the Frenchman began to cry . 
The clerk glanced round , evidently hoping that his joke would be appreciated . 
Some people began to laugh , others continued to watch in dismay the executioner who was undressing the other man . 
Pierre choked , his face puckered , and he turned hastily away , went back to his trap muttering something to himself as he went , and took his seat . 
As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so audibly that the coachman asked him : `` What is your pleasure ? '' 
`` Where are you going ? '' 
shouted Pierre to the man , who was driving to Lubyanka Street . 
`` To the Governor 's , as you ordered , '' answered the coachman . 
`` Fool ! 
