See her knife ? 
... '' `` Is n't she a Tartar ! '' 
`` How is it you did n't go head over heels ? '' 
asked the boldest of all , addressing Natasha directly . 
`` Uncle '' dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which stood in the midst of an overgrown garden and , after a glance at his retainers , shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should take themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made to receive the guests and the visitors . 
The serfs all dispersed . 
`` Uncle '' lifted Natasha off her horse and taking her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch . 
The house , with its bare , unplastered log walls , was not overclean -- it did not seem that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless -- but neither was it noticeably neglected . 
In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples , and wolf and fox skins hung about . 
`` Uncle '' led the visitors through the anteroom into a small hall with a folding table and red chairs , then into the drawing room with a round birchwood table and a sofa , and finally into his private room where there was a tattered sofa , a worn carpet , and portraits of Suvorov , of the host 's father and mother , and of himself in military uniform . 
The study smelt strongly of tobacco and dogs . 
`` Uncle '' asked his visitors to sit down and make themselves at home , and then went out of the room . 
Rugay , his back still muddy , came into the room and lay down on the sofa , cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth . 
Leading from the study was a passage in which a partition with ragged curtains could be seen . 
From behind this came women 's laughter and whispers . 
Natasha , Nicholas , and Petya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa . 
Petya , leaning on his elbow , fell asleep at once . 
Natasha and Nicholas were silent . 
Their faces glowed , they were hungry and very cheerful . 
They looked at one another -LRB- now that the hunt was over and they were in the house , Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to show his manly superiority over his sister -RRB- , Natasha gave him a wink , and neither refrained long from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had a pretext ready to account for it . 
After a while `` Uncle '' came in , in a Cossack coat , blue trousers , and small top boots . 
And Natasha felt that this costume , the very one she had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe , was just the right thing and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat . 
`` Uncle '' too was in high spirits and far from being offended by the brother 's and sister 's laughter -LRB- it could never enter his head that they might be laughing at his way of life -RRB- he himself joined in the merriment . 
`` That 's right , young countess , that 's it , come on ! 
I never saw anyone like her ! '' 
said he , offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stem and , with a practiced motion of three fingers , taking down another that had been cut short . 
`` She 's ridden all day like a man , and is as fresh as ever ! '' 
Soon after `` Uncle 's '' reappearance the door was opened , evidently from the sound by a barefooted girl , and a stout , rosy , good-looking woman of about forty , with a double chin and full red lips , entered carrying a large loaded tray . 
With hospitable dignity and cordiality in her glance and in every motion , she looked at the visitors and , with a pleasant smile , bowed respectfully . 
In spite of her exceptional stoutness , which caused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw back her head , this woman -LRB- who was `` Uncle 's '' housekeeper -RRB- trod very lightly . 
She went to the table , set down the tray , and with her plump white hands deftly took from it the bottles and various hors d'oeuvres and dishes and arranged them on the table . 
When she had finished , she stepped aside and stopped at the door with a smile on her face . 
`` Here I am . 
I am she ! 
Now do you understand ` Uncle ' ? '' 
her expression said to Rostov . 
How could one help understanding ? 
Not only Nicholas , but even Natasha understood the meaning of his puckered brow and the happy complacent smile that slightly puckered his lips when Anisya Fedorovna entered . 
On the tray was a bottle of herb wine , different kinds of vodka , pickled mushrooms , rye cakes made with buttermilk , honey in the comb , still mead and sparkling mead , apples , nuts -LRB- raw and roasted -RRB- , and nut-and-honey sweets . 
Afterwards she brought a freshly roasted chicken , ham , preserves made with honey , and preserves made with sugar . 
All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna 's housekeeping , gathered and prepared by her . 
The smell and taste of it all had a smack of Anisya Fedorovna herself : a savor of juiciness , cleanliness , whiteness , and pleasant smiles . 
`` Take this , little Lady-Countess ! '' 
she kept saying , as she offered Natasha first one thing and then another . 
Natasha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten such buttermilk cakes , such aromatic jam , such honey-and-nut sweets , or such a chicken anywhere . 
Anisya Fedorovna left the room . 
After supper , over their cherry brandy , Rostov and `` Uncle '' talked of past and future hunts , of Rugay and Ilagin 's dogs , while Natasha sat upright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes . 
She tried several times to wake Petya that he might eat something , but he only muttered incoherent words without waking up . 
Natasha felt so lighthearted and happy in these novel surroundings that she only feared the trap would come for her too soon . 
After a casual pause , such as often occurs when receiving friends for the first time in one 's own house , `` Uncle , '' answering a thought that was in his visitors ' mind , said : `` This , you see , is how I am finishing my days ... Death will come . 
That 's it , come on ! 
Nothing will remain . 
Then why harm anyone ? '' 
`` Uncle 's '' face was very significant and even handsome as he said this . 
Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good he had heard about him from his father and the neighbors . 
Throughout the whole province `` Uncle '' had the reputation of being the most honorable and disinterested of cranks . 
They called him in to decide family disputes , chose him as executor , confided secrets to him , elected him to be a justice and to other posts ; but he always persistently refused public appointments , passing the autumn and spring in the fields on his bay gelding , sitting at home in winter , and lying in his overgrown garden in summer . 
`` Why do n't you enter the service , Uncle ? '' 
`` I did once , but gave it up . 
I am not fit for it . 
That 's it , come on ! 
I ca n't make head or tail of it . 
That 's for you -- I have n't brains enough . 
Now , hunting is another matter -- that 's it , come on ! 
Open the door , there ! '' 
he shouted . 
`` Why have you shut it ? '' 
The door at the end of the passage led to the huntsmen 's room , as they called the room for the hunt servants . 
There was a rapid patter of bare feet , and an unseen hand opened the door into the huntsmen 's room , from which came the clear sounds of a balalayka on which someone , who was evidently a master of the art , was playing . 
Natasha had been listening to those strains for some time and now went out into the passage to hear better . 
`` That 's Mitka , my coachman ... . 
I have got him a good balalayka . 
I 'm fond of it , '' said `` Uncle . '' 
It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in the huntsmen 's room when `` Uncle '' returned from the chase . 
`` Uncle '' was fond of such music . 
`` How good ! 
Really very good ! '' 
said Nicholas with some unintentional superciliousness , as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased him very much . 
`` Very good ? '' 
said Natasha reproachfully , noticing her brother 's tone . 
`` Not ` very good ' it 's simply delicious ! '' 
Just as `` Uncle 's '' pickled mushrooms , honey , and cherry brandy had seemed to her the best in the world , so also that song , at that moment , seemed to her the acme of musical delight . 
`` More , please , more ! '' 
cried Natasha at the door as soon as the balalayka ceased . 
Mitka tuned up afresh , and recommenced thrumming the balalayka to the air of My Lady , with trills and variations . 
`` Uncle '' sat listening , slightly smiling , with his head on one side . 
The air was repeated a hundred times . 
The balalayka was retuned several times and the same notes were thrummed again , but the listeners did not grow weary of it and wished to hear it again and again . 
Anisya Fedorovna came in and leaned her portly person against the doorpost . 
`` You like listening ? '' 
she said to Natasha , with a smile extremely like `` Uncle 's . '' 
`` That 's a good player of ours , '' she added . 
`` He does n't play that part right ! '' 
said `` Uncle '' suddenly , with an energetic gesture . 
`` Here he ought to burst out -- that 's it , come on ! 
- ought to burst out . '' 
`` Do you play then ? '' 
asked Natasha . 
`` Uncle '' did not answer , but smiled . 
`` Anisya , go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right . 
