`` Listen ! '' 
cried he , standing there and addressing those in the room . 
All were silent . 
`` I bet fifty imperials '' -- he spoke French that the Englishman might understand him , but he did , not speak it very well -- `` I bet fifty imperials ... or do you wish to make it a hundred ? '' 
added he , addressing the Englishman . 
`` No , fifty , '' replied the latter . 
`` All right . 
Fifty imperials ... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum without taking it from my mouth , sitting outside the window on this spot '' -LRB- he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window -RRB- `` and without holding on to anything . 
Is that right ? '' 
`` Quite right , '' said the Englishman . 
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons of his coat and looking down at him -- the Englishman was short - began repeating the terms of the wager to him in English . 
`` Wait ! '' 
cried Dolokhov , hammering with the bottle on the window sill to attract attention . 
`` Wait a bit , Kuragin . 
Listen ! 
If anyone else does the same , I will pay him a hundred imperials . 
Do you understand ? '' 
The Englishman nodded , but gave no indication whether he intended to accept this challenge or not . 
Anatole did not release him , and though he kept nodding to show that he understood , Anatole went on translating Dolokhov 's words into English . 
A thin young lad , an hussar of the Life Guards , who had been losing that evening , climbed on the window sill , leaned over , and looked down . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
he muttered , looking down from the window at the stones of the pavement . 
`` Shut up ! '' 
cried Dolokhov , pushing him away from the window . 
The lad jumped awkwardly back into the room , tripping over his spurs . 
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily , Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his legs . 
Pressing against both sides of the window , he adjusted himself on his seat , lowered his hands , moved a little to the right and then to the left , and took up the bottle . 
Anatole brought two candles and placed them on the window sill , though it was already quite light . 
Dolokhov 's back in his white shirt , and his curly head , were lit up from both sides . 
Everyone crowded to the window , the Englishman in front . 
Pierre stood smiling but silent . 
One man , older than the others present , suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize hold of Dolokhov 's shirt . 
`` I say , this is folly ! 
He 'll be killed , '' said this more sensible man . 
Anatole stopped him . 
`` Do n't touch him ! 
You 'll startle him and then he 'll be killed . 
Eh ? 
... What then ? 
... Eh ? '' 
Dolokhov turned round and , again holding on with both hands , arranged himself on his seat . 
`` If anyone comes meddling again , '' said he , emitting the words separately through his thin compressed lips , `` I will throw him down there . 
Now then ! '' 
Saying this he again turned round , dropped his hands , took the bottle and lifted it to his lips , threw back his head , and raised his free hand to balance himself . 
One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the window and from Dolokhov 's back . 
Anatole stood erect with staring eyes . 
The Englishman looked on sideways , pursing up his lips . 
The man who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself on a sofa with his face to the wall . 
Pierre hid his face , from which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror and fear . 
All were still . 
Pierre took his hands from his eyes . 
Dolokhov still sat in the same position , only his head was thrown further back till his curly hair touched his shirt collar , and the hand holding the bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort . 
The bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head tilting yet further back . 
`` Why is it so long ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
It seemed to him that more than half an hour had elapsed . 
Suddenly Dolokhov made a backward movement with his spine , and his arm trembled nervously ; this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping ledge . 
As he began slipping down , his head and arm wavered still more with the strain . 
One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill , but refrained from touching it . 
Pierre again covered his eyes and thought he would never never them again . 
Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around . 
He looked up : Dolokhov was standing on the window sill , with a pale but radiant face . 
`` It 's empty . '' 
He threw the bottle to the Englishman , who caught it neatly . 
Dolokhov jumped down . 
He smelt strongly of rum . 
`` Well done ! 
... Fine fellow ! 
... There 's a bet for you ! 
... Devil take you ! '' 
came from different sides . 
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money . 
Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak . 
Pierre jumped upon the window sill . 
`` Gentlemen , who wishes to bet with me ? 
I 'll do the same thing ! '' 
he suddenly cried . 
`` Even without a bet , there ! 
Tell them to bring me a bottle . 
I 'll do it ... . 
Bring a bottle ! '' 
`` Let him do it , let him do it , '' said Dolokhov , smiling . 
`` What next ? 
Have you gone mad ? 
... No one would let you ! 
... Why , you go giddy even on a staircase , '' exclaimed several voices . 
`` I 'll drink it ! 
Let 's have a bottle of rum ! '' 
shouted Pierre , banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out of the window . 
They seized him by his arms ; but he was so strong that everyone who touched him was sent flying . 
`` No , you 'll never manage him that way , '' said Anatole . 
`` Wait a bit and I 'll get round him ... . 
Listen ! 
I 'll take your bet tomorrow , but now we are all going to -- 's . '' 
`` Come on then , '' cried Pierre . 
`` Come on ! 
... And we 'll take Bruin with us . '' 
And he caught the bear , took it in his arms , lifted it from the ground , and began dancing round the room with it . 
