All the facts are in flat contradiction to such conjectures . 
During the whole period of the war not only was there no wish on the Russian side to draw the French into the heart of the country , but from their first entry into Russia everything was done to stop them . 
And not only was Napoleon not afraid to extend his line , but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and did not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns , but very lazily . 
At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided , and our sole aim was to unite them , though uniting the armies was no advantage if we meant to retire and lure the enemy into the depths of the country . 
Our Emperor joined the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russian soil and not to retreat . 
The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel 's plan , and there was no intention of retiring farther . 
The Emperor reproached the commanders in chief for every step they retired . 
He could not bear the idea of letting the enemy even reach Smolensk , still less could he contemplate the burning of Moscow , and when our armies did unite he was displeased that Smolensk was abandoned and burned without a general engagement having been fought under its walls . 
So thought the Emperor , and the Russian commanders and people were still more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating into the depths of the country . 
Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and missed several chances of forcing an engagement . 
In August he was at Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther , though as we now see that advance was evidently ruinous to him . 
The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of the advance on Moscow , nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then think of luring Napoleon on , but quite the contrary . 
The luring of Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan , for no one believed it to be possible ; it resulted from a most complex interplay of intrigues , aims , and wishes among those who took part in the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable , or of the one way of saving Russia . 
Everything came about fortuitously . 
The armies were divided at the commencement of the campaign . 
We tried to unite them , with the evident intention of giving battle and checking the enemy 's advance , and by this effort to unite them while avoiding battle with a much stronger enemy , and necessarily withdrawing the armies at an acute angle -- we led the French on to Smolensk . 
But we withdrew at an acute angle not only because the French advanced between our two armies ; the angle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther , because Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner disliked by Bagration -LRB- who would come his command -RRB- , and Bagration -- being in command of the second army -- tried to postpone joining up and coming under Barclay 's command as long as he could . 
Bagration was slow in effecting the junction -- though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters -- because , as he alleged , he exposed his army to danger on this march , and it was best for him to retire more to the left and more to the south , worrying the enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for his army ; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under the command of the detested foreigner Barclay , whose rank was inferior to his own . 
The Emperor was with the army to encourage it , but his presence and ignorance of what steps to take , and the enormous number of advisers and plans , destroyed the first army 's energy and it retired . 
The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp , but Paulucci , aiming at becoming commander in chief , unexpectedly employed his energy to influence Alexander , and Pfuel 's whole plan was abandoned and the command entrusted to Barclay . 
But as Barclay did not inspire confidence his power was limited . 
The armies were divided , there was no unity of command , and Barclay was unpopular ; but from this confusion , division , and the unpopularity of the foreign commander in chief , there resulted on the one hand indecision and the avoidance of a battle -LRB- which we could not have refrained from had the armies been united and had someone else , instead of Barclay , been in command -RRB- and on the other an ever-increasing indignation against the foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal . 
At last the Emperor left the army , and as the most convenient and indeed the only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was necessary for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation in general to a patriotic war . 
And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow the strength of the Russian army was trebled . 
He left in order not to obstruct the commander in chief 's undivided control of the army , and hoping that more decisive action would then be taken , but the command of the armies became still more confused and enfeebled . 
Bennigsen , the Tsarevich , and a swarm of adjutants general remained with the army to keep the commander in chief under observation and arouse his energy , and Barclay , feeling less free than ever under the observation of all these `` eyes of the Emperor , '' became still more cautious of undertaking any decisive action and avoided giving battle . 
Barclay stood for caution . 
The Tsarevich hinted at treachery and demanded a general engagement . 
Lubomirski , Bronnitski , Wlocki , and the others of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay , under pretext of sending papers to the Emperor , dispatched these Polish adjutants general to Petersburg and plunged into an open struggle with Bennigsen and the Tsarevich . 
At Smolensk the armies at last reunited , much as Bagration disliked it . 
Bagration drove up in a carriage to to the house occupied by Barclay . 
Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior officer Bagration . 
Despite his seniority in rank Bagration , in this contest of magnanimity , took his orders from Barclay , but , having submitted , agreed with him less than ever . 
By the Emperor 's orders Bagration reported direct to him . 
He wrote to Arakcheev , the Emperor 's confidant : `` It must be as my sovereign pleases , but I can not work with the Minister -LRB- meaning Barclay -RRB- . 
For God 's sake send me somewhere else if only in command of a regiment . 
I can not stand it here . 
Headquarters are so full of Germans that a Russian can not exist and there is no sense in anything . 
I thought I was really serving my sovereign and the Fatherland , but it turns out that I am serving Barclay . 
I confess I do not want to . '' 
The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still further embittered the relations between the commanders in chief , and even less unity resulted . 
Preparations were made to fight the French before Smolensk . 
A general was sent to survey the position . 
This general , hating Barclay , rode to visit a friend of his own , a corps commander , and , having spent the day with him , returned to Barclay and condemned , as unsuitable from every point of view , the battleground he had not seen . 
While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field of battle , and while we were looking for the French -- having lost touch with them -- the French stumbled upon Neverovski 's division and reached the walls of Smolensk . 
It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save our lines of communication . 
The battle was fought and thousands were killed on both sides . 
Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the whole people . 
But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitants-who had been misled by their governor . 
And these ruined inhabitants , setting an example to other Russians , went to Moscow thinking only of their own losses but kindling hatred of the foe . 
Napoleon advanced farther and we retired , thus arriving at the very result which caused his destruction . 
The day after his son had left , Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary to come to his study . 
`` Well ? 
Are you satisfied now ? '' 
said he . 
`` You 've made me quarrel with my son ! 
Satisfied , are you ? 
That 's all you wanted ! 
Satisfied ? 
... It hurts me , it hurts . 
I 'm old and weak and this is what you wanted . 
Well then , gloat over it ! 
Gloat over it ! '' 
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week . 
He was ill and did not leave his study . 
Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the old prince not only excluded her from his room , but did not admit Mademoiselle Bourienne either . 
Tikhon alone attended him . 
At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way of life , devoting himself with special activity to building operations and the arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off his relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
His looks and cold tone to his daughter seemed to say : `` There , you see ? 
You plotted against me , you lied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him , but you see I need neither her nor you ! '' 
Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas , watching his lessons , teaching him Russian and music herself , and talking to Dessalles ; the rest of the day she spent over her books , with her old nurse , or with `` God 's folk '' who sometimes came by the back door to see her . 
Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars . 
She feared for her brother who was in it , was horrified by and amazed at the strange cruelty that impels men to kill one another , but she did not understand the significance of this war , which seemed to her like all previous wars . 
She did not realize the significance of this war , though Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed was passionately interested in its progress and tried to explain his own conception of it to her , and though the `` God 's folk '' who came to see her reported , in their own way , the rumors current among the people of an invasion by Antichrist , and though Julie -LRB- now Princess Drubetskaya -RRB- , who had resumed correspondence with her , wrote patriotic letters from Moscow . 
`` I write you in Russian , my good friend , '' wrote Julie in her Frenchified Russian , `` because I have a detestation for all the French , and the same for their language which I can not support to hear spoken ... . 
We in Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor . 
`` My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns , but the news which I have inspires me yet more . 
`` You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski , embracing his two sons and saying : ' I will perish with them but we will not be shaken ! ' 
And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we , we were unshakable . 
We pass the time as we can , but in war as in war ! 
The princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me , and we , unhappy widows of live men , make beautiful conversations over our charpie , only you , my friend , are missing ... '' and so on . 
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance of this war was that the old prince never spoke of it , did not recognize it , and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner . 
The prince 's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary unhesitatingly believed him . 
All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated . 
He planned another garden and began a new building for the domestic serfs . 
The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that he slept very little and , instead of sleeping in his study as usual , changed his sleeping place every day . 
One day he would order his camp bed to be set up in the glass gallery , another day he remained on the couch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room and dozed there without undressing , while -- instead of Mademoiselle Bourienne -- a serf boy read to him . 
Then again he would spend a night in the dining room . 
On August 1 , a second letter was received from Prince Andrew . 
In his first letter which came soon after he had left home , Prince Andrew had dutifully asked his father 's forgiveness for what he had allowed himself to say and begged to be restored to his favor . 
To this letter the old prince had replied affectionately , and from that time had kept the Frenchwoman at a distance . 
Prince Andrew 's second letter , written near Vitebsk after the French had occupied that town , gave a brief account of the whole campaign , enclosed for them a plan he had drawn and forecasts as to the further progress of the war . 
In this letter Prince Andrew pointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald Hills , so near the theater of war and on the army 's direct line of march , and advised him to move to Moscow . 
At dinner that day , on Dessalles ' mentioning that the French were said to have already entered Vitebsk , the old prince remembered his son 's letter . 
`` There was a letter from Prince Andrew today , '' he said to Princess Mary -- `` Have n't you read it ? '' 
`` No , Father , '' she replied in a frightened voice . 
She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had arrived . 
`` He writes about this war , '' said the prince , with the ironic smile that had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war . 
`` That must be very interesting , '' said Dessalles . 
`` Prince Andrew is in a position to know ... '' `` Oh , very interesting ! '' 
