But you do n't understand it . '' 
`` Oh , yes , I quite understand , '' answered Rostov , who was under his new friend 's influence . 
In the autumn the Rostovs returned to Moscow . 
Early in the winter Denisov also came back and stayed with them . 
The first half of the winter of 1806 , which Nicholas Rostov spent in Moscow , was one of the happiest , merriest times for him and the whole family . 
Nicholas brought many young men to his parents ' house . 
Vera was a handsome girl of twenty ; Sonya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening flower ; Natasha , half grown up and half child , was now childishly amusing , now girlishly enchanting . 
At that time in the Rostovs ' house there prevailed an amorous atmosphere characteristic of homes where there are very young and very charming girls . 
Every young man who came to the house -- seeing those impressionable , smiling young faces -LRB- smiling probably at their own happiness -RRB- , feeling the eager bustle around him , and hearing the fitful bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle of young girls ready for anything and full of hope - experienced the same feeling ; sharing with the young folk of the Rostovs ' household a readiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness . 
Among the young men introduced by Rostov one of the first was Dolokhov , whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha . 
She almost quarreled with her brother about him . 
She insisted that he was a bad man , and that in the duel with Bezukhov , Pierre was right and Dolokhov wrong , and further that he was disagreeable and unnatural . 
`` There 's nothing for me to understand , '' cried out with resolute self-will , `` he is wicked and heartless . 
There now , I like your Denisov though he is a rake and all that , still I like him ; so you see I do understand . 
I do n't know how to put it ... with this one everything is calculated , and I do n't like that . 
But Denisov ... '' `` Oh , Denisov is quite different , '' replied Nicholas , implying that even Denisov was nothing compared to Dolokhov -- `` you must understand what a soul there is in Dolokhov , you should see him with his mother . 
What a heart ! '' 
`` Well , I do n't know about that , but I am uncomfortable with him . 
And do you know he has fallen in love with Sonya ? '' 
`` What nonsense ... '' `` I 'm certain of it ; you 'll see . '' 
Natasha 's prediction proved true . 
Dolokhov , who did not usually care for the society of ladies , began to come often to the house , and the question for whose sake he came -LRB- though no one spoke of it -RRB- was soon settled . 
He came because of Sonya . 
And Sonya , though she would never have dared to say so , knew it and blushed scarlet every time Dolokhov appeared . 
Dolokhov often dined at the Rostovs ' , never missed a performance at which they were present , and went to Iogel 's balls for young people which the Rostovs always attended . 
He was pointedly attentive to Sonya and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his glances without coloring , but even the old countess and Natasha blushed when they saw his looks . 
It was evident that this strange , strong man was under the irresistible influence of the dark , graceful girl who loved another . 
Rostov noticed something new in Dolokhov 's relations with Sonya , but he did not explain to himself what these new relations were . 
`` They 're always in love with someone , '' he thought of Sonya and Natasha . 
But he was not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov as before and was less frequently at home . 
In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the war with Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before . 
Orders were given to raise recruits , ten men in every thousand for the regular army , and besides this , nine men in every thousand for the militia . 
Everywhere Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war was talked of . 
For the Rostov family the whole interest of these preparations for war lay in the fact that Nicholas would not hear of remaining in Moscow , and only awaited the termination of Denisov 's furlough after Christmas to return with him to their regiment . 
His approaching departure did not prevent his amusing himself , but rather gave zest to his pleasures . 
He spent the greater part of his time away from home , at dinners , parties , and balls . 
On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home , a thing he had rarely done of late . 
It was a grand farewell dinner , as he and Denisov were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany . 
About twenty people were present , including Dolokhov and Denisov . 
Never had love been so much in the air , and never had the amorous atmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rostovs ' house as at this holiday time . 
`` Seize the moments of happiness , love and be loved ! 
That is the only reality in the world , all else is folly . 
It is the one thing we are interested in here , '' said the spirit of the place . 
Nicholas , having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses , without visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited , returned home just before dinner . 
As soon as he entered he noticed and felt the tension of the amorous air in the house , and also noticed a curious embarrassment among some of those present . 
Sonya , Dolokhov , and the old countess were especially disturbed , and to a lesser degree Natasha . 
Nicholas understood that something must have happened between Sonya and Dolokhov before dinner , and with the kindly sensitiveness natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner . 
On that same evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel -LRB- the dancing master -RRB- gave for his pupils durings the holidays . 
`` Nicholas , will you come to Iogel 's ? 
Please do ! '' 
said Natasha . 
`` He asked you , and Vasili Dmitrich * is also going . '' 
* Denisov . 
`` Where would I not go at the countess ' command ! '' 
said Denisov , who at the Rostovs ' had jocularly assumed the role of Natasha 's knight . 
`` I 'm even weady to dance the pas de chale . '' 
`` If I have time , '' answered Nicholas . 
`` But I promised the Arkharovs ; they have a party . '' 
`` And you ? '' 
he asked Dolokhov , but as soon as he had asked the question he noticed that it should not have been put . 
`` Perhaps , '' coldly and angrily replied Dolokhov , glancing at Sonya , and , scowling , he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given Pierre at the Club dinner . 
`` There is something up , '' thought Nicholas , and he was further confirmed in this conclusion by the fact that Dolokhov left immediately after dinner . 
He called Natasha and asked her what was the matter . 
`` And I was looking for you , '' said Natasha running out to him . 
`` I told you , but you would not believe it , '' she said triumphantly . 
`` He has proposed to Sonya ! '' 
Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late , something seemed to give way within him at this news . 
Dolokhov was a suitable and in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless , orphan girl . 
From the point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the question for her to refuse him . 
And therefore Nicholas ' first feeling on hearing the news was one of anger with Sonya ... . 
He tried to say , `` That 's capital ; of course she 'll forget her childish promises and accept the offer , '' but before he had time to say it Natasha began again . 
`` And fancy ! 
she refused him quite definitely ! '' 
adding , after a pause , `` she told him she loved another . '' 
`` Yes , my Sonya could not have done otherwise ! '' 
thought Nicholas . 
`` Much as Mamma pressed her , she refused , and I know she wo n't change once she has said ... '' `` And Mamma pressed her ! '' 
said Nicholas reproachfully . 
`` Yes , '' said Natasha . 
`` Do you know , Nicholas -- do n't be angry -- but I know you will not marry her . 
I know , heaven knows how , but I know for certain that you wo n't marry her . '' 
`` Now do n't know that at all ! '' 
said Nicholas . 
`` But I must talk to her . 
What a darling Sonya is ! '' 
he added with a smile . 
`` Ah , she is indeed a darling ! 
I 'll send her to you . '' 
And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away . 
A minute later Sonya came in with a frightened , guilty , and scared look . 
Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand . 
This was the first time since his return that they had talked alone and about their love . 
`` Sophie , '' he began , timidly at first and then more and more boldly , `` if you wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant and advantageous match but a splendid , noble fellow ... he is my friend ... '' Sonya interrupted him . 
`` I have already refused , '' she said hurriedly . 
`` If you are refusing for my sake , I am afraid that I. . . '' 
Sonya again interrupted . 
She gave him an imploring , frightened look . 
`` Nicholas , do n't tell me that ! '' 
she said . 
`` No , but I must . 
