But can she love me ? 
... I am too old for her ... . 
Why do n't you speak ? '' 
`` I ? 
I ? 
What did I tell you ? '' 
said Pierre suddenly , rising and beginning to pace up and down the room . 
`` I always thought it ... . 
That girl is such a treasure ... she is a rare girl ... . 
My dear friend , I entreat you , do n't philosophize , do n't doubt , marry , marry , marry ... . 
And I am sure there will not be a happier man than you . '' 
`` But what of her ? '' 
`` She loves you . '' 
`` Do n't talk rubbish ... '' said Prince Andrew , smiling and looking into Pierre 's eyes . 
`` She does , I know , '' Pierre cried fiercely . 
`` But do listen , '' returned Prince Andrew , holding him by the arm . 
`` Do you know the condition I am in ? 
I must talk about it to someone . '' 
`` Well , go on , go on . 
I am very glad , '' said Pierre , and his face really changed , his brow became smooth , and he listened gladly to Prince Andrew . 
Prince Andrew seemed , and really was , quite a different , quite a new man . 
Where was his spleen , his contempt for life , his disillusionment ? 
Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind to speak openly ; and to him he told all that was in his soul . 
Now he boldly and lightly made plans for an extended future , said he could not sacrifice his own happiness to his father 's caprice , and spoke of how he would either make his father consent to this marriage and love her , or would do without his consent ; then he marveled at the feeling that had mastered him as at something strange , apart from and independent of himself . 
`` I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of such love , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` It is not at all the same feeling that I knew in the past . 
The whole world is now for me divided into two halves : one half is she , and there all is joy , hope , light : the other half is everything where she is not , and there is all gloom and darkness ... '' `` Darkness and gloom , '' reiterated Pierre : `` yes , yes , I understand that . '' 
`` I can not help loving the light , it is not my fault . 
And I am very happy ! 
You understand me ? 
I know you are glad for my sake . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' Pierre assented , looking at his friend with a touched and sad expression in his eyes . 
The brighter Prince Andrew 's lot appeared to him , the gloomier seemed his own . 
Prince Andrew needed his father 's consent to his marriage , and to obtain this he started for the country next day . 
His father received his son 's communication with external composure , but inward wrath . 
He could not comprehend how anyone could wish to alter his life or introduce anything new into it , when his own life was already ending . 
`` If only they would let me end my days as I want to , '' thought the old man , `` then they might do as they please . '' 
With his son , however , he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and , adopting a quiet tone , discussed the whole matter . 
In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regards birth , wealth , or rank . 
Secondly , Prince Andrew was no longer as young as he had been and his health was poor -LRB- the old man laid special stress on this -RRB- , while she was very young . 
Thirdly , he had a son whom it would be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl . 
`` Fourthly and finally , '' the father said , looking ironically at his son , `` I beg you to put it off for a year : go abroad , take a cure , look out as you wanted to for a German tutor for Prince Nicholas . 
Then if your love or passion or obstinacy -- as you please -- is still as great , marry ! 
And that 's my last word on it . 
Mind , the last ... '' concluded the prince , in a tone which showed that nothing would make him alter his decision . 
Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that his feelings , or his fiancee 's , would not stand a year 's test , or that he -LRB- the old prince himself -RRB- would die before then , and he decided to conform to his father 's wish -- to propose , and postpone the wedding for a year . 
Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs , Prince Andrew returned to Petersburg . 
Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonski all day , but he did not come . 
On the second and third day it was the same . 
Pierre did not come either and Natasha , not knowing that Prince Andrew had gone to see his father , could not explain his absence to herself . 
Three weeks passed in this way . 
Natasha had no desire to go out anywhere and wandered from room to room like a shadow , idle and listless ; she wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the evenings . 
She blushed continually and was irritable . 
It seemed to her that everybody knew about her disappointment and was laughing at her and pitying her . 
Strong as was her inward grief , this wound to her vanity intensified her misery . 
Once she came to her mother , tried to say something , and suddenly began to cry . 
Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why it is being punished . 
The countess began to soothe Natasha , who after first listening to her mother 's words , suddenly interrupted her : `` Leave off , Mamma ! 
I do n't think , and do n't want to think about it ! 
He just came and then left off , left off ... '' Her voice trembled , and she again nearly cried , but recovered and went on quietly : `` And I do n't at all want to get married . 
And I am afraid of him ; I have now become quite calm , quite calm . '' 
The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which she knew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in the mornings , and that day she returned to the old way of life which she had abandoned since the ball . 
Having finished her morning tea she went to the ballroom , which she particularly liked for its loud resonance , and began singing her solfeggio . 
When she had finished her first exercise she stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that particularly pleased her . 
She listened joyfully -LRB- as though she had not expected it -RRB- to the charm of the notes reverberating , filling the whole empty ballroom , and slowly dying away ; and all at once she felt cheerful . 
`` What 's the good of making so much of it ? 
Things are nice as it is , '' she said to herself , and she began walking up and down the room , not stepping simply on the resounding parquet but treading with each step from the heel to the toe -LRB- she had on a new and favorite pair of shoes -RRB- and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the toe as gladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice . 
Passing a mirror she glanced into it . 
`` There , that 's me ! '' 
the expression of her face seemed to say as she caught sight of herself . 
`` Well , and very nice too ! 
I need nobody . '' 
A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room but she would not let him , and having closed the door behind him continued her walk . 
That morning she had returned to her favorite mood -- love of , and delight in , herself . 
`` How charming that Natasha is ! '' 
she said again , speaking as some third , collective , male person . 
`` Pretty , a good voice , young , and in nobody 's way if only they leave her in peace . '' 
But however much they left her in peace she could not now be at peace , and immediately felt this . 
In the hall the porch door opened , and someone asked , `` At home ? '' 
and then footsteps were heard . 
Natasha was looking at the mirror , but did not see herself . 
She listened to the sounds in the hall . 
When she saw herself , her face was pale . 
It was he . 
She knew this for certain , though she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors . 
Pale and agitated , Natasha ran into the drawing room . 
`` Mamma ! 
Bolkonski has come ! '' 
she said . 
`` Mamma , it is awful , it is unbearable ! 
I do n't want ... to be tormented ? 
What am I to do ? 
... '' Before the countess could answer , Prince Andrew entered the room with an agitated and serious face . 
As soon as he saw Natasha his face brightened . 
He kissed the countess ' hand and Natasha 's , and sat down beside the sofa . 
`` It is long since we had the pleasure ... '' began the countess , but Prince Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question , obviously in haste to say what he had to . 
`` I have not been to see all this time because I have been at my father 's . 
I had to talk over a very important matter with him . 
I only got back last night , '' he said glancing at Natasha ; `` I want to have a talk with you , Countess , '' he added after a moment 's pause . 
The countess lowered her eyes , sighing deeply . 
